Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
REPORT NO.
299
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th January, )5 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on )5 2018th January,
The National Sports University Bill, 2017
TWO HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

83
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED NINETY NINTH REPORT
The National Sports University Bill, 2017
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-10
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 1 1-13
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 15-24
6. T HE NATIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY BILL, 2017 (As introduced in Lok Sabha) .................... 25-81

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2017)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya    —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
5. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13. Shri Nihal Chand
14. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste.
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
17. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
18. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
19. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
20. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N.K. Premachandran
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri M.I. Shanavas
26. Dr. Nepal Singh
27. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
28. Shri Satyapal Singh
29. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
30. Shri P.R. Sundaram
31. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Mishra, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and Ninety Ninth Report
of the Committee on the National Sports University Bill, 2017. (Annexure I)
2. The National Sports University Bill, 2017 (NSU) was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 10th August,
2017 and referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha on the 24th
August, 2017 for examination and report.
3. The National Sports University Bill, 2017 (NSU) seeks to establish and incorporate a National Sports
University in the State of Manipur, specialized University first of its kind, to promote sports education in the
areas of sports sciences, sports technology, sports management and sports coaching besides functioning as
the national training centre for select sports disciplines by adopting best international practices and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
4. The Committee also issued a Press Communiqué on 31st October, 2017 in print and electronic media
to seek the views of the people on the Bill. The Committee held extensive deliberations on the Bill with the
stakeholders which included Secretary, Department of Sports, Director, Lakshmibai Institute for Physical
Education, Dean, Guru Nanak Dev University, Head, Department of Physical Education and Sciences, Delhi
University and Director, Sports Injury Centre, Safdarjung Hospital in its meeting held on 16th October, and
13th December, 2017 and 4th January, 2018.  The Committee also interacted with the State Government of
Manipur on the Bill. The Committee also took note of the written submissions of the stakeholders. Views of
the stakeholders and comments of the Department were taken note of while formulating the observations
and recommendations of the Committee.
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting held on 4th
January, 2018.
6. For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of Committee have been printed in
bold letters at the end of Report.
DR. SA TYANARAY AN JATIYA
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
4 January,  2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausa 15,  1939 (Saka) Committee on Human Resource Development
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

1
REPORT
1. The National Sports University Bill, 2017 (NSU) was introduced in Lok Sabha on the 10th August,
2017 and referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha on the 24th
August, 2017 for examination and report.
2. The National Sports University Bill, 2017 (NSU) seeks to establish and incorporate a National Sports
University in the State of Manipur, specialized University first of its kind, to promote sports education in the
areas of sports sciences, sports technology, sports management and sports coaching besides functioning as
the national training centre for select sports disciplines by adopting best international practices and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
3. The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:-
“The National Sports University will be the first full-fledged sports university in India of international
standard. The Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior, a deemed university, is
restricted to offering Bachelor of Physical Education and Master of Physical Education courses and
the Netaji Subhas National Institute of Sports focuses on training elite athletes and coaches only.
Thus, a void exists in the sports environment of the country in various areas, such as, sports science,
sports technology, sports management, high performance training, etc. Therefore, it has been decided
to establish the National Sports University (University) which is expected to fill this void with its
exclusive focus on creation of high standard infrastructure for the development of sports sciences and
training of athletes apart from providing Bachelors Degree, Master’ s Degrees and Research and Training
in various areas related to sports”.
“Consistent with international practices followed by best sports universities in the world, the focus of
the University will be on multi-disciplinary studies and accordingly, have functionally related Schools
with stress on applicability based on the latest researches in sports sciences, sports medicine and sports
technology. The University will address issues relating to various disciplines of great importance at
international levels, including adventure and disability sports. The University is also empowered to
establish Outlying Campuses throughout the country and also outside India. Apart from academic
programmes and research, the University and its Outlying Campuses will also impart training to elite
athletes, sports officials, referees and umpires and evolve as centres of excellence in various disciplines
of sports. To make the University a world standard university, a memorandum of understanding have
been signed by the Government of India with two Australian Universities, namely, the University of
Canberra and Victoria University, for the development of curriculum, research facilities, laboratories,
etc”.
4. Giving a background of the Bill the Secretary, Department of Sports in his deposition before the
Committee on 16th October, 2017 submitted that there was no full-fledged university in India and NSU
would fill this void. The Secretary submitted that the National Sports University Bill, 2017 would lay emphasis
on inter-disciplinary approach integrating Sports Science, Sports Medicine and Sports Technology to educate,
train and produce best sportspersons.  He further added the University would be in consistent with international
trends, would encourage Adventure Sports, and provide proper facilities and training to Para and Differently-
abled Athletes. The University would also offer Degree in Sports Coaching to be introduced for the first time

2
in India and also train elite athletes for International competitions and train Sports Coaches and Officials,
Referees and Umpires.
5. He further added that the University would provide structure and curriculum modeled on the lines of
International Sports Universities with a focus on inter-disciplinary approach. The NSU will have Four
Schools:-
(i) School of Sports Science and Sports Medicine having Seven Departments;
(ii) School of Sports Management and Technology having Two Departments;
(iii) School of sports education having two Departments; and
(iv) School of Inter-disciplinary Studies having two Departments under it.
The Secretary in his presentation also submitted that the unique features of NSU would be that
administrative responsibilities entrusted to the Central Government for efficient decision making.  The Secretary
further added that the University will be empowered to establish outlying campuses anywhere in India, and
also outside India, to give NSU an International Character. The Academic and Activity Council will have
sports persons who have distinguished themselves in Olympics/World Championships and the Chancellor
will be an eminent person in the field of sports.
6. In its submission, the Secretary of the Department further added that National Sports University is
intended to focus on education, training and research in areas related to Sports, based on high standard
infrastructure.
7. The Secretary fu rther pointed out that the existing State Sports Universities and Lakshmibai National
Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE), Gwalior, restrict themselves to offering B.P .Ed. and M.P.Ed
Courses. Netaji Subhas National Institute of Sports (NSNIS), Patiala, has focused on training elite athletes
and coaches only, thus a void existed in the sports environment of the country. NSU is expected to fill this
void with its exclusive focus on creation of high standard infrastructure for the development of sports
sciences and training of athletes and would provide Maste r’s Degrees, Research and T raining in areas
related to sports.
8. The Secretary further submitted that the proposal for setting up NSU was approved by the Cabinet on
26.07.2017 and the National Sports University Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017 but the
same could not be passed as the Lok Sabha was adjourned sine die on 11.08.2017.
9. The Secretary further added that the salient features of NSU are as under:
(i) There would be no Visitor for the University. Functional control would be exercised by the
Central Government. It would be conducive to smooth functioning and quick decision making.
(ii) The Chancellor of NSU would be an eminent person in the field  of sports, who shall be either
a sportsperson or a sports  administrator or a sports academician.
(iii) The Academic and Activity Council of NSU would include  sportspersons who have distinguished
themselves in Olympics/  World Championships.
(iv) NSU would have the authority to establish Outlying Campuses  throughout India and outside
India, to give it a truly national and international character.

3
10. The Department of Sports in its reply to the questionnaire submitted that the proposed University land
measuring 325.90 acres at 47- Koutruk Village and 40-Senjam Khunou Village, Imphal West District, Manipur,
has been handed over by the Government of Manipur to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. As land
has been taken over from the Government of Manipur free of cost, the cost of land is not factored in the
overall project cost. The Department further added that it is proposed to implement the project in a time-
span of two years i.e. from 2017-18 to 2018-19.  The total cost of the project as per the existing preliminary
and tentative estimate is ` 524 Crore, of which ` 184 Crore is proposed for the year 2017-18, and the
` 340 Crore is proposed in the year i.e. 2018-19. This includes expenditure for establishing Outlying Campuses.
Out of ` 524 crore, non-recurring expenditure would be ` 442 crore and recurring expenditure ` 82 Crore.
The Department further added that Manipur is the hub of sports activities in India and establishment of a
Sports University there would give further impetus to sports activities not only in Manipur but throughout
the North-East.
11. The Department further added that as per advice of the Ministry of Finance, this Ministry sanctioned
` 50 Crore for pre-investment activities. After designs/specifications/estimates are firmed up, a detailed
proposal would be submitted before competent authority for final approval.  Integrated Finance Division of
the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has stated that it has no objections in the matter and pre-investment
activities at the site have also commenced.  ` 18.75 Crore has been released till late to Hindustan Steel Works
construction Ltd. (HSCC), the project management consultant engaged for setting up NSU for pre-investment
activities.
12. During the consultation with other Ministries, the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and
Justice had raised the issue that in most of the Central Universities, there is a post of the Visitor and the
President of India has been named as Visitor of the University who exercises power of the Visitor in accordance
with Constitutional scheme. The Department of Sports, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports submitted that
in this case, exception is called for on the ground that a Sports University has specific needs which are very
different from an Academic University which can be best addressed if the control of the Sports University
is vested in the Central Government. It would also enable the University to adopt the best International
practices at short notices. As addition, amendment and repeal of Statutes require the assent of the Visitor
who has to oversee the functioning of 43 Central Universities, quick change would not be in the realm of
possibility for the proposed University with the Visitor at the apex. Moreover, formulating a standard template
for all institutions and making it applicable to a Sports University would not only thwart flexibility but would
restrict uniqueness, functionality and objective of the Sports University. The Department further added that
this had been agreed to by the Ministry of Law and Justice.
13. The Department further added that NSU would have the power to co-operate or collaborate or associate
with other Universities and institutions to put within their reach the latest advances in Sports Sciences,
Sports Medicine and Sports Technology for suitably equipping their faculty and students. Also, the alumni
of NSU would in due course get into other universities and institutions as faculty, coaches, research associates,
other supporting personnel etc. and strengthen the other sports institutions including NSNIS, Patiala.
14. The Department further added that to ensure that the proposed National Sports University conforms
to the best international standards and practices, Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) with the Universities
of Canberra and Victoria of Australia have been signed by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in April
2017. The two Universities would render advice with regard to specific fields of study and research,

4
infrastructure needs, selection of equipment, faculty structures, student and faculty exchange programmes,
and joint research projects of the proposed university.  The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports have approached
these two universities to depute expert faculty for rendering advice with regard to curriculum development,
infrastructures needs, selection of equipment and faculty.
15. The Department further submitted that the National Sports University Bill encompasses the activities
of all the sports played at national and international level. They further added that objectives of the National
Sports University Bill 2017 inter alia provide that the University shall be able to generate capabilities for the
development of knowledge, skills and competences at various levels in the fields of physical education and
sports sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all sports and games; to generate
capabilities to provide infrastructure of international standard for education, training and research in the
areas related to physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and high performance training for
all sports and games; to prepare highly qualified professionals in the fields of physical education and sports
sciences, sports technology and high performance training for all sports and games; to serve as a Centre of
Excellence for the elite and other talented sportspersons of all sports and games and innovation in physical
education and sports sciences and to carry out, endorse and propagate research; and to function as a leading
resource centre for knowledge and development in the areas of physical education and sports sciences,
sports technology and high performance training for all sports and games.
16. The Department informed that, initially it is proposed to start the University with two courses, Bachelor
of Physical Education and Sports (BPES) and Bachelor of Science (B.Sc) (Sports Coaching). The former
will be a three-year degree course and the latter a four-year degree course. The eligibility for admission for
the said courses will be 12th pass or any other equivalent examination by the University.
17. It was submitted that Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has written to all the State Governments and
Union Territories for providing land for establishing Outlying Campuses of NSU. It was informed that the
Government of Punjab had responded by offering land at Mohali. The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports
was in touch with other State Governments for setting up outlying campuses. It was further added that
conferring autonomous status on a college or an institution will be done in accordance with the guidelines of
UGC and with approval of concerned organizations including UGC, where ever required.
18. The Department also informed that the University would offer undergraduate, postgraduate, certificate,
diploma and Ph.D courses and function as a centre of excellence with exclusive focus on Sports Medicine,
Sports Science, Sports Psychology and related research. It was further added that competitive sports will
be an integral part of the academic programme of the university and the students may directly participate in
the inter-university tournaments in various sports and games as also at different levels as per the university
policy. For the B.Sc (Sports Coaching), presently sports disciplines of archery, boxing, shooting, badminton,
track and field, football and weightlifting had been included.
19. It was further submitted before the Committee that the regional enthusiasm and expertise for different
games/ sports will be taken into consideration while opening technical institutes under NSU. In fact, one of
the primary reasons for setting up Outlying Campuses in other parts of India was to popularize sports
culture and spread sports education throughout the country.
20. It was also informed that the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has recently introduced a scheme
Khelo India – National Programme for Development of Sports. Under this scheme, Talent Search and
Development is one of the components. Further, Sports Authority of India was also running a number of

5
schemes such as National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) scheme, SAI Training Centres (STC) Scheme,
Army Boys Sports Company (ABSC) Scheme and Special Area Games (SAG) Scheme, which basically aim
at talent identification and nurturing of the identified sportspersons.
21. In addition to the views of the Government the Committee decided to seek the views of public,
experts and stakeholders. Accordingly, the Committee also issued a Press Communiqué on 31st October,
2017 in print and electronic media to seek the views of the people on the Bill.  The Committee received views
from the people on various provisions of the Bill. The Committee also heard the experts from Lakshmibai
National Institute for Physical Education, Guru Nanak Dev University, Department of Physical Education
and Sciences, Delhi University and Sports Injury Centre, Safdarjung Hospital.  The Committee also interacted
with the State Government of Manipur on the Bill.  The inputs received from the various representatives on
the Bill have been incorporated in the succeeding paragraphs.
22. The Director, LNIPE submitted before the Committee that NSU should be nationally prominent for
preparing elite sportspersons and educating students in the area of physical education who are globally
competent, ethical leaders working and serving in our complex and charging world. The Director further
added that mission of the University should be to provide access to high quality education and coaching to
facilitate opportunities for sports science. The University should also prepare a programme to reach and
nurture potential with the help of highly trained and technical professionals and support such highly motivated
individuals.  The university should further prepare students for competent, safe and contemporary service
such as an Adapted Physical Education specialist that would allow them to prepare physically active and
educated students with disabilities for transition into adulthood.
23. The Director further added that the mission of the university should be to design and introduce
innovating, integrated, inter-disciplinary curriculum in Physical Education and various sports and games and
allied areas and provide leadership to the profession. The Director further submitted that the NSU should
also develop high-tech research facilities and contribute to knowledge through scholarly work and publication
and disseminate its finding to the professionals, faculty and students.  He further added that the university
should also develop Internal Quality Management System (IQMS) through Internal Quality System Cell
(IQSC).
24. The Director, Sports Injury Centre, Safdarjung Hospital submitted that this University should meet the
needs of elite level sports. The Director further added that the university should have synergy between the
proposed SAARC Centre for Injury and National Sports University for Planning. He further added that this
University should help in executing and standardizing high quality sports health care delivery system. The
Director further added that this University should provide mandatory affiliation to institution offering degree/
diploma in field of sports physiotherapy, sports psychology, sports nutrition and sports massage to have
uniform high-level standards. He further added that the University should also have collaborations with
premier management and technological institutions of the country, like IITs and IIMs which will enhance
the level of the university.
25. The Director further added that the entry to courses offered at the university should be through an All
India level entrance tests with minimal relaxation for educational background.  He further submitted that the
University funding should place emphasis on academics and research and find an alternative source of self
generating funds by offering courses and expertise.

6
26. The Head, Department of Physical Education and Sports Sciences, University of Delhi while deposing
before the Committee raised following concerns for consideration of the Committee:
a. the university should establish various “Sports Academics” within the university campus and its
affiliated units by providing maintenance grant and financial aid for experts involved in coaching.
b. the university should develop norms relating to various health physical, physiological,
anthropometrical, parameters and any such other areas of importance in physical education and
sports for various age groups of the country by involving physical educationists/sports experts
employed in various educational institutions/organizations.
27. The representative of University of Delhi further added that the university should initiate proposing
and developing a sports policy for various universities in the country.  He further added that the university
should serve as a scientific hub for identification, nurturing talents and also review the course contents of
various degree/diploma/certificate courses or any other courses after every five years.
28. The representative of University of Delhi further added that for any programme to be successful, it is
essential that strong foundation of research is set up.  He pointed out that research based finding help in
updating the knowledge of specialist in every discipline.  He further added that University should publish
various research findings from Departments and faculty in a journal.  The university  must also display the
various research facilities available in various laboratories in the university and extend the services to all
those who wish to use by collecting a nominal charge so as to promote research in the field of physical
education and sports.
29. He further added that the university should conduct specialized workshops and conference regularly.
The representative further added that the university should take up projects in developing normative scores
and standards for various motor fitness components, health related components, for people of various age
groups. The University should also extend scientific back up to various levels of sports teams and sportspersons
and also extend support on the psychological development, physiological assessment and health assessment.
30. The representative of University of Delhi further submitted that the faculty members should be
encouraged to develop instruments and standardized tools for the purpose of evaluating sportspersons.  He
further added the faculty should also develop and validate new tools/instruments and also validate tools/
instruments of foreign origin for the Indian sportspersons.
31. The representative further pointed out that winning a medal at international level is dependent on
various factors of which talent identification plays a dominant role in the process of grooming a talent in
sports of elite status.  He further added that the faculty / Department of the University shall extend specialized
knowledge and assist in developing a strong talent identification programme based on the requirement and
demands in a sport covering all the aspects of development. He further added that to achieve this, constitution
of specialized teams to assess and discover the talented sports persons from various parts of the country
would be needed.  He pointed out that this could be achieved by involving various State bodies promoting
sports, State regulatory bodies of education and by involvement of various physical education and sports
institutes and university faculty/Departments of physical education in various parts of the country.
32. He further added that university should also organise a National Sports Day under the umbrella of the
Department of Sports. He further added that the university should also interact with the community especially
within the vicinity of its location. The University should also organize health status assessment for the

7
people of the society through Health Mela or Test on quarterly /half yearly basis in rural as well as urban
areas.  He further added that university should invite head of educational institutions (schools and colleges)
and implement the possibility of developing health and fitness evaluation and individual profile of each
student.
33. The Committee undertook a study visit to Guwahati and Imphal from 30th October to 3rd November,
2017 to interact with the stakeholder and Manipur Government.
34. During its study visit to Imphal the representative of the Manipur Government submitted before the
Committee that the location for the University has been selected carefully, which is at a juncture between the
Hills and the valley and has two approach roads, one of which is Asian Highway-2 (NH-39) and well-
connected. Hence, the place has a huge prospect for being developed into a Tourist Hotspot. The Committee
was assured that all possible assistance would be provided by the State Government to ensure that all the
University infrastructures are constructed smoothly and timely. On being prodded by the Committee about
some concrete steps taken by the State Government, the representative informed that all land-related problems
have been solved and till the Bill is passed arrangements are being made.
35. The Committee during its examination on the Bill deliberated on various clauses on the Bills. Some
provisions in the clauses drew the attention of the Committee which have been dealt in the succeeding
paragraphs.
36. The Clause 3 deals with the Establishment of the University.  The Committee notes that Clause 3 (2)
of the Bill provides that the headquarters of the University shall be in the State of Manipur and it may
establish or maintain outlying campuses, Colleges, Regional Centres and Study Centres at such other places
in India as it may deem fit. Proviso to this clause provides that the University may, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, also establish outlying campuses and Study Centres outside India. There was a
concern in Committee with the location of the university.  It was pointed out that the university would be
drawing the students, sportspersons, faculty and experts not only from all over the country but also from
abroad. The Committee feels that as the university is being established in the North-Eastern part of
the country suitable measures need to be taken by the Ministry and the concerned agencies with
regard to the travel facilities and concessions so as to reduce the locational disadvantage to students,
sportspersons, faculty and other related persons.
37. The Committee notes that as informed by the Department that the outlying campus(s) would be
geographically located elsewhere but would function under the overall guidance of the NSU with its
headquarters at Manipur subject to the same curricula, the same set of rules and under the same overall
supervision of the University. The Committee endorses the concept of setting up of outlying campuses
of the University in different parts of the country and also outside the country .
38. Clause 4 of the Bill deals with the objectives of the university. The Committee during its examination
noted that university will strengthen physical education and sports training programmes to promote sports
including traditional and tribal sports and games.  The Committee was informed by the Department that the
University will generate capabilities for the development of knowledge, skills and competencies at various
levels in the fields of physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and high performance
training for all sports and games including traditional and tribal sports. Indigenous disciplines like Archery,
Kho-kho, Kabaddi etc. have been identified for the purpose and curricula will be made out for the same. The
Committee welcomes that the university will be giving knowledge for development of physical

8
sciences and sports sciences for all games including traditional and tribal sports.  The Committee
suggests that the university should also engage the local community in development of the traditional
sports and also encourage them to acquire skills needed in modern sports.
39. Clause 4 (iv) deals with the establishment of centres and institutions of excellence for imparting
training and research in the fields of physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and high
performance training for all sports and games. In its written reply the Department informed the Committee
that this  comprehensive legislation has been made  to ensure that the University is not handicapped at a later
stage in spreading sports culture and sports education throughout the country. The first stage would be
setting up NSU and its Outlying Campuses. Establishment of centers and institutions of excellence would be
undertaken subsequently and resources and funds would be marshaled for meeting the increased scope and
reach of NSU and outlying campuses in the times to come. The Committee feels that the proposed
University would prove to be an umbrella at the national level synchronizing all the sports related
activities right from spreading the sports culture throughout the country to producing the medal
winning sportspersons at global level.
40. The Committee was however concerned about the resources that university needs. It was
assured by the Department that it would be ensured that the NSU and its outlying campuses do not
suffer on this account.  The Committee suggests that it should also be ensured that the funds are
rightfully utilized.  The Committee is also of the view that the University should be able to generate
its own resources to meet or supplement its requirements.
41. Clause 5 of the Bill enumerates the powers and functions of the university. The Committee feels that
the university would be able to fulfil the void in the sports environment of the country in various areas, such
as, sports science, sports technology, sports management, high performance training, etc. and thereby
would be providing professional and academic leadership to other sports institutions at national level. The
NSU would also be collaborating with the leading medical and technical institutes like AIIMS, IITs and IIITs
etc. to evolve new technologies for the existing sports disciplines.  The Bill provides the desired scope for
university to conduct courses and exchange programmes in Biological Sciences, Sport Psychology, Sports
Biomechanics and Movement Sciences, Preventive and Rehabilitative Sciences and matters concerning
Disability issues in its Manipur and outlying campuses.
42. The Committee agrees with the Department that the university through its extramural research
and training programmes will reach out to the people who are not full time students of the university.
The University may, through its extension services conduct special/ customize programmes on the
demand/request from various institutions, organizations, sports bodies etc.
43. The Committee takes note of the submission by the  Department in furtherance of the objects enumerated
in this clause, the University shall be instrumental in giving effect to the procedures and standards provided
under the Khelo India Scheme or the National Sports Talent Search Identification Scheme. The Committee
believes that since  Khelo India is one of the flagship schemes of the Ministry of Youth Affairs &
Sports aiming at broad basing of sports throughout the country and one of components of the
Scheme is Talent Search and Development, NSU will be of immense help to the Ministry in prescribing
procedures and standards for talent identification under the Khelo India Scheme and the NSU may
function as the training centre for select sport disciplines, identify the talented sportspersons and
nurture/ groom them under Khelo India Scheme.

9
44. The clause 7 empowers the central government to review work and progress of the university.  This
clause inter alia states that the Central Government may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to
review the work and progress of the University, including outlying campuses, Colleges, Institutions, Regional
Centres and Study Centres maintained by it, and to submit a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report,
the Central Government may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon through the Vice-
Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions, as it considers necessary, in respect of any of the
matters dealt with in the report and the University shall abide by such action and be bound to comply with
such directions. The Committee of one or more persons would be appointed as and when required and
would also have experts as members who may be required to give a report on the overall work and progress
of the university.
45. The Committee apprehends  that through this clause  the Central Government by appointing
one or more person to review the work at the university including the outlying campuses, colleges,
study centres and regional centres maintained by it may unnecessarily lead to interference in
affairs of the university and thereby affect its autonomy.  The Committee feels that the university
should have autonomy over its functioning and also the matters relating to it. The Committee feels
that the Department of Sports has to allay such an apprehension and ensure that this provision
needs to be in line with other Central Universities and in any case should not hamper with the
autonomy of the university. The Committee feels that like other central universities, this
university should also be given freedom to decide the courses and the degrees to be conferred to
its stud ents.
46. The Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the officers of the University that includes the Chancellor, Vice-
Chancellor, Dean of School etc. The Department in its reply submitted that  the constitution of the Court is
elaborated in clause 9 (1) of the Schedule of the Bill. The Court will consist, inter alia, of the Chancellor, the
Vice-Chancellor, the Proctor, the Deans of Schools, the Dean of Students’ Welfare, the Finance Officer, the
Heads of Departments/Professors who are members of the   Academic and Activity Council; one representative
from each institution recognized by the university, nominated by the Vice-Chancellor on recommendations
of the Head of the Institution; not more than four persons from amongst eminent sports scientists, sports
academicians and sports administrators to be nominated by the Central Government, not more than two
persons representing Sports Industry, to be nominated by the Central Government; not more than ten
persons from amongst eminent sports persons and highly recognized coaches to be nominated by the
Central Government.
47. The Committee, however, finds that the Bill does not provide for appointment of Visitor as is
the case in respect of central universities.  When enquired, the Secretary, Department of Sports
explained to the Committee that this provision of visitor has been substituted with the provision of
Central Government because administrative responsibilities have to be exercised by the Central
Government.  The Committee is in agreement with the explanation given by the Secretary,
Department of Sports.
48. The Clause 30 (1) deals with the fund of the University.  The Committee raised some issues regarding
this clause.  In this regard the Department submitted that this clause of the provides for University Fund
which shall include––
(a) any contribution or grant made by the University Grants Commission or the Central Government;

10
(b) any contribution or grant made by the State Government;
(c) any contribution made by Government, semi-Government or autonomous bodies;
(d) any loans, gifts, bequests, donations, endowments or other grants, if any;
(e) income received by the University from fees and charges; and
(f) the money received by the University from the collaborating industries in terms of the provisions
of the Memorandum of Understanding entered between the University and the industry for the
establishment of sponsored Chairs, fellowships or infrastructure facilities of the University; and
(g) amounts received in any other manner from any other source.
Incorporation of clause (g) providing for receipt of amounts in any other manner from any other
source is to cover such contributions which have not been specifically mentioned in clauses (a) to (f) above.
For example, if some agency intends to establish a Chair and makes a contribution to that effect and for its
future continuation, the same would be covered under clause (g).
49. The Committee is very much concerned about the availability of funds for the University and
feels that at any point of time it should not suffer due to resource constraints.  It suggests that in
addition to the provision made in the Bill, the University should also explore other resources like
reaching out to corporate sector for contribution under CSR requesting for setting up of Chairs,
fellowships and scholarships in the University
50. The Committee suggests that the outlying campuses should be established in different regions
in the country which are hubs of different sports.  The Committee points out that specific sports
like hockey, wrestling are popular in Punjab and Haryana, Archery and Shooting popular in Madhya
Pradesh and Jharkhand and Athletics in Kerala and other southern States.  The Committee
recommends that the outlying campuses should also focus on the specific sports which are popular
in those areas and also provide infrastructure, coaching and other facilities to the sportspersons
playing the sports there.
51. The Committee would like to point out that the faculty is needed to produce World Class
Athletes at the University.  The Committee points out that due to the location of the University
many of the faculties would find it difficult to travel to the location.  The Committee also feels that
some incentives should be given so that World Class Coaches are attracted to take faculty position
at the University.
52. The Committee also suggests that the university should use information and technology to
provide online courses to students in other parts of the country.  The Committee feels that the
establishment of this university will not only help in instilling sports culture in our society but also
help in raising the standards of coaching, infrastructure, umpiring and other areas related to sports.
53. The Committee endorses the Bill in its present form. The suggestions given by the Committee
may however be taken into account at appropriate stage.

OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Clause 3 deals with the Establishment of the University. The Committee notes that Clause
3 (2) of the Bill provides that the headquarters of the University shall be in the State of Manipur and
it may establish or maintain outlying campuses, Colleges, Regional Centres and Study Centres at
such other places in India as it may deem fit. Proviso to this clause provides that the University
may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, also establish outlying campuses and
Study Centres outside India. There was a concern in Committee with the location of the university.
It was pointed out that the university would be drawing the students, sportspersons, faculty and
experts not only from all over the country but also from abroad. The Committee feels that as the
university is being established in the North-Eastern part of the country suitable measures need to
be taken by the Ministry and the concerned agencies with regard to the travel facilities and
concessions so as to reduce the locational disadvantage to students, sportspersons, faculty and
other related persons. (Para 36)
The Committee notes that as informed by the Department that the outlying campus(s) would
be geographically located elsewhere but would function under the overall guidance of the NSU with
its headquarters at Manipur subject to the same curricula, the same set of rules and under the
same overall supervision of the University. The Committee endorses the concept of setting up
of outly ing campuses of the University in different parts of the country and also outside the
country. (Para 37)
Clause 4 of the Bill deals with the objectives of the university.  The Committee during its
examination noted that university will strengthen physical education and sports training programmes
to promote sports including traditional and tribal sports and games.  The Committee was informed
by the Department that the University will generate capabilities for the development of knowledge,
skills and competencies at various levels in the fields of physical education and sports sciences,
sports technology and high performance training for all sports and games including traditional and
tribal sports. Indigenous disciplines like Archery, Kho-kho, Kabaddi etc. have been identified for
the purpose and curricula will be made out for the same. The Committee welcomes that the university
will be giving knowledge for development of physical sciences and sports sciences for all games
including traditional and tribal sports.  The Committee suggests that the university should also
engage the local community in development of the traditional sports and also encourage them to
acquire skills needed in modern sports. (Para 38)
Clause 4 (iv) deals with the establishment of centres and institutions of excellence for imparting
training and research in the fields of physical education and sports sciences, sports technology and
high performance training for all sports and games. In its written reply the Department informed
the Committee that this  comprehensive legislation has been made  to ensure that the University is
not handicapped at a later stage in spreading sports culture and sports education throughout the
country. The first stage would be setting up NSU and its Outlying Campuses. Establishment of
centers and institutions of excellence would be undertaken subsequently and resources and
funds would be marshaled for meeting the increased scope and reach of NSU and outlying
campuses in the times to come. The Committee feels that the proposed University would prove to
be an umbrella at the national level synchronizing all the sports related activities right from
11

12
spreading the sports culture throughout the country to producing the medal winning sportspersons
at global  level. (Para 39)
The Committee was however concerned about the resources that university needs. It was
assured by the Department that it would be ensured that the NSU and its outlying campuses do not
suffer on this account. The Committee suggests that it should also be ensured that the funds are
rightfully utilized.  The Committee is also of the view that the University should be able to generate
its own resources to meet or supplement its requirements. (Para 40)
The Committee agrees with the Department that the university through its extramural research
and training programmes will reach out to the people who are not full time students of the university.
The University may, through its extension services conduct special/ customize programmes on the
demand/request from various institutions, organizations, sports bodies etc. (Para 42)
The Committee takes note of the submission by the Department in furtherance of the
objects enumerated in this clause, the University shall be instrumental in giving effect to the
procedures and standards provided under the Khelo India Scheme or the National Sports Talent
Search Identification Scheme. The Committee believes that since  Khelo India is one of the
flagship schemes of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports aiming at broad basing of sports
throughout the country and one of components of the Scheme is Talent Search and Development,
NSU will be of immense help to the Ministry in prescribing procedures and standards for talent
identification under the Khelo India Scheme and the NSU may function as the training centre for
select sport disciplines, identify the talented sportspersons and nurture/ groom them under Khelo
India Scheme. (Para 43)
The Committee apprehends  that through this clause  the Central Government by appointing
one or more person to review the work at the university including the outlying campuses, colleges,
study centres and regional centres maintained by it may unnecessarily lead to interference in
affairs of the university and thereby affect its autonomy.  The Committee feels that the university
should have autonomy over its functioning and also the matters relating to it. The Committee feels
that the Department of Sports has to allay such an apprehension and ensure that this provision
needs to be in line with other Central Universities and in any case should not hamper with the
autonomy of the university. The Committee feels that like other central universities, this
university should also be given freedom to decide the courses and the degrees to be conferred to
its stud ents. (Para 45)
The Committee, however, finds that the Bill does not provide for appointment of Visitor as is
the case in respect of central universities. When enquired, the Secretary, Department of Sports
explained to the Committee that this provision of visitor has been substituted with the provision of
Central Government because administrative responsibilities have to be exercised by the Central
Government. The Committee is in agreement with the explanation given by the Secretary,
Department of Sports. (Para 47)
The Committee is very much concerned about the availability of funds for the University and
feels that at any point of time it should not suffer due to resource constraints.  It suggests that in
addition to the provision made in the Bill, the University should also explore other resources like

13
reaching out to corporate sector for contribution under CSR requesting for setting up of Chairs,
fellowships and scholarships in the University. (Para 49)
The Committee suggests that the outlying campuses should be established in different regions
in the country which are hubs of different sports. The Committee points out that specific sports like
hockey, wrestling are popular in Punjab and Haryana, Archery and Shooting popular in Madhya
Pradesh and Jharkhand and Athletics in Kerala and other southern States. The Committee
recommends that the outlying campuses should also focus on the specific sports which are popular
in those areas and also provide infrastructure, coaching and other facilities to the sportspersons
playing the sports there. (Para 50)
The Committee would like to point out that the faculty is needed to produce World Class
Athletes at the University.  The Committee points out that due to the location of the University
many of the faculties would find it difficult to travel to the location.  The Committee also feels that
some incentives should be given so that World Class Coaches are attracted to take faculty position
at the University. (Para 51)
The Committee also suggests that the university should use information and technology to
provide online courses to students in other parts of the country. The Committee feels that the
establishment of this university will not only help in instilling sports culture in our society but also
help in r aising the standards of coaching, infrastructure, umpiring and other areas related to
sports. (Para 52)
The Committee endorses the Bill in its present form. The suggestions given by the Committee
may however be taken into account at appropriate stage. (Para 53)

MINUTES

17
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M., Monday the 16th October, 2017 in
Committee Room No.3, A Block, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya     —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
5. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
8. Shri Nihal Chand
9. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
10. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
11. Shri Ramachandran Mullappaly
12. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
13. Shri Hari Om Pandey
14. Shri N.K. Premachandran
15. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
16. Dr. Nepal Singh
17. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
18. Shri Satyapal Singh
19. Shri P.R. Sundaram
20. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer

18
WITNESSES
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports
(Department of Sports)
1. Shri Injeti Srinivas, Secretary (Sports)
2. Smt. Kiran Soni Gupta, AS & FA (MY AS)
3. Shri Naveen Agarwal, DG , NADA
4. Shri Sandip Pradhan, DDG , SAI
5. Shri Sagar Preet Hooda, Director, MYAS
6. Shri Vivek Narayan, Director, MYAS
7. Shri Sanjeev Barnwal, Director, (Infra.), SAI
8. Prof. (Dr.) G.L. Khanna, Project Director, IISSR
9. Prof. (Dr.) Jayashree Acharya, Project Director, NSU
10. Shri Sunil Garg, Deputy Secretary, MY AS
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the newly re-constituted
Committee. He informed the members that two Bills viz., (i) the National Sports Universify Bill, 2017; and
(ii) the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (Second Amendment) Bill, 2017 has been
referred to the Committee for examination and report by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation
with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha. He’ then apprised the Members that the meeting has been convened
to hear the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Sports to discuss and examine the National
Sports University Bill, 2017.
3. The, Secretary, Department of Sports in his presentation before the Committee submitted that the
announcement regarding the setting up of the National Sports University in Manipur was made in the Budget
Speech on 10
th July, 2014. He informed the Committee that this would be the first sports university of its
kind in India. He further added that the university would emphasize on inter-disciplinary approach; integrate
sports science, sport medicine and sports technology and educate, train and produce best sportspersons in
consistency with international trends. It would also encourage adventure sports and provide facilities and
training to para and differently-abled sportspersons.
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised a number of issues which were replied to by the
Secretary, Department of Sports.
(Witnesses then withdrew)
5. The Committee, then, decided to undertake a study visit to Guwahati and Imphal from 29 th October to
3rd November, 2017 to assess the problems and issues being faced by the higher education sector, examine
infrastructure facilities at SAI Sports Complex/Centres, contribution to NSDF, performance of National
Sports Development Fund (NSDF) and recruitment and promotion of sportspersons in PSUs, functioning
of Anganwadi Centres and facilities available there and progress of Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Scheme at these
places. The Committee also decided to interact with the stakeholders in connection with the National Sports
University Bill, 2017 and the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (Second Amendment) Bill,
2017. The Committee decided to interact with the authorities of the Universities, Higher Education Institutions,
Sports Authorities, PSUs and officers of the Central and State Governments as well as representatives of

19
other organisations on these issues at Guwahati and Imphal. The Committee, accordingly, authorized the
Chairman of the Committee to approach the Hon’ble Chairman for seeking permission for the aforesaid
visit.
6. The Committee also agreed to issue a Press Communique in respect of both the Bills for soliciting the
views of public on the provisions of both the Bills.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M.

20
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M on Wednesday, the 13th December,
2017 in Committee Room D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
5. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
7. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
8. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
9. Shri N.K. Premachandran
10. Dr. Nepal Singh
11. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
12. Shri Satyapal Singh
13. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
WITNESSES
I. Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior
(i) Prof. Dilip K. Dureha, Vice-Chancellor
(ii) Shri S.K Sharma, Project Officer
II. Faculty of Sports Medicine & Physiotherapy, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar
Prof. (Dr.) Shyamal Koley, Dean & Head
III. Department of Physical Education & Sports Sciences, Faculty of Inter-Disciplinary and
Applied Sciences, Delhi University
Dr. Sandeep Tiwari, Head

21
IV. Sports Injury Centre, Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi
(i) Dr. Deepak Chaudhary, Director
(ii) Col. (Dr.) Bibhu Nayak, Specialist (Sports Medicine)
V. Ministry of Law and Justice
(i) Dr. N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
(ii) Smt. Veena Kothavale, Additional Legislative Counsel
VI. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
(i) Shri Pankaj Rag, Joint Secretary (Dev.)
(ii) Shri Naveen Agarwal, Director, NSU Society
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and other delegates to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the representatives of Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior; Faculty
of Sports Medicine & Physiotherapy, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar; Department of Physical Education
& Sports Sciences, Faculty of Inter-Disciplinary and Applied Sciences, Delhi University and Sports Injury
Centre, Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi. Thereafter, he briefed the participants about the important provisions
of Bill and sought their views on the same.
2. Vice-Chancellor, Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior dwelled upon the various
provisions of the Bill and was of the opinion; that it should be passed at the earliest and any shortcomings
may be resolved by way of amendments at a later stage.
3. Dean and Head, Faculty of Sports Medicine & Physiotherapy, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar
suggested that to promote research, a post of Director (Research) may be created; an ethical Committee
should be set up to handle issues like doping etc and a medical unit should be set up in the University
comprising of sports physiotherapy unit.
4. Head of Department of Physical Education & Sports Sciences, C/o Indira Gandhi Institute of Physical
Education & Sports Sciences, Delhi University briefed the Committee on the issues that needs to be
incorporated in the Bill. He suggested the following measures to be taken care of in the Bill: (i) need for
developing adequate norms for assessing the individuals talent; (ii) need for developing models for identifying
the potential persons for different sports; (iii) parity between the degrees, diplomas and certificate courses
need to be made; (iv) the curriculum of the degree courses should be made a part of different State Public
Service Commission exams to promote physical education degree courses; (v) research needs to be promoted
at the University; (vi) the Minister of Sports can be made one of the pro Vice-Chancellors; (vii) School of
Studies need to be mentioned in the beginning; and (viii) collaboration between different faculties/disciplines
be developed for better Sports Management.
5. Director, Sports Injury Centre, Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi emphasized on international
collaborations with different institutions and stressed that there should also be collaboration with premier
management and technological institutions of the country. He also emphasized on an all India entrance
examination for the University courses and the need to develop quality course content. He also pointed out
need for generating funds for the courses to make them self-sustaining.
6. Joint Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports informed the Committee that some suggestions
have already been incorporated in the Bill while the rest of the suggestions would be taken into consideration

22
when the University starts functioning and the Executive Committee is formed. It was also stated that in
due course the, norms would be developed by the University which could then be adopted by other
Universities. Issues like talent identification, collaboration with industry, focus on research were also
dwelled upon.
7. The Committee thereafter, raised a number of queries, some of which were clarified to by the
representatives. The Committee asked the Ministry for written replies that remained unanswered.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.

23
V
FIFTH  MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 4th January,
2018 in Committee Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK  SABHA
5. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
6. Shri Nihal Chand
7. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
8. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
9. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
10. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
11. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
12. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the draft (i) 294
th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations /
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty third Report on “Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and
Mid-Day-Meal Scheme”, (ii) 295 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty fourth Report on “Issues and Challenges before
Higher Education Sector in India”, (iii) 296 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2017-
2018) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, (iv) 297th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty eighth Report on Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Department of Higher Education, (v) 298 th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty ninth Report on Demands for
Grants (2017-2018) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development and (vi) 299th Report on the National
Sports University Bill, 2017.

24
3. The Committee considered the draft 294th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th and 299th Reports and adopted
them after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decide to present/lay the 294th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th and 299th Reports
to both the Houses of the Parliament on 5th  January, 2018. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in
his absence, Shri Partap Singh Bajwa, M.P., Rajya Sabha to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and
Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P., Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati, M.P .,
Lok Sabha to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 A.M.

25
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 162 of 2017
THE NA TIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY BILL, 2017
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLA USES
—————
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Establishment of University.
4. Objects of University.
5. Powers and functions of University.
6. University to be open to all castes, creed, race or class.
7. Central Government to review work and progress of University.
8. Officers of the University.
9. Chancellor.
10. Vice-Chancellor.
11. Deans of Schools.
12. Registrar.
13. Finance Officer
14. Controller of Examinations.
15. Librarian.
16. Other officers
17. Authorities of University.
18. The Court.
19. Executive Council.
20. Academic and Activity Council.
21. Board of Sports Studies.
22. Finance Committee.
23. Other authorities of University.
24. Power to make Statutes.
25. Statutes how to be made.
26. Power to make Ordinances.

26
27. Regulations.
28. Annual report.
29. Annual accounts.
C
LAUSES
30. Fund of University
31. Returns and information
32. Conditions or service of employees. etc.
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students
34. Right to appeals.
35. Provident and pension funds.
36. Disputes as to constitutions of authorities and bodies.
37. Filling of casual vacancies
38. Proceedings of authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
39. Protection of action taken in good faith
40. Mode of proof of University record
41. Powers to remove difficulties.
42. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before
Parliament.
43. Transitional provisions.
THE SCHEDULE.

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 162 of 2017
THE NA TIONAL SPORTS UNIVERSITY BILL, 2017
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a National Sports University in the State of Manipur, a
specialised University first of its kind. to promote sports education in the areas of
sports sciences. sports technology. sports management and sports coaching besides
functioning as the national training centre for select sports disciplines by adopting
best international practices and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:-
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the National Sports University
Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a)” Academic and Activity Council” means the Academic
and Activity Council of the University;
(b) “academic staff’ means such categories of staff as are
designated as academic staff by the Ordinances;
27
Short title,
extent and
commencement
Definitions

28
(c) “Board of Sports Studies” means the Board of Sports
Studies of a Department of the University;
(d) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the University;
(e) “College” means a college or other academic Institution
established or maintained by or admitted to the privileges of,
the University;
(f) “Court” means the Court of the University;
(g) “Department” means a Department of Studies and
includes a Centre of Studies;
(h) “employee” means any person appointed by the
University and includes teachers and other staff of the University;
(i) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the
University;
(j) “Finance Committee” means the Finance Committee of
the University;
(k) “Fund” means the University Fund referred to in section
30;
(l) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for
the students of the University, or of an outlying campus or of a
College or an Institution, maintained by the University;
(m) “Head of the Department’ means the head of any
teaching department of the University;
(n) “Institution’ means an academic Institution, not being a
college, maintained by or admitted to the privileges of, the
University;
(o) “outlying campus’ means the campus of the University
as may be established by it at any place within or outside India;
(p) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an Institution
maintained by the University and includes, where there is no
Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as
Principal, and in the absence of the Principal, or the acting
Principal, a Vice-Principal duly appointed as such;
(q) “Regional Centre” means a Centre established or
maintained by the University for the purpose of co-ordinating
and supervising the work of Study Centres in any region and
for performing such other functions as may be conferred on
such centre by the Executive Council;

29
(r) “Regulations” means the regulations made by any
authority of the University under this Act for the time being in
force;
(s) “School” means a School of Studies of the University;
(t) “section” means the section of this Act;
(u) “State” includes a Union territory;
(v) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the
Statutes and the Ordinances of the University for the time being
in force;
(w) “Study Centre” means a centre established, maintained
or recognised by the University for the purpose of advising,
counseling, training or for rendering any other assistance
required by the students;
(x) “teachers of the University” means Professors, Associate
Professors, Assistant Professors and such other persons as may
be appointed for imparting instructions, training or conducting
research in the University or in any outlying campus, College or
Institution or Regional Centres and Study Centres maintained
by the University and are designated as teachers by the
Ordinances;
(y) “University” means the National Sports University
established and incorporated as a University under this Act;
(z) “Vice-Chancellor” means the Vice-Chancellor of the
University.
3. (1) There shall be established a University by the name of
“National Sports University”.
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be in the State of
Manipur and it may establish or maintain outlying campuses, Colleges,
Regional Centres and Study Centres at such other places in India as
it may deem fit:
Provided that the University may, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, also establish outlying campuses and Study
Centres outside India.
(3) The first Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor and the first
members of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic
and Activity Council, and all such persons who may hereafter
become such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold
such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate
by the name of “National Sports University”.
Establishment
of University

30
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common
seal, and sue or be sued by the said name.
4. The objects of the University shall be-
(i) to evolve as an institute of advanced study in the field of
physical education and sports sciences;
(ii ) to provide for research and development and
dissemination of knowledge in physical education and sports
sciences by providing specially designed academic and training
programmes in various areas of physical education and sports
sciences and training in advanced technologies of sports;
(iii) to strengthen physical education and sports training
programme; to promote sports including traditional and tribal
sports and games;
(iv) to establish centres and institutions of excellence for
imparting state of the art educational training and research in
the fields of physical education and sports sciences, sports
technology and high performance training for all sports and
games;
(v) to provide professional and academic leadership to other
institutions in the field of physical education and sports sciences;
(vi) to provide vocational guidance and placement services
in physical education, sports sciences, sports medicine, sports
technology and other related fields;
(vii ) to generate capabilities for the development of
knowledge, skills and competences at various levels in the fields
of physical education and sports sciences, sports technology
and high performance training for all sports and games;
(viii) to generate capabilities to provide infrastructure of
international standard for education, training and research in
the areas related to physical education and sports sciences, sports
technology and high performance training for all sports and
games;
(ix) to prepare highly qualified professionals in the fields of
physic a education and sports sciences sports technology and
high performance training for all sports and game’s;
(x) to serve as a Centre of Excellence for the elite and other
talented sports-persons of all sports and games and innovation
in physical education and sports science’s’ and to carry out,
endorse and propagate research;
Objects of
University

31
(xi) to function as a leading resource centre for knowledge
and development in the areas of physical education and sports
sciences, sports technology and high performance training for
all sports and games;
(xii) to provide international collaboration in the fields of
physical education and sports sciences, Sports technology and
high performance training for all sports and games;
(xiii) to establish close linkage with sports academies,
schools, colleges, sports and recreation clubs, sports associations
and international federations for the purpose of teaching, training
and research in physical education and sports sciences, sports
technology and high performance training for all sports and
games;
(xiv) to train talented athletes so as to help them to evolve
into elite athletes of international level;
(xv) to make India become a sporting power;
(xvi) such other objects, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, which the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
5. ( 1) The University shall have the following powers and
functions, namely:—
(i) to plan, design. develop and prescribe courses of study
and conduct appropriate academic and training programmes in
physical education anti sports sciences including sports
technology and to provide for instruction and training in such
branches of learning as the University may, from time to time,
determine and to make previsions for research and for the
advancement and dissemination of knowledge;
(ii) to grant, subject to such-conditions as the University
may determine, diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees
or other academic distinctions on, persons, on the basis of
examinations, evaluation or any method of testing, and to
withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;
(iii) to provide opportunities to the students of the University
to participate in the sports tournaments and competitions in co-
ordination with established International Sports Federations,
National Sports Federations. Indian Olympic Association and
Association of Indian Universities;
Powers and
functions of
University

32
(iv) to have liaison or membership with various international
professional organisations or bodies:
(v) to establish and maintain, with the prior approval of tile
Central Government, such outlying campuses, Regional Centres,
specialised laboratories or other units for research, instruction
and training as me, in the opinion of the University, necessary
for the furtherance of its objects:
(vi) to establish, maintain or recognise Study Centres in the
manner laid down by the Statutes;
(vii) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;
(viii) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in
the manner prescribed by the Statutes;
(ix) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Associate
Professorships, Assistant Professorships and other teaching or
academic positions, required by the University and to appoint
persons to such Principalships, Professorships, Associate
Professorships, Assistant Professorships or other teaching or
academic positions;
(x) to appoint persons working in any University or academic
institution, including those located outside the country, as
teachers of the University for a specified period;
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and
to make appointments thereto;
(xii) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other
University or authority or institution of higher learning, including
those located outside the country, in such manner and for such
purposes as the University, may determine;
(xiii) to provide facilities through the distance education
system to such persons and in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Statutes;
(xiv) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships,
studentships, medals and prizes for raising academic standards
and research;
(xv) to organise and to undertake extramural studies, training
and extension services;
(xvi) to make provision for research and advisory services
and for that purpose, to enter into such arrangements with other
institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University
may deem necessary;

33
(xvii ) to organise and conduct refresher Courses,
workshops, seminars and other programmes for teachers,
evaluators, other academic staff and students;
(xviii ) to appoint on contract or other-vise visiting
Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and such other
persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects
of the University;
(xix) to determine standards of admission to the University,
which may include examination, evaluation or any other method
of resting;
(xx) to demand and receive payment of fees and other
charges;
(xxi) to supervise the residences of the students of the
University and to make arrangements for promoting their health
and general welfare;
(xxii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of
employees including their code of conduct;
(xxiii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students
and the employees, and to take such disciplinary measures in
this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and
general welfare of the employees;
(xxv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to
acquire, hold and manage, and to dispose of, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, any properly, movable or
immovable, including trust and endowment properties, for the
purposes of the University;
(xxvi) to borrow, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, on the security of the property of the University,
money for the purposes of the University;
(xxvii) to conduct innovative experiments and promote new
methods and technologies in the fields of physical education,
sports sciences, sports medicine, sports technology, and sports
management and other related fields;
(xxviii) to purchase or to take on lease any land or building
or sports complex or sports infrastructure and scientific sports
research equipment or indoor stadium or works which may be
necessary or convenient for the purposes of the University, on
such terms and conditions as it may think fit and proper and to
construct, alter and maintain any such building or work;

34
(xxix) to start any new allied course or research programme
or diploma or training programme and discontinue any course
or training programme;
(xxx) to invest the funds of the University in or upon such
securities and transpose any investment from time to time in
such manner as it may deem fit in the interest of the University;
(xxxi ) to execute conveyances regarding transfers,
mortgages, leases, licenses, agreements and other conveyances
in respect of the property, movable or immovable, including
Government securities, belonging to the University or to be
acquired for the purposes of the University, after taking prior
permission of the Central Government;
(xxxii) to act as a technical advisory body to Government
of India and other National Organisations, State Governments
and National Sports Federations on all matters related to sports;
(xxxiii) to provide training, coaching and other back up to
high level sports persons for achieving success in different
national and international sports competitions;
(xxxiv ) to give effect to the procedures and standards
provided under the Khelo India Scheme or the National Sports
Talent Search and Identification Scheme;
(xxxv) to confer autonomous status on a College or an
Institution in the manner laid down by the Statutes;
(xxxvi) to admit to its privileges any College or Institution in
or outside India subject to such conditions as may be laid down
by the Statutes;
Provided that no College or Institution shall be so admitted
except with the prior approval of the Central Government;
(xxxvii) to provide for the preparation of instructional and
training materials, including films cassettes. tapes, video cassettes
and other software:
(xxxviii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in
any College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the
University; and
(xxxix) to do all such other acts and things (is may be
necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or
any of it objects.
(2) The University shall in the exercise of its powers have

35
jurisdiction over the whole of India and to the outlying campuses
and Study Centres outside India.
(3) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section ( 1). it
shall be the endeavour of the University to’ maintain an all-India
character and high standards of teaching, training and research and
the University shall, among other measures which may necessary
for the said purpose. take, in particular, the following measures,
namely:—
(i) admissions of students and recruitment of faculty shall
be made on all-India basis through appropriate procedures
approved by the Executive Council of the University;
(ii) foreign students shall be admitted to various courses
and programmes by the University as per the policy and schemes
of the Government of India and the procedure approved by the
Executive Council of the National Sports University;
(iii) inter-University mobility of faculty with portable pension
scheme benefits, if any and protection of seniority shall be
encouraged;
(iv) semester system, continuous evaluation and choice-
based credit system shall be introduced and the University shall
enter into agreement with other Universities and academic
Institutions for credit transfer and joint degree programmes;
(v) innovative courses and programmes of studies shall be
introduced with a provision for periodic review and
restructuring;
(vi) active participation of students shall be ensured in all
academic activities of the University. including evaluation of
teachers;
(vii) accreditation shall be obtained from the National
Assessment. and Accreditation Councilor any other accrediting
agency at the national level; and
(viii) e-governance shall be introduced with an effective
management information.
6. The University shall be open to persons of any sex and of
whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for
the University to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever
of religious belief or profession in order to entitle such person to be
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office
therein or to be admitted as a student in the University or to graduate
thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:
University to be
open to all castes,
creed, race or class

36
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent
the University from making special provisions for the employment
or admission of women. persons with disabilities or of persons
belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially
and educationally backward classes of citizens:
Provided further that no such special provision shall be made
on the ground of domicile.
7. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, appoint
one or more persons to review the work and progress of the
University, including outlying campuses, Colleges, Institutions,
Regional Centres and Study Centres maintained by it. and to submit
a report thereon; and upon receipt of that report, the Central
Government may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council
thereon through the Vice-Chancellor, take such action and issue
such directions, as it considers necessary, in respect of any of the
matters dealt with in the report and the University shall abide by
such action and be bound to comply with such directions.
(2) The Central Government shall have the right to cause an
inspection to be made by such person or persons, as it may direct,
of the University, its buildings, sports complexes, libraries,
laboratories and equipment and of any outlying campus or College
or Institution or Regional Centres or Study Centres maintained by
the University; and also of the examinations, teaching and other
work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry
to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with
the administration or finances of the University, Colleges or institutions
or Regional Centres or Study Centres.
(3) The Central Government shall, in every matter referred to in
sub-section (2), give notice of its intention to cause an inspection
or inquiry to be made, to the University, and the University shall
have the right to make such representations to the Central
Government, as It may consider necessary.
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the
University, the Central Government may cause to be made such
inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub-section ( 3).
(5) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made
by the Central Government, the University shall be entitled to appoint
a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be heard
at such inspection or inquiry.
Central
Government to
review work and
progress of
University

37
(6) The Central Government may, if the inspection or inquiry is
made in respect of the University or any outlying campus or College
or Institution or Regional Centre or Study Centre established or
maintained by it, address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to the
result of such inspection or inquiry together with such views and
advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Central
Government may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address
made by the. Central Government, the Vice-Chancellor shall
communicate to the Executive Council the views of the Central
Government with such advice as the Central Government may offer
upon the action to be taken thereon.
(7) The Executive Council shall communicate through the Vice-
Chancellor to the Central Government such action, if any, as it
proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection
or inquiry.
(8) Where, the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable
time, take action to the satisfaction of the Central Government, it
may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation
made by the Executive Council, issue such directions, as it may
think fit, and the Executive Council shall comply with such directions.
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section,
the Central Government may, by order in writing, annul any
proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances:
Provided that before making any such order, the Central
Government shall call upon the Vice-Chancellor to show cause why
such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown
within a reasonable time, it shall consider the same.
(10) The Central Government shall have such other powers, in
respect of the affairs of the University, as may be prescribed by the
Statutes.
8. The following shall be the officers of the University, namely:—
(a) the Chancellor;
(b) the Vice-Chancellor;
(c) the Deans of Schools ;
(d) the Registrar;
(e) the Finance Officer;
(f) the Controller of Examinations ;
Officers of the
University

38
(g) the Librarian: and
(h) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes
to be the officers of the University.
9. ( 1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office. be the head of
the University and shall, if present, preside at the Convocations of
the University held for conferring degrees and other ceremonial
functions and also the meetings of the Court.
10. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor Shall be the principal executive and
academic officer of the University and shall exercise general
supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give
effect to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.
(3) The V ice-Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that
immediate action is necessary on any matter. exercise any power
conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act
and shall appraise such authority at the next meeting the action
taken by him on such matter;
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that
such action ought not to have been taken, it may refer the matter to
the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided further that any person in the service of the University
who is aggrieved by the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under
this sub-section shall have the right to represent against such action
to the Executive Council within three months from the date on which
decision an such action is communicated to him and thereupon the
Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken
by the Vice-Chancellor.
(4) Where the Vice-Chancellor is of the opinion that any decision
taken by any authority of the University is beyond the powers of
the authority conferred under the provisions of this Act or the Statutes
or the Ordinances, or that any decision taken by the authority is not
in the interest of the University, he may ask the authority concerned
to review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the
authority refuses to review the decision either in whole or in part or
no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the
matter shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision
thereon shall be final.
Chancellor.
Vice-Chancellor.

39
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and
perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or
the Ordinances.
11. Every Dean of School shall be appointed in such manner,
and on such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the
Statutes.
12. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner, and on
such terms and conditions of service, as may be prescribed by the
Statutes.
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements.
sign documents and authenticate records on behalf of the University,
and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
13. The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner, and
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
prescribed by the Statutes.
14. The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed in such
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties,
as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
15. The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and on
such terms and conditions of service, and shall exercise such powers
and perform such duties, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
16. The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other
officers of the University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
17. The following shall be the authorities of the University,
name!y:—
(a) the Court;
(b) the Executive Council;
(c) the Academic and Activity Council;
(d) the Board of Sports Studies;
(e) the finance Committee;
(f) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes
to be the authorities of the University.
18. (1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of
its members shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
Dean of School
Registrar
Finance Officer
Controller of
Examinations
Librarian
Other officers
Authorities of the
University
The Court

40
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have
the following powers and functions, namely:—
(a) to review from time to time, the broad policies and
programmes of the University, and to suggest measures for the
improvement and development of the University;
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report
and the annual accounts of the University and the audit report
on such accounts;
(c) to advise the Central Government in respect of any matter
which may be referred to it for advice; and
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed
by the Statutes.
19. (1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive
body of the University.
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office
of its members and its powers and functions shall be prescribed by
the Statutes.
20. (1) The Academic and Activity Council shall be the principle
academic body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions
of this Act. the Statutes and the Ordinances, co-ordinate and
exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the
University.
(2) The constitution of the Academic and Activity Council, the
term of office of its members and its powers and functions shall be
prescribed by the Statutes:
Provided that the Academic and Activity Council shall have sports
persons who have achieved distinction in Olympics or world
championships.
21. The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of
Sports Studies shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
22. The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance
Committee shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
23. The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities,
as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the
University, shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
24. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
Executive Council
Academic and
Activity Council.
Board of Sports
Studies
Finance
Committee
Other authorities
of University
Power to make
Statutes

41
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of authorities
and other bodies of the University, as may be constituted from
time to lime;
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members
of the said authorities and bodies, the filling up of vacancies of
members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and
other bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to
provide;
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of
the University and their emoluments;
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other
employees of the University, the emoluments and conditions of
service;
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working
in any other University or organisation for a specific period for
undertaking a joint project;
(f) the conditions of service of employees including
provisions for pension, insurance, provident fund the manner
of termination of service and disciplinary action;
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of .the
employees of the University;
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between
employees or students and the University;
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by
any employee or student against the action of any officer or
authority of the University;
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an
Institution or a Department;
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments,
Centres. Halls, Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study
Centres;
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;
(m) the conferment and withdrawal of degrees, diplomas,
certificates and other academic distinctions;
(n) the management of Colleges, Institutions, Regional
Centres and Study Centres established and maintained by the
University;

42
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or
officers of the University;
(p) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and
students; and
(q) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be,
provided for by the Statutes.
25. (1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule to
this Act.
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new
or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal any Statutes referred
to in sub-section ( 1):
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or
repeal any Statutes affecting the status, powers or constitution of
any authority of the University until such authority has been given
an opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on proposed
changes, and any opinion so expressed shall be considered by the
Executive Council.
(3) Every new Statutes amending or repealing existing Statutes
shall require the approval of the Central Government and unless so
approved, they shall be invalid.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-
sections, the Central Government may make new or additional
Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub-section
(1) during the period of three years immediately after the
commencement of this Act:
Provided that the Central Government may, on the expiry of the
said period of three years, make, within one year from the date of
such expiry, such detailed Statutes as it may consider necessary
and such detailed Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of
Parliament.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the
Central Government may direct the University to make provisions
in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by it and if the
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty
days of its receipt, the Central Government may, after considering
the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its
inability to comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes
suitably.
Statutes how to be
made

43
26. (1) Subject to ,the provisions of this Act and the Statutes,
the Ordinance, may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the admission of students to the University and their
enrolment as such;
(b) the courses of study and their duration to be laid down
for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other
academic distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the
means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the
same;
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the
University and for admission to examinations, degrees and
diplomas of the University;
(f) the conditions for award of fellowship, scholarships,
studentships, medals and prizes;
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office
and manner of appointment and the duties of examining bodies,
examiners and moderators;
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the
University;
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for
the residence and teaching of women students and the
prescribing of special courses of studies for them;
(j) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Board of Studies,
Specialised Laboratories and other Committees;
(k) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other
Universities, Institutions and other agencies including learned
bodies or associations;
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other
body which is considered necessary for improving the academic
life of the University;
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships,
medals and prizes;
(n) the setting-up of a machinery for redressal of grievances
of employees and students; and
Power to make
Ordinance

44
(o) all other matters which by this Act, or, the Statutes, are
to be, or, may be, provided for by the Ordinances.
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor
with previous approval of the Executive Council and the Ordinances
so made may also be amended, repealed or added to at any time by
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
27. The authorities of the University may make Regulations,
consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, for the
conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any,
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or
the Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
28. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared
under the directions of Executive Council, which shall include, among
other matters, the steps taken by the University towards the fulfilment
of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or before such
date as may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Court shall consider
the report in its annual meeting.
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the Central
Government along with its comments, if any.
(3) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, cause a
copy of the annual report to be laid before both the Houses of
Parliament.
29. (1) The annual accounts and balance-sheet of the University
shall be prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and
shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not more than
fifteen months. be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India or by such persons as he may authorise in this behalf.
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report
thereon shall be submitted to the Court and the Central Government
along with the observations of the Executive Council.
(3) Any observations made by the Central Government on the
annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the Court and the
observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by
the Executive Council. be submitted to the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be. cause
the copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report to be
laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before
both Houses of Parliament shall be published in the Gazette of India.
Regulations
Annual report
Annual accounts

45
30. (1) There shall be a University Fund which shall include—
(a) any contribution or grant made by the University Grants
Commission or the Central Government:
(b) any contribution or grant made by the State Government;
(c) any contribution made by Government. semi-Government
or autonomous bodies;
(d) any loans, gifts, bequests, donations, endowments or
other grants, if any;
(e) income received by the University from fees and charges;
and
(f) the moneys received by the University from the
collaborating industries in terms or the provisions of the
Memorandum of Understanding entered between the University
and the industry for the establishment of sponsored Chairs,
fellowships or infrastructure facilities of the University; and
(g) amounts received in any other manner from any other
source.
(2) All funds of the University shall be deposited in such banks
or invested in Such manner as the Board may decide on the
recommendation of the Finance Committee.
(3) The funds of the University shall be applied towards the
expenses of the University including expenses incurred in the exercise
of its powers and discharge of its functions by or under this Act.
31. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such
returns or other information with respect to its property or activities,
within such period, as the Central Government may. from time to
time, require.
32. ( 1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University
and a copy of which shall be furnished to the employee concerned.
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University
and any employee shall, at the request of the employee, be referred
to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee
concerned and an umpire appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall
lie in any civil court in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal:
Fund of
University
Returns and
information
Conditions of
service of
employees, etc.

46
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall preclude the
employee from availing of the judicial remedies available under articles
32 and 226 of the Constitution.
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub-section ( 2)
shall be deemed to be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of
this section within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act. 1996.
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall
be prescribed by the Statutes.
33. (1) Any student or candidate for an examination whose name
has been removed from the rolls of the University by the orders or
resolution of the Vice-Chancellor. Discipline Committee or
Examination Committee, as the case may be, and who has been
debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for
more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of
such orders or copy of such resolution by him, appeal to the
Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify
or reverse the decision of the Vice-Chancellor or the Committee, as
the case may be.
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by
the University against a student shall, at the request of such student,
be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub-
sections (2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 32 shall, as far as may be,
apply to a reference made under this sub-section.
34. Every employee or student of the University or of a College
or an institution or a Regional Centre or a Study Centre established
or maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may
be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the
decision of any officer or authority of the University, or of the
Principal or the management of any College an Institution or Regional
Centre or Study Centre, as the case may be, and thereupon, the
Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision
appealed against.
35. (1) The University shall constitute for benefit of its employees
such provident fund or any other similar fund or provide such
insurance schemes as it may deem tit, in such manner and subject
to such conditions, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
(2) Where such provident fund or other similar fund has been
so constituted, the Central Government may declare that the
Procedure of
appeal and
arbitration in
disciplinary cases
against students
Right to appeals
Provident and
pension funds

47
provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 shall apply to such
fund, as if it were a Government provident fund.
36. If any question arises as to whether any person has been
duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any
authority or other body of the University, the matter, shall be referred
to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final.
37. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex
officio members) of any authority or other body of the University
shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person or body who
appoints, elects or co-opts the member. whose place has become
vacant and the persons appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual
vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue
of the term for which the person whose place he tills would have
been a member.
38. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the
University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a
vacancy or vacancies among its members.
39. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer
or other employee of the University for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions
of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances
40. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of
any receipt, application. notice, order, proceeding or resolution of
any authority or other body of the University, or any other document
in possession of the University, or any entry in any register duly
maintained by the University, if certified by the Registrar, shall be
received as prima facie evidence of such receipt, application, notice,
order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry
in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and
transactions therein where the original thereof would, if produced,
have been admissible in evidence.
41. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act., the Central Government: may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of three years from the commencement of this
Act.
Disputes as to
constitutions of
authorities and
bodies
Filling of casual
vacancies
Proceedings of
authorities or
bodies not
invalidated by
vacancies.
Proteetion of
action taken in
good faith
Mode of proof of
University record
Power to remove
difficulties

48
(2) Every order made under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament,
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the order or both Houses agree that the
order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the Validity of anything previously done under
that order.
42. (1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this
Act shall be published in the Official Gazette,
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this
Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
Statute, Ordinances or Regulations or both Houses agree that the
Statute, Ordinances or Regulations should not be made, the Statute,
Ordinances or Regulations shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done Linder the Statute,
Ordinances or Regulations.
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations
shall include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not
earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes,
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect
shall be given to any Statues, Ordinances or Regulations so as to
prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statutes,
Ordinances or Regulations may be applicable.
43. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the
Statutes,—
(a) the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner and on such conditions as may be
deemed fit and the said officer shall hold office for such term,
not exceeding five years, as may be specified by the Central
Government;
Statutes,
Ordinances and
Regulations to be
published in the
Officail Gazette
and to be laid
before Parliament
Transitional
provisions

49
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be
appointed by the Central Government and each of the said
officers shall hold office for a term of three years;
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shell consist
of not more than thirty-one members and eleven members,
respectively, who shall be nominated by the Central Government
and shall hold office for a term of three years; and
(d) the first Academic and Activity Council shall consist of
not more than twenty-one members, who shall be nominated
by the Central Government and they shall hold office for a term
of three years:
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or
authorities, the same shall be filled by appointment or nomination,
as the case may be, by the Central Government and the person so
appointed or nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer
or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated would
have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred.

THE SCHEDULE
(See section 25)
The Statutes of the University
l. ( 1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central
Government from a panel of names of not less than three persons
recommended by the Executive Council:
Provided that if the Central Government does not approve any
of the persons included in the panel, it may call for an extended
fresh panel.
(2) The Chancellor shall be an eminent person in the field of
sports who shall either be a sports person himself or a Sports
Administrator or a Sports Academician.
(3) The Chancellor shall hold office for the term of five years
and shall not be eligible for reappointment:
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office,
the Chancellor shall continue to hold office until his successor enters
upon his office.
2. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central
Government from out of a panel recommended by a Committee as
constituted under clause ( 2):
Provided that if the Central Government does not approve any
of the persons included in the panel, it may call for an extended
fresh panel.
(2) The Committee referred to in clause (1) shall consist of five
persons, out of whom three shall be nominated by the Executive
Council and two by the Central Government, and one of the
nominees of the Central Government shall be the convener of the
Committee:
Provided that none of the members of the Committee shall be
an employee of the University or of a College or institution or Regional
Centre or Study Centre established or maintained by the University
or a member of any authority of the University.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time salaried officer
of the University.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office, or until he
attains the age of seventy year, whichever is earlier, and he shall not
be eligible for reappointment:
50
Chancellor
Vice-Chancellor

51
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of
five years, he shall continue in office until his successor is appointed
and enters upon his office:
Provided further that the Central Government may direct any
Vice-Chancellor after his term has expired to continue in office for
such period, not exceeding a total period of one year. as may be
specified by it:
Provided also that when the office of the Vice-Chancellor
becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or, as the
case may be, due to illness or such other cause, the Executive
Council may appoint the senior-most Dean to perform the functions
of the Vice-Chancellor until a new Vice-Chancellor is appointed or,
as the case may be, the existing Vice-Chancellor resumes his duties.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), the Central
Government may, at any time after the Vice-Chancellor has entered
upon his office, by an order in writing, remove the Vice-Chancellor
from office on grounds of incapacity, misconduct or violation of
statutory provisions:
Provided that no such order shall be made by the Central
Government unless the Vice-Chancellor has been given a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be
taken against him:
Provided further that the Central Government may, at any time
before making such order, place the Vice-Chancellor under
suspension, pending enquiry.
(6) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-
Chancellor shall as follows:—
(i) The Vice-Chancellor shall be paid a monthly and
allowances, other than house rent allowance, at the rates fixed
by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be
entitled, without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence
throughout his term of office and no charge shall fall on the
Vice-Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence
(ii) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal
benefits and allowances as may be fixed by the Central
Government from time to time:
Provided that where an employee of the University, or of a
College, Institution, Regional Centre or Study Centre established or
maintained by the University, or of any other University or any College

52
or Institution admitted to the privileges of, the University or such
other University is appointed as the Vice-Chancellor, he may be
allowed to continue to contribute to the provident fund of which he
is a member and the University shall contribute to the account or
such person in that provident fund at the same rate at which the
person had been contributing immediately before his appointment
as the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided further that where such employee had been a member
of any pension scheme, the University shall make the necessary
contribution to such scheme.
(iii) The vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling
allowance at such rates as may be fixed by The Executive
Council.
(iv) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full
pay at the rate of’ thirty days in a calendar year and the leave
shall be credited to his account in advance in two half-yearly
instalments of fifteen days each on the first day of January and
July every year:
Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor assumes or relinquishes
charge of the office of the Vice-Chancellor during the currency of
a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the rare of
two and-a-half days for each completed month of service.
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub-clause ( iv),
the Vice-Chancellor shall also be entitled to half-Day leave at
the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service, and
half-pay leave may also be availed of as commuted leave on full
pay on medical certificate:
Provided that when such commuted leave is availed of, twice
the amount of half-pay leave shall be debited against half-pay leave
due.
3. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman of the
Executive Council, the Academic and Activity Council and the
Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor,
preside at the Convocations held for conferring degrees and at
meetings of the Court.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and
address, any meeting of any authority or other body of the University,
but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of
such authority or body.
Power and duties
of Vice-Chancellor

53
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to see that this
Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations are duly
observed and he shall have all the powers necessary to ensure such
observance.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for
the proper maintenance of discipline in the University and he may
delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall have the power to convene or
cause to be convened the meetings of the Executive Council, the
Academic and Activity Council and the Finance Committee.
4. ( 1) Every Dean of School shall be appointed by the Vice-
Chancellor from amongst the Professors in the School by rotation
in order of seniority for a period of three years:
Provided that in case there is only one Professor or no Professor
in a School. the Dean shall be appointed, for the time being, from
amongst the Professor, if any and the Associate Professors in the
School by rotation in the order of seniority:
Provided further that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty-five
years shall cease to hold office as such.
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is,
by reason of illness, absence or any other cause. unable to perform
duties of his office. the duties of the office shall be performed by
the senior-most Professor or Associate Professor. as the case may
be, in the School.
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be
responsible for the conduct and maintenance of the standards of
teaching and research in the School and shall have such other
functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at
any meeting of the Boards of Sports Studies or Committees of the
School, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote
thereat unless he is a member thereof.
5. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council
on the recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted
for the purpose and shall be whole-time salaried officer of
University.
(2) The Registrar shall be appointed for a term of five years and
shall be eligible for reappointment.
Dean of School
Registrar

54
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service
of the Registrar shall be such as may be prescribed by the Executive
Council from time to time:
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of
sixty-two years.
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the
Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable
to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be
performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint [or
the purpose.
(5)( a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action
against such of the employees, excluding teachers and other
academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Executive
Council and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings
to them or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the
withholding of increment:
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against
the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any
order of the Registrar imposing any of the penalties specified in
sub-clause ( a).
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment
beyond the power of the Registrar is called for the Registrar
shall, upon the conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the
Vice-Chancellor along with his recommendation:
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against
an order of the Vice-Chancellor imposing any penalty.
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Executive
Council and the Academic and Activity Council but shall not be
deemed to be member of either of these authorities and he shall be
ex officio Member-Secretary of the Court.
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar—
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and
such other property of the University as the Executive Council
shall commit to his charge;
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the

55
Executive Council, the Academic and Activity Council and of
any Committee appointed by those authorities;
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the
Executive Council, the Academic and Activity Council and of
any Committees appointed by those authorities;
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the
Executive Council and the Academic and Activity Council;
(e) to supply to the Central Government, copies of the agenda
of the meetings of the authorities of the University as soon as
they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;
(f) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or
against the University, sign powers of attorney and verify
pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and
(g) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the
statutes, the Ordinances or Regulations or as may be required
from time to time by the Executive Council.
6. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed in the Executive
Council on the recommendations of Selection Committee constituted
for the purpose and shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the
University.
(2) The Finance Officer shall be appointed for a term of five
years and shell be eligible for reappointment.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service
of the Finance Officer shall be such as may be prescribed by the
Executive Council from time to time:
Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the
age of sixty-two years.
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when
the Finance Officer is, by reason of illness, absence or any other
cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the
office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor
may appoint for the purpose.
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the
Finance Committee, but shall not be deemed to be a member of
such Committee.
(6) The Finance Officer shall—
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the
Finance Officer

56
University and shall advise it as regards its finan cial policy;
and
(b) perform such other financial function as may be assigned
to him by the Executive Councilor as may be prescribed by the
Statutes or the Ordinances.
(7) Subject to the control of the- Executive Council, the Finance
Officer shall—
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the
University including trust and endowed property;
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for
recurring and non-recurring expenditure for a year are not
exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for
which they are granted or allotted;
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts
and the budget of the University and for their presentation to
the Executive Council;
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank
balances and on the state of investments;
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenues and
advise on the methods of collection employed;
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and
equipment are maintained up to date and that stock-checking is
conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all
offices, Departments, Centres and Specialised Laboratories;
(g) bring to the notice of tile Vice-Chancellor any
unauthorised expenditure and other financial irregularities and
suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and
(h) call fo r from any office, Department, Centre,
Laboratory. College or Institution, Regional Centre or Study
Centre established or maintained by the University, any
information or returns that he may consider necessary for the
performance of his du ties.
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or
persons duly authorised in this behalf by the Executive Council for
any money payable to University shall be sufficient discharge for
payment of such money.
7. (1) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the
Executive Council the recommendations of a Selection Committee
Controller of
Examinations

57
constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole-time salaried
officer of the University.
(2) The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed for a term
of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service
of the Controller of Examinations shall be such as may be prescribed
by the Executive Council from time to time:
Provided that the Controller of Examinations shall retire on
attaining the age of sixty-two years.
(4) When the office of the Controller of Examinations is vacant
or when the Controller of Examinations is. by reason of illness,
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his
office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor
may appoint for the purpose.
(5) The Controller of Examinations shall arrange for and
superintend the examinations of the University in the manner
prescribed by the Ordinances.
8. (1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council
on the recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted
for the purpose and he shall be a whole-rime salaried officer of the
University.
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council.
9. (1) The court shall consist of the following members who
shall hold office for a period of three years, namely:-
(a) Ex officio Members:
(i) the Chancellor;
(ii) the Vice-Chancellor;
(iii)the Proctor;
(iv) the Deans of Schools;
(v) the Dean of Students’ Welfare;
(vi) the Finance Officer;
(vii) one Senior Warden, by rotation;
(viii) the Librarian of the University;
(ix) the President, Alumni Association;
Librarian
Constitution and
meetings of a
Court

58
(b) Other Members:
(i) Heads of Departments or Professors who are
members of the Academic and Activity Council;
(ii) one representative from each institution recognised
by the university, nominated by the Vice-Chancellor on
recommendations of the Head of the Institution;
(iii) not more than four persons from amongst eminent
sports scientists, sports academicians and sports
administrators to be nominated by the Central Government;
(iv) not more than two persons representing sports
industry, to be nominated by the Central Government;
(v) not more than ten persons from amongst eminent
sports persons and highly recognised coaches to be
nominated by the Central Government;
(e) the Registrar - Ex officio Member-Secretary.
(2) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be
fixed by the Executive Council unless some other date has been
fixed by the Court in respect of any year.
(3) At an annual meeting of the Court a report on the working
of the University during the previous year, together with a statement
of the receipts and expenditure, the balance sheet as audited, and
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.
(4) A copy of the statement or receipts and expenditure, the
balance-sheet and the financial estimates referred to in clause ( 2)
shall be sent to every member of tile Court at least seven days before
the date of the annual meeting.
(5) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the
Executive Council or the Vice-Chancellor or if there is no Vice-
Chancellor, by the Registrar.
(6) Eleven members of the Court shall form a quorum far a
meeting of the Court.
10. Seven members of the Executive Council shall form a
quorum for a meeting of the Executive Council.
11. (1) The Executive Council shall consist of the following
members to be nominated by the Central Government who shall
hold office for a period of two years, namely:-
(a) Ex officio Members:
Quorum for
meeting of
Excutive Council.
Constitution,
Powers and
functions of
Executive Council

59
(i) the Vice-Chancellor;
(ii) the Proctor;
(iii) the Dean of Students’ Welfare;
(iv) the Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor,
Ministry of youth Affairs and Sports;
(v) the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports;
(vi) the Deans of Schools;
(b) Other Members:
(i) three Senior Professors by rotation;
(ii) four persons from amongst sports scientists, sports
administrators, eminent sports persons and distinguished
coaches.
(2) The Executive Council shall have the power of management
and administration of the revenue and property of the University
and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University not
otherwise provided for.
(3) Subject to the provision of this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, in addition to all other
powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:-
(i) to create teaching and other academic posts including
Chairs, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts
and to define the duties and conditions or service of Professors,
Associate Professors’. Assistant Professors and other academic
staff:
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council
in respect of the number and qualifications of teachers and other
academic staff otherwise than after consideration of the
recommendations of the Academic and Activity Council;
(ii) to appoint such Professors; Associate Professors,
Assistant Professors and other academic staff including Chair,
as may be necessary, on the recommendation of the Selection
Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary
vacancies therein;
(iii) to promote interfacial research by making joint
appointments of teaching staff in different Schools, Department
and Centres;

60
(iv) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary
posts and to define, their duties and conditions of their service
and to make appointments thereto in the manner prescribed by
the ordinances;
(v) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University
other than the Chancellor and the Vice-Chancellor. and to make
necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of
such officer during his absence;
(vi) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in
accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances;
(vii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts,
investments, property, business and all other administrative
affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such
agents as it may think fit;
(viii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non-
recurring expenditure for a year on the recommendation of the
Finance Committee;
(ix) to invest any money belonging to the University, including
any unapplied income, in such stocks, funds, share or securities,
from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying
such investment from time to time;
(x) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or
immovable property on behalf of the University;
(xi) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus
and other means needed for carrying on the work of the
University;
(xii) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on
behalf of the University;
(xiii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if though fit, to
redress any grievances of the employees and students of the
University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;
(xiv) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary,
to remove them, and to fix their fees, emoluments and travelling
and other allowances, after consulting the Academic and Activity
Council;
(xv) to select a common seal for the University and provide
for the use of such seal;

61
(xvi) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary
for the residence of women students;
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships,
medals and prizes;
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors,
Emeritus Professors. Consultants and Scholars and determine
the terms and conditions of such appointments;
(xix) to enter into partnership with industry and non-
government agencies for the advancement of knowledge and
establish a corpus of funds out of the profits of such partnership;
and
(xx) to exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by this Act or this
Statutes.
12. ( 1) The members of the Academic and Activity Council
shall include sports persons who have achieved distinction in
Olympics or world championships.
(2) Nine members of the Academic and Activity Council shall
form quorum for the meeting of the Academic and Activity Council.
13. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances, the Academic and Activity Council shall, in addition to
all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely:—
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies
of the University and to give directions regarding methods of
instruction, co-ordination of teaching among the Colleges,
Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres and evaluation
of research and improvement of academic standards;
(b) to bring about and promote inter-School co-ordination
and to establish or appoint such committees or boards as may
be deemed necessary for the purpose:
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either
on its own initiative, or on a reference by a School or the
Executive Council, and to take appropriate action thereon;
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the
Statutes and the Ordinances regarding the academic functioning
of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of
fellowships and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life
and attendance.
Members of
Academic and
Activity Council
and quorum for
meeting
Powers and
functions of
Academic and
Activity Council

62
14. ( 1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as
may be specified in the Statutes.
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members
of the first School Board shall be nominated by the Executive Council
for a period of three years.
(3) The composition, powers and functions of a School Board
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the
quorum required for such meetings shall be prescribed by the
Ordinances.
(5) (a) Every School shall consist of such Departments as may
be assigned to it by the Ordinances:
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation
of the Academic and Activity Council, establish Centers of Studies
to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the
Executive Council may consider necessary.
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members.
namely:—
(i) teachers of the Department:
(ii) persons conducting research in the Department;
(iii) Dean of the School:
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the
Department; and
(v) such other persons as may be members of the
Department in accordance with the provisions of the
Ordinances.
15. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Sports Studies.
(2) The term of office of the Board of Sports Studies and of its
members shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic
and Activity Council, the functions of a Board of Sports Studies
shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and
other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the
concerned School Board in the manner prescribed by the
Ordinances—
Schools of Studies
and Departments
Board of Sports
Studies

63
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for
courses, but excluding research degrees;
(b) appointment of supervisors for research; and
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching
and research:
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Sports Studies
shall, during the period of three years immediately after the
commencement of this Act, be performed by the Department.
16. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following
members, namely:-
(i) the Vice-Chancellor;
(ii) one person to be nominated by the Court;
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Executive Council,
out of whom at least one shall be a member of the Executive
Council; and
(iv) three persons to be nominated by the Central
Government.
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum
for a meeting of the Finance Committee.
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex
officio members, shall hold office for a term of three years.
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to
record a minute of dissent if he does not agree with any decision of
the Finance Committee.
(5) The Fi nance Committee shall meet at least thrice every
year to examine the accounts and to scrutinise proposals for
expenditure.
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items
which have not been included in the budget, shall be examined by
the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive
Council.
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the
University prepared by the Finance Officer shall be laid before the
Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter
submitted to the Executive Council for approval.
(8) The Fina nce Committee shall recommend limits for the
total recurring expenditure and the total non-recurring expenditure
Finance
Committee

64
for the year, based on the income and resources of the University
(which, in the case of productive works, may include the proceeds
of loans).
17. ( 1) There shall be Selection Committees for making
recommendations to the Executive Council for appointment to the
post of Professor, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, Registrar,
Finance Officer, Controller of Examinations, Librarian and Principals
of Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres
established or maintained by the University.
(2) The Select ion Committee for appointment to the-posts
specified in column 1 of the Table below shall consist of the
Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Central Government and the
persons specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the
said Table:
TABLE
12
Professor. (i) The Dean of the School.
(ii) The Head of the Department, if he is a
Professor.
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the
University, nominated by the Executive Council,
out of a panel of names recommended by the
Academic and Activity Council for their special
knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with
which the Professor will be concerned.
Associate (i) The head of the Department.
Professor/ (ii) One  Professor  nominated  by  the  Vice-
Assistant
ChancellorProfessor.
(iii)  Two persons not in the service of the
University, nominated by the Executive Council,
out of a panel of names recommended by the
Academic and Activity Council for their special
knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with
which the Associate Professor or Assistant
Professor will be concerned.
Registrar/ (i) Two members of the Executive Council
Finance nominated by it.
Selection
Committees

65
Officer/ (ii) One person not in the service of the University
Controller of nominated by the Executive Council.
Examination.
Librarian. (i) One person not in the service of the University
who has special knowledge of the subject of the
Library Science or Library Administration
nominated by the Executive Council.
(ii) One person not in the service of the University
nominated by the  Executive Council.
Principal of Three persons not in the service of the University
college or of whom two shall be nominated by the Executive
institution Council and one by the Academic and Activity
maintained by Council for their special knowledge of, or interest
the University. in, a subject in which instruction is being provided
by the College or Institution.
Note 1. — Where the appointment is being made for an inter-
disciplinary project, the head of the project shall be deemed to be
the Head of the Department concerned.
Note 2.— The Professor to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor
shall be a Professor concerned with the specialty for which the
selection is being made and the Vice-Chancellor shall consult the
Head of the Department and the Dean of the School before
nominating the Professor.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall convene and preside at the meeting
of the Selection Committee.
Provided that the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be
fixed after prior consultation with, and subject to the convenience
of the Central Government’s nominee and the experts nominated by
the Executive Council:
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee
shall not be valid unless,—
(a) where the number of the Central Government’s nominee
and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is four in
all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and
(b) where the number of the Central Government’s nominee
and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is three in
all, at least two of them attend the meeting

66
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Selection Committee
shall be laid down in the Ordinances.
(5) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the
recommendations made by the Selection Committee, it shall record
its reasons and submit the case to the Central Government for final
orders.
(6) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner
indicated below:—
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration longer than one
academic session, it shall be filled on the advice of the Selection
Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the
foregoing clauses:
Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests
of work it is necessary to fill the vacancy, the appointment may be
made on a purely temporary basis on the advice of a local Selection
Committee referred to in sub-clause (ii) for a period not exceeding
six months.
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a
year, an appointment to such vacancy shall be made on the
recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of
the Dean of the School concerned, the Head of the Department
and a nominee of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean
and the Head of the Department, the Selection Committee may
contain two nominees of the Vice-Chancellor:
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of
teaching posts caused by death or any other reason, the Dean may,
in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, make’
a temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice-
Chancellor and the Registrar about such appointment.
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not
recommended by a, regular Selection Committee for
appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on
such temporary employment, unless he is subsequently selected
by a local Selection Committee or, a regular Selection
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the
case may be.

67
18. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 16, the
Executive Council may invite a person of high academic distinction
and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Associate
Professor or any other equivalent academic post in the University
on Such terms and conditions as it deems fit and on the person
agreeing to do so, appoint him to the post:
Provided that the Executive Council may also create
supernumerary posts for a specified period for appointment of such
persons:
Provided further that the number of supernumerary posts so
created should not exceed five per cent of the total posts in the
University.
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other
academic staff working in any other University or organisation for
undertaking a joint project in accordance with the mariner laid down
in the Ordinances.
19. The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in
accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 16 for a fixed
tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.
20. (1) An authority of the University may appoint as many
standing or special committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint
to such committees persons Who are not members of such
authority.
(2) A committee appointed under clause (1) may deal with any
subject delegated to it subject to subsequent confirmation by the/
authority appointing it.
21. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the
University shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary,
be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of
conduct as are specified in the. Statutes, the Ordinances and the
Regulations.
(2) The emoluments of members of the academic staff shall be
such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(3) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the
University shall be appointed on a written contract. the form or
which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances
(4) A copy of every contract referred to ill clause ( 3) shall be
deposited with the Registrar.
Special mode of
appointment
Appointment for
fixed tenure
Committees
Terms and
conditions of
service and code of
conduct of
teachers, etc.

68
22. ( 1) All the employees of the University, other than the
teachers and other academic staff shall, in the absence of any contract
to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service
and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances
and the Regulations.
(2) The manner of appointment and emoluments of employees,
other than the teachers and other academic staff, shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
23. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person
is to hold an office or be a member of an authority of the University
by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined
according to tile length of continuous service of such person in his
grade and in accordance with such other principles as the Executive
Council may, from time to time, prescribe.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain
in respect of each class of persons to whom the provisions of these
Statutes’ apply, a complete and up-to-date seniority list in accordance
with the provisions of clause ( 1).
(3) lf two or more persons have equal length of continuous
service in a particular grade or the relative seniority of any person
or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own
motion and shall, at the request of any such person, submit the
matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall be
final.
24. ( 1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a
teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee of the
University, the Vice-Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or a
member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to
appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) in the
case of other employee may, by order in writing, place such teacher,
member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may
be, under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive
Council the circumstances in which the order was made:
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion,
that the circumstance of the case do not warrant the suspension of
the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the
contract of appointment or of any other terms and condition of
service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of
teachers and other academic staff, and the appointing authority in
Terms and
conditions of
service and code of
conduct of other
employees
Seniority list
Removal of
employees of
University

69
respect of other employees, shall have the power to remove a teacher
or a member of the academic staff or other employee, as the case
may be, on grounds of misconduct.
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case
may be, the appointing authority, shall not be entitled to remove any
teacher. member of the academic staff or other employee except
for a good cause and after giving three months’ notice or on payment
of three months’ salary in lieu thereof.
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee
shall be removed under clause, ( 2) or clause (3) unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action
proposed to be taken in regard to him.
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or
other employee shall take effect from the date on which the order
of removal is made:
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff
or other employee is under suspension at the time of his removal,
such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed
under suspension.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing
provisions of the Statute, a teacher, member of the academic staff
or other employee may resign —
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three
months’ notice in writing to the Executive Council or the
appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three
months’ salary in lieu thereof;
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after given one
months’ notice in writing to the Executive Councilor, as the
case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month’s
salary in lieu thereof:
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date
all which the resignation is accepted by the’ Executive Councilor
the appointing authority, as the case may be.
25. (1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of
the Academic and Activity Council and by a resolution passed by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting, make proposals to the Central Government for the
conferment of honorary degrees:
Honorary degrees

70
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may,
on its own motion, make such proposals.
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Central
Government, any honorary degree conferred by the University.
26. The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting, withdraw a degree or academic distinction conferred on, or
any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University
for good and sufficient cause:
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in
writing has been given to that person calling upon him to show
cause within such time as may be specified in the notice as to why
such a resolution should not be passed and until his objections if
any, and any evidence he may produce in support of them. have
been considered by the Executive Council.
27. (1) All powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and
disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University shall
vest in Vice-Chancellor.
(2) There shall be Proctor of the University to assist the Vice-
Chancellor in the exercise of the powers referred to in clause ( 1),
who shall be appointed by the Executive Council from amongst the
Professors and Associate Professors in the manner prescribed by
the Ordinances.
(3) The Vice-Chancellor may delegate ail or any of the powers
referred to in clause ( 1), as he deems proper, to the Proctor and to
such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to
the maintenance of discipline and taking such action, as may seem
to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice-
Chancellor may, in exercise of such powers, by order, direct that
any student or students be expelled or rusticated. for a specified
period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a
College, Institution or Regional Centre or a Department or a School
of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an
amount to be specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an
examination or examinations conducted by the University, College.
Institution or Regional Centre or Department or a School for one or
more years, or that the results of the student or students concerned
Withdrawal of
degrees, etc.
Maintenance of
discipline amongst
students of
University

71
in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared
be withheld or cancelled.
(5) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools
of Studies and Heads of teaching Departments in the University
shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers
over the students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools
and teaching Departments in the University, as may be necessary
for the proper conduct of such Colleges. Institution, Schools and
teaching Departments.
(6) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor and
the Principals and other persons specified in clause ( 5), detailed
rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University
and the Principals of Colleges. Institutions, Deans of Schools of
Studies and Heads of teaching Departments in the University may
also make such supplementary rules as they deem necessary for
the purposes stated therein,
(7) At the lime of admission, every student shall be required to
sign a declaration to the effect that he submits himself to the
disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice-Chancellor and other authorities
of the University.
28. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees
or for other purposes shall be held in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Ordinances,
29. Where no provision is made for Chairman to preside over a
meeting of any authority of the University or any Committee of
such authority or when the Chairman so provided for is absent the
members present shall elect one from among themselves to preside
at such meeting.
30. Any member. other than an ex officio member of the Court.
the Executive Council, the Academic and Activity Council or any
other authority of the University or any Committee of such
authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar and the
resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by
the Reg istrar.
31. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and
for being, a member of any of the authorities, or for being appointed
as, and for being, an officer, of the University if —
(i) he is or unsound mind: or
(ii) he is an undischarged insolvent; or
Convocations
Acting Chairman
of meetings
Resignation
Disqualification

72
(iii) he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence
involving moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to
imprisonment for not less than six months,
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been
subjected to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (i), the
question shall be referred to the Central Government and its decision
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil
court against such decision,
32. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person
who is not ordinarily resident in India shall not be eligible to be an
officer of the University or a member of any authority of the
University.
33. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person
who holds any post in the University or is a member of any authority
or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular
authority or body or as the holder of a particular appointment shall
hold such office or membership only for so long as he continues to
be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of
that particular appointment, as the case may be.
34. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association
shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to
vote or stand for election un less he has been a member of the
Association for at least one year prior to the date of election and is
a degree holder of the University of at least five years standing:
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one
year’s membership shall not apply in the case of tile first election,
35. (1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students’
Council for every academic year, consisting of —
(i) the Dean of Students’ Welfare who shall be the Chairman
of the Students’ Council;
(ii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic and
Activity Council on the basis of merit in studies, sports and
extra-curricular activities; and
(iii) twenty students to be elected by the students as their
representatives:
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right
to bring up any matter concerning the University before the Students’
Residence
conditions for
membership and
office
Membership of
authorities by
virtue of
membership of
other bodies
Alumni
Association
Students Council

73
Council. if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right
to participate ill the discussions at any meeting when the matter is
taken up for consideration.
(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make
suggestions to the appropriate authorities of the University in regard
to the programmes of studies, students’ welfare and other matters
of importance, in regard to the working of the University in general
and such suggestions shall be made on the basis of consensus of
opinion,
(3) The Students’ Council shall meet at least twice in every
academic year and the first meeting of the Council be held in the
beginning of the academic session.
36. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub-section ( 2) of
section 26 may be amended, repealed or added. to at any time by
the Executive Council in the manner specified in the following
clauses.
(2) No Ordinances in respect of the matters enumerated in sub-
section (1) of section 26 of this Act shall be made by the Executive
Council unless a draft of such Ordnances has been proposed by the
Academic and Activity Council.
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any
draft of any Ordinances proposed by the Academic and Activity
Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the
draft to the Academic and Activity Council for re-consideration,
either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the
Executive Council may suggest.
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the
draft of an Ordinances proposed by the Academic and Activity
Council, the Academic and Activity Council may consider the
question a fresh and in case the original draft is reaffirmed by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present and
voting and more than’ half of the total number of members of the
Academic and Activity Council, the draft may be sent back to the
Executive Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Central
Government whose decision shall be final.
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shell come
into effect immediately.
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be
submitted to the Central Government within two weeks from the
date of its adoption.
Ordinances how to
be made

74
(7) The Central Government shall have the power to direct the
University to suspend the operation of any Ordinance.
(8) The Central Government shall inform the Executive Council
about its objection to the Ordinances referred to in clause ( 7) and
may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw
the order suspending the Ordinances or disallow the Ordinances,
and its decision shall be final.
37. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations
consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the
following matters, namely:—
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meeting
and the number of members required to form a quorum;
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by this Act,
the Statutes or the Ordinances, to be prescribed by Regulations;
and
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such
authorities or committees appointed by them and not provided
for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations
providing for the giving of notice to the members of such authority
of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at
meetings and for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of
meetings.
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such
manner as it may specify of any Regulation made under the Statutes
or the annulment of any such Regulation.
38. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, any
officer or authority of the University may delegate his or its powers
to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective
control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility the
exercise of the powers so delegated shall continue to vest in the
officer or authority delegating such powers.
Regulations
Delegation of
powers

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Sports University will be the first full-fledged sports university in India of international
standard. The Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior, a deemed university, is restricted
to offering Bachelor of Physical Education and Master of Physical Education courses and the Netaji Subhas
National Institute of Sports focuses on training elite athletes and coaches only. Thus, a void exists in the
sports environment of the country in various areas, such as, sports science, sports technology, sports
management, high performance training, etc. Therefore, it has been decided to establish the National Sports
University (University) which is expected to fill this void with its exclusive focus on creation of high
standard infrastructure for the development of sports sciences and training of athletes apart from providing
Bachelors Degree, Master’s Degrees and Research and Training in various areas related to sports.
2. Consistent with international practices followed by best sports universities in the world, the focus
of the University will be on multi-disciplinary studies and accordingly, have functionally related Schools
with stress on applicability based on the latest researches in sports sciences, sports medicine and sports
technology. The University will address issues relating to various disciplines of great importance at international
levels, including adventure and disability sports. The University is also empowered to establish Outlying
Campuses throughout the country and also outside India. Apart from academic programmes and research,
the University and its Outlying Campuses will also impart training to elite athletes, sports officials, referees
and umpires and evolve as centres of excellence in various disciplines of sports. To make the University a
world standard university, a memorandum of understanding have been signed by the Government of India
with two Australian Universities, namely, the University of Canberra and Victoria University, for the development
of curriculum, research facilities, laboratories, etc.
3. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions of the Bill.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives,
N
EW DELHI; VIJAY GOEL
31st July, 2017.
75

76
Notes on clauses
Clause 2 of the Bill defines the-various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Sports University with its headquarters
in the State of Manipur.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the objects of the University which include, inter alia, (a) to evolve
as an institute of advanced study in the field of physical education and sports sciences; (b) to provide for
research and development and dissemination of knowledge in physical education and sports sciences; (c) to
provide professional and academic leadership to other institutions in the field of physical education and
sports sciences; (d) to serve as a Centre of Excellence for the elite and other talented sports persons of all
sports and games and innovation in physical education and sports sciences and to carry out, endorse and
propagate research, etc.
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for and elaborates the powers and functions of the University which
include, infer alia, (a) to design, develop and conduct appropriate academic and training programmes in
physical education and sports sciences; (b) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may
determine, diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions; (c) to open Regional
Centres in other parts of the country and to establish outlying campuses within India or outside India: (d) to
conduct innovative experiments and promote new methods and technologies in the fields of physical education,
sports sciences, sports ·medicine, sports technology, sports management and other related fields; (e) to act
as a technical advisory body to Government of India and other National Organisations, State Governments
and National Sports Federations on all matters related to sports, etc.
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the University shall be open to all castes, creed, race or class.
Clause 7  of the Bill empowers the Central Government to review the work and progress of the
University including outlying campuses, Colleges, Institutions, Regional Centres and Study Centres maintained
by it.
Clause 8 of the Bill specifies the officers of the University namely, the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor,
the Deans of Schools, the Registrar, the Finance Of ficer, the Controller of Examinations, the Librarian and
such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes.
Clause 9  of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Chancellor who shall be the head of the
University
Clause 10 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Vice-Chancellor who shall be the Principal
Executive and Academic Officer of the University.
Clause 11 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Deans of Schools.
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Registrar.
Clause 13 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Finance Officer.
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Controller of Examinations.
Clause 15 of the Bill provides for the appointment of the Librarian.
Clause 16 of the Bill provides for the appointment of Other Officers of the University.

77
Clause 17  of the Bill specifies the authorities of the University namely, the Court, the Executive
Council, the Academic and Activity Council, the Board of Sports Studies, the Finance Committee and such
other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes.
Clause 18  of the Bill provides for the Court and its powers which, includes, inter alia, review of
broad policies and programmes of the University and to suggest measures of improvement.
Clause 19 of the Bill provides for the Executive Council, who shall be the Principal Executive Body of
the University, and its powers.
Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the Academic and Activity Council which shall be the Principal
Academic Body of the University and its constitution.
Clause 21  of the Bill provides that the constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Sports
Studies shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
Clause 22 of the Bill provides that the constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
Clause 23 of the Bill provides that the constitution, powers and functions of other authorities of the
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.
Clause 24 of the Bill provides for the matters in respect of which the Statutes may be made under the
Bill.
Clause 25 of the Bill provides for the manner in which the Statutes may be made under the Bill.
Clause 26 of the Bill provides for the matters in respect of which the Ordinances may be made under
the Bill.
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the authorities of the University to make Regulations, consistent with
the Bill, the Statutes and the Ordinances.
Clause 28 of the Bill provides that the Annual Report of the University shall be prepared under the
directions of the Executive Council and shall be submitted to the Court which, in turn, shall submit the same
to the Central Government with its comments, if any.
Clause 29  of the Bill provides that Annual Accounts of the University shall be prepared under the
directions of the Executive Council every year and be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
(CAG) of india and the observations of the Central Government thereon shall be brought to the notice of the
Court and on resubmission to the Central Government, may be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
Clause 30 of the Bill provides that there shall be a University Fund for contributions, grants, loans,
gifts, donations, etc.
Clause 31 of the Bill provides that the University shall furnish returns and information in respect of its
property to the Central Government.
Clause 32 of the Bill provides for the conditions of the service of the employees which, inter alia,
include that every employee shall be employed under a written contract and disputes arising out of the
contract, shall be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration.

78
Clause 33 of the Bill provides for procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against
students.
Clause 34 of the Bill provides that every employee or student of the University or of a College or an
Institution or a Regional Centre or a Study Centre of the University shall have the right to appeal to the
Executive Council.
Clause 35 of the Bill provides that the University shall constitute provident and pension funds for its
employees.
Clause 36 of the Bill provides for referral of disputes arising out of elections of the University to the
Central Government for a final decision.
Clause 37 of the Bill provides for filling of casual vacancies of the University.
Clause 38 of the Bill provides that the proceedings of authorities or bodies shall not be invalidated by
the vacancies among its members.
Clause 39  of the Bill provides for protection of officers who have taken action in good faith in
pursuance or the provisions of the Act, the statutes or the ordinances.
Clause 40 of the Bill provides that anything certified by the Registrar shall be received as prima facie
evidence such as receipts, applications, etc.
Clause 41 of the Bill provides for power of the Central Government to remove difficulties, by order
published in the Official Gazette, if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill.
Clause 42 of the Bill provides that every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under the Bill shall be
published ill the Official Gazette.
Clause 43  of the Bill provides for transitional provisions empowering the Central Government to
appoint the first Vice-Chancellor, the first Registrar, the first Executive Council, the first Academic and
Activity Council.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a University by the name of
“National Sports University” with its headquarters in the State of Manipur.
2. The University is proposed to be established within a period of two financial years with effect from
2017-18 to 2018-2019. The total expenditure towards establishment of the University is estimated to be 524
crore rupees, of which the cost for the said two financial years is expected to be 184 crore rupees and 340
crore rupees, respectively, which will include expenditure for the establishment of outlying campuses. The
land for the establishment of the University has been granted by the Government of Manipur free of cost.
Hence, the cost of land is not factored in the overall expenditure.
3. Out of the total expenditure of 524 crore rupees, the non-recurring expenditure is estimated to be
442 crore rupees and the recurring expenditure is estimated to be 82 crore rupees.
4. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
79

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 25 of the Bill provides that the first Statutes are those set-out in the Schedule
to this Bill. Sub-clause (4) of clause 25 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may make new or
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the first Statutes during the period of three years immediately after the
commencement of the Bill. It further provides that on the expiry of the period of three years, the Central
Government may make, within one year from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as it may
consider necessary. Clause 24 of the Bill provides for the matters in respect of which the Statutes may be
made.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 26 of the Bill provides for the matters in respect of which the Ordinances
may be made which include, inter alia, admission of students, courses of study, medium of instructions,
award of degrees, diplomas, etc., fees charged for the courses, conditions for award of fellowships,
scholarships, etc., conduct of examinations, conditions of residence of students, special arrangements, if
any, establishment of centres of studies, collaboration with other universities and institutions, creation of
any other body considered necessary, institution of fellowships, setting-up machinery for redressal of
grievances and any other matter that may be provided for by the Ordinances. Sub-clause ( 2) of clause 26 of
the Bill provides that the first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor with the previous approval of
the Executive Council and the Ordinances so made may also be amended, repealed or added to at any time
by the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.
3. Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the University to make Regulations consistent with the Bill, the
Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of its own business and that of the Committees, if any, appointed
by them and not provided for by the Bill, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner prescribed by the
Statutes.
4. The matters ill respect of which the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations may be made are matters
of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the proposed
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
80

LOK SABHA
—–——–—
A
BILL
to establish and incorporate a National Sports University in the State of Manipur, a
specialised University first of its kind, to promote sports education in the areas of
sports sciences, sports technology, sports management and sports coaching besides
functioning as the national training centre for select sports disciplines by adopting
best international practices and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—–——–—
(Shri Vijay Goel, Minister of State for Youth Affairs and Sports)
81