Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Magha, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-fifth 
Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 105) 
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
REPORT NO. 
251


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

33
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-fifth
Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 105)
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Magha, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—20
Chapter I – Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government . ........................................................................................... 2—8
Chapter II – Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply .................. 9
Chapter III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 10—19
Chapter IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited ............................................................... 20
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 21—24
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 25—28
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 29 —32

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2012)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Tarun Vijay
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Chaudhary Munavver Saleem
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
9. Shri Baishnab Parida
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
*16. Shrim ati Deepa Dasmunshi
17. Dr. Charles Dias
@18. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
19. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
20. Shri Virender Kashyap
21. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
24. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
25. Shri Sis Ram Ola
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
28. Shri M.I. Shanavas
29. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
30. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
31. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
32. Shri Manicka Tagore
(i)
* Shrimati Deepa Dasmunshi was elevated to Union Minister of State, Urban Development on 28.10.2012.
@ Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  09.01.2013.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Two Hundred Fifty -first Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty -fifth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand
No. 105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the year 2012-13.
2. The Two Hundred Forty -fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 3
rd May, 2012 and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 3 rd May, 2012. Replies of the Government to the
recommendations/observations contained in the Report, were considered by the Committee at its
meeting held on the 21
st February, 2013.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the
21st February, 2013.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman
February 21, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Magha 1, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Two Hundred forty-fifth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No.105) of the Ministry of
Youth Affairs and Sports for the year 2012-13.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the 245
th Report, have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government –
paras – 2.2, 3.4, 6.6, 8.3, 11.4, 13.2, 13.9, 15.2 and 16.5
(Chapter-I) Total – 9
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s reply—paras – 3.12
(Chapter-II) Total – 1
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee—paras 2.4, 3.8, 3.10, 3.11, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7,
7.3, 10.5, 10.8, 12.3, and 14.5
(Chapter-III) Total – 13
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are
still awaited.
(Chapter-IV) Total – Nil

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/observations
2.2 The Committee observes that while Youth related overall allocation remains unchanged in
2012-13, provision for sports-related activities has shown some enhancement. Scheme-wise
analysis indicates decrease in the allocation for NSS from `90 crore given in 2011-12 to `80 crore
provided for in 2012-13. The Committee finds sharp decrease in allocation in some sports related
schemes as indicated below:–
(` in crores )
Scheme 201 1-12 2012-13
Scheme related to Talent Search and Training 10.00 0.50
Promotion of Sports among Disabled 5.50 0.00
Urban Sports Infrastructure 50.00 40.00
Not only this, the Committee is surprised to note that no funds have been provided for National
Welfare Fund for Sportspersons. The Committee finds no justification for sportspersons’ welfare
related schemes failing to get any assistance. Similarly, required infrastructure is the most crucial
component for sports promotion. Likewise, disabled sportspersons need all kinds of encouragement,
financial assistance being the most essential one. The Committee would be commenting on these
schemes in the Report.
Action Taken
Funds have been provided for the National Welfare Fund for Sportspersons. Budgetary
allocation of `0.50 crore has been made during 2012-13 for the Scheme of National Welfare Fund
for Sportspersons, a Non-Plan Scheme. For creation of sports infrastructure and facilities,
budgetary allocation of `23.00 crore has been made during 2012-13 for the Urban Sports
Infrastructure Scheme. For promotion and development of sports among persons with disabilities,
budgetary allocation of `5.00 crore has been made during 2012-13 for the Scheme of Sports and
Games for Persons with Disabilities. Further, assistance to the National Sports Federations dealing
with differently abled sportspersons, viz., Paralympic Committee of India (PCI), Special Olympic
Bharat (SOB) and All India Sports Council for the Deaf (AISCD), assistance for conduct of
national championships, international tournaments in India, participation in international sports
tournaments abroad, organizing coaching camps, engagement of foreign coaches, procurement of
sports equipments etc will be provided out of the Scheme of Assistance to National Sports
Federations (NSFs), for which a budgetary provision of `100 crore has been made during 2012-13.
The valuable suggestions of the Committee have been noted for further action.
2

3
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
3.4 The Committee notes that there is general lack of awareness regarding the multiple activities
being carried out by the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) in the country. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that extensive and intensive publicity may be taken up at a higher scale so
as to attract more and more youth power towards NYKS programmes on a priority basis.
Secondly, the Committee would appreciate if more and more activities are planned exclusively for
the youth living in village and rural areas to make them its relevance to them so as to encourage
them to take benefit of the schemes for their betterment.
Action Taken
Nehru Yuva Kendras (NYKs) have the objective to provide rural youth avenues to take part
in the process of nation building and opportunities for the development of their personality and
skills undertake multifarious activities through a large network of youth, Mahila Mandals and
volunteers who work at the grassroots level. As per the annual Action Plan for the year 2012-13,
the major thrust of NYKs is towards the deployment and mentoring of rural youth and sports clubs
at the village level. The following steps have been taken for the youth living in villages and rural
areas:–
1. Scheme of Mentor Youth Club
2. Capacity Building of Office Bearers of Mentor Youth Clubs
3. Youth Club Exchange Programme
4. Sports Tournaments
5. Provision of Sports Material for Youth Clubs
6. Work Camps
7. Skill Up-gradation Programme for women
8. Skill Development Training Programme under National Council for V ocational Training
(NCVT)
9. Youth Employability Skills (YES) Project in North East
10. Block & District Folk Cultural Festival
11. District/State Youth Awards (Individual)
12. Celebration of National & International Days and Weeks
13. District Youth Convention
14. Exhibition for Youth & Handicrafts (Yuva Kriti) and State Cultural Festival
15. Rajiv Gandhi Adventure Scheme
16. National Youth Corps (NYC) to tap the potential of the youth and channelizing their
energy towards nation building.
To give extensive and intensive publicity to programme/activities, NYKS undertakes following
initiatives:–
• Field offices to reach the young people and masses through campaigns, rallies,
leadership development programmes, awareness generation activities, meetings,
personal contact programmes etc. as well as through print and electronic media;

4
• e-newsletter at State/Zonal level in regional languages and at National level;
• Printing of news letters, brochures and leaflets;
• Films about NYKS initiatives;
• Publish and widely circulate News Bulletins;
• Issue periodical Press Releases in National and Vernacular Media;
• Contact and solicit support from Government agencies like DA VP, PIB, Doordarshan,
AIR etc.; and
• Interaction of senior officer through AIR and Doordarshan with Public via interview,
discussions, appeal etc.
VI. YOUTH HOSTELS
Recommendations/observations
6.6 The Committee believes that the advice given by the Planning Commission for not
sanctioning new Youth Hostels should be taken in positive spirit by the Ministry in the sense that
it should consolidate its activities as regards existing Youth Hostels is concerned. The Committee
also feels that the Ministry has not been able to complete the existing projects and these were
getting delayed due to lack of proper coordination with the State Governments, besides other
reasons. The maintenance of Hostels was also not very encouraging and even some Hostels were
functioning without caretakers. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should concentrate
on completion of construction of Hostels, upkeeping of the Hostels, their facelifting work and the
appointment of Managers etc. so that the purpose of building Youth Hostels is not defeated. The
Committee further recommends that after the completion of all the projects/works in this regard,
the Department then submit new plans for the construction of new hostels and demand more funds
for the purpose.
Action Taken
The Ministry has followed the advice of the Planning Commission for not sanctioning new
Youth Hostels and action has been initiated/funds have been released to complete the existing
projects at Thoubal, Churachandpur, Cuddapah and Roing. These projects are in last stage of
completion and will be functional very soon except Youth Hostel at Roing which may take some
more time. Regular maintenance of the Youth Hostel is the responsibility of the State Governments.
However, this Department has sanctioned `5.00 lakh each to 56 Youth Hostels for urgent face
lifting works in last three years. It is also mentioned that there is no Hostels functioning without
caretaker. There are 68 functional Youth Hostels with this Department and out of these, regular
Managers have been appointed in most of these Youth Hostels. It is also stated that presently, some
Hostels are being looked after by the officer of Nehru Yuva Kendra, Youth Welfare/Sports Officer
of the concerned State.
VIII. RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT
Recommendations/Observations
8.3 The RGNIYD will become a landmark in formulation of policies for youth of our country.
It is now proposed to make this institute an institution of national importance. The process has
already started therefor. As the apex national agency for youth development the Institute shall

5
develop into a globally recognized centre of academic and professional excellence in the yield of
youth development. The Committee hopes that the process would be expedited and the institute
would start working towards its cherished goals, for the upliftment of our youth power.
Action Taken
In order to convert Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD) into
an Institute of National Importance, “RGNIYD Bill, 2011” was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
21.12.2011, after obtaining approval of the Cabinet and recommendation of President of India. This
Bill has been passed by Lok Sabha on 21.05.2012 and Rajya Sabha on 9.8.2012 respectively. The
President of India has given the assent to the Bill and the RGNIYD Act, 2012 (No. 35 of 2012)
was notified in the Gazette of India Extraordinary dated 31.8.2012 and the process for
implementation of this act in RGNIYD is under review. Action has been initiated to move the
motion for consideration of this Bill in the Rajya Sabha. Once the Bill is passed by Parliament,
action will be initiated to fill up the required faculties, introduce appropriate courses and create
needful infrastructure which will aim at empowering youth of our nation.
XI. URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEME
Recommendations/Observations
11.4 The Committee is happy to note that the scheme has been approved and funds have been
released for some projects. The Committee, however, feels that since this is the initial state of
formulation of policy for development of sports infrastructure, it should also take into account the
needs at block and district level. A large sports infrastructure for the city may not be accessible
to majority of the users or sportspersons but the effort should be to build practice stadium
conferring to the needs of a smaller group. The Committee cautious the Ministry on the monitoring
of the projects, its timely completion and proper utilization of funds.
Action Taken
The Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme (USIS) provides assistance for creation of urban
Sports infrastructure in States/UTs. So far, 12 States and 1 U.T have been provided financial
assistance during 2010-11 and 2011-12. The locations for which the sports infrastructure projects
have been sanctioned include not only capital cities but also District Headquarters. For instance,
grants have been released to the States of Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Punjab, Rajasthan, Madhya
Pradesh, Kerala and Assam for developing the sports infrastructure projects in the districts of Una,
Kawnpuri, Tarn Taran, Jodhpur, Jabalpur, Kottayam and Tinsukia respectively. It is for States and
UTs to decide where they would like to develop the sports infrastructure facilities in the urban
areas.
The users of the sports facilities created out of financial assistance provided under the USIS
are youth, sportspersons and the community at large as well. States provide coaches to train these
people in various sports disciplines. Currently, the scheme is on a pilot mode. Construction of
practice stadia may be considered for inclusion in the list of eligible infrastructure projects, while
converting it into a full-fledged scheme.
Regarding monitoring of the sports infrastructure projects sanctioned under USIS, it is
stated that the Project Officers in the Mission Directorate do watch the progress of completion of
the projects in States, when they undertake field visits. A Committee has also been constituted for
monitoring the progress of implementation of each project. This Committee will meet at periodical
internals and ensure timely completion of the project and proper utilization of funds. The
observations of the Standing Committee have been noted for compliance.

6
XIII. SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
Recommendations/Observations
13.2 The Committee is happy to note that the five stadia complex at New Delhi having state of
art facilities for various games have been put to good use by various organizations including Sports
Federations and national/international level sportspersons. The Committee has also been given to
understand that training is also being imparted to children under the scheme of ‘come and play’
at various SAI stadia complexes in New Delhi and SAI centres across the country. The Committee
would like to have state-wise details in this regard.
Action Taken
‘Come & Play’ Scheme was initiated at various SAI Stadia Complexes in Delhi in phases
in May, 2011. The response to the Scheme has been encouraging a large number of sports
enthusiasts. The objective of the Scheme is not only to impart professional training to established
sportspersons but also to beginners to broad-base sports and encourage participation in sports so
as to aim at optimum utilization of stadia facilities.
Presently Stadia wise strength of trainees under the scheme ‘Come & Play’ in various
disciplines like Badminton, Boxing, Basketball, Cricket, Cycling, Football, Hockey, Gymnastics,
Judo, Shooting, Swimming, Table Tennis, V olleyball, Weightlifting, wrestling may be seen below:
1. J.N. Stadium 2039 trainees
2. I.G. Sports Complex 1546 trainees
3. MD National Stadium 1544 trainees
4. Dr. KSS Ranges 904 trainees
5. Dr. SPM Swimming Pool Complex 532 trainees
After the successful launch of the Scheme in Delhi, the Scheme was launched all over the
country in SAI Regional Centres/Sub-Centres/Institutions, and other SAI field units in October,
2011. Region-wise, state-wise details of strength of trainees under the Scheme in various disciplines
as on date is provided in Annexure-I.
Recommendations/Observations
13.9 The Committee is aware of the perennial problem of acute shortage of coaches in the
country. SAI has not been able to tackle this problem due to the lack of proper guidelines or policy.
It is expected that this new institution will emerge as an institution of excellence and help not only
in eliminating the shortage of coaches but develop coaches of international standard. Coaching is
the backbone and the basic strength behind excellent performance in sports. Once this institution
starts churning out good coaches, performance of our sportspersons will automatically improve.
The Committee strongly advocates a strong coaching institution and hopes it should not suffer
from low allocation of funds or under utilization of funds.
Action Taken
There has been no regular recruitment of coaches in Sports Authority of India since 1996
when a ban on the regular recruitment in SAI was imposed w.e.f. 07.11.1996 as an economy
measure. It was decided that in future, the recruitment of coaches would be done only on contract
basis, as the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) has also declared the Coaches Cadre as a dying cadre

7
and recommended for contract appointment of coaches. However, the cadre of coaches was
reviewed. The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports has sanctioned a total strength of coaches as
1524 during 2010-11. The present strength of regular coaches and contract coaches is 1123 and
139 respectively.
With the approval of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, recruitment of coaches on
regular basis in SAI is in progress. In the first phase, 100 coaches were planned to be recruited
at the Entry Grade during 2011-12, but due to administrative reasons, the selection /interviews have
been postponed. The posts were re-advertised and the process of recruitment is expected to be
completed soon.
Further, the setting up of National Institute of Sports Coaching, Patiala by de-merger of
National Institute of Sports, Patiala from Sports Authority of India, will go a long way in tackling
the problem of lack of well qualified coaches of international standard within the country and
develop a holistic system for imparting coaching.
XV. NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND
Recommendations/Observations
15.2 The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry has to be more pro-active in this area and
approach some of the leading business establishments on their own. In any case, additional funds
made available by the corporate sector would be for making our children/youth better
sportspersons. The Committee, therefore, recommends that as far as possible Government should
ensure proper and appropriate flow of funds for the development of sports in the country and also
directs the Ministry that they should not only depend on the Government funding but should look
towards generating additional resources/funds for the corporate sector by way of their social
responsibility. They should evolve new ideas for eliciting more cooperation from the private sector
which is hitherto they are getting. The corporate sector should be allowed more free space in the
scheme of things as to draw maximum support from them.
Action Taken
The National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) plans to contact the Apex Industry Bodies
like Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI), Confederation of Indian
Industries (CII) and Associated Chambers of Commerce (ASSOCHAM) requesting them to give
adequate publicity in the Corporate Sector of the relevance and importance on the National Sports
Development Fund and its contribution and role for the promotion of sports in the country. NSDF
would also get in touch with selected Industrial Houses for generous contribution to the fund as
part of corporate social responsibility. It is expected that such steps will go a long way in
generating more money for the fund. The contribution to the NSDF is eligible for 100% exemption
from Income Tax.
The Council of the NSDF has been re-constituted recently and the members include
representatives of the three Apex Industry Bodies namely, FICCI, CII and ASSOCHAM. It is
expected that such close interaction will help in highlighting its importance and facilitating generous
contribution to the Fund.
XVI. NA TIONAL PLAYING FIELDS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA (NPFAI)
Recommendations/Observations
16.5 The Committee finds this a novel idea and a very positive step towards creating space for

8
children who are not professional sports persons but are prospective sports persons. The well
maintained playfields will promote sports and general health and well being of children. At the same
time the Committee is vary of the fact that such off the track schemes loose their basic aim due
to lack of proper guidelines, funds and strong monitoring mechanism. The Ministry has to take
care of these factors in order to make this scheme a success.
Action Taken
Response to the National Playing Fields Association of India (NPFAI), set up in February,
2009 to ‘promote, protect and preserve playfields’ has been quite encouraging. The Ministry of
Youth Affairs is in constant interaction with the State Governments for setting up similar bodies
in their respective States.
The NPFAI will continue to work towards evolving proper awareness among the public on
the need to promote, develop and protect playfields and open spaces in all parts of the country.
Such efforts will give the right message on the impact and benefits of the facilities of playfields/
open spaces. Efforts will be made for resource mobilization in terms of money and goodwill for
the success of the scheme.

9
9
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
I. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/observations
3.12 The Committee was informed that the honorarium being paid to volunteers under NYKS is
very meager ranging from `500/- to `2500/- and this request have been received from various
quarters for enhancing this to `5000/- and that this meagre amount is also effecting the efficiency
and efficacy of the various scheme/programmes. On a specific query the Committee was informed
that this have taken up the matter with the Planning Commission. The Committee also feels that
the amount of honorarium is very low and needs immediate enhancement and therefore direct the
Ministry and the Planning Commission to consider it positively and sympathetically.
Action Taken
The scheme of National Youth Corps (NYC) including the payment of honorarium of
`2500/- per month to the volunteers engaged under the scheme has recently been reviewed on the
basis of comments of various stakeholders. It may be submitted that honorarium is paid as a
pocket allowance for doing voluntary work. It should not be taken as reward or salary. As such
the proposal to enhance the honorarium paid to the volunteers has not been recommended. The
major thrust under the scheme now is toward skill training/skill up-gradation training of the
volunteers. The objective is that once the volunteers complete the tenure under the scheme, they
should be in a position to get suitable employment including self-employment. It is for the overall
welfare of the volunteers including their future employment. As such the funds available under the
scheme have been earmarked for skill training.

10
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/observations
2.4 The Committee would like to point out before the commencement of a new plan period,
all those schemes lagging behind due to one reason or the other have to be reviewed and inherent
problem-areas identified followed by remedial steps. The Committee would appreciate if immediate
action is initiated without any delay.
Action Taken
Reply: (a) Department of Youth Affairs :
Under the Plan Period, `80 crores was allocated to NSS under revised Estimates for 2012-13,
out of which `69.90 crores has since been expended.
(b) Department of Sports :
The Scheme of Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) was introduced from
2008-09 with the objective of providing basic playfields in all village panchayats and block
panchayats of the country in a phased manner over a period of ten years during 11th and 12th
Plan Period and providing access to organized sports competitions at block, district, state and
national levels. During the four year period (2008-09 to 2011-12) in 11th Plan, 53,297 villages and
block panchayats have been approved for providing with basic sports facilities, which is nearly
21% of the total village panchayats and block panchayats of the country. The main reason for slow
coverage of the village panchayats and block panchayats under the Scheme of PYKKA is inadequate
budgetary allocation. Against the approved Budget Outlay of Rs. 1500 Crore for the 11th Five Year
Plan Period, budget allocation of `742.20 Crore only was provided, which has been fully utilized
on the implementation of PYKKA scheme during the period from 2008-09 to 2011-12. As the
scheme is being implemented through State Governments, there is also delay on the part of the
States in utilizing the grant provided to them and submission of Utilization Certificates (UCs), which
effects the speedy implementation of the scheme. The States/UTs are being impressed upon to
expedite the implementation of the scheme and submission of outstanding UCs. The various aspects
the PYKKA Scheme were discussed with representatives of the State Governments and other
stakeholders at a workshop held in Gwalior on 10-11 March 2012. Action on suggestions emerging
out of the workshop is being taken. The observations of the Standing Committee have been
noted for compliance.
The Scheme of Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme was introduced from 2010-11 on pilot
basis with a view to addressing the entire ‘sports eco-system’ holistically i.e., Players’ Academies,
Coaching and Infrastructure (hockey turf/football turf/multipurpose halls/athletic track). The
Scheme envisages development of playfields by the State Governments through Playfield
Associations, Coach Training Programmes through Central and State Governments, setting up of
10

11
players academies where SAI centres will provide the nucleus of a hub and spoke model for such
academies catering to premier sports in each State.
The Scheme has received a very enthusiastic response from the States and the Working
Group on Sports & Physical Education for 12th Plan has recommended that the Scheme be
adopted as a regular Scheme during 12th Plan.
Although Scheme of Urban Sports Infrastructure envisages assistance for one project in
each state every year, however, during 2010-11 and 2011-12, only 14 sports infrastructure projects
have been approved because of inadequate budgetary allocation for the Scheme. For the year
2012-13, a budgetary allocation of `23.00 crore has been made for the Scheme, which is again
much below the annual requirement of `175 crore per annum.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that inadequate allocation of funds has remained the main
constraint in effective implementation of schemes of the Ministry. The ambitious scheme of
Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) is one such example. Against the
approved Budget outlay of `1500 crore for the scheme in Eleventh Plan, an allocation of
only `742.20 crores was made which had been fully utilized. Another impediment noticed is
delay on the part of the State Governments in utilizing the grant provided to them. While
appreciating the obvious constraints, the Committee views with serious concern the fact that
suggestions emerging out of the workshop held on 10-11 March, 2012 on PYKKA with State
Governments and other stakeholders are yet to be implemented. While advocating the
allocation of required funds for Flagship Schemes like PYKKA and Urban Sports
Infrastructure Scheme, the Committee would like to emphasize that concerted efforts are
also required to be made for bringing improvement in the implementation of these schemes.
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
3.8 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for no increase in the plan allocation for
NYKS in 2012-13. As against the allocation of `93.90 crore under Plan, the expenditure of NYKS
as on 29 February, 2012 is `94.02 crore. There is thus total utilization of funds. The Committee
finds it hard to understand that against this backdrop, what are the reasons for not increasing the
allocation of funds in BE 2012-13 as demanded by the Ministry. The projection made by the
Ministry seems to be justified to a large extent as the requirement is for expenditure on filling up
of vacant posts and establishment of 122 new Kendras, besides other expenditures. The Committee,
therefore, impresses upon the Ministry to make efforts for allocation of additional funds for
expansion of NYKS. The Committee would like to point out that before arriving at final figures of
Plan Outlay, an analysis of past record of utilization, capacity of the implementing agencies and the
most important of all, genuine requirement based both on implementation of the scheme in true
spirit and broad policy parameters is carried out.
Action Taken
The directions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee had emphasized the need for higher allocation of funds under NYKS
for 2012-13, keeping in view the projected requirements as well as optimum utilization of
allocated funds during 2011-12. The Committee had also recommended that an analysis of
the funds required for various components under the scheme along with all the allied

12
aspects be made so as to project the actual requirement of financial assistance. The
Committee finds the response of the Ministry very routine.
The Committee would like to reiterate that against the projected demand of `336.81
crore for 2012-13, fund allocation of only `94 crore has been made, the same as made in
2011-12. The Committee would like to point out that these additional funds were meant to
cover crucial areas like increase of budget for regular programmes and activities of NYKS
to `16.85 lakh per Kendra, construction of office building of 60 Kendras at `10 lakh per
Kendra, modernization of IT network in NYKS throughout the country and also pension and
other benefits for employees, filling up of vacant posts and establishment of 122 new
Kendras. Due to the substantive cut in the projected requirements for 2012-13, it is more
than clear that there would be neither any improvement in the functioning of existing
Kendras nor further expansion. The Committee would appreciate if concerted efforts are
initiated to ensure the allocation of funds as required for 2013-14.
3.10 The Committee has been voicing its concern over the unduly long time taken in having the
presence of NYKS in all the districts of the country. The Committee finds no justification for such
a prolonged process going on in a very crucial area of youth welfare. One plan period is already
over and nothing positive seems to be evident so far. Concerted efforts with a logical conclusion
have to be made.
Action Taken
The Government has recently approved the proposal for opening of a Kendra of NYKS in
122 uncovered districts of the country. The action to open new Kendras has been initiated. The
new Kendras are proposed to be opened during the 12th Plan period in a phased manner depending
upon the availability of funds.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes with dismay that no progress has been made on the issue of
expansion of NYKS to the remaining 122 districts of the country. It continues to remain
approved in principle. These new Kendras are proposed to be opened during the Twelfth Plan
period in a phased manner, availability of funds being the deciding factor. First year of the
Twelfth Plan period is reaching its end and the position remains unchanged. The Committee
once again emphasizes that the Ministry will have to make vigorous efforts to procure the
required funds for 2013-14. The Committee was given to understand that a total of `37.72
crore was required for opening of 122 new Kendras and conduct of programme/activity.
Apparently, when these 122 new Kendras are to be opened in a phased manner during the
remaining four years of the Twelfth Plan Period, requirement of funds per year would be
much below `37.72 crore. The Committee strongly feels that there should be no problem
making the funds available for activating the new Kendras in a phased manner.
Recommendations/observations
3.11 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expedite the recruitment of DYC’s
and ACTs so that fresh recruitment takes place to fill up the vacancies. Filling up these posts
should be a priority area for NYKS to achieve its objectives. The Committee is not aware about
the status of proposal for sanction of required posts by the Ministry of Finance. If the proposal
has not materialized as yet, it is a cause of serious concern for the Committee. It would be
appropriate if the matter is taken up at the higher level. The Committee also recommends that the
Ministry of Finance needs to provide the adequate funds during the 12th Plan Period (2012-2017)

13
for expanding NYKS in the remaining 122 districts of the country. One must not forget that youth
residing in these uncovered 122 districts also belong to the country.
Action Taken
At present the Cadre Review of NYKS is being conducted with the following objectives:
(i) The Government has recently approved the proposal for opening of a Kendra of NYKS
in 122 uncovered districts of the country. It is proposed to open new Kendras in a
phased manner during the Twelfth Plan period depending upon the availability of
funds.
(ii) To assess magnitude of stagnation in various grades of the organization. While doing
so, the viewpoints of the association and other stakeholders may be examined.
(iii) To review the structure of the organization alongwith the feeder cadre, keeping in
view the findings of (1) above;
(iv) To suggest remedial measures, both short term and long term for career progression
of the officers of the organization in various levels.
After receipt and acceptance of the recommendations of the Cadre Reviews Committee, the
Recruitment Rules (RRs) for the various posts in NYKS would be reviewed and amended.
Thereafter, the recruitment process to fill up the vacant posts including that District Youth
Coordinator (DYC) and Accounts Clerk-cum-Typist (ACT) would be undertaken through promotion
and direct recruitment.
With the objective of filling up the various vacant posts, expansion of NYKS to 122 new
Kendras and conduct of various programmes/activities, a Budget Estimate of `419.34 crore was
projected for the financial year 2012-13. However, the budget allocation for NYKS for the year
2012-13 has been restricted to `134.50 crore.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee was given to understand that 323 posts of Youth Co-ordinator and
189 posts of Account Clerk Typist were proposed to be filled up during 2012-13. Besides
that, the Committee had also taken note of 201 posts of District Youth Co-ordinators lying
vacant. The Committee has been viewing the continuance of such a large number of vacant
posts under NYKS with serious concern. The Committee is dismayed to find that position
remains unchanged. Latest feedback received from the Ministry clearly indicates that this
position is likely to continue for long. The process of cadre review, acceptance of its Report,
review of the Recruitment Rules for various posts and their amendment wherever required
has just been initiated. The Committee does not have much hope of this prolonged process
being completed during the Twelfth Plan period. Even thereafter, the problem of availability
of required funds would remain to be resolved. And during this period, the existing NYKS
can not be considered fully functional in the absence of required manpower. Also, youth of
the uncovered 122 districts of the country would continue to be deprived of various
programmes being implemented by NYKS.
IV. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
Recommendations/observations
4.4 The Committee, however, is of the view that the NSS could not keep pace with the

14
desired expansion to Universities, Colleges and +2 schools despite there being huge opportunity
due to uneven distribution of NSS volunteers across the North and South of the Country. Details
of the universities and colleges covered presently under NSS also seem to indicate that
professional colleges like medical and engineering colleges which have shown a phenomenal
growth over the recent years have perhaps remained outside the purview of the scheme. If that
be so, Committee can conclude that a vast potential of our youth has remained devoid of positive
impact of NSS which has helped in creation of social awareness among college/university/
students. Its main objective is of nation building and national integrity and therefore it needs
special attention.
Action Taken
Being a centrally sponsored scheme any expansion is possible only when the States come
forward to increase the strength as there is financial implications for both the States and the
Centre. The observation/recommendation of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee has been conveyed to all State Liaison Officers for equitable spread of sanctioned
volunteers. Presently, the request of enhancement of volunteers strength was received from
Government of Meghalaya for 10000 more volunteers and the same has been acceded to. Further,
Government of Arunachal Pradesh has also requested for enhancement of 500 volunteers. All the
State Liaison Officers are also directed to explore the options of opening of Self Financing Units
for covering non-covered Universities/Colleges for increasing the ambit of the NSS for greater
reach to the Student Youth.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the fact that the Advisory Committee of individual
States/UTs is the designated authority to decide the allocation of volunteers at the State
level and also amongst various constituent colleges/universities under the National Service
Scheme. The Committee would like to point out that the National Service Scheme (NSS) is
a Centrally Sponsored Scheme with the objective to develop character and personality of
school and college going youth. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry has to play
a pro-active role so as to ensure even spread of this social scheme. Mere conveying the
observation/recommendation of the Committee to State Liaison Officers would not serve
any purpose. What is required is pursuing this issue with the State authorities and also
having an effective monitoring mechanism.
Recommendations/Observations
4.5 The Committee welcomes this long awaited initiative which would lead to secured and
healthy atmosphere for the vulnerable youth in these areas. The Committee impresses upon the
Ministry to take every conceivable step in co-ordination with the concerned State Governments so
as to ensure success of this major initiative.
Action Taken
The National Council on Skill Development along with Tata Institute of Social Sciences is
actively working out a revised framework for NSS. A series of discussions have been held at
various levels wherein implementing universities have participated. The new focus of the scheme
would be on students attaining employable skills while undertaking work with the community to
bring about sustainable social change and equity. It may not be out of place to mention here that
even the University Grants Commission, in 2006, issued an advisory encouraging Universities and
Colleges to introduce Career Oriented Programmes at first degree level.

15
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is surprised to note that the modalities for inclusion of skill
development are still being worked out in consultation with the National Council on Skill
Development and the Tata Institute of Social Sciences. The Committee can only emphasize
that all formalities need to be completed at the earliest and the revised framework for NSS
is finalized and implemented. Every effort needs to be made for launching of a pilot project
whereby 1000 volunteers of Left Wing Extremist (LWE) affected districts of Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and NE States are proposed to be imparted skill
development training.
Recommendations/Observations
4.6 The Committee notes that funds allocated for the scheme during the last three years have
remained under-utilised. When asked to clarify specially with regard to 2011-12, the Committee was
informed that from 1.4.11 onwards, Planning Commission conveyed that Annual Plan allocation
should be released to States/UTs on the basis of Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan (SCSP), Tribal Sub-
Plan (TSP) and North Eastern/Others. As the enrolment of volunteers is on a voluntary basis and
NSS data is not segregated under SC/ST categories, there was confusion over the amount of funds
to be released to each State and UT. The clarification dated 10.2.2012 had now been received from
the Planning Commission with regard to the actual percentage of allocation of various categories
and releases to States/UTs would be smoother w.e.f. 1.4.2012 onwards. The Committee is not
happy at the unduly time taken in getting the matter resolved with the Planning Commission. In
the process, the scheme remaining deprived of required funds cannot be justified.
Action Taken
As per the norms of the NSS Manual, the funds are allocated on the basis of number of
volunteers’ strength for Schedule Caste, Scheduled Tribes and Other Category. For increasing
number of volunteers, the matter was discussed with the Planning Commission, but the Planning
Commission has advised to run the scheme within the allocated budgetary provision.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Department about allocation of
funds under the Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) and Scheduled Tribe Sub Plan (STSP). The
Committee observes that the Department has not given any clarification about the
segregation of the amount of funds related to each State and U.T. The Committee would
appreciate if the Department gives due importance to the scheme and ensures that a suitable
mechanism is devised so that the scheme is not deprived of funds. The Committee, therefore,
recommends steps may be taken to get the NSS segregated under SC/ST categories so as to
avoid any condusion over the amount of funds to be released to each State and UT.
Recommendations/Observations
4.7 The Committee would appreciate if a viable decision in consultation with the State
Governments/UT Administrations is taken at the earliest. It should not happen that this Flagship
Programme of the Ministry suffers adversely for want of a decision.
Action Taken
Responses from 12 States (including the NE States) has been received and all except one
has agreed to the 3:1 for other States and 9:1 for NE States.

16
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that availability of funds is the most crucial aspect so far
as effective implementation of any scheme is concerned. It is also a well-known fact that
quite a few States of the country, particularly those in the N-E region face acute financial
constraint. To resolve this issue, Working Group for the Twelfth Plan had suggested two
viable options. The Committee is constrained to observe that it is only after their
observations on this aspect the State Governments have been approached so far responses
have been received from only 12 States. In this era of IT advancement, the process of
consultation should not be a prolonged one. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry
should expedite the feedback from all the State Governments so that this Flagship
Programme of the Ministry is implemented in the right spirit.
VII. SCOUTING AND GUIDING
7.3 The Committee is of the view that both the recommendations are worth consideration and
implementation and the Ministry should take the required steps in this direction.
Action Taken
For the year 2012-13, already an amount of `48,38,000/- has already been released to
Bharat Scouts and Guides for promotion of Scouting and guiding. An amount of `1,01,58,000/- is
in the pipeline for release. Further, file is also under submission for merger of Scouting and
Guiding Movement with the existing NPYAD from financial year 2013-14.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is happy to note that the process of merger of Scouting and Guiding
Movement would begin in 2013-14. The Committee would appreciate if this exercise is
completed at the earliest so as to ensure reach of this scheme to the targeted beneficiaries.
The Committee would also emphasize that the Impact Assessment Study of the Bharat Scouts
and Guides should not be delayed due to procedural matters. The Committee hopes that
suitable agency has already been identified for carrying out the Impact Assessment Study.
X. PANCHAYAT YUV A KRIDA AUR KHEL ABHIYAN (PYKKA)
Recommendations/Observations
10.5 The Committee is not happy with the reductions in budgetary provisions for such an
ambitious programme which involves development of sports infrastructure at the grassroot level for
the marginalized section of the society. On a specific query regarding the funding of schemes
through MPLAD funds, the Committee was informed that it has been approved and circular in this
regard has been issued by the Ministry. The Committee welcomes the initiative for funding of the
scheme through MPLAD. It is for the Ministry to make optimum use of such an opportunity. The
Committee also has a word of caution for the implementing agencies. The Ministry has to exhibit
extra level of commitment and vigour in the achievement of targets through mission mode so that
the shortfall so far noticed in the delivery of performance is bridged effectively. The Committee
hopes that the Ministry would adopt a proactive and pragmatic approach for better performance
during the Twelfth Plan period.
Action Taken
Budget allocation of `225 core was provided in BE 2011-12 which was brought down to

17
`165.20 core at the RE stage 2011-12. A budgetary cut of `116 crore was imposed in the allocation
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports at RE stage. To accommodate this budgetary cut, a cut
of `59.80 crore was imposed in the allocation provided for PYKKA scheme also. Regarding funding
of scheme through MPLAD Scheme, it is stated that the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation have issued an order converging PYKKA scheme with MPLAD scheme. States/UTs
are being requested to avail of this opportunity to dovetail financial resources from MPLAD
Scheme for furtherance of implementation of PYKKA scheme.
To cover all the remaining village/block panchayats during Twelfth Five year Plan Period,
funds requirement has been submitted to Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance. The Planning
Commission and the Ministry of Finance are being persuaded to provide adequate budget allocation
under PYKKA scheme so that its targets could be achieved. As desired by the Hon’ble Members
of the Committee, the Ministry will exhibit a higher level of commitment and vigour in the
achievement for targets through Mission mode so that shortfalls noticed in the delivery of
performance is bridged effectively.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
has issued an order converging PYKKA Scheme with MPLAD Scheme. The Committee also
notes that States/UTs are being requested to avail of this opportunity to dovetail financial
resources from MPLADS Scheme for furtherance of implementation of PYKKA Scheme. The
Committee, however, has a word of caution. Since the two schemes are being administered
by two different Ministries, a well-structured monitoring mechanism and co-ordination not
only between the two Ministries but also among the various implementing agencies will have
to be in place. Necessary steps may, accordingly, be initiated by the Ministry.
Recommendation/Observations
10.8 The Committee feels deeply concerned with the States’ inability to have the maximum
benefit from the scheme. The Committee is not aware whether any norms have been laid down
for development of playfields and training expenses per coach. If such specification has already
been made, then the same needs to be enforced judiciously. If not, the Committee would appreciate
if norms for every conceivable component are laid down.
Action Taken
The Scheme of PYKKA is implemented through State Governments. Therefore, the States/
UTs are given the flexibility to decide the norms for development of play fields. As regards
finalizing the norms for the training expense of Kridashrees, it is stated that funds amounting to
`2000/- per head are provided to the States/UTs to meet the expenses on conducting one week
training course for the Kridashrees. These norms are being enforced judiciously. A total number of
29,713 Kridashrees have been trained upto 31/10/2012 in 26 States and one UT (Puducherry).
Comments of the Committee
The Committee finds that PYKKA Scheme has taken off. As per the feedback made
available to it, under the component of training of community coaches (Kridashrees), 25,038
Kridashrees have been trained up to 31.03.2012 in 26 States and one UT. The Committee
is, however, not aware about the implementation status of the other component, i.e. creation
of playfields with basic facilities at panchayat and block levels. The Committee hopes that
benefits of this very crucial component of the PYKKA Scheme has also started reaching the
targeted beneficiaries in all the States and UTs.

18
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
Recommendations/Observations
12.3 The Committee is aware that Para Olympics are held alongwith the Olympics at international
level. The amount of budgetary allocation to the scheme is not very encouraging and not in any
way assures that our para sportspersons will be benefited fully. There is a need not only for
coaches, sports equipment, but also sports infrastructure especially for the disabled sportspersons
and the creation of an environment which is friendly to such persons. The Committee is not aware
whether any monitoring mechanism is in place so as to ensure that this marginalized section of our
society is in a position to get full support of the scheme. The Committee would be happy if the
Ministry takes an initiative in this regard.
Action Taken
While the Scheme of Sports & Games for Persons with Disabilities is for broad-basing of
sports among differently abled children at the grassroots level, the requirement of differently abled
sportspersons participating in National Championships and International tournaments including Para-
Olympics is met under the Scheme of Assistance to National Sports Federations (NSFs). The
Government of India provides assistance to NSFs for conducting National Championships and
International Tournaments in India, participation in International tournaments abroad, organizing
coaching camps, procuring sports equipments, engagement of foreign coaches and disbursement of
salaries of the paid Joint/Assistant Secretaries engaged by NSFs. Under this Scheme, assistance is
also provided to the NSFs which are dealing with disabled sportspersons, viz.  Paralympic
Committee of India (PCI) for physically disabled, Special Olympics Bharat (SOB) for intellectually
challenged and the All India Sports Council for the Deaf (AISCD). A budgetary allocation of
`110.00 crore has been made during 2012-13 for the Scheme of Assistance to NSFs. For
preparation of athletes in the Para-Olympic Games, London 2012, coaching camps were first
organized from 15th July, 2011 to 30th November, 2011 at Gandhi Nagar, Bengaluru and Sonepat
and then again from March, 2012 onwards at Bengaluru and New Delhi. Requisite financial
assistance will be provided to the Paralympic Committee of India for participation of the Indian
contingent in London Para Olympic Games 2012. So far, 10 Paralympic athletes (Swimming-1,
Shooting-1 and Athletics-5) have qualified for participation in Para Olympics 2012. India won 1
silver medal in London Paralympics, 2012.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee had made a specific observation about the need for a monitoring
mechanism under the Scheme for Promotion of Sports among Persons with Disabilities so
as to ensure the reach of this scheme to the marginalized section of our society. In the
Action Taken Note submitted by the Ministry, this concern of the Committee remains
unaddressed. The Committee can only reiterate that an effective monitoring mechanism has
to be in place if the objective of this Scheme has to be achieved in the real spirit.
XIV. LONDON OLYMPICS 2012
Recommendations/Observations
14.5 The Committee has taken note of the efforts being made by the Ministry for preparations
for the London Olympics 2012. The Committee gives due credence to the exceptional support given
to the sportspersons during the Commonwealth Games 2010. The sportspersons responded well to
the support with excellent performance and this was reflected in the large number of medals won

19
by the country. The Committee expects that the same kind of support would be given to the
probables of the London Olympics. All efforts should be directed towards coaching, provision of
required equipments and most important of all the taking care of the nutrition aspects of the
sportspersons. The Committee would once again reiterate that top priority should be accorded to
the preparations of sportspersons for the Olympics and they should be made the centre point of
all the initiatives discussion so as to get maximum medals for the country.
Action Taken
Highest priority was accorded by the Ministry and the Sports Authority of India to the
preparation of the core probables for their participation in London Olympics 2012. The Ministry
of Youth Affairs & Sports has launched Project ‘Operation Excellence for London Olympics 2012’
(OPEX 2012), a comprehensive programme for imparting focussed training to Indian sportspersons
for preparation for London Olympics 2012. Core probables have been identified and are being
provided comprehensive and intensive training, both within the country and abroad as well as
competition exposure in international sports competitions. The funding for training/competition of
the sportspersons for London Olympics 2012 is being provided at the funding norms, which are
at par with Commonwealth Games (CWG-D2010) scales, with further upscaling in certain areas
such as lodging, nutrition, scientific support and daily allowance.
The coaching/training and International Competitions/Exposures requirements of athletes and
teams have been finalized in consultation with the concerned National Sports Federations, Sports
Authority of India and experts from the respective fields of sports. The Ministry is closely
monitoring the preparations and is in continuous interaction with concerned National Sports
Federations, Sports Authority of India and other experts to review the preparations. Two High Level
Committees i.e., the Apex Committee headed by Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Youth
Affairs & Sports and the Steering Committee headed by Secretary (Sports) have been formed to
finalize and review/monitor the action plans for preparation of sportspersons for London Olympics
2012.
81 sportspersons have qualified for participation in London Olympics. Sportspersons put up
a commendable performance at the London Olympics in which the country won an all time record
of six medals (2 Silver and 4 Bronze).
Comments of the Committee
The Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department observes
that the medal tally of India in the Olympic, 2012 had increased only marginally. The
Committee feels that there was some lack of co-ordination in certain sports which was
reflected in the poor performance at the London Olympic. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that highest priority should be accorded by the Ministry and Sports Authority
of India (SAI) to the training and preparation of probables for participation in the
Commonwealth Games to be held in 2014 and Olympics to be held in 2016 in Rio. The
teams for the various sports should be provided with better facilities and world class
infrastructure, opportunities for training and practice under the best international coaches.
Athlete/Sportspersons should be provided adequate medical facilities and nutritional aspect
should also be taken care of in a more efficient manner. Special attention should be given
to sportspersons from rural areas.

20
20
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
–NIL–

21
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee notes that inadequate allocation of funds has remained the main
constraint in effective implementation of schemes of the Ministry. The ambitious scheme of
Panchayat Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) is one such example. Against the
approved Budget outlay of R1500 crore for the scheme in Eleventh Plan, an allocation of
only R742.20 crores was made which had been fully utilized. Another impediment noticed is
delay on the part of the State Governments in utilizing the grant provided to them. While
appreciating the obvious constraints, the Committee views with serious concern the fact that
suggestions emerging out of the workshop held on 10-11 March, 2012 on PYKKA with State
Governments and other stakeholders are yet to be implemented. While advocating the
allocation of required funds for Flagship Schemes like PYKKA and Urban Sports
Infrastructure Scheme, the Committee would like to emphasize that concerted efforts are
also required to be made for bringing improvement in the implementation of these schemes.
(Para 2.4)
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
The Committee had emphasized the need for higher allocation of funds under NYKS
for 2012-13, keeping in view the projected requirements as well as optimum utilization of
allocated funds during 2011-12. The Committee had also recommended that an analysis of
the funds required for various components under the scheme along with all the allied
aspects be made so as to project the actual requirement of financial assistance. The
Committee finds the response of the Ministry very routine.
The Committee would like to reiterate that against the projected demand of R336.81
crore for 2012-13, fund allocation of only R94 crore has been made, the same as made in
2011-12. The Committee would like to point out that these additional funds were meant to
cover crucial areas like increase of budget for regular programmes and activities of NYKS
to R16.85 lakh per Kendra, construction of office building of 60 Kendras at R10 lakh per
Kendra, modernization of IT network in NYKS throughout the country and also pension and
other benefits for employees, filling up of vacant posts and establishment of 122 new
Kendras. Due to the substantive cut in the projected requirements for 2012-13, it is more
than clear that there would be neither any improvement in the functioning of existing
Kendras nor further expansion. The Committee would appreciate if concerted efforts are
initiated to ensure the allocation of funds as required for 2013-14. (Para 3.8)
The Committee notes with dismay that no progress has been made on the issue of
expansion of NYKS to the remaining 122 districts of the country. It continues to remain
approved in principle. These new Kendras are proposed to be opened during the Twelfth
Plan period in a phased manner, availability of funds being the deciding factor. First year
of the Twelfth Plan period is reaching its end and the position remains unchanged. The
Committee once again emphasizes that the Ministry will have to make vigorous efforts to
procure the required funds for 2013-14. The Committee was given to understand that a
total of R37.72 crore was required for opening of 122 new Kendras and conduct of
programme/activity. Apparently, when these 122 new Kendras are to be opened in a phased
21

22
manner during the remaining four years of the Twelfth Plan Period, requirement of funds
per year would be much below R37.72 crore. The Committee strongly feels that there
should be no problem making the funds available for activating the new Kendras in a
phased manner. (Para 3.10)
The Committee was given to understand that 323 posts of Youth Co-ordinator and
189 posts of Account Clerk Typist were proposed to be filled up during 2012-13. Besides
that, the Committee had also taken note of 201 posts of District Youth Co-ordinators lying
vacant. The Committee has been viewing the continuance of such a large number of vacant
posts under NYKS with serious concern. The Committee is dismayed to find that position
remains unchanged. Latest feedback received from the Ministry clearly indicates that this
position is likely to continue for long. The process of cadre review, acceptance of its Report,
review of the Recruitment Rules for various posts and their amendment wherever required
has just been initiated. The Committee does not have much hope of this prolonged process
being completed during the Twelfth Plan period. Even thereafter, the problem of availability
of required funds would remain to be resolved. And during this period, the existing NYKS
can not be considered fully functional in the absence of required manpower. Also, youth of
the uncovered 122 districts of the country would continue to be deprived of various
programmes being implemented by NYKS. (Para 3.11)
IV. NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS )
The Committee takes note of the fact that the Advisory Committee of individual
States/UTs is the designated authority to decide the allocation of volunteers at the State
level and also amongst various constituent colleges/universities under the National Service
Scheme. The Committee would like to point out that the National Service Scheme (NSS) is
a Centrally Sponsored Scheme with the objective to develop character and personality of
school and college going youth. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry has to play
a pro-active role so as to ensure even spread of this social scheme.  Mere conveying the
observation/recommendation of the Committee to State Liaison Officers would not serve
any purpose. What is required is pursuing this issue with the State authorities and also
having an effective monitoring mechanism. (Para 4.4)
The Committee is surprised to note that the modalities for inclusion of skill
development are still being worked out in consultation with the National Council on Skill
Development and the Tata Institute of Social Sciences. The Committee can only emphasize
that all formalities need to be completed at the earliest and the revised framework for NSS
is finalized and implemented. Every effort needs to be made for launching of a pilot project
whereby 1000 volunteers of Left Wing Extremist (LWE) affected districts of Jharkhand,
Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and NE States are proposed to be imparted skill
development training. (Para 4.5)
The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Department about allocation of
funds under the Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) and Scheduled Tribe Sub Plan (STSP).
The Committee observes that the Department has not given any clarification about the
segregation of the amount of funds related to each State and U.T. The Committee would
appreciate if the Department gives due importance to the scheme and ensures that a
suitable mechanism is devised so that the scheme is not deprived of funds. The Committee,
therefore, recommends steps may be taken to get the NSS segregated under SC/ST
categories so as to avoid any condusion over the amount of funds to be released to each
State and UT. (Para 4.6)

23
The Committee observes that availability of funds is the most crucial aspect so far
as effective implementation of any scheme is concerned. It is also a well-known fact that
quite a few States of the country, particularly those in the N-E region face acute financial
constraint. To resolve this issue, Working Group for the Twelfth Plan had suggested two
viable options. The Committee is constrained to observe that it is only after their
observations on this aspect the State Governments have been approached so far responses
have been received from only 12 States. In this era of IT advancement, the process of
consultation should not be a prolonged one. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry
should expedite the feedback from all the State Governments so that this Flagship
Programme of the Ministry is implemented in the right spirit. . (Para 4.7)
VII. SCOUTING AND GUIDING
The Committee is happy to note that the process of merger of Scouting and Guiding
Movement would begin in 2013-14. The Committee would appreciate if this exercise is
completed at the earliest so as to ensure reach of this scheme to the targeted beneficiaries.
The Committee would also emphasize that the Impact Assessment Study of the Bharat
Scouts and Guides should not be delayed due to procedural matters. The Committee hopes
that suitable agency has already been identified for carrying out the Impact Assessment
Study. (Para 7.3)
X. PANCHAYAT YUVA KRIDA AUR KHEL ABHIYAN (PYKKA)
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
has issued an order converging PYKKA Scheme with MPLAD Scheme. The Committee also
notes that States/UTs are being requested to avail of this opportunity to dovetail financial
resources from MPLADS Scheme for furtherance of implementation of PYKKA Scheme. The
Committee, however, has a word of caution. Since the two schemes are being administered
by two different Ministries, a well-structured monitoring mechanism and co-ordination not
only between the two Ministries but also among the various implementing agencies will have
to be in place. Necessary steps may, accordingly, be initiated by the Ministry. (Para 10.5)
The Committee finds that PYKKA Scheme has taken off. As per the feedback made
available to it, under the component of training of community coaches (Kridashrees),
25,038 Kridashrees have been trained up to 31.03.2012 in 26 States and one UT. The
Committee is, however, not aware about the implementation status of the other component,
i.e. creation of playfields with basic facilities at panchayat and block levels. The Committee
hopes that benefits of this very crucial component of the PYKKA Scheme has also started
reaching the targeted beneficiaries in all the States and UTs. (Para 10.8)
XII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
The Committee had made a specific observation about the need for a monitoring
mechanism under the Scheme for Promotion of Sports among Persons with Disabilities so
as to ensure the reach of this scheme to the marginalized section of our society. In the
Action Taken Note submitted by the Ministry, this concern of the Committee remains
unaddressed. The Committee can only reiterate that an effective monitoring mechanism has
to be in place if the objective of this Scheme has to be achieved in the real spirit.
(Para 12.3)
XIV. LONDON OLYMPICS 2012
The Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department observes

24
that the medal tally of India in the Olympic, 2012 had increased only marginally. The
Committee feels that there was some lack of co-ordination in certain sports which was
reflected in the poor performance at the London Olympic. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that highest priority should be accorded by the Ministry and Sports Authority
of India (SAI) to the training and preparation of probables for participation in the
Commonwealth Games to be held in 2014 and Olympics to be held in 2016 in Rio. The
teams for the various sports should be provided with better facilities and world class
infrastructure, opportunities for training and practice under the best international coaches.
Athlete/Sportspersons should be provided adequate medical facilities and nutritional aspect
should also be taken care of in a more efficient manner. Special attention should be given
to sportspersons from rural areas. (Para 14.5)

25
MINUTES

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
21st February, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Shri Derek O’ Brien
6. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Suresh Angadi
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
11. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
12. Shri Virender Kashyap
13. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
14. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
16. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla
17. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 248
th Report on the Universities for Research and
Innovation Bill, 2012 and draft 249 th, 250 th, 251 st and 252 nd Report on Action Taken by Government
27

28
on the recommendations/observations contained in 243 rd, 244 th, 245 th and 246 th Reports on the
Demand for Grants 2012-13 of the Ministry of Women and Child Development, Department of
School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Department of Higher
Education respectively.
3 . ***
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft 249
th, 250 th, 251 st and 252 nd
Reports on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/observations contained in the
Reports on Demands for Grants 2012-13 pertaining to the four Departments/Ministries under the
purview of the Committee.
5. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned five Reports in both the Houses
of Parliament on 26
th February, 2013. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence
Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem and in the absence of both, Shri Baishnab Parida to present the
Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla and in his absence Shri Manicka Tagore
to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

29
ANNEXURES

31
ANNEXURE-I
Region-wise, State-wise details of strength of trainees under the ‘Come & Ply’ Scheme in
various disciplines as on date are as under:-
Sl. No. Region/States(s) Boys Girls T otal
Northern Region, Chandigarh
1 Punjab 117 79 196
2 Himachal Pradesh 08 12 20
TOTAL 125 91 216
NER, Imphal
3 Manipur 229 82 311
4 Mizoram 31 04 35
5 Nagaland 09 01 10
T
OTAL 269 87 356
SC-Lucknow
6. Uttar Pradesh 271 75 346
TOTAL 271 75 346
Central Region, Bhopal
7 Madhya Pradesh 212 65 277
8 Chhattisgarh 128 71 199
TOTAL 340 136 476
LNCP  Trivandraum
9 Kerala 918 106 1024
TOTAL 918 106 1024
Northern Region, Sonepat
10 Haryana 272 11 283
TOTAL 272 11 283
NIS Patiala
11 Patiala (Punjab) 596 151 747
TOTAL 596 151 747

32
Sl. No. Region/States(s) Boys Girls T otal
Western Region, Gandhinagar
12 Gujarat 231 14 245
13 Maharashtra 368 115 483
14 Rajasthan 59 02 61
T
OTAL 658 131 789
Southern Region, Bangalore
15 Andhra Pradesh 51 35 86
16 Karnataka 1196 606 1802
17 Tamil Nadu 112 74 186
T
OTAL 1359 715 2074
SC-Guwahati
18 Assam 355 148 503
19 Meghalaya 24 18 42
T
OTAL 379 166 545
Eastern Region, Kolkata
20 West Bengal 1041 347 1388
21 Bihar 27 0 27
22 Tripura 78 32 110
23 Jharkhand 113 24 137
T
OTAL 1259 403 1662
GRAND TOTAL 6446 2072 8518

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.