PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
  
HUNDRED – THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
  
ON 
  
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED 
THIRTEENTH REPORT ON TECHNICAL EDUCATION OF THE DEPARTMENT 
OF SECONDARY AND HIGHER EDUCATION 
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT) 
  
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   10TH     APRIL, 2003) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10TH    APRIL, 2003) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                
PREFACE 
REPORT                                                                                                                                                         
                
         CHAPTER I      Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  
                                    Government             
         CHAPTER II     Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to      
                                    pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
          CHAPTER III    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the     
                                    Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
          CHAPTER IV    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies/final replies of   
                                    the Government are still awaited 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                    
MINUTES                                                                                            
ANNEXURE  
            COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2003) 
  
Shri Arjun Singh               Chairman 
  
Page 1 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

MEMBERS 
            RAJYA SABHA 
  
Dr. Abrar Ahmed          
Dr. Akhilesh Das 
Shri B.P. Apte   
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Shri Eduardo Faleiro   
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik 
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi 
Shri R. Sarath Kumar 
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
Shri Mrinal Sen 
Smt. Vanga Geetha 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
Shri Ambareesha 
Shri Ramakant Angle 
Shri Kirti Jha Azad 
Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria 
Prof. Kailasho Devi 
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit 
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal 
Shri R.L. Jalappa 
Shri Baliram Kashyap 
Shri Brij Lal Khabri 
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Shri Y.G. Mahajan 
Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa 
Dr. Manda Jagannath 
Smt. Nivedita Mane 
Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena 
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29th  January, 2003.  
(i) 
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja 
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Smt. Renu Kumari 
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao 
Shri Sunil Dutt 
Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
Dr. N. Venkataswamy 
Smt. Ganti Vi
jaykumari 
Page 2 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

Shri Devendra Singh Yadav 
Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer 
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
PREFACE 
  
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Hundred Thirty-Fourth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Hundred thirteenth Report on Technical Education of the 
Department of Secondary and Higher Education,  Ministry of Human Resource Development for the 
year 2002-2003. 
  
2.         The Hundred thirteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
18
th December, 2002.  Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, 
received from the Department of Secondary and Higher Education Ministry of Human Resource 
Development were considered by the Committee at its meetings meeting held on the 9th January, 2003.  
  
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
7th April, 2003. 
  
REPORT 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in its One Hundred Thirteenth Report on Technical Education presented to 
Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:- 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:  2.4, 2.11, 3.2, 3.3, 3.6, 
3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.21,  5.4, 7.2, 10, 11.2  (Chapter I) Total- 13 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies:2.8, 3.17, 8.2                                                  (Chapter II)  Total- 3 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee: 2.4, 2.5, 3,6, 3.22, 3.24, 5.3, 6.4, 6.5    (Chapter-III)  Total- 8 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies/final replies of the Government are still 
awaited: 2.1,2.9,2.10, 3.4, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.16, 3.19 4.3, 6.5, 6.6, 9.2  (Chapter IV) Total- 13 
  
The re
plies/final replies in respect of  the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of 
NEW DELHI 
April 7, 2003   
Chaitra 17, 1925 (Saka)  
 ARJUN SINGH 
 Chairman 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development
Page 3 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

the Report are still awaited from the Department.  The Committee may be apprised of the same as 
and when action is taken.  
CHAPTER  I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT – ROLE OF AICTE 
Observation/Recommendation  
2.4  The Committee is of the view that the Department and AICTE should make all conceivable efforts 
for encouraging both Govt. and private initiatives in setting up technical institutions in N-E region. 
Action Taken  
Setting up of institutes on self-financing basis by Trusts/Societies is being encouraged.  As of now, 
there are 26 polytechnics, 8 Engg colleges, 7 Management Colleges and 18 PG programmes in the 
North Eastern Region. During 2001-2002, out of 3 applications received for setting up of Diploma 
Level, 2 were approved; 1 application received for degree could not be approved as it did not meet 
norms and standards. Also, during 2001-2002, 3 PG programmes were considered and approved. 
Observation/Recommendation  
2.11     It has been further informed that in April, 2000, AICTE had written to each State Government to 
prepare a perspective plan for developing technical education in the state and for qualitative 
improvement of technical education.    However, none of the States has given any perspective plan for 
development of technical education and the Council has so far not been provided with any feedback 
from the State Govts. regarding the quality of technical education, manpower requirement, employment 
opportunities etc.   The Committee is of the view that AICTE should impress upon the State Govts. to 
furnish the required information at the earliest.  
Action Taken  
Noted for compliance. 
INCONSISTENCIES IN DIFFERENT PROCEDURES AND NORMS – REMEDIAL SUGGESTIONS 
THEREFOR 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.2       The Committee was informed that in spite of academic eligibility prescribed by AICTE for 
Degree and Diploma  level courses, different States follow different academic eligibility criteria 
and there is no uniformity in the minimum cut off percentage which creates confusion.  During  its 
study visit to Chennai, the Sub-Committee was informed that in Tamil Nadu a minimum of 60% 
in Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry individually and an aggregate of 70% at the 10+2 level is 
considered as entry criteria into the Professional courses.   However, in other States like 
Karnataka, Kerala,  Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and UT of Pondicherry, they require a pass 
percentage of  50 % .   Due to this differential eligibility criteria and other reasons, nearly 20,000 
seats  in Tamil Nadu remained unfilled this year.  The Committee strongly feels that there should 
be  uniformity at all India level for selection/eligibility criteria for admission in different technical 
education courses as far as possible.   The Committee, therefore, recommends  that the 
Department  and AICTE, alongwith State Governments, should work out common modalities in 
this regard. 
Action Taken  
In order to ensure uniformity at the all- India level for selection / eligibility for technical 
institutions in the country, AICTE had framed regulations in 1994;  Norms and Guidelines for 
Fees and Guidelines for Admissions in Professional Colleges Regulation, 1994”. Most of the States 
conduct a common entrance examination for admission, and they are following the requirements 
of the AICTE guidelines.  From the academic year 2002-2003, a Common Entrance Test for 
admission in engineering colleges (AIEEE) has been introduced. More and more higher technical 
colleges, in consultation with the State Governments, will be included in the entrance examination 
in the near future.  AICTE is also in the process of evolving mechanism for conduct of a common 
Page 4 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

entrance examination for MBA and MCA courses. 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.3       The Committee's attention was drawn to the practice of different Universities in the country 
awarding degrees under different nomenclature and resultant difficulty in establishing their equivalence.  
A suggestion was, therefore, made that AICTE should publish a list of such degrees with their 
equivalence to Degree in Engineering, PG Degree in Engineering and Diploma in Engineering  which 
should be given wide publicity.   
Action Taken  
AICTE has communicated the approved nomenclature of Bachelors degree in Engineering & 
Technology, Pharmacy, Architecture, Diploma programmes, PG programmes and Ph.D programmes to 
all the Universities. This information is also included in the application forms for starting new technical 
institutions as well as the AICTE handbook for approval of courses.   
Observations/Recommendations  
The Committee is also surprised to note that discrepancy is also there in respect of career 
advancement for the faculty members of Engineering Colleges and Polytechnics.  Latest circular 
of AICTE recommending the new Pay Scales states that a Lecturer requires eleven years service 
to get the selection grade without improving any qualification, whereas a Lecturer in Diploma 
level institution requires a higher qualification, i.e. Master’s Degree in Engineering in order to 
become eligible for selection grade.  In other words, teachers who are teaching the diploma 
programme need higher qualifications as compared to teachers who are teaching the students in 
the Degree Colleges. 
Action Taken  
A review of the Career Advancement Scheme will be taken up and discrepancy, if any, will be sorted 
out. 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.8       The Committee was also apprised that there was no uniformity in the admission schedules of 
different States.  As a result,  students face difficulty while seeking admission in  different states.   Not 
only this,  at present different  admission tests are conducted on different dates for admission to various 
technical institutions in the country.   Sometimes,  it is observed that various  entrance test dates clash 
creating problems for the candidates and also putting  a lot of financial burden on their parents.   In this 
context, it was suggested that a uniform/common entrance test may be held for students seeking 
admission to different institutions on All India basis. Another suggestion made was that only one 
combined entrance test for one stream of technical education may be conducted at All India level.   
3.9       The Committee, in this context, was informed that in the IIT, JEE, already IT-BHU and ISM-
Dhanbad are participating in addition to the IITs.  The ambit of IIT-JEE is being expanded from the year 
2002 to include three other premier national level institutions (NIFFI, IITT, IITM) that have been 
conducting their separate tests.  The Committee was also  informed that the  Government is planning to 
hold an All India Engineering Entrance Examination (AIEEE) for admission to undergraduate 
programmes in Engineering which will cover all Centrally funded technical institutions, including 
Deemed Universities in the field of technical education.  All other institutions in the States that agree to 
participate in this test may be included and gradually the Examination will be extended to all technical 
institutions in the country.  The Committee hopes that  more and more States would participate in the 
Test and the Test may be conducted at the earliest, preferably from 2002-2003 academic session.  
Action Taken  
            AIEEE has been started from the academic year 2002-03.  It is expected that more and 
more States/Institutions will participate in the coming years. 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.10     As per Section 10 of AICTE Act, which defines Powers and Functions of the Council, there are 
varied functions to be discharged by AICTE.   However, it has been observed that AICTE basically 
keeps itself engrossed  with the function under section  10 (k) i.e. grant of approval for starting new 
technical institutions  and for introduction of new courses or programmes in consultation with the 
Page 5 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

agencies concerned.   However, other equally important functions like undertaking surveys, coordinating 
for development of technical education in the country, promoting innovations, research and 
development, formulating schemes for promoting technical education for women, handicapped and 
weaker sections of society  have been neglected.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that AICTE 
should not restrict its activities to granting approval or fixing norms, formulating guidelines for fees etc. 
but it should discharge its other functions as well which are necessary for proper, coordinated and 
qualitative improvement of technical education in the country as prescribed in the AICTE Act.     
Action Taken  
AICTE is giving due importance to other activities of technical education such as Research and 
Institutional Development Schemes / Projects, Faculty Development Schemes / Projects and 
improvement of quality of education through Accreditation of programmes. Reviews of the existing 
schemes have been initiated and on the basis of these reviews, the recommended existing activities will 
be strengthened further, and new activities will be initiated. 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.21     The Committee was further informed that accreditation has been made mandatory for all 
institutions from which at least two batches have passed out.   The grades awarded are put on web 
site of AICTE.  Steps have also been taken to caution the general public regarding the quality of 
grades assigned by the National Board of Accreditation through various other modes of 
awareness.   The Committee is of the considered view that accreditation and gradation of 
institutions should be given more coverage and wider area of operation so that general public are 
aware of the status of the institutions before they apply for it. 
Action Taken  
AICTE publishes the results of accreditation of programs of the various technical institutions in a 
Directory. This information is also available at NBA Website (www.nba-aicte.org) and AICTE Website 
(www.aicte.ernet.in). The Council has published in national newspapers information about the nature 
and scope of accreditation as an indication of Quality Assurance for the benefit of prospective students 
and parents. The Council is also bringing out posters for disseminating this information. 
TEACHERS 
Observation/Recommendation  
5.4       The Committee has also been given to understand that possibility of relaxing the Ph.D. 
qualification for Asstt.   Professor level, if there is evidence of quality R&D and Industry work is there, 
can be explored.    Inviting industry/ R&D personnel of Public/Private Sector as guest lecturers  and 
permitting personal consultancy were the other suggestions put forth  for solving the problem of faculty 
shortage.   The Committee recommends that feasibility of these suggestions should be reviewed and 
decision taken accordingly.   
Action Taken  
As per the existing AICTE regulations, candidates with Ph.D are eligible for appointment as Assistant 
Professor. However, considering the severe shortage of Ph.Ds in Technical Education, the concerned 
Boards are examining the possibility of relaxing Ph.D., if there is evidence of quality R&D activity.  
This measure is to be taken for a limited period till adequate number of Ph.Ds are available. Several 
technical institutions also invite personnel from industry and R&D institutions as visiting faculty. 
AUTONOMY 
Observation/Recommendation  
7.2       There is no denying the fact that granting autonomy will go a long way in accomplishing self-
reliance and would encourage healthy competition.  The Committee, however, feels that granting 
autonomy without judging the capability of institutions will degrade the quality of education.  Only such 
institutions which have proper track record and committed to quality should be given autonomy.    The 
Committee would, therefore, like to emphasize that autonomy should be given only to selected 
institutions that have consistently maintained excellent performance in the recent past. 
Action Taken  
Grant of autonom
y for technical institutions is  given as per set guidelines of AICTE Autonomy is 
Page 6 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

accorded only to institutions possessing adequate infrastructure and competent faculty which are 
assessed through accreditation of the programmes and expert committee visits. 
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY  
Observation/Recommendation  
10  The need for establishing a Technical University in each State under which all technical institutions 
in the State are affiliated  has been much talked about during the visits of the Sub-Committee.   The 
Committee finds that  some States have taken up the initiative for establishing  Technical Universities.  
As a result, some of the major concerns such as delay in admission, delay in  the beginning of academic 
session,  reduction in number of academic days required for a semester, non-uniformity in basic 
structure of  curriculum etc. have been alleviated.   The Committee,  therefore, recommends, that with 
the vast expansion of technical education in different States, the possibility of setting up of Technical 
Universities in every State or group of states may be examined by the Government.  However, it should 
be ensured that such universities are managed by experts in the field of technical education, so that 
professional approach of the management may help the university for proper growth of technical 
education and monitoring of technical institutions in the State.   
Action Taken  
            Technical Universities have been set up in several States in the country. They are headed by 
Vice-Chancellors who are eminent persons and experts in the field of technical education. 
FUNDING  
Observation/Recommendation  
The Committee feels that shortage of funds could be tackled through generation of resources by 
the Institutions themselves.   This could be done through Industry Institute contacts, generation of 
technology for the Industry, renting the labs, Consultancy and encouraging the alumni  who are 
abroad and are in a position to contribute towards growth of technical education in the Country.  
The Committee would, however, like to emphasize that Govt. has also to simultaneously continue 
funding technical education with increased allocation wherever feasible.  The Committee would 
like to point out that availability of infrastructure in most of the States needs substantial 
improvement.  Govt. may take some initiative in this regard specially in view of poor financial 
condition of majority of the State Governments.  
 Action Taken  
In the accreditation criteria, the National Board of Accreditation (NBA) has given importance to 
Industry sponsored research, continuing education and consultancy as important ingredients of 
institutional activities. It is observed that several institutions have initiated progress in all these areas as 
a result of NBA requirement. AICTE provides funding under the schemes of MODROBS, TAPTEC & 
R&D schemes for institutions on the basis of proposals made by them for improvement and 
modernization of infrastructure and promotion of R&D. 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT- ROLE OF AICTE 
Observation/Recommendation  
2.8       The Committee also observes that  with the ongoing recession in industry, demand for IT has 
shown a declining trend.  Quite a few  sanctioned  seats in IT and Computer Science are remaining 
vacant.  The Committee, therefore,  strongly feels that for a balanced development there should be a 
planned and coordinated development of every branch of technical education. Courses in core areas like 
Civil/Electrical Engineering etc are required to be continued and updated by introducing specialization 
in keeping with the changing technological scenario.  The Committee is of the opinion that while 
starting  Information  Technology and related courses, the requirements of various States need to be kept 
in view so as to remove regional imbalances and disparity. 
Action Taken 
Page 7 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

The demand for particular courses of technical education mainly depends on the employment 
opportunities available in the States in respect of a particular branch of technical education. 
However, in the Regional Committee meetings, effort is made to point out to the State 
Government representatives that every branch should be given adequate consideration. 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.17     During its study visits, the Committee was given to understand that a number of  schemes, such 
as Modernisation and Removal of Obsolescence (MODROB), Research and Development (R&D), 
Thrust Area Programme in Technical Education (TAPTEC) etc.  operate under AICTE through which 
financial assistance is provided to technical institutions.   However,  many of the Govt. as well as self-
financing institutions were  unaware of such schemes and consequently failed  to reap the benefits of 
such schemes.  On a specific query, the Council clarified that all possible attempts to give publicity to 
various Schemes of Staff Development,  Institutional Development, Research and Development through 
national and local newspapers,  AICTE  website and also through individual correspondence with the 
States, Universities and institutions are being made.  Every year, more than 40 to 50 crores of rupees are 
being spent under these schemes.   The Committee feels that AICTE should prepare a composite list of 
financial assistance schemes under separate heads such as Schemes for staff Development, Institutional 
Development, Research and Development and send it to various Institution directly.   In that way, it 
would give wider publicity to such schemes than what is practised now.  
Action Taken  
Information relating to the scope of schemes and the procedures for making applications by institutions 
is already in vogue.  In addition, advertisements are placed in national and local dailies (Hindi & 
English). Copies of booklets of the various schemes are available at the seven Regional Offices and 
information on these schemes are posted in the AICTE Website. This year the Council has prepared 
posters summarizing the salient features of the RID schemes and has despatched to the Technical 
Institutions in various States. 
BRAIN DRAIN  
Observation/Recommendation  
8.2       The Committee has been given to understand that better pay package, career advancement, 
conducive work environment, freedom to work to one’s full potential, job satisfaction and security may 
help curbing brain drain.    Another suggestion made  to the Committee was that it should be made 
compulsory for a Graduate /Post Graduate of technical education  to serve in India for a minimum  
period before going abroad.   In the event of his going abroad permanently,  he should be made to refund 
the amount spent on his education.   The Committee is of the opinion that work environment in  the 
country needs to be improved so that our students find it lucrative to be in their jobs in the country.  
Besides, gainful opportunities need to be  created in the country itself to reverse the brain drain.  The 
Committee feels that if necessary, students may be asked to pay back in easy instalments wherever Govt. 
funding is there.  Modalities in this regard may be explored. 
Action Taken  
Because of the liberalisation and global scenario, job markets have widened.  There are lots of 
opportunities available to the professionals.  The concept of brain drain has also changed. Many 
professionals get training or work abroad and come back to the country after some years of service.   
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
PLANNED  DEVELOPMENT – ROLE OF AICTE 
Observation/Recommendation  
2.4       The Committee in this context is of the view that for proper growth of technical education, focus 
of the Department and AICTE should be on proper planning and coordinated development.   
Concentration in certain pockets has already given  rise to regional imbalance.   Therefore, focus should 
be on the country as a whole.     
Page 8 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

Action Taken 
The AICTE invites applications from all over the country through advertisements in national and 
regional dailies and also through its Website for establishment of new Technical Institutes and for 
introduction of new courses. It is for the concerned State Government to keep in view the requirements 
of different regions within the State while recommending such proposals to AICTE for its approval.  All 
the State Governments have been requested by AICTE to prepare perspective plans for planning of 
technical education in the respective State.  AICTE is proposing to hold National Consultation (NC)  
involving representatives from State Governments, Universities and also academicians of repute in order 
to discuss several issues relating to the planning of future growth of technical education in the country 
including issues of quality and regional imbalance.   Large number of self-financing private institutes 
were established mainly in the States of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh and 
thus there has been higher concentration of Technical Institution in these States as compared to the 
States in other regions, particularly in Eastern and Northern Regions.  AICTE is aware of such 
imbalances and is encouraging setting up of new Institutes in those regions having lesser number of 
Institutes so as to achieve a balanced growth. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee feels that the proper planning and coordinated development of technical 
education in the country leave much to be desired.    
Observation/Recommendation  
2.5       Another disturbing development as a result of concentration of technical institutions in a few 
states is that intake capacity in different streams of technical institutions is not being utilised fully.   
There are reports that a very large number of seats remain vacant every year.    In most of the States, 
admission is made through a common entrance test conducted by the State Govt.    On a specific query 
about the number of seats filled up during the last three years in the States of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra, the Committee has been informed that data on vacant seats is not 
made available to the Council.   Hence, it is not possible to analyse the details in this regard.   
Expressing its serious concern on such a situation, the Committee would like to point out that an 
objective analysis of intake capacity and vacancy position in these States is very much required for 
checking mushroom growth of technical institutions. 
Action Taken  
An analysis on intake capacity and vacant seats during 2001-2002 in the States of Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra has been made and the position is as under:- 
  
  
State                           Total Seats       Seats  Vacant               % of    Seats Vacant 
  
Tamil Nadu                 48887              11583                  23% 
Andhra Pradesh            46147              493                     2% 
Karnataka                    36535              4908                               13% 
Maharashtra                 44190              3876                               8% 
In the ensuing meeting of the National Consultation, the issues will be discussed for eliciting views of 
the State Governments to take corrective measures. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee notes with concern that during 2001-2002, a large number of seats remained 
vacant, particularly in the States of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra, thus giving  an indication 
that the seats were approved without properly examining the requirements of the States.   The 
Committee observes that there is need to take suitable remedial measures in this regard. 
INCONSISTENCIES IN DIFFERENT PROCEDURES AND NORMS – REMEDIAL 
SUGGESTIONS THEREFOR 
Observation/Recommendation  
The Committee has also been given to understand that  there is a lot of discrepancy in  AICTE norms 
Page 9 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

and standards in respect of educational qualifications  prescribed for various faculty positions in 
Engineering, Architecture, Pharmacy and Polytechnics.  It was informed to the Committee that a 
Lecturer in the Engineering College needs 1st class Bachelor’s Degree whereas a Lecturer in Pharmacy 
College & Architecture College needs 1st Class Master’s Degree in the same pay scale. 
 Action Taken 
The qualifications prescribed for Pharmacy and Architecture degree level institutions are based on the 
recommendations of the Board of Pharmacy Education and Board of Architecture Education. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
            The Committee feels that anomalies should be removed to the extent they place students of 
these disciplines at disadvantage.   There should be a level playing field in this regard.   
Observation/Recommendation   
3.22     It has been reported that many universities are not periodically updating curricula for  
different streams of technical education.   As a result,  curricula used for imparting training are 
not in tune with the requirements of industry.  The Committee notes that the Council does not 
have any mandate to revise the curricula which is the responsibility of respective universities 
which affiliate technical institutions.  The Committee is however, given to understand that Council 
has endeavoured to prescribe a model curriculum in various major branches of engineering, 
pharmacy, computer applications etc.   The Committee is of the view that  updated curricula in 
tune with the present  global scenario is the very basis for maintaining the required standard of  
all streams of technical education.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that a joint 
mechanism for periodical updating of curricula for different streams of technical education  
consisting of representatives of universities, State Boards of Technical Education, AICTE and 
industry needs to be evolved.   
Action Taken 
AICTE has been preparing model curricula for various programs / courses for technical education. 
These curricula have been prepared by Working Groups which included industry experts and have been 
coordinated largely by QIP centres. Many of these curricula have been updated by a panel of experts 
which include industry  professionals and academicians. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee is aware that AICTE prepares model curricula for various 
programmes/courses of technical education.    However, it is of the view that this is not serving the 
desired objective as the universities affiliating various technical institutions are free to either 
adopt them or reject them.   This is why, the Committee had earlier recommended that a joint 
mechanism consisting of representatives of universities, State Boards of Technical Education, 
AICTE and Industry needs to be evolved for preparing/updating the curricula as per the changing 
requirement, which can be suitable to all concerned.   
Observation/Recommendation  
3.24     The Council further clarified that at the time of granting approval, the intimation is also 
given to the respective states and the affiliating University for ensuring the adherence to the 
norms and standards as set by the Council.   The Committee is of the view that requisite norms 
and standards are not being scrupulously adhered to on the part of the concerned authorities.  It, 
therefore, recommends strict adherence to the prescribed norms and standard.   
Action Taken  
Adherence to the prescribed norms and standards is monitored through visits of expert committee 
for extension of approval at regular intervals. Shortcoming/ discrepancies/ non-compliance of 
Norms and Standards noticed are brought to the notice of the institutes concerned for 
remedial/corrective action. Punitive action is taken including 'no admissions' and 'reduced intake' 
in case of non-compliance. 
Comments of the Committee 
            The Committee observes that the question of overseeing the entire process of entrance 
examinations to technical institutions is very important and crucial for students.   While AICTE 
Page 10 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

must take steps to ensure, by bringing more and more institutions in its ambit or otherwise, that 
no inconvenience  is caused to the students by clash of examination dates, costly and time 
consuming procedures, inconvenient and distant located examination centres etc. 
            At the same time AICTE must keep in view that not more than 20% of students are able to 
reach the university level of education.   It is, therefore, imperative that the system of education 
from the secondary level or even earlier must have ingredients in its syllabus that minimum 
reliance is placed on white-collar   jobs.    The syllabus should have vocational content so much so 
that after completing secondary education one must be able to reach the top levels in technical 
education though I.I.Ts., I.T.Is.  and such other institutions.    At the same time the aim should be 
to provide technical education and that too at the Government cost to all those who want to 
pursue this. 
TEACHERS 
Observation/Recommendation  
5.3       The Committee notes that through the Early Faculty Induction Programme, an amount of Rs. 
10,000 is provided as scholarship from Eighth Semester onwards to B. Tech students who are selected 
through a National Level screening.   1100 qualified, trained and committed  faculty members for 
technical education was the target fixed by AICTE by the end of Ninth Five Year Plan.   The Committee 
is, however, constrained to observe that this programme could be launched only in 1999-2000 due to 
non-availability of the approval of the Central Govt. 30, 92 and 40 students joined the programme 
during the years 1999-2000, 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 respectively against 300 available scholarships 
provided by AICTE.   The Committee is of the view that wide publicity should be given to such 
programmes so as to attract student community towards teaching.    The Committee is perturbed to note 
that separate  budget is yet to be sanctioned for this Programme by the Central Govt.  Taking strong 
objection to such uncalled for delay, the Committee emphasizes that the needful should be done at the 
earliest.   The Committee also hopes that recommendations of the Committee on Post Graduate 
Education and Research in Engineering and Technology for doubling of annual out- turn of various 
programmes in PG courses in Engineering and Technology will be implemented at the earliest. 
Action Taken  
Based on the Report of the AICTE PG Review Committee, MHRD issued policy framework on PG 
Education and Research in Engineering & Technology. Accordingly, AICTE has issued notifications in 
the national newspapers on the increase of duration from 18 months to 24  months for all M Tech / M 
Pharm / M. Arch programmes as well as increase in the stipend from Rs. 2500 to Rs. 5000 beginning 
from academic year 2002-2003. 
AICTE has also set up a working group for preparing action plan for implementation of the other 
recommendations of the Committee. 
Comments of the Committee  
            The Committee notes the position and awaits further development.  
INSTITUTION – INDUSTRY LINK 
Observation/Recommendation  
6.4       The Committee is of the view that industry must be consulted for curriculum formulation  and 
joint Research and Development programme.   Besides that, industry can also be actively  involved in 
the conducting and evaluation of training programmes.   The Committee feels that feasibility of 
attaching technical institutions with nearby industries  also needs to be explored. 
Action Taken  
            AICTE involves professionals from Industry in the development of model curricula. 
Several schemes such as Industry-Institute Partnership Cell, National Facilities in Engineering and 
Technology with Industrial Collaborations, Entrepreneurship and Management Development, Nationally 
Coordinated Projects (NCP), etc. are being implemented by AICTE to have wider participation of 
Industry in the development of Technical Education system. 
The concept of attaching technical institutions with nearby industries have been explored by some of the 
States like Punjab, etc. by initiating actions such as setting up of industry incubation centers in the 
Page 11 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

technical institutions, compulsory visits to the industry, taking real life projects / assignments / 
consultancy work in nearby industries etc. 
Comments of the Committee 
            With computerization and information technology having acquired deeper roots in the 
country, possibility of preparing a data base in respect of the potential of students particularly in 
technical fields should be available at one site, which can be accessed by the industry for 
generating employment, should be considered. 
Observation/Recommendation  
6.5       The Committee  would also like to point out that on a  larger perspective it is necessary to assess 
the manpower requirement of major industries and their needs.   Courses should be formulated 
accordingly.   Intake of students should be decided on the basis of requirement of industries.   In that 
way, unemployment and under-employment could be tackled  in a better manner or else industry would 
be requiring manpower as per their needs and we  would be producing manpower not fit for them.    
Action Taken  
AICTE is funding a project on National Technical Manpower Information System (NTMIS) to IAMR. 
The NTMIS reports provide information on rate of absorption vis-a-vis technical manpower output. 
AICTE has set-up a Board under the Chairmanship of Dr. V.K. Aatre, Scientific Adviser to the Raksha 
Mantri to advise on how to better utilize the NTMIS data for manpower development which matches 
industry requirements. 
AICTE had already requested all State Governments to prepare Perspective Plan including manpower 
requirements. 
The proposed National Consultation workshop will also examine this issue. 
Comments of the Committee 
            The committee would like to know response of the States in respect of preparation of the 
Perspective Plan as well as conclusions of the proposed National Consultation Workshop for its 
consideration as soon as possible. 
CHPATER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES/FINAL 
REPLIES  OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
PLANNED  DEVELOPMENT – ROLE OF AICTE 
Observation/Recommendation  
2.1  The Committee, after undertaking extensive field visits and discussing the status of technical 
education in the country with various experts in the field, is of the considered opinion that AICTE has 
failed to accomplish the mandate given to it under the Act.   The Committee has found that there is no 
proper planning, proper assessment of technical manpower, balanced development, coordinated 
approach, and quality maintenance regarding technical education.    
Observation/Recommendation  
2.9       Committee's attention has also been drawn to a recent decision of the Apex Court (Bharatidasan 
University vs AICTE and Others) which indicates that the Universities are not obliged to seek prior 
permission of AICTE to introduce any technical courses in their departments and constituent colleges.   
The Apex Court has further decided that the role of AICTE with respect to Universities imparting 
technical education is recommendatory in nature.   The Committee has been given to understand that 
this decision would lead to different norms for Universities and other Technical institutions, different 
quality parameters and, therefore, different standards of education which would eventually result in 
lopsided development of technical education.   The Committee feels that implications of the aforesaid 
judgement may be studied in their entirety and remedial steps, if required, may be initiated. 
Action Taken 
An Expert Committee has been set up to review the situation arising out of the decision of the apex court 
in this regard.   Based on the recommendations, remedial measures will be taken. 
Observation/Recommendation  
Page 12 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

2.10     The Committee is of the view that for planned development of technical education, accurate data 
regarding demand and supply of technical manpower is necessary.  As per Section 10 (a) of AICTE Act, 
the Council is empowered to undertake survey in various fields of technical education, collect data on all 
related matters and make forecast of the needed growth and development in technical education.  The 
Council has initiated a scheme for collecting data and forecasting the demand and supply of technical 
manpower in the country through National Technical Manpower Information System (NTMIS) which 
has established various nodal centres in the country.   The findings  of NTMIS are made available to the 
user agencies including State Governments.    The Committee is, however, constrained to note that at 
present NTMIS is not being effectively made use of  which  has  led to uncontrolled and imbalanced 
growth of technical institutions, many of them being sub-standard. 
INCONSISTENCIES IN DIFFERENT PROCEDURES AND NORMS – REMEDIAL 
SUGGESTIONS THEREFOR 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.4       The Committee observes that  various Technical Institutes/Boards  award degrees in technical 
education.  It becomes difficult to establish the equivalence of such degrees for the purpose of admission 
and also for the purpose of recruitment.  It was suggested that a State Council of Technical Education be 
set- up in all the States of the country and the Engineers who qualify in various examinations should get 
registered with SCTE for the purpose of admission to Technical Institution for acquiring higher 
qualification as well as for the purpose of recruitment.  The practice which is followed by Medical 
Council of India (MCI), Council of Architecture and Pharmacy Council of India may be made 
applicable to the engineering graduates and Diploma holders. 
Action Taken 
Action may be taken only after discussion with the States.  The matter will be taken up in the National 
Consultation meeting. 
Observation/Recommendation 
3.11     The Sub-Committee, during its interaction with various experts, got an impression that AICTE 
has become highly centralised and there is need for decentralisation of its powers among its regional 
offices.  The Committee also feels that Regional Offices of AICTE  need to be strengthened by 
delegating more powers by the Head Office to avoid delay and for effective and smooth functioning of 
the Regional Offices.  However, it would like to point out that delegation of powers to the Regional 
Offices may be done only after sanction of permanent staff for the Council and its Regional Offices.  
The Committee would also like to point out that in view of tremendous increase in the number of 
technical institutions in the Country  in the recent years, required strength of staff should be sanctioned 
for Regional Offices.   
Action Taken 
AICTE has delegated the responsibility of approving Diploma Level Institutions to the concerned State 
Govts. On the basis of study by the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU), requirement of staff in Regional Offices 
will be determined. 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.12     The Sub-Committee  during its field visits after interacting with different functionaries gathered  
that the present norm of 5 acres land in metropolitan cities and 25 acres in rural areas for establishing an 
Engineering College does not seem to be practical.  In a Metropolitan City  like Mumbai it is very 
difficult to get the required land.  Even in rural areas, due to land ceiling, difficulties were being faced.  
It was suggested that the requirement of land at different places should be realistic.  In metropolitan 
cities,  where land is too scarce, vertical construction could be thought of which would require lesser 
land.    
Action Taken 
AICTE had constituted a EC Sub-Committee for review of norms and standards.  The report of this 
committee is now under consideration by the concerned All India Board’s (AIBs) and Regional 
Committees. The requirement of land in metropolitan cities is among  various issues considered by the 
Committee.  On submission of Report, the Ministry shall examine it for further necessary action.
Page 13 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

Observation/Recommendation   
3.13     It was also pointed out that fixed deposit of Rs. 50 lakhs remains blocked which can neither be 
used by promoters nor by AICTE.  A suggestion was, accordingly, made that security deposit taken 
from institutions should be refunded in case  of those institutions which have shifted to their own 
buildings so that the amount could be utilised for further development of these institutions. Another 
suggestion made was that there should be option for either having a fixed deposit or bank guarantee.   
Action Taken  
            This aspect has also been considered by the EC Sub-Committee mentioned above. 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.16     The Committee notes that a Core Committee under the Chairmanship of the Special Secretary, 
Ministry of Human Resource Development has been set up for modification of norms and standards, 
including requirement of land and fixed deposit for technical institutions.  The Committee hopes that the 
Core Committee will finalise its Report at the earliest and take a realistic and practical approach in the 
matter. 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.19     In regard to the misuse of seats under NRI quota, the AICTE has stated that the provision 
of NRI seats has been long misinterpreted by  private institutions and universities.  The Council  
has now clarified vide its circular dated 3rd October, 2001 that unfilled seats under NRI quota 
shall automatically revert to payment seat category.   The AICTE has further clarified that it is 
the responsibility of the State Govts. to monitor admission and prevent the misuse of admission 
against NRI seats.   AICTE also clarified that besides the 5% NRI seats within the approved 
intake, AICTE has also allowed 15% supernumerary seats for Foreign National/Person of Indian 
Origin (PIO) through a separate notification dated March 31, 2001.   Seats remaining unfilled 
under the 15%  Foreign National/PIO quota shall not be allocated to anyone other than foreign 
students/PIO as per the said regulations.  The Committee hopes that the AICTE and State Govts. 
would take necessary steps to see that   NRI quota is not misused.    
STAFFING PATTERN IN AICTE 
Observation/Recommendation  
4.3       The Committee has been informed that AICTE has got its manpower requirement assessed 
by the Management Development Institute (MDI), Gurgaon which suggested that 60% of the staff 
of AICTE should be on permanent basis and 40 % could be on ad-hoc basis.   The Committee has 
been further informed that recommendations in the Report of MDI have been forwarded to the 
Department  for sanction of required posts on regular basis and the consent of the Department is 
awaited.  The Committee feels that ad-hocism in AICTE will not help in its effective functioning  
and, therefore it recommends that minimum regular posts may be sanctioned without delay.  
There should be balanced mix of regular and ad-hoc posts in AICTE. 
Action Taken 
Study of the manpower requirement of AICTE is scheduled to be undertaken by SIU.  Based on its 
recommendations, further necessary action will be taken. 
 INSTITUTION – INDUSTRY LINK 
Observations/Recommendations  
6.5       The Committee  would also like to point out that on a  larger perspective it is necessary to assess 
the manpower requirement of major industries and their needs.   Courses should be formulated 
accordingly.   Intake of students should be decided on the basis of requirement of industries.   In that 
way, unemployment and under-employment could be tackled  in a better manner or else industry would 
be requiring manpower as per their needs and we  would be producing manpower not fit for them.    
Observation/Recommendation  
6.6       The Committee is also of the view that to promote Industry-institution interaction, the existing 
schemes like Industry-Institute  Partnership Cell, Establishment of National Central Facility in select 
institutions, Organizing seminars/workshops on topics pertaining to Industry-Institute interaction, 
encouraging engineers from industry to visit Engineering Institutions to deliver lectures, participation in 
Page 14 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

curriculum design activity and arranging visits of staff members to various industries should be 
implemented more vigorously.   Apart from it, certain percentage  should also be contributed by 
Industry towards Research and Development (R&D). 
  
Action Taken  
In order to implement the schemes vigorously, a Board of Industry- Institute Interaction has been 
constituted with Mr N. Kumar, former Chairman of CII, as Chairman. The suggestion of the Committee 
will be put up before the Board. The recommendations of this board will be considered by the Council 
for appropriate implementation. 
FEE STRUCTURE 
Observation/Recommendation  
9.2       The Committee, however, observes that all these guidelines/norms laid down by Govt./AICTE 
have failed to achieve their objective of eliminating the element of commercialization and profit 
making by having a rationsalised fee-structure.  At present, wide variations are observed in the 
fixation of fee in different states.  The Committee notes that AICTE has recently constituted a 
‘National Fee Committee’ which would look into the reported variance in the fees fixed by different 
State Level Committees.  The Committee also notes that this Committee is expected to submit its final 
report within the next three months and the recommendations thereof shall be implemented from the 
next year.   
OBSERVATONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee feels that the proper planning and coordinated development of technical 
education in the country leave much to be desired. (Para No. 2.4)    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee notes with concern that during 2001-2002, a large number of seats remained 
vacant, particularly in the States of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra, thus giving  an indication 
that the seats were approved without properly examining the requirements of the States.   The 
Committee observes that there is need to take suitable remedial measures in this regard.(Para No. 2.5) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
            The Committee feels that anomalies should be removed to the extent they place students of 
these disciplines at disadvantage.   There should be a level playing field in this regard. (Para No. 
3.7)  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee is aware that AICTE prepares model curricula for various 
programmes/courses of technical education.    However, it is of the view that this is not serving the 
desired objective as the universities affiliating various technical institutions are free to either 
adopt them or reject them.   This is why, the Committee had earlier recommended that a joint 
mechanism consisting of representatives of universities, State Boards of Technical Education, 
AICTE and Industry needs to be evolved for preparing/updating the curricula as per the changing 
requirement, which can be suitable to all concerned. (Para No. 3.22)  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee observes that the question of overseeing the entire process of entrance 
examinations to technical institutions is very important and crucial for students.   While AICTE 
must take steps to ensure, by bringing more and more institutions in its ambit or otherwise, that 
no inconvenience  is caused to the students by clash of examination dates, costly and time 
consuming procedures, inconvenient and distant located examination centres etc. 
            At the same time AICTE must keep in view that not more than 20% of students are able to 
reach the university level of education.   It is, therefore, imperative that the system of education 
from the secondary level or even earlier must have ingredients in its syllabus that minimum 
Page 15 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

reliance is placed on white-collar   jobs.    The syllabus should have vocational content so much so 
that after completing secondary education one must be able to reach the top levels in technical 
education though I.I.Ts., I.T.Is.  and such other institutions.    At the same time the aim should be 
to provide technical education and that too at the Government cost to all those who want to 
pursue this. (Para No. 3.24) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
            The Committee notes the position and awaits further development. (Para No. 5.3) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            With computerization and information technology having acquired deeper roots in the 
country, possibility of preparing a data base in respect of the potential of students particularly in 
technical fields should be available at one site, which can be accessed by the industry for 
generating employment, should be considered. (Para No. 6.4) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The committee would like to know response of the States in respect of preparation of the 
Perspective Plan as well as conclusions of the proposed National Consultation Workshop for its 
consideration as soon as possible. (Para No. 6.5) 
MINUTES 
SECOND  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th  January, 2003 in Committee Room No. 139, 
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Shri Arjun Singh               Chairman 
MEMBERS   PRESENT 
            RAJYA SABHA 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Kirti Jha Azad 
Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Baliram Kashyap 
Shri Brij Lal Khabri 
Shri Y.G. Mahajan 
Dr. Manda Jagannath 
Smt. Nivedita Mane 
Smt. Jas Kaur Meena 
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja 
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Smt. Renu Kumari 
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav 
            SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer 
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
  2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee then 
too
k-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 120th Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Page 16 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department. of Secondary and Higher Education and identified  the 
following points/ issues for clarifications from the Department: 
Criteria/guidelines regarding opening of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs). 
Criteria/guidelines regarding opening of Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs). 
Admission procedure in KVs specially in Parliamentary Constituencies where there are no KVs. 
Transfer Policy of Teachers/Staff in KVs specially posting of both husband and wife at the same station.
Slow pace of construction of JNVs and KVs . 
Improvement in school Laboratories and Libraries. 
Transfer  of students of JNVs to different states as part of national integration leading to aberration and 
frustration among students. 
Vacancies of teachers and staff in Colleges and Universities and Role of UGC in filling of vacancies. 
Status of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) regarding implementation of reservation policy. 
Implementation of the scheme for Education of SC/ST Girls in Rajasthan, non-release of funds on time 
and diversion of funds for other purposes. 
Underutilisation of funds under various heads like UGC, NCERT, etc. 
Neglect of Research activities in NCERT. 
Undue delay in making the National Council of Rural Institutes (NCRI) functional. 
2.1       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 113th Report of the 
Committee on Technical Education relating to Department. of Secondary and Higher Education and 
identified  the following points/ issues for clarifications of the Department: 
Emphasis on increase in number of students in Govt. Engineering colleges than Private Engineering 
Colleges to enable poor students to get engineering education. 
Staffing pattern of All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE). Presently, most of the Manpower 
is on deputation. 
General complaints regarding recognition of Private Institutions not fulfilling the requisite standard. 
Uniformity in educational qualifications prescribed for various technical courses like Engineering, 
Architecture, Pharmacy etc. 
2.2       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 114th Report of the 
Committee on Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes relating to Department. of Elementary 
Education and Literacy. The Committee was of the view that the Education  Secretaries  of some of the 
states  be heard by it in respect of implementation of various elementary education schemes in their 
respective states. 
2.3       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 121st  Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department of Women and Child 
Development and  identified the following points/issues for clarifications of the Department: 
Status regarding increase in the honorarium of Anganwadi workers and Anganwadi Helpers.  
Non-availability of proper structure/building for running Anganwadi Centres.  
Review of the Schemes of Indira  Mahila  Yojana  and  Rashtriya  Mahila Kosh in view of the general 
impression that these Schemes are not achieving their objectives of economic empowerment of poor 
women. 
Utility of Short Stay Homes.   
2.4       The Committee was also of the view that it should visit the states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, 
Kerala to have on-the-spot study of the implementation of the various schemes/ programmes related to 
women.  
2.5     The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 122nd   Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and 
identified the following points/issues for clarifications of the Department: 
Non-adherence of instructions regarding associating the MPs with the activities of Nehru Yuva Kendra 
Sangathan (NYKS). 
Under-utilisation of funds under National Service Scheme (NSS).
Page 17 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

Shrinking of activities under National Service Scheme (NSS) and Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
(NYKS). 
Utilisation and maintenance of stadia after International events. 
3.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.30 P.M. for lunch  and then again adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
to meet again at 2.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21st January, 2003. 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th April, 2003 in Committee Room `A`,  First 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
Dr. Manda Jagannath        in the Chair 
MEMBERS   PRESENT 
            RAJYA SABHA 
Dr. Akhilesh Das 
Shri B.P. Apte 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik 
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Smt. Vanga Geetha 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria 
Shri Baliram Kashyap 
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
Shri S.B.P.B.K.Satyanarayana Rao 
Dr. N. Venkataswamy 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer  
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
2.          In the absence of the Chairman, Dr. Manda Jagannath was voted to the Chair. 
3.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee, then, 
took up  consideration of the following Reports: 
One Hundred twenty-fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred sixteenth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Health; 
One Hundred twenty-sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred seventeenth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Family Welfare; 
One Hundred twenty-seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred eighteenth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy; 
One Hundred twenty-eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred-nineteenth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Elementary Education and Literacy; 
One Hundred twent
y-ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Page 18 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm

recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred twentieth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Secondary and Higher Education; 
One Hundred thirtieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in One Hundred twenty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) 
relating to the Department of Women and Child Development; 
One Hundred thirty-first Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in One Hundred twenty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) 
relating to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
One Hundred thirty-second  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred fourteenth Report of the Committee on 
Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes; 
One Hundred thirty-third  Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred twelfth Report of the Committee on Medical 
Education; and 
One Hundred thirty-fourth  Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred thirteenth Report of the Committee on 
Technical Education. 
4.         After some discussion,  the Committee adopted the above reports. The Committee also decided 
that these  Report may be presented to Rajya Sabha and /laid in Lok Sabha  on the 10th April, 2003.  The 
Committee, in this connection, authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Prof. 
R.B.S. Varma and  Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey  to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and  Dr. M. 
Jagannath and in his absence Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit to lay the same in the Lok Sabha.   
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. 
Page 19 of 19134thReportofHRD
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report134th.htm