PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
HUNDRED – THIRTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
  
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE HUNDRED 
TWELFTH REPORT ON MEDICAL EDUCATION THE DEPARTMENT OF 
HEALTH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
  
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  10TH APRIL,  2003) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 10 TH  APRIL, 2003) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2003/ CHAITRA, 1925 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   
PREFACE                                                                                                             
REPORT                                                                                                                                               
CHAPTER I            Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue           
                        in view of the Government’s reply  
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government    
                        have not been accepted by the Committee  
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  replies of the  
                                                        
                        Government are still awaited 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE                                                
MINUTES                                                                                                                                            
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2003) 
  
Shri Arjun Singh                   Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
            RAJYA SABHA 
Page 1 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

  
Dr. Abrar Ahmed          
Dr. Akhilesh Das 
Shri B.P. Apte   
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Shri Eduardo Faleiro   
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik 
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Dr. Ramendra Kumar Yadav Ravi 
Shri R. Sarath Kumar 
Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
Shri Mrinal Sen 
Smt. Vanga Geetha 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
Shri Ambareesha 
Shri Ramakant Angle 
Shri Kirti Jha Azad 
Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria 
Prof. Kailasho Devi 
Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit 
Shri Shankar Prasad Jaiswal 
Shri R.L. Jalappa 
Shri Baliram Kashyap 
Shri Brij Lal Khabri 
Shri Samik Lahiri 
Shri Y.G. Mahajan 
Shri  G.Mallikarjunappa 
Dr. Manda Jagannath 
Smt. Nivedita Mane 
Shrimati Jas Kaur Meena 
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
  
  
* ceased to be member w.e.f 29
th   January, 2003. 
  
(i) 
Dr. Ranjit Kumar Panja 
Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Smt. Renu Kumari 
Shri S.B.P.B.K. Satyanarayana Rao 
Shri Sunil Dutt 
Shri Ramsheth Thakur 
Dr. N. Venkataswamy 
Smt. Ganti Vi
jaykumari 
Page 2 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Shri Devendra Singh Yadav 
Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer 
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
PREFACE 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Hundred-Thirty-Third  Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained to its Hundred-twelfth Report on Medical Education of the 
Department of Health,  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
2.         The Hundred Twelfth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on   
18
th December, 2001.  
  
  
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 7th 
April, 2003. 
  
REPORT 
  
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the  One Hundred-Twelfth  Report on Medical 
Education of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development  presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on18th 
 December, 2001.   
Action Taken Note received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report, have been categorized as follows:- 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:      
6.1&6.2,11.4,11.5,12.1,12.2,15.4,15.6,20.1to20.4,22.2, 23.1&23.2, 24.1(Chapter I)  
              Total-16 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies: 2.1,2.2,6.3,8.1,9.1to9.3,11.6,11.7,14.1to14.3, 19.1to19.3,21.3,21.5 
(Chapter II)  Total-17 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
3.5,3.11,5.4to5.6,7.1to7.4,10.1to10.4,10.5,10.6to10.8,11.8&11.9,12.4,15.1&15.2,15.5, 
NEW DELHI 
April 7, 2003    
Chaitra 17,  1925 (Saka) 
ARJUN SINGH 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development 
Page 3 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

16.1,17.1&17.2,21.4,21.6, 22.1, 23.3, 25.1          (Chapter-III)  Total- 
31                                                                                      
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited–  3.1to3.8,4.1&4.2,4.4&4.5,4.6&4.76.4,8.2&8.3,12.3,13.1,18.1&18.2   (Chapter – IV) Total-
21 
  
The final  replies in respect of  the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of the Report are 
still awaited from the Department.  The Committee may be apprised of the same as and when action is 
taken.  
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
VI        POOR CONDITION OF GOVT. MEDICAL COLLEGES  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
6.1       The Committee had the opportunity to visit a number of State-run medical colleges, besides 
interacting with medical professionals associated with such colleges.  The Committee observed that 
overall condition of these medical colleges was very bad.  The Committee was given to understand that 
there had been no improvement in the infrastructure facilities  for the medical colleges established long 
time back.   Even though there has been  manifold increase in the number of undergraduate and 
postgraduate seats, the facilities remained virtually the same.    Not only this, many new  paramedical 
courses have also been started without going into the availability of basic  infrastructure.   No new 
classrooms have been added, labs have tremendous scarcity of space and classrooms were equipped with 
the minimum teaching aids.   Over the  years, what has happened is that all the modern technology 
developments have not reached such colleges and as a result both teachers and doctors are not fully 
exposed to the latest techniques.   General opinion was that there was a need for having a moratorium  
on establishing new medical colleges in States having large concentration.  Instead attention was 
required to be focuses on updating the infrastructure of existing medical colleges. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
6.2       The Committee is inclined to agree with this view-point.   The Committee  is of the view 
that there is an urgent need for undertaking a review of  infrastructure status of all state-run 
medical  colleges in the country.   Non-existence of required facilities tend to create an atmosphere 
which  has a de-motivating effect on the teachers/doctors/students.    The Committee understands 
that Central Govt. has  already launched a pilot project for providing financial assistance to some 
State Govt.  medical colleges/hospitals.   The Committee feels that a time-bound action plan for 
revamping the infrastructure facilities should be drawn by the Central Govt. which could be 
implemented by State Govts in active co-ordination with Central Govt. and MCI. 
ACTION TAKEN 
 6.1&6.2    Though the State run medical colleges are bound by the MCI Regulations on the 
requirements for a Medical College vis-à-vis the admission capacity, the facilities available in some 
of the Government Medical Colleges are in a poor state.  Presently, the Central Govt. has 
launched a pilot scheme for providing financial assistance to State Govt. Medical colleges for 
strengthening their diagnostic facilities.  
XI. TEACHERS 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
11.4     The Committee finds that in states like Maharashtra and Gujarat, shortage of faculty strength in 
Govt. medical college has been addressed to some extent by having two types of teachers -  Full-time 
and Honorary teachers.  Although divergent views were given with regard to honorary teachers, the 
Committee had a feeling that both the categories of teachers  were playing a complimentary role.   The 
Committee observes that in spite of there being a provision for only full-time teachers in MCI 
Regulations on the request of some State Govts., system of honorary teachers has been further extended 
Page 4 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

by the Central Govt.  upto 30th June, 2002.   The  Committee is of the view that Central Govt./MCI 
should undertake a detailed review of Honorary System of teachers in the concerned States.   The 
Committee is of the view that after removal of all the  loopholes in this system and also safeguarding the 
interest of Full time teachers, other State Govts. can be approached to take benefit of Honorary System 
of teachers to the extent possible.  
ACTION TAKEN 
11.4     Taking into account the dearth of experienced teachers, the Central Govt. has extended the 
system of appointment of honorary/part-time teachers in the medical institutions for a further period of 
five years i.e. October 2006. This communication has been sent to all the State Govts., Universities and 
the Heads of all medical institutions for appropriate action. The MCI is, however, of the view that the 
engagement of honorary teachers may be made only in addition to the regular teaching faculty as 
required to be provided under the Council's Regulations. 
Recommendation/Observation 
11.5     The Committee finds that the UGC guidelines regarding extension of retired medical teachers of 
all medical colleges/institutions on yearly basis upto the age of 65 years have been agreed to by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in 1997.   The Committee feels that this directive should be 
given wide publicity  so that the Govt. medical colleges may take benefit of the same.  Besides that, 
possibility of hiring the services of  medical professionals – Visiting Professors and practicing doctors 
without compromising the standard of medical education can also be explored.  
Action Taken 
11.5     The Council is of the view that the possibility of hiring the services of medical professionals, 
visiting professors and practicing doctors can be permitted only in addition to the prescribed 
requirement of full-time teachers by the regulations and without compromising the standard of medical 
education. 
XII       TRAINING 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
12.1     During its interactions, Committee’s attention was drawn time and again about there being need 
for having some kind of training for medical teachers.   The majority view was that it is not necessary 
that a good medical practitioner is also a good teacher.  The Committee observes that most postgraduate 
teaching programmes have a component of students taking classes of undergraduate courses and also  
conducting seminars as part of their training. In spite of that, it was emphasized that training to 
prospective teachers  specially for communication skills was very much required.  The Committee 
strongly feels that training in educational technology should be made the eligibility criteria for 
appointment of a medical teacher.   If that is not considered feasible, extensive training programme of 
short duration should be mandatory before   the prospective teachers join their duties.  
ACTION TAKEN 
12.1     The Council's regulations only prescribe the minimum qualification and experience to be 
possessed by the medical teachers in different specialities. While agreeing with the recommendations of 
the Committee, considering the shortage of teachers in certain specialities it is felt that the training in 
educational technology can be made compulsory for the medical teachers within a fixed time after they 
join duties. The State Governments and institutions can set up training centres for this purpose..  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
12.2     Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that there was also a constant need to have in-
service training programme/refresher course for doctors involved in teaching to update their knowledge 
especially during the present era when rapid scientific developments are taking place and a wide variety 
of  diseases are being recognized.   The Committee finds that Graduate Medical Education Regulations 
provide that Medical Education Units/Departments be established in all medical colleges for faculty 
development and providing learning resource material to teachers.   The Committee is, however, 
constrained to note that these directives are not being adhered to as only about 50-60 medical colleges in 
the country  have established such units so far.   The Committee is of the opinion that fulfillment of this 
condition should be pursued with all medical colleges, both Govt. and private. 
Page 5 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

ACTION TAKEN 
12.2     The Council has been taking up the matter with all the medical colleges and so far about 130 
medical colleges have intimated the functioning of such units as per the guidelines of the Council. 
XV       PROBLEM OF SHORTAGE OF DOCTORS IN RURAL AREAS – REMEDIES 
THEREFOR  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
15.4     The Committee has been given to understand that some State Govts. have  adopted the policy of 
making rural service compulsory in the initial posting of medical officers before they are transferred to 
urban areas or permitted to do postgraduate medical education.   There is no shortage  of doctors as 
such, but there is mal-distribution between the  rural and urban areas.   The Committee is of the view 
that compulsion alone will not have the desired results.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
alongwith compulsory rural service for a limited specified time, incentives like special allowance, better 
housing and other allied facilities and special relaxation for admission to postgraduate courses are also 
necessary for attracting young doctors towards rural areas. 
ACTION TAKEN 
15.4     As per the decisions arrived in the Central Council for Health & Family Welfare, the State 
Govts. have been periodically advised to take various incentive measures to attract doctors for rural 
service, such as improving infrastructure facilities for doctors to remove their hardships, making rural 
service obligatory for three years, reservation of 25% of Postgraduate medical seats in medical colleges 
for in-service candidates who have.worked in rural areas for at least three years with a bond that 
thereafter they will serve the Government for at least five years etc. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
15.6     There was also a need for developing proper infrastructure in PHCs.   The Committee is of the 
view that the Department should pursue this issue with the State Govts.  The Committee understands the 
limitations of the Centre, health being a State subject.   However, PHCs are being maintained through 
Central Grants.  Hence, the need for Central monitoring about upkeep of PHCs is also there. 
ACTION TAKEN 
15.6     Wherever schemes are running with Central grants, the Central Government is obliged to 
monitor the execution of such schemes. The recommendation of the Committee in this regard will be 
kept in view while providing grants to the PHCs.  
XX       POWERS OF UNIVERSITY/HEALTH UNIVERSITY 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
20.1     All medical colleges in the country are affiliated to one University or the other.  Besides that, the 
States of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Punjab have established Medical 
University/University of Health Sciences, affiliating all the medical colleges  and other teaching 
institutions in health sciences. The Committee had the opportunity to  interact with the  representatives 
of some of the Universities including Health  Universities of Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka 
and Maharashtra.   The major issues/problems with regard to functioning of universities/medical 
universities can be enumerated as given below :- 
Besides allopathic system, institutions of other systems of medicine being brought under the jurisdiction 
of Health University in one or two states has created procedural problems due to proper infrastructure 
not being there for the management of such a large number of  institutions. 
Resource  crunch being faced as funds being provided by State/Centre  not adequate  enough.  Need for 
having a separate Commission like UGC emphasized  for universities/health universities. 
There was no provision for setting up a Senate in a Health University.   As a result, Health Universities 
being deprived of their right of representation in MCI. 
Need for involving representative of a University/Health University in the exercise of 
formulation/revision of curriculum for medical education related courses. 
Only exam-holding powers vested with University/Health University. Local University should also be 
involved in the exercise of opening of new colleges/increasing the intake capacity/starting of new course 
alongwith MCI/Central Govt. 
Page 6 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Effective involvement of local universities in the inspection of medical colleges. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
20.2     The Committee notes that in the opinion of the MCI, the concerned University from time to time 
should carry out its own inspections to evaluate the facilities available at the affiliated medical 
college/institution.   The University should also intimate any deficiencies to the Council from time to 
time in order to maintain the standard of medical education.   In addition to this, the University should 
ensure the strict compliance of the regulations of the MCI for its affiliated medical colleges. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
20.3     The Committee apprehends that the ground realities are entirely different.  Although as per the 
IMC Act, 1956, all  Universities have a right to be represented in the Council, majority of them are not 
there for so many years due to prolonged procedural formalities.   Not only this, Health Universities, by 
virtue of their composition, are not being represented in the Council.    The Committee has been given to 
understand that  universities are not being involved  in any exercise undertaken for regulation of medical 
education. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
20.4     The Committee is of the opinion that observations of local University  should invariably  be 
obtained before permission being given for starting a new college/increasing the intake capacity/adding 
new courses.  Similarly, the Committee finds no harm if University  representative is also part of the 
inspection team.   The Committee has been informed that a Sub-Committee was constituted by the 
General Body of the Council to go into the establishment of Health Universities.    The Sub-Committee 
has recommended discussion by a broader group in a workshop.  The Committee hopes that the issues 
raised before the Committee with regard to Health Universities would also be taken care of and a clear 
perception of the feasibility of Health University  would emerge as a result of discussion to be 
undertaken by the broader Group. 
ACTION TAKEN 
20.1 to 20.4     The establishment of University of Health Sciences in States was envisaged with a view 
to bring in uniformity in the standards of medical education imparted and to work as a Centre for 
Manpower Policy Planning. So far only five States have established the University of Health Sciences.  
The policy of the Central Government is to persuade the remaining State Governments also to follow 
suit. The Universities are already empowered to inspect the facilities available in the medical colleges 
before granting and renewing the affiliation to them.  Though, as per the present scheme there is no 
representative of the University in the inspection teams of the Council as such, the MCI has been 
appointing the Vice-chancellors/Deans as their inspectors 
XXII    JOINT CONSULTATIVE MACHINERY 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
22.2     The Committee is also of the view that a cell for receiving complaints and inviting suggestions 
from general public and affected persons should be set up in the MCI to work as a watch-guard and also 
facilitate the functioning of MCI. 
ACTION TAKEN 
22.2     The Council has set up a grievance cell under the charge of a Deputy Secretary since April 2002 
for this purpose. 
XXIII. PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY STUDENT COMMUNITY  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
23.1     The Committee had very fruitful discussions with representatives of student community of all the 
medical colleges visited by it.   Various suggestions for improvement of medical education based on 
their experience were put forth before the Committee which are reflected in the Report.  Besides that, 
the students also drew the attention of the Committee to a number of problems being faced by them 
which are enumerated below :- 
Due to a prolonged admission procedure for MBBS, session for 1st year generally starts very late. 
Maximum publicity needs to be  given to the rules/regulations and conditions with respect to admission 
procedure for the convenience of students.
Page 7 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Hostel accommodation satisfying the needs of entire student community not there.   Majority of the 
students have to travel a long distance daily for attending their classes. 
Lack of  hospital accommodation has resulted in tendency of students not attending their classes 
regularly.   In the process, there were frequent instances of shortage of attendance. 
Another peculiar development is students opting for private tuition. 
Students of private medical colleges/younger institution not having adequate library facilities. 
Very low rates of stipend being paid to trainee doctors.    Amount of stipend also varies from State to 
State, institution to institution. 
Foreign textbooks  not fulfilling the requirements of students. 
Complaints of biased attitude of external examiners  conducting practical exams were also there. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
23.2     The Committee understands that a specific  time schedule for admission  to MBBS has been laid 
down by MCI.   The Committee finds that due to  delay in the admission procedure, training schedule 
gets disturbed and as a result, instances are there that results are delayed.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly feels that MCI should strictly monitor the adherence of  time schedule by medical  colleges all 
over the country. 
ACTION TAKEN 
23.2     The Graduate Regulations 1997 provides that the universities should organise admission timings 
and admission process in such a way that teaching in first semester starts by 1st August each year.  
Though the regulations are mandatory, instances have come to notice where these are not strictly 
adhered to.  The Hon'ble Supreme Court vide its order dated 11.9.2002  has also directed that there shall 
be no mid-stream admissions in the medical courses and the Council is at present drafting a guideline to 
be followed by all concerned fixing a time frame for conduct of entrance examination, counseling, 
commencement of the academic session and closure of the admission.  These guidelines shall be binding 
on all concerned in pursuance of the Supreme Court directions. 
XXIV    TEACHER-STUDENT RELATIONSHIP 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
24.1     There has been gradual erosion in the traditional relations between students and teachers in 
medical education.    Over the years, what has happened is that  with the increase in the intake capacity 
in medical colleges all over the country,  faculty strength with a few exceptions has continued to be the 
same.    The MCI ratio 10:1 for  student teacher  is nowhere to be seen.   The Committee has been given 
to understand that in the majority of the medical colleges small group teaching was being practiced only 
during tutorials, clinical teaching and  field visits.   The Committee feels that the situation should be  
such that the teachers are able to share their experiences with the students.   Teachers also  get an 
opportunity to evaluate the students better in such an environment.   The Committee finds that  
availability of video cassettes and internet access has vastly improved interactive learning wherever 
available.   The Committee is of the view that steps should be taken for compulsory introduction of such 
hi-tech facilities in all medical colleges  in the country. 
ACTION TAKEN 
24.1   The recommendation of the Committee in this regard will be intimated to all the universities and 
institutions for appropriate action by the MCI. 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
II         OVERVIEW 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
2.1       The Committee observes that the amendments made in the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 in 
1993 by laying down very stringent norms for establishment of new medical college, increase in the 
intake capacity and introduction of a new or higher course of study  has  checked  the mushroom growth 
of  medical colleges in the country to some extent.   However, these norms need to be enforced 
Page 8 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

uniformly  and  with an objective approach.   Sporadic proposals for starting a very large number of 
medical colleges at a stroke  still continue to be noticed. 
ACTION TAKEN 
2.1       The Medical Council of India Regulations on Establishment of Medical Colleges initially 
notified in 1993 were reviewed and revised Regulations were notified in 1999 prescribing stringent 
conditions for opening new medical colleges.  The observations made by the Committee will be taken 
into account as these Regulations are subject to periodical review. At present, the Government proposes 
to review these Regulations in the light of the judgment of the 11-Judge Constitution Bench in the case 
of TMA Pai Foundations & Ors. vs. State of Karnataka and Ors. delivered on 31st October, 2002. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
2.2       The Committee had the opportunity to visit both govt. and private medical  colleges and interact 
with the management, faculty members and student representatives.   Feedback with regard to  
functioning of both govt. and  private  medical colleges was also received from different quarters.   
While it is true that  common parameters about the  two categories of medical colleges can not be drawn, 
the Committee  has the following observations to make. Private medical colleges, in the initial period, 
barely reach the standards and  norms set up by MCI  with regard to infrastructure, manpower etc.   
Similarly, in the Govt. medical  colleges set up in different parts of the country, with the passage of time 
there has been a steady deterioration in the infrastructure because of   inability of State Govts  to provide 
any assistance  whatsoever due to their very poor financial position.   Other major   constraints noticed 
in the smooth functioning of Govt. medical colleges are control of too many authorities, lack of 
accountability, prolonged procedure of recruitment  and promotion of teachers.   Inadequate  staff, 
unwarranted interference by management and manipulation in the admission of students can be said to 
be major drawbacks of private medical colleges.    The Committee also noticed that access to clinical 
facilities having large patient attendance was there in Govt. medical colleges.   In contrast in private 
medical colleges, in spite of having impressive hospital  buildings, required clinical material  was 
lacking. 
ACTION TAKEN 
2.2       The Regulations of MCI has prescribed the minimum clinical attendance for recommending the 
grant of Letter of Permission to a new medical college. Presently, these norms are being followed.  
VI        POOR CONDITION OF GOVT. MEDICAL COLLEGES 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
6.3       The Committee has been given to understand that in the present set up, educational level of 
technical/Para-medical  staff is not appropriate to handle the hi-tech equipments and to pick up newer  
techniques.   An indirect fall-out of such a situation is that more and more work is being handled by the 
medical staff themselves at the   cost of time to be devoted for teaching and training of students.  The 
Committee is of the view  that against the backdrop of technological development, basic qualifications 
required for technical staff need to be reviewed.   Besides that, regular in-service training, workshops 
and Continuing Medical Education (CMEs) for technical staff should be made a regular feature.   The 
Committee also feels that feasibility of having Medical Learning Technique (MLT) colleges imparting 
diploma/B.Sc degrees being attached to medical colleges can be explored. 
ACTION TAKEN 
6.3       The Council is having a scheme for conducting CME programmes which can be availed by the 
institutions under the NRI/Non-NRI participation schemes. This is in addition to the CME programmes 
already being conducted by various professional bodies such as Indian Medical Association, National 
Academy of Medical Sciences, AIIMS and PGIMER, Chandigarh and specialist organisations.   The 
feasibility of having institutes imparting diploma/B.Sc. degrees attached to medical colleges needs 
extensive discussion with the universities and others concerned. 
VIII      NRI QUOTA IN GOVT. MEDICAL COLLEGES 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
8.1       The Committee notes that the  Central Govt. in a communication dated 7th April, 1999 had 
allowed the State Govts to take   their own decision with regard to admission of NRI students in State 
Page 9 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Govt. medical colleges up to 15% of the total intake capacity after  keeping in view the requirements of 
the local students and   subject to the condition  that there shall  be no commercialization of medical 
education and that their contribution of seats towards the All India Entrance Examination Quota will not 
be affected.   The Council has also no objection to this procedure  subject to  admission of 15% of the 
total seats by NRI/foreign students.   The funds collected by these admissions should be utilized for the 
development of the particular institution.  The Committee understands that in some of the States, this 
practice has been started which is likely to be followed in other States also.   The Committee has its own 
reservations about this Central Govt. directive.   While noting that contribution of seats towards the All 
India Entrance Examination Quota by the State Govt. medical  colleges will not be affected by this 
move, the Committee apprehends that requirements of local students are bound to be hit hard.   The 
Committee wonders as to how the interest of local students will be taken care  of with the  total number 
of seats remaining the same.   The Committee is of the view  that relaxation should only be resorted to if 
equal number of seats are increased.   In that event also, availability of additional required infrastructure 
will also have to be ensured.    The Committee also feels that there are little chances of funds thus 
generated being utilized for the development of a particular institution.  Instances  have already  come to 
the notice  of the Committee where initial understanding with State Govt. was  that money generated 
from NRI admissions was to be deposited with college and a special committee was to be authorized to 
utilize these funds.   However, subsequently, State Govt directions were given  that such funds are to be 
deposited with the State Exchequer to be allotted  afterwards to the college. 
ACTION TAKEN 
8.1       The option of filling up of 15% of seats in the State Govt. medial colleges by NRI/foreign 
students was allowed to the State Govts. in order to tide over the financial crunch in response to the 
requests received from some of the States.  The Communication sent by the Central Govt. to the State 
Govts. was advisory in nature and it is for the respective State Govts. to take an appropriate decision in 
the matter. 
IX        EXAMINATION PROCEDURE 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
9.1       MCI Regulations on Graduate Medical  Education, 1997 deal extensively with the examination 
procedure to be followed for obtaining MBBS degree.   Attendance, internal assessment and university 
examinations are the three basic factors on which performance of a student in essential components of 
training is to be assessed.   Detailed procedure for internal assessment and conducting university 
examination has been laid down.   Distribution of marks to various disciplines has also been specified.   
Criteria for appointment of examiners – both external and internal -  is   also there.   There is a separate 
chapter on ‘Internship’ outlining beside other aspects the specific objectives, distribution of compulsory 
and elective posting in various disciplines and the methodology for assessment of internship etc.    Even 
model time-table for different semesters has been given. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
9.2       During the course of its discussions with various authorities, the Committee had the opportunity 
to hear divergent views on various aspects of examination procedure for MBBS course.   Semester 
system was generally welcomed.   However,  there were views both in favour and against internal 
assessment.  One view was that internal assessment of students should be given due weightage as it 
would result in improved attendance.  However, apprehensions were also there as it was felt that element 
of partiality was bound to be there in internal assessment.   It was also pointed out that examiners were 
not being appointed as per MCI norms.   Views were also expressed both for and against multiple choice 
system in question papers. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
9.3       The Committee is of the view that MCI norms are not being strictly adhered to by many of the 
medical colleges.   Had it been so, there would not have been such reservations and also variations in 
examination patterns being followed by different institutions/universities.  The Committee would also 
like to point out that uniformity of examination pattern to the maximum extent possible can only be   
achieved if the teaching facilities and  courses are also uniform.  The Committee, therefore, is of the 
Page 10 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

view that steps need to be initiated for evolving a forum for interaction amongst medical faculties of 
different universities on this aspect of medical education. 
ACTION TAKEN 
9.1to9.3           The concept of uniformity in curriculum, required hours of teaching and training and 
scheme of examination has been achieved significantly through incorporation in the Regulations on 
Graduate Medical Education.  However, the Council has always provided a national forum for 
discussion, deliberation and decision on such wider academic issues through holding suitable national 
workshops periodically and implementing recommendations emanating therefrom. 
XI        TEACHERS  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
11.6     The Committee observes  that MCI has not made any Regulations regarding separation of 
teaching and non-teaching cadres.   The Council Regulations only provide for a required number of 
teachers and other non-teaching staff required for each department in the medical college and attached  
hospital  according to the seat intake capacity in MBBS course.   The Committee is of the view that 
practice of inter-change between teaching and non-teaching cadres is indeed creating problems for 
medical faculty in some of the States.   The Committee,  therefore, recommends that the MCI should 
examine this practice and make specific provision in the best interest of medical teachers in its 
Regulations.  
ACTION TAKEN 
11.6     The MCI does not permit computation of non-teaching experience in lieu of teaching experience 
and the Council has prescribed Regulations on Teachers Minimum Eligibility Qualifications to that 
effect. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
11.7     The Committee observes that the duties and responsibilities of medical teachers are different, 
immediate and exacting in nature when compared with other categories  of professions/govt. 
employees.    The Committee would like to emphasise that there is an urgent need for providing the  best 
possible service conditions to the medical teachers.   Their pay scales and other incentives need to be of 
a higher scale as compared to other teachers. 
ACTION TAKEN 
11.7     The service conditions of the medical teachers are governed by the respective State 
Governments. In the absence of any Central funding, it is not possible for the Central Government to 
prescribe uniform pay scale for medical teachers in the country. 
XIV     PRIVATE PRACTICE 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
14.1     The issue of private practice by medical college teachers was raised time and again during the 
deliberations of the Committee with all categories of medical professionals – doctors, teachers, state 
authorities, student community.   Besides that, the Committee also received lot of feedback on this issue 
from various parts of the country.   The Committee observes that at present, no uniform system with 
regard to private practice by teachers is prevailing in the various medical colleges.   There are colleges 
where teachers of clinical subjects  are allowed to do private practice and teachers of non-clinical 
subjects are eligible for non-practicing allowance.   Besides that, in some states, there is a total ban on 
private practice by medical teachers.    Instances are also there of teachers, in spite of  getting NPA,  
doing private practice. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
14.2     The Committee finds that there is no provision in the MCI Regulations on this issue except that 
all teachers should be full-time in medical  colleges and attached hospitals.   The Committee has been 
informed that in pursuance of Central Govt. directions, a number of state govts. adopted the policy of 
grant of NPA to medical staff  including the teachers and have abolished private practice. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
14.3     The Committee strongly feels that the teaching institutions should have non-practicing staff.   
Private practice wherever in vogue is largely affecting the quality of functioning of the Institute as well 
Page 11 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

as proper patient care  because teachers are more interested in private practice rather than in imparting 
teaching and research.   Keeping these factors  in view, the  Committee emphasizes that it is very 
essential that the teachers are  well paid so as to compensate them for their extra time and dedication to 
their profession.   The Committee has been given to understand that the varying rates of NPA are 
prevalent in different State Govt. medical colleges which are less than Central Govt. rates.  The 
Committee is of the firm view that  there should be a clear policy regarding private practice and non 
practicing allowance throughout the country.   MCI/Central Govt. should take the initiative in this 
direction without any further delay. 
ACTION TAKEN 
14.1 to 14.3     As the service conditions of the teachers in the medical colleges are governed by the rules 
of the respective State Governments and in the absence of any Central funding, the Central Government 
is not in a position to prescribe amount of NPA to be paid to the medical teachers. However, the 
Regulations of the Council clearly provide that the teacher should be functioning on a full-time basis.  
XIX     THINK TANK 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
19.1     Divergent views have been received by the Committee about the need for having a ‘Think Tank’ 
of eminent medical professionals  for streamlining medical education in the country.   While majority 
opinion was in favour of having such an entity, there were few voices of caution also.  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
19.2     The Committee notes that major policy  decisions in the field of medcial  education  are taken by 
the Govt. after consulting MCI and, if necessary, eminent persons in the  field.  The MCI also consists of 
eminent  medical  professionals with representatives from universities, State Govts as well as the Central 
Govt. nominees.    Besides that, the Council, wherever necessary, constitutes Sub-Committees 
consisting of experts to consider specific issues. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
19.3     The Committee is aware about the mandate of MCI and also the over-all involvement of the 
Central Govt. in regulating the standard of medical education in the country.   The Committee, however, 
is given to understand that the required academic input for strengthening the quality of medical 
education is somewhat lacking.    The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that there is a need for having 
a ‘Think Tank’ of eminent Professionals of both medical care and medical education.   Such a body 
should, however, be solely involved in the work of assessment and analysis of medical education  so as 
to provide various policies based on the academic knowledge and professional experience of its 
members for its growth in the right direction.  
ACTION TAKEN  
19.1to19.3       The Council already consists of eminent medical professionals with representatives from 
universities, State Govts. and Central Govt. which makes various recommendations in the field of 
medical education to the Central Govt.  Whenever occasion arises like formulation of policies during the 
Plan period etc., eminent medical professionals in the field are associated in the policy planning process. 
XXI     ROLE OF NATIONAL LEVEL INSTITUTIONS 
RECOMMENDATION 
21.3     The Committee feels that in  view of the weak financial position  of States, Central Govt. has to 
take an initiative in this direction if referral character of All India Institutions is to be maintained.   The 
Committee is happy to note that the Central Govt. has launched a pilot project this year for 
strengthening the diagnostic facilities of State hospitals.   The Committee has been given to understand 
that this scheme is being implemented for the last two-three years.   States like M.P., Haryana, Bihar, 
Tripura, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, UP, Kerala, Gujarat and J&K have already benefited from this 
scheme during this period.   While appreciating the initiative, the Committee would like to emphasise 
that such grants should also be strictly monitored by the Central Govt. so as to assess the fulfillment of 
the objective of this project. 
21.3 ACTION TAKEN 
The recommendation will be kept in view while releasing grant to the State Govt. medical colleges/ 
Page 12 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

hospitals. 
RECOMMENDATION 
21.5     The Committee is of the opinion that India being a vast country and in view of phenomenal 
increase in its population, only three-four national level institutions can not be considered to be serving 
the purpose. The Committee therefore, feels that the Central Govt. should explore the possibility of 
establishing more national level institutions. 
21.5   ACTION TAKEN 
This recommendation will be kept in view subject to availability of financial inputs. 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT  BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
III      MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.5       In some states, a number of Universities now fall under the jurisdiction of Health Universities  
established in the recent years.   This development has led to a peculiar situation.   By virtue of coming 
under the jurisdiction of a Health University, such Universities   have lost their right of being 
represented in the Council.   On the other hand, Health Universities  cannot send their nominee to the  
Council as they do not have any Senate.   Thus, as many as 21 Universities over and above 56 eligible 
Universities are not represented in the Council.   Health Universities   having a  large number of medical 
colleges under their  jurisdiction, specially  in southern  and western states have no say in the decision-
making apex body on medical education. 
ACTION TAKEN 
3.5       As per the existing provisions of the IMC Act 1956, any University having a medical faculty is 
entitled to send one member to the Council and this provision is also available to the Health Universities 
set up in some of the States.   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee is  aware of the provision of Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, which lays down 
that any University having a medical faculty is entitled to send one member to the Council.   
However, the problem is that some Universities are still un-represented  in the Medical Council as 
they do not have a Senate in existence.   In view of this, the Committee recommends that sincere 
efforts be made for the constitution of 'Senate' in such Universities so as to enable them to be  
represented in the Indian Medical Council. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.11     The Committee is not inclined to agree with the viewpoint  of the Council.  In its all the study 
visits  and interactions with the various   functionaries comprising the entire medical education   
spectrum, one view  that has been consistently put across before the Committee, was that with the 
increase  in the number of medical colleges over the years, it is practically not possible for a centralized 
body like MCI to constantly monitor the standard of medical education.    The Committee observes that 
there is no regional council of the MCI.   The State  Medical Councils are autonomous bodies 
established by State Govts that too not by all the State Govts.    These  State Medical Councils have no   
authority in the maintenance of standards of medical education.   In such a  scenario with 183   medical 
colleges spread across the country with chances  of future expansion, the Committee strongly feels that 
regional  councils  with MCI continuing as the apex body need to be set up in the country.   The 
Committee is of the view that, both the Central Govt. and MCI should explore the possibility of setting 
up four regional councils  in  Southern, Northern, Eastern and Western parts of the country.   This would 
ultimately lead to better monitoring of the standard of medical  education as laid down in the IMC Act, 
1956,  and regulations made thereunder.     The Committee also desires that the Department may take up 
the matter of establishing  State Medical Council in the States where they are not existing.   Role of 
State Medical Council may also be reviewed so as to involve them in the exercise of maintaining the 
Page 13 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

standards of Medical Education in the States under the guidance of MCI. 
ACTION TAKEN 
3.11     The Medical Council of India has proposed that there is more of a need to strengthen the Council 
with more regulatory authority through appropriate amendments in the Act.  Setting up of zonal 
branches of the Medical Council of India is something to be viewed from the administrative feasibility 
and the financial constraints.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee notes that the Medical Council of India has proposed  appropriate  amendments 
in the Act for the purpose  of strengthening the Council with more regulatory authority. The 
Committee, however, feels that empowering the Council alone will not remedy the situation, as 
monitoring of the standards of Medical Education by State-run Medical colleges/universities has 
to be done from close quarters.   The Committee, reiterates its recommendation that despite the  
administrative and financial constraints, the possibility of setting up four regional councils in 
Southern, Northern, Eastern and Western parts of the country should be explored simultaneously 
by both the Central Government and the Medical Council of India.  The Department should take 
up the establishment of State Medical Councils in the States where they are not presently existing, 
besides reviewing their role.  
V.  INSPECTION 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
5.4        The Committee notes that a number of steps  have been taken by MCI to make the procedure of 
inspection foolproof.   For example, the medical colleges are now supposed to maintain a list of teachers 
on their strength  alongwith their photographs  duly verified by the Dean of the College. The Committee, 
however, is of the view that there is a need for  streamlining the inspection procedure so as to make it 
more stringent and effective.  The Committee understands that, so far, inspections are being carried out 
only  after giving prior  notice.   The Committee is of the view that MCI should initiate measures  so as 
to build up  a  mechanism for carrying out surprise inspections and inspections at a very short notice.   
This would indirectly lead to a  situation where medical college authorities would work towards having 
a proper set up as per the prescribed norms.   The Committee is also of  the view that rate  of fees 
charged  for different  categories of inspection should be reviewed.   Specially, in spite of   the so-called 
annual inspections being  carried out only once in five years,  annual fee of Rs. 30,000 is prescribed  
which  seems to be on the high side. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
5.5        From the details of inspections carried out by MCI during the period 1995-96 to 1999-2000, the 
Committee finds that in majority of the colleges, deficiencies have been pointed out as indicated 
below :- 
  
Status position  regarding the removal of the deficiencies pointed out in the 23 inspection reports 
submitted in  1998-99 furnished by MCI reveals that inspection is followed by Compliance Report and 
re-inspection for compliance verification in some cases.  The Committee finds that all these inspections 
were carried out in 1998-99.   Major deficiencies pointed out in all the cases are with respect to teaching 
staff, shortage of teaching beds, inadequate clinical material, lack of infrastructure facilities, lack of 
journals in library etc.    In spite of repeated reminders, deficiencies still persist in almost all the 
colleges.   The Committee has been given to  understand that in the event of deficiencies still continuing 
despite repeated  reminders, show-cause notice is issued giving a specific time for the State/college to 
Year  No. of Colleges 
inspected 
Approved Deficiencies pointed out 
1995-96 14 1 13
1996-97 25 9 16
1997-98 16 7 9
1998-99 29 6 23
1999-2000 20 1 19
Page 14 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

send a reply asking why steps should not be initiated to recommend to Central Govt. for de-
recognition/reduction of seats.   If no corrective action is taken thereafter, the Council recommends 
reduction of seats/de-recognition to the Central Govt. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
5.6       The Committee is surprised to note that this elaborate procedure does not   seem to be serving 
the required  purpose.   The Committee would like to quote one example in this regard.   The General 
Body of the Council at its meeting held on 17th March, 1998 had recommended to the Central Govt. de-
recognition of BRD Medical College, Gorakhpur, UP.   It is  pertinent to point out that inspection of this 
college was carried out in 1995.   It took more than three years for the Council to arrive at a decision 
which was communicated to the Central Govt. on 6th July, 1998.    Since then there have been 
correspondence between the Central Govt., State Govt. and MCI and the matter hangs     there.   The 
Committee takes a very serious view of this situation.   Nobody  seems to have any concern-neither the 
college nor the State Govt./University/Central Govt.    No doubt, students’ interest is safeguarded as de-
recognition, if approved by the Central Govt., would be made effective from prospective date.    The 
Committee is of the view that in the name of safeguarding the interest of students, interest of college 
authorities is being secured.   The Committee feels that such developments defeat the very purpose of 
carrying out an inspection.   The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that a time-bound and 
result-oriented inspection procedure is required to be built up if the standard of medical education is to 
be maintained. 
ACTION TAKEN 
5.4 to 5.6         The Council has already formulated a system for conducting inspection, including 
surprise inspection, of the medical colleges at the time of its inception and in the subsequent years to 
verify the targets achieved as required under the Council's regulations.  Besides, the Council also 
undertakes periodical inspection of the colleges recognised under section 11(2) of the Act.  From time to 
time the Council has also been taking steps to make the mechanism of inspection foolproof.  The 
regulations of the Council has laid down the target dates by which the application for new college has to 
be processed and for grant of letter of intent and letter of permission to establish the college and 
thereafter for annual renewal of the permission until the college has been recognised under section 11(2) 
of the IMC Act.  The inspections have to be conducted by the Council in accordance with this schedule.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee is of the view that the Department appears to have tried to evade any reply 
to the particular case of B.R.D. Medical College, Gorakhpur, U.P. which is the most glaring 
example of the tardy application of MCI regulations.  The Committee, therefore,  reiterates its 
earlier recommendation that a time-bound and result oriented inspection procedure is required to 
be  laid down if standard of medical education is to be maintained.  The Committee would also 
like the Department to respond to its observation that rates of different categories of inspections 
need to be reviewed and made reasonable as they are too high. 
VII      ADMISSION PROCEDURE 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
7.1       MCI Regulations on Graduate Medical Education, 1997 lay down the Eligibility criteria for 
admission to MBBS course  and different categories of entrance tests as indicated below :- 
(i)         In states, having only one Medical College and one University/Board/Examining Body 
conducting the qualifying examination, the marks obtained at such qualifying examination; 
In states, having more than one university/board/examining body conducting the qualifying 
examinations, a competitive entrance examination to be held; 
Where there are more than one college in a state and only one university/board conducting the 
qualifying examination, then a joint selection board to be constituted; and  
A competitive entrance examination in the cases of Institutions of All India character. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
7.2       The Committee was informed that all the State Govts. conduct entrance examination for 
admission to MBBS course in Govt. medical colleges as well as merit seats in private medical colleges.   
Page 15 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

As per  the Supreme Court directive, 15% of the MBBS seats in Govt. and some private medical 
colleges all over the country are already being filled on the basis of merit through the All India entrance 
examination conducted by the CBSE.    Entrance tests for admission to MBBS course can thus be 
broadly classified in three categories -  entrance  test conducted by respective State Govts, entrance test 
conducted by CBSE for 15% seats and entrance tests conducted  by national level Institutions like 
AIIMS,  JIPMER, AFMC, BHU, Aligarh Muslim University, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Wardha etc.   Committee’s attention was drawn to the practical problems and inconvenience 
faced by the students sitting for a number of entrance tests every year.    The Committee feels that a  
uniform entrance test covering all the medical colleges – both Govt. and private would be the ideal 
position.   The Committee, however, is of the opinion that in view of the different patterns of secondary 
level education  in different states, uniform admission procedure would not prove to be feasible.   The 
Committee  feels that this issue needs to be debated by the medical fraternity, its pros and cons 
thoroughly established and evaluated first.  The Committee is of the view that Central Govt./MCI  
should take the initiative to examine this issue in detail so that number of entrance tests is minimized to 
the extent possible  thus lessening the burden of students.  
ACTION TAKEN 
7.1&7.2           The recent judgment dated 31.10.2002 of the 11 Judge Constitution Bench of the 
Supreme Court has overruled its earlier judgment in the Unnikrishnan case whereby the admission to 
85% of the seats in the privately managed institutions were being filled through the State.  This 
judgment, inter-alia, deals with admission of students by the institutions themselves, charging of fee etc. 
The recommendation made by the committee with regard to conduct of entrance test in general and for 
the NRI students in particular and the mode of conducting the test etc. needs to be reviewed in the light 
of this judgment.     
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
7.3       The Committee notes that the students admitted against the 15% seats in medical colleges  filled 
by the management have to fulfill the minimum eligibility criteria namely, obtaining the qualification 
equivalent to the pre-eligibility qualifications prescribed  for Indian students for admission to medical 
courses prescribed by the MCI.    However, the Committee has been given to understand that in view  of 
the different backgrounds they come from, it is for the management concerned to judge the merit of 
these candidates, having regard to all relevant factors.   The  Committee has its reservations on such a 
procedure.   The Committee strongly feels that there has to be a mechanism for judging the basic 
knowledge and aptitude for medical profession even for NRI students.   The Committee,  therefore,  is of 
the view that a separate entrance test should be prescribed for NRI students so as to somewhat  eliminate 
the element of commercialization in admission through this category.  The Committee  has no hesitation 
in saying that track record of such students will justify such an initiative. 
ACTION TAKEN 
7.3       The recent judgment dated 31.10.2002 of the 11 Judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court 
has overruled its earlier judgment in the Unnikrishnan case whereby the admission to 85% of the seats in 
the privately managed institutions were being filled through the State.  This judgment, inter-alia, deals 
with admission of students by the institutions themselves, charging of fee etc. The recommendation 
made by the committee with regard to conduct of entrance test in general and for the NRI students in 
particular and the mode of conducting the test etc. needs to be reviewed in the light of this judgment.     
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
7.4       During its interactions with faculty members and experts, it was time and again emphasized that 
only motivated and committed students should be selected for medical courses.   Marks alone or 
performance in the entrance test should not be one and only criterion for eligibility for admission to 
MBBS.   Objectives of medical education being not simply personal but social also, aptitude of students 
was very relevant.   The Committee, therefore, is of the view that entrance test for admission to MBBS 
should also include a mechanism like aptitude test  for assessing the prospective student’s  inclination 
for medical profession. 
ACTION TAKEN 
Page 16 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

  7.4       The recent judgment dated 31.10.2002 of the 11 Judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme 
Court has overruled its earlier judgment in the Unnikrishnan case whereby the admission to 85% of the 
seats in the privately managed institutions were being filled through the State.  This judgment, inter-alia, 
deals with admission of students by the institutions themselves, charging of fee etc. The 
recommendation made by the committee with regard to conduct of entrance test in general and for the 
NRI students in particular and the mode of conducting the test etc. needs to be reviewed in the light of 
this judgment.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            Despite the recommendations made by the Committee from time to time in this regard, 
constraints of the government including that of the State Governments and with due regard to the 
judgments given by the apex court from time to time, the Committee feels that the process 
regarding admission needs to be made as fair as possible.  The role of money, whether it is in the 
form of the capitation fee or under the table or in any other form must come to an end.  It has to 
be recognized that the influence of money here has a chain reaction thereby affecting the poorest 
of the poor and the middle class of the society who cannot bear the costly treatment in posh 
private hospitals whether it is a case of minor treatment, surgery or for that matter the major 
surgery.  These hospitals, clinics etc. have become shops where the first question that is asked to a 
patient whether the expenditure on his treatment is going to be reimbursed so that they can use 
their razor on the pocket of the patient accordingly.  
 X.     CURRICULUM 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
10.1     MCI Regulations on Graduate Medical Education, 1997 deal extensively with the curriculum 
prescribed for the   MBBS course.   The entire course has been divided into three  phases.   Phase I (two 
semesters) consists of pre-clinical subjects i.e. Human Anatomy,  Physiology including Bio-Physics, 
Bio-Chemistry and introduction to Community Medicine  including Humanities.   Phase II (3 semesters) 
consists of Para-clinical/clinical subjects.  Para-clinical subjects shall consist of Pathology, 
Pharmacology, Microbiology, Forensic Medicine including Toxicology and part of Community 
Medicine.   Phase III will be of 4 semesters.   The clinical subjects to be taught during Phase II and III 
are Medicine and its allied specialties, Surgery and its allied specialties, Obstetrics and Gynecology and 
Community Medicine. 
10.2     The Committee has been informed that after the   revision of the curriculum for undergraduate 
course in 1997, all the Universities in the country were requested to ensure that the revised curriculum is 
implemented effectively.   Without exception, all the  universities are now following the revised 
curriculum which is being monitored by MCI through periodical inspections.  
10.3     The Committee notes that although proposal for bringing out changes in the curriculum for 
undergraduate course was initiated in 1993, changes could be finally brought about only in 1997.  The 
Committee has been given to understand that due to this time-consuming process, some of the changes 
in the undergraduate curriculum have become outdated by the time of implementation.   
10.4     Based on implementation of 1997 Regulations, suggestions have already been received for 
amendments which have been considered by the Council.   The Committee notes that these amendments 
are at present under discussion between  Central Govt., DGHS and MCI.  The Committee notes that no 
time-frame has been specified for upgrading  and updating the  curriculum.    The Committee  is of the 
view that revision of MBBS curriculum  should be made a regular feature, within a specific time-frame 
strictly adhered to so as to keep pace with the advancement in medical sciences. 
ACTION TAKEN 
10.1 to 10.4     The Graduate Medical Education Regulations were updated and notified in 1997 and is 
currently under review based on inputs received from the Universities and others concerned. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE: 
The Committee in its 112th Report noted that no time-frame had been specified for updating the  
curriculum and that the review of the Graduate Medical Education Regulations could not be  
completed even after the lapse of a period of  twelve months since this report was presented.   The 
Page 17 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Committee views  this lackadaisical approach of  the Department seriously and    observes that not 
only the said review be expedited but the fixed curriculum should also be     updated at regular 
intervals. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
10.5     During the course of its inter-actions, the Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that 
although MCI has laid down detailed regulations on curriculum for MBBS, these were not being 
followed by all the universities.   There was non-uniformity of  curriculum even in one state resulting in 
lot of problems being faced by the students.   The Committee emphasizes  the need for adoption of 
curriculum for MBBS  in letter and spirit by all the universities in spite of there being variations in 
standard of medical education being imparted in different medical colleges due to one reason or the 
other.   
ACTION TAKEN  
10.5     The curriculum for MBBS, as prescribed in the Graduate Medical Education Regulations, 1997 
is mandatory for all concerned to follow. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee has been informed that  the curriculum for MBBS,  as prescribed in the Graduate 
Medical Regulations, 1997,  is mandatory for all concerned to follow. However, it was brought to 
the notice of the Committee that these regulations were not being followed by all the Universities, 
resulting in variation in the standards of medical education being imparted in different medical 
colleges. The Committee feels existence of rules in the Rules book is one thing and having no rule 
is better  than having one  and not being able to ensure its adherence. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that a permanent mechanism  should be evolved to ensure 
strict adherence of  said regulations by all the concerned universities. 
  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
10.6     There were extensive discussions on various components of MBBS curriculum.   Divergent 
feedback was received as detailed below :- 
(i)         Reduction in the period of study for Basic medical sciences  from 18 months to 12 months was 
considered to be a move in the right direction as exposure of students to clinical subjects was for longer 
duration now.   It was also  pointed out that   applied aspects of Basic medical Sciences are re-taught 
during clinical teaching.   However, reservations were also  there as this move had resulted  in longer 
period of daily study and drastic cut in the duration of vacations for students.    
(ii)        A strong plea was made for restoration of Amphibian Practicals in  undergraduate course.   It 
was  felt that testing on animals was necessary before going for treatment of patients. 
(iii)       Need for inclusion of behavoural aspects  of medical care in the undergraduate course was 
emphasized.   One view was that no amount of training will make the student committed to provide the 
best medical care to the patient until and unless his attitude and aptitude towards patients is positive and 
his zeal for patient care is paramount.    The other view was that to sensitise students to behave with 
compassion and concern with patients, teachers  are the role models for students while they examine 
patients.   Addition  of a course on individual and group behaviour could supplement  this process of 
sensitization. 
(iv)      Another drawback pointed out was that curative aspect of treatment was given more  emphasis  
in the revised curriculum.  Despite strong indications that what is needed is more training in primary 
care and more investment in critical public health issues, precious time is spent in investigating diseases 
that afflict only a limited number of people. 
(v)     Another  fall-out of this approach was lack of desired capacity in the present day medical 
graduates in  making proper clinical diagnosis.  By and large there was more concentration/ dependency 
on high-tech methods and sophisticated instruments for identifying a disease and treatment thereof.    
There is a need  for having a balanced approach. 
(vi)       More emphasis on  problem-based learning. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION
Page 18 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

10.7     The Committee is aware that  quantum of curriculum for undergraduate course is already quite 
high resulting in great pressure  on students.   The Committee feels that a line has to be drawn 
somewhere and one should not forget that in medical profession, learning has to be a  life-long process.   
However,  during its discussions with various medical functionaries and also the feedback received from 
various  quarters, there were a lot of suggestions for inclusion of additional inputs in MBBS curriculum 
as detailed below :- 
(a)        Training in administration of a medical college/hospital management. 
Stress management. 
Trauma education, calamity and disaster management. 
Geriatric medicine, i.e. problems of the elderly as well as Adolescent Health and Education. 
Awareness   of medico-legal issues  
Computer medicine 
Emphasis on medical ethics throughout the course by integration in each speciality rather than as a 
separate subject. 
Inputs regarding cost-effectiveness of hi-tech interventions being used by doctors. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
10.8     The Committee has been informed by MCI that in the MBBS course subjects like medical 
ethics, behavioural sciences, hospital management and  health  administration are also covered 
under Community Medicine and Forensic Medicine.   Graduate Medical Education Regulations, 
1997 also provide that Medical Education Units/Departments should be established in all medical 
colleges and faculty members should avail of modern education technology while teaching the 
students.  The Committee feels that steps should  be taken by MCI in co-ordination with 
universities and college management to emphasise that all the components of MBBS curriculum 
should be made part of the training.   The Committee recommends that various suggestions with 
regard to MBBS  curriculum as enumerated in the foregoing paragraphs  should also be included 
in the ongoing discussions between  Central Govt./DGHS/MCI on proposed amendments to 
Regulations on Graduate Medical Education. 
ACTION TAKEN 
10.6 to10.8      The Council is of the view that the existing quantum of curriculum for 
undergraduate course being high is resulting in great pressure on students.  In view of this, any 
addition in the curriculum in order to make the curriculum relevant should be made with a 
proportionate substitution as far as possible so as to keep the load optimal in character. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the MCI agrees with its observation about the heavy 
curriculum at under graduate level as well as need for optimizing it.  The Department, however, has not 
indicated its plan or intention of undertaking their exercise which it ought to have done in its reply.  The 
Committee would like to know steps taken/proposed in this  regard. 
XI        TEACHERS  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
11.8     The Committee notes that the Central Govt. or the MCI have not prescribed any uniform pay 
scales for teachers in medical colleges.   Some of the state govts. have adopted the UGC scales while 
some have adopted the revised Central pay scales based on 5th Pay Commission recommendations.  
Feedback received by the Committee points to the fact that such state govt.  initiatives are very few.   By 
and large, pay scales of medical teachers are dependent on the resource position  of the state govts. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
11.9     The Committee is not convinced by the stand of the Central Govt. that in the absence of central 
funding, it is in no position to prescribe uniform salary and allowances for the teachers in medical 
colleges.  The Committee strongly feels that uniform pay scales  in accordance with the manifold duties 
performed by medical teachers across the country would be the ideal condition.   In order to maintain the 
standard of medical education, there is imperative need for safeguarding the interests of medical 
teachers in every conceivable manner.   The Committee is surprised to note that the proposal for having 
Page 19 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

a  Central agency on the  pattern of UGC and AICTE was initially discussed in a meeting taken by the 
Member, Planning Commission and the broad guidelines for establishment of such a Commission  were 
also  worked out.   However,  subsequently in 1997 with the approval of the then Health Minister  it was 
decided to keep the proposal in abeyance.   The Committee is of the view that a Medical Grants 
Commission  is required  to be set up without any further delay.  The Committee is happy to note that 
draft National Health Policy, 2001 at present under circulation to all concerned for their comments 
envisages the setting up of Medical Grants Commission for funding new Govt. medical colleges and 
upgradation of the existing Govt. medical colleges.     The service conditions of medical teachers should 
also be covered under the mandate of Medical  Grants Commission. 
  
ACTION TAKEN 
11.9     Due to inadequate fund allocation, it has not been possible to finalise the  scheme for  setting up 
of the Medical Grants Commission.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee would like to refer to the reply of the Department to Para 12.4 of the ATN 
wherein the  Department,  in response to the recommendation of the Committee to attract bright 
students towards teaching, replied that in the absence of an organisation like UGC for providing 
financial assistance in the field of medical education, there can be no Central initiative for 
attracting the bright students towards teaching profession. 
            The Committee would like to mention that the proposal for having a  Central agency on 
the  pattern of UGC and AICTE was initially discussed in a meeting taken by the Member, 
Planning Commission and the broad guidelines for establishing  such a Commission  were also  
worked out.   However,  subsequently in 1997, with the approval of the then Health Minister  it 
was decided to keep the proposal in abeyance. The Committee further notes that the Draft 
National Health Policy 2001, envisages the setting up of Medical Grants Commission for funding 
new Govt. medical colleges and upgrading the existing Govt. medical colleges   The Committee is, 
therefore, not inclined  to accept that the Medical Grants Commission cannot be established due 
to scarcity of funds and strongly recommends that the Department should take all necessary 
measures for the establishment of Medical Grants Commission.   
XII      TRAINING  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
12.4     Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that young doctors are not inclined to join 
teaching profession.   General  perception is that at the time of joining medical education, most of the 
students make up their mind to do private practice since it provides financial gain of varying nature to 
the practitioners in comparison to the doctors going for teaching profession.   However, it can also be 
said that teaching job actually serves as a good launching pad for private  practice after gaining 
sufficient experience, confidence and credibility.   Interest in teaching is also dependent on the attitude 
and commitment of the young pass-outs.   The Committee is inclined to agree with these views.   The 
Committee finds that at present no incentive schemes are there to attract bright students towards 
teaching and there is no such proposal also being contemplated by MCI.   In view of medical practice 
being more income generating, the Committee is of the view that a  system of identifying and providing 
incentives  like earmarking funds for research projects and job guarantee to students interested in 
teaching needs to be evolved on the pattern of various schemes being implemented by the 
Govt. /AICTE/UGC for attracting young talent towards teaching.   The Committee strongly feels that 
this is specially required for students of non-clinical and Para-clinical subjects. 
ACTION TAKEN 
12.4     In the absence of an organisation like the UGC for providing financial assistance in the field of 
medical education, there can be no Central initiative for attracting the bright students towards teaching 
profession where financial outgo is involved.  However, taking into account the acute shortage of 
teachers in the non-clinical and Para-clinical subjects, in order to encourage the Institutions to increase 
their admission capacity in these subjects the MCI has in its regulations provided that the institutions 
Page 20 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

setting up teaching facilities in these subjects would not have to provide bank guarantee.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee feels that the steps taken by the Department to deal with the acute shortage of 
teachers in  non-clinical and para clinical subjects would not serve the desired purpose unless, the 
teaching profession as a whole was made attractive.   Moreover, there is, in general, an acute 
shortage of teachers in almost all subjects.   The Committee, therefore,  feels that the Department 
should endeavour to find a permanent solution for this problem.  
XV       PROBLEM OF SHORTAGE OF DOCTORS IN RURAL AREAS – REMEDIES 
THEREFOR  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
15.1     Acute shortage of doctors in rural areas is a problem being faced in the entire country.   No State 
can be said to be not facing this problem, only its acuteness can be varying in different states.   The 
Committee finds that the main reason for the paucity of doctors in rural areas is the lack or inadequacy 
of facilities available in PHCs/hospitals.   Nobody would deny the fact that almost all PHCs in the 
country are ill-equipped.  They lack necessary facilities for treating even minor ailments whereas ground 
reality is that generally very complicated cases are handled there.   Another de-motivating factor is the 
disparity in the living conditions in the rural areas vis-à-vis  urban areas.  Geographical location is not 
convenient, and  even basic amenities like  proper roads, electricity and water, education for children, 
entertainment etc. are not there.  The situation gets more aggravated because doctors who man the PHCs 
are generally young pass-outs possessing only theoretical knowledge, practical exposure of ground 
realities virtually being nil. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
15.2     A number of suggestions were made for strengthening the rural services.   One suggestion made 
was that there can be two types of doctors  - one for rural areas and the other for urban areas.   Services 
of diploma doctors (three years course) can be utilized in rural areas.  However, the Committee is not 
inclined to agree with this view mainly because equal standards are required to be maintained for both 
rural and urban areas.   One must not forget the fact that rural masses although generally illiterate are 
gradually realizing the harm caused by unregistered doctors  practising in rural areas.   The Committee 
strongly feels that creation of a class within a class will not be appropriate.  Such a distinction would be 
detrimental to the entire medical profession. 
ACTION TAKEN 
The Three-years Licentiate Medical course has been discontinued since long and the MCI has expressed 
its reservation about is revival. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
15.5     The Committee would also like to emphasise that during internship period, PHC posting should 
be strictly adhered to and monitored as it would motivate them towards rural service later on.  The 
Committee also feels that  there should be an orientation programme before doctors posted in rural areas 
join their duties. 
ACTION TAKEN 
15.5     The recommendation of the Committee will be considered by the Council alongwith the on-
going review of the Graduate Medical Education Regulation 1997 being undertaken by the Council.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            While the Committee considers it necessary that doctors must serve rural areas.  There 
cannot be two opinions about it.  However, with regard to the duration of the period the 
Committee has  a flexible approach.  In view of the long  gestation period in these cases, the 
Committee feels that an effective system with lesser duration of even six months should suffice.  
Doctors should be given the choice to adopt a village nearest to their place of residence or work.  
They should be required to maintain a record of their visits, which should be at least 3 days a 
week, and the name and address of patients attended with the nature of disease and the diagnosis.  
The record of visit should as far as possible, be signed by any member/functionary of the 
Panchayat but this should not be compulsory.
Page 21 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

XVI     BRAIN DRAIN 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
16.1     The Committee observes that the problem of brain drain is being faced at two fronts – one being 
from one institution to another inside the country and the other being flight of young talent to foreign 
institutions.   The Committee has been given to understand that this malady has penetrated even premier 
medical institutions.   On the one side,  national level institutions like PGI, AIIMS are facing shortage of 
faculty strength due to faculty members joining foreign institutions primarily for job satisfaction.   The 
other cause of serious concern is the silent brain drain in the form of voluntary retirement or taking  up 
regular jobs by Govt. medical  college teachers in private medical colleges.   Better working conditions, 
monetary benefits and more opportunity for undertaking research activities can  be  cited as the main 
factors responsible for this phenomenon.   The Committee observes that there is another aspect of this 
problem.   Young pass-outs do not get to know all the opportunities  which are available in the country.   
There is a need for evolving a facility  on the pattern of Recruitment agencies coming to the campuses of 
premier technical institutions for placements.   The Committee is of the firm view that  remedial steps 
need to be taken for creating best job opportunities  thereby retaining our young talent in the country.  
The Committee also feels that if necessary, students may be asked to pay back in easy instalments, 
wherever Government  funding is there.    Modalities in this regarding may be explored. 
ACTION TAKEN 
16.1     At present, in terms of Emigration Act the doctors and nurses fall under the exempted category 
of 'Emigration Check Not Required'. However, the MCI is of the view in the last 10-15 years the exodus 
of doctors has come down considerably due to the expansion in the medical and health facilities in the 
country.  Some of the foreign countries have also imposed stringent conditions on recruitment of doctors 
from abroad which has further curtailed the problem of brain drain.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE: 
            The Committee does not quite agree that exemption of `ECMR’ under the Emigration Act 
is a reason for the problem of brain-drain.   The Committee would like this to be substantiated 
with facts and figures that during the last 10-15 years, the exodus of doctors has come down 
considerably due to expansion in the medical and health facilities in this Country.   The 
Committee feels that brain drain is a serious malady and that in medical profession where lot of 
tax payers money is spent on the education and training of medical students.  Tackling this 
problem may be difficult but not impossible.  What is needed is to adopt a carrot and stick policy 
in curbing this malady; purely punitive measures would not do.  Department should with the help 
of Department of Science & Technology work out a multi pronged strategy for curbing the brain 
drain in a time bound manner. 
XVII    MUSHROOMING OF LABS/DIAGNOSTIC CENTRES 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
17.1     Diagnosis of diseases based on clinical impressions alone can have fallacies even in experienced 
hands.   No Medicare system can ignore state of the art hi-tech methods of diagnosis.    The Committee  
however, observes that too much dependence of present-day doctors on technical know-how has 
indirectly led to a  mushroom growth of Labs/Diagnostic Centres  conducting CT Scan and MRI and 
other sophisticated tests all over the country.   The Committee has been given to understand that such 
centres are not generally manned by qualified medical    personnel.   The doctors treat their patients on 
the basis of reports given by such centres which sometimes give out incorrect interpretation of patient’s 
state of health.   The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for bringing out a 
comprehensive legislation to check  the mushroom growth of  such centres. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
17.2     The Committee has been informed that the Department of Health has circulated the draft Clinical 
Establishment Regulation Act to the State Govts. in February, 2001 to obtain  the recommendations of 
the respective state legislatures to enable the Central Govt. to get the law enacted by the Parliament.   
The main features of the proposed legislation, inter-alia, include mandatory registration of a  clinical 
establishment, requirement of minimum  standards in respect of building, equipments, qualified doctors 
Page 22 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

and other staff  etc. and the powers to frame the rules under the Act to prescribe the minimum  standards 
and procedures to conduct tests- pathological, chemical, bacteriological  and others.   The Committee 
hopes that the procedural  formalities are completed at the earliest so that the proposed legislation comes 
into force without any further delay. 
ACTION TAKEN  
17.2     The Central Govt. has called for the comments of the State Govts. and other concerned agencies 
with regard to the draft Clinical Establishment Regulation Bill which is under circulation for 
comments/views since February 2001.   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE: 
The Committee expresses its displeasure that comments/views on the draft Clinical Establishment 
Regulation Bill, which was circulated to the State Govts. and other agencies in February, 2001, 
have still not been received and desires that the matter may be finalized without further delay. 
XXI     ROLE OF NATIONAL LEVEL INSTITUTIONS 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
21.4 The Committee has been given to understand that  income generated by  national institutions  from 
their internal resources results in reduction of equivalent amount from their budget allocation.   The 
Department has clarified that in respect of Govt. Institutions which are depositing the income generated 
by them to the Govt. Revenue, no reduction from their budget allocation is made.   The Committee 
strongly feels that Govt. Institutions generating income should be allowed to retain such an income in 
the maintenance and up-gradation of their institution.   If the whole income being placed at their disposal 
is not possible, the Committee finds no harm in a specific percentage of income being retained by them.  
This facility  need not result in deduction of equivalent amount of funds  from their budget allocation. 
ACTION TAKEN 
In respect of Govt. institutions which are depositing the income generated by them to the Govt. 
revenue, no reduction from their budget allocation is being made. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Department has not responded to the Committees recommendation that government 
institutions generating income should be allowed to retain such income in the maintenance and 
upgradation of their institutions.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation in this 
regard and expects that Department to respond to it at the earliest.  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
21.6     The Committee observes that problem of faculty shortage is also being faced by premier 
institutions like AIIMS and PGI due to one reason or other.   The Committee understands that besides     
a number of posts lying vacant, quite a few  professors are working on ad hoc basis.  Besides that, in the 
institutions   under the control of Central Govt., recruitment to all the four sub-cadres i.e. General Duty 
Medical Officers, Teaching Sub-cadre, Specialist Non-teaching Sub-cadre and Public Health Sub-cadre  
of Central Health services is  made  through UPSC.   The Committee has been given to understand that 
this is a very long drawn affair.  Not only this, promotional avenues for all the sub-cadres of    Central 
Health Services  are not of a satisfactory level.   The Committee hopes that after the  ongoing exercise of 
cadre review is over,  things would improve for the better.   The Committee  is of the view that there is 
also a need for evolving some system of co-ordination among the concerned authorities, i.e. UPSC, 
Directorate of Health Services/ Directorate of Medical Education and the concerned college. 
ACTION TAKEN 
21.6     The problem of vacancies in the teaching faculty of AIIMS and PGI has been due to litigations 
and other administrative difficulties.  These institutions are taking measures for filling up of vacancies 
on regular basis. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            Large number of vacancies in the teaching faculty of AIIMS and PGI “due to litigations 
and administrative difficulties”, does not augur well for the present as well as future of these 
premier institutions. While litigation presupposes selective application of rules etc. administrative 
difficulties are due to inadequate or inefficient management.  The Committee would like to 
Page 23 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

impress on these institutions to get rid of unnecessary technicalities and recommends that the 
Department should help them to have out of Court settlements of the cases in a time bound 
manner.  
XXII    JOINT CONSULTATIVE MACHINERY 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
22.1     The Committee is deeply disturbed by frequent incidents of doctors/teachers, para-medical staff, 
ancillary staff etc. of medical institutions and attached hospitals all over the country resorting  to strikes 
on trivial matters and thus putting public at large to great inconvenience.   The Committee strongly feels 
that a co-ordination mechanism needs to be  evolved whereby all categories of employees – be it, faculty 
members, doctors, students, technicians -  get common platform to air their problems and find a solution 
agreeable to all concerned.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue 
the setting up of such a mechanism with all the State Govts/management of both national level and 
private institutions. 
ACTION TAKEN 
22.1     On the directions of the Court, AIIMS, New Delhi have set up a permanent redressal of 
grievances forum.  The disputes which are not settled in this forum are  to be referred to an appellate 
tribunal constituted in the Ministry under the Chairmanship of Secretary(Health).  Similar mechanism 
could be established by other institutions in the States.   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee reiterates its recommendation regarding pursuing states to make it 
compulsory for all the medical institutions to have permanent grievance redressal forums.  
XXIII. PROBLEMS BEING FACED BY STUDENT COMMUNITY 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
23.3     Lack of required hospital accommodation has become a big problem for students.   The 
Committee recommends that MCI should take up this issue with the concerned State Govts./Private 
college managements so that students’ problems are minimized.   The Committee is of the view that the   
development of coaching classes in some states in addition to the normal colleges cannot be considered 
to be a healthy sign.   MCI should, therefore, undertake a review of this development in concerned states 
and pursue the State Govts. to take required steps for  putting a check  to this unhealthy practice.    The 
Committee feels that possibility of students of private medical colleges/younger institutions utilizing the 
library facility available in Govt. medical colleges strictly on merit and without disturbing  students  of 
such colleges may be explored in the larger interests of medical education.   The Committee is also of 
the view that a mechanism needs to be evolved  for periodic review  of stipend payable to students and 
bringing about uniformity to the extent possible.   The Committee would also like to point out that there 
is a need for standardization  of medical textbooks having a balanced mixture of foreign and national 
components. 
ACTION TAKEN 
23.3     The MCI while agreeing with the suggestions of the Committee that there should be no private 
tuition imparted by the teachers or obtained by the students is of the opinion that the teachers may be 
encouraged to take extra CME classes in the college itself.  However, enforcement of such obligation 
has to be done by the concerned State Government/University/Medical College and violation thereof 
may be treated as a disciplinary breach by the said authorities. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee concern about the crises of hostel  accommodation, both in Hospitals as 
well as medical colleges, have not been responded to in the reply.  Issue of low stipend payable to 
students raised by the Committee has also been left out.  The Committee would like to have 
response of the department in these regards. 
            As regards private tuitions by the teachers and taking extra CME classes, the Department 
should prepare a guideline if it is not there, and get it circulated twice a year indicating penalties 
for teachers taking private tuition or not taking extra CME classes. 
XXV    MEDICAL RESEARCH 
Page 24 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION 
25.1     The Committee visited the ICMR     to apprise itself about the medical research being carried out 
in the country.   Even though ICMR is doing pioneer work in the field of medical research, the 
Committee notes that the students in general are not pursuing research in their field of study for want of 
proper incentives and conducive environment in the   country.   It has also been observed that the 
students are not  taking full benefit out of the research projects undertaken by the ICMR, like short-term 
summer studentship programme, course on research methodology etc.   The Committee is of the 
considered view that steps should be taken  to step up research activities in the   Health sector, with the 
active involvement of both public and private sector. 
ACTION TAKEN 
25.1    The ICMR has already taken various measures for encouraging the research activities in the 
Health sector and in the teaching institutions. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee notes that neither the MCI nor the Department have said anything in response to its 
concern about lack of proper incentives and conducive environment for medical research as also about 
poor response to the research projects undertaken by ICMR.The Committee would like to have specific 
comments on this points. 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
III        MEDICAL COUNCIL OF INDIA (MCI) 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.1       Medical Council of India (MCI) is a statutory body which was established under the  Indian 
Medical Council Act, 1956.   It is a nodal body assigned the task of processing the proposals for 
establishment of a new medical college, starting  of a new or higher course of study or training and 
increasing of admission capacity in any course of study  or training.      Other major function  of MCI is 
regulating the standard of medical education by carrying out regular inspections of different medical 
colleges  located all over the country in accordance with the  provisions of the Act and Regulations 
made thereunder. The Council is also empowered to recommend withdrawal of recognition in respect of 
any college based on its inspections.   Thus, it can be said  that MCI acts as the watchdog  for 
maintaining  the standard of medical education in the country. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.2       MCI is composed of both elected and nominated members.   As laid down in Section 3(1) of the 
IMC Act, 1956 under the elected category, one member of the medical faculty from each university, one 
member from each State in which a State Medical  Register is maintained and seven members to be 
elected  from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on any of the State Medical Registers are 
included.   Under the nominated category, one member from each state is nominated by the Central 
Govt. in  consultation with the State Govt.  and eight members are to be nominated by the  Central 
Govt.   Thus,  composition of MCI was envisaged to be well represented having members from all the 
required  categories. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.3       The Committee has been informed that  as on 21st June, 2001, the  total membership of MCI is 
113 out of which 77 are filled  up and 36 are vacant.   Out of 77 members in position, 34 belong to the 
nominated category and 43 are from the elected category.    Out of the total number of 36 vacancies, 35 
are from the  elected category.   The Committee observes that the  present composition of  MCI cannot 
be said  to be of an All India  character.   This is all the more evident as only  fifteen members form the 
quorum  of the Council and all the acts of the Council are   decided by a majority of the members 
present and voting. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.4       The Committee notes that out of 36 vacancies in the  113-member Council, 21 are in the seats 
Page 25 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

reserved for Universities.  Reason for vacancies in this category, as intimated by    the Department is 
non-constitution/non-reconstitution  of Senate or Court of the Universities or  meetings of the 
Senate/Court not being held for a long time.    What is a cause of  serious concern  is that Universities 
are simply not responding to the reminders  sent by the Council and the Central Govt. from time to time 
and vacancies are continuing in some cases for the last 10-15 years. 
3.5       In some states, a number of Universities now fall under the jurisdiction of Health Universities  
established in the recent years.   This development has led to a peculiar situation.   By virtue of coming 
under the jurisdiction of a Health University, such Universities   have lost their right of being 
represented in the Council.   On the other hand, Health Universities  cannot send their nominee to the  
Council as they do not have any Senate.   Thus, as many as 21 Universities over and above 56 eligible 
Universities are not represented in the Council.   Health Universities   having a  large number of medical 
colleges under their  jurisdiction, specially  in southern  and western states have no say in the decision-
making apex body on medical education. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.6       Out of 15 seats representing the Registered Medical Graduates (RMG) Constituency, 7 are lying 
vacant for varying periods of time.   The Committee has been informed that the  main reason for 
vacancies   in this category is that Returning Officers who are quite often the Registrar, State Medical 
Council or the State Director of Medical Education, keep on changing due to change of incumbents  and 
in some cases voters’ list has not been prepared up-to-date.   The Committee is constrained to observe 
that in spite of funds towards expenses for conducting the  election being provided by the Council, the 
Returning Officers  are simply not responding to the reminders of the  Council. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.7       Situation is equally disturbing so far as seats representing Licentiate Group are concerned.   At 
present, all the seats are lying vacant.   The Committee  has been given to understand that Asstt. Director 
General, Directorate General of Health Services was appointed as the Returning Officer on 21st 
January,1997.   However, as late as on 12th June, 2000, the Assistant Director-General approached the 
Central Govt. with a   request to be spared from the responsibilities of Returning Officer due to his 
transfer to Lady Hardinge Medical College.  Thereafter,  ADG of Health Services was appointed as the 
Returning Officer w.e.f. 19th June, 2000.   It  has been informed that he has so far received lists of 
registered licentiates from 12 State Medical Councils and the remaining 6 State  Medical Councils have 
also been reminded.  The Committee feels that chances of election process being completed in the near 
future seem to be very dim. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
3.8       The Committee is of the strong opinion that procedure for election of different categories of  
posts to the Council is too rigid.   There is an urgent need for streamlining  the election procedure, more 
so, if the representative composition of the Council as envisaged in the IMC Act, 1956 is sought to be 
maintained.   The Committee has been given to understand that a proposal of the Council for bringing 
out amendment in the relevant provisions of the Indian Medical Council Rules, 1957 for expediting 
election of members from Medical Faculty of Universities is pending with the Central Govt.  since 15th 
February, 1999.    The Committee recommends that the Central Govt. should take immediate steps in the 
matter.   The Committee would also urge upon the Central Govt. to take up the issue of non-completion 
of election process for other categories of seats with the concerned State Govts and impress upon them  
to expedite the same.   The Committee recommends that the Central Govt. should review the various 
provisions for constituting the Council laid down in the Act and the Regulations made thereunder for 
removing the anomalies therein. 
ACTION TAKEN 
3.1to3.8           The Central Govt. has already initiated action to amend the IMC Act 1956 to ensure that 
the vacancies in the Council do not remain unfilled for long and that the Council remains fully 
represented.  After this new law has been enacted, appropriate amendments in the Election Rules for 
various categories of members will be undertaken.
Page 26 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

IV        PROCEDURE/NORMS PRESCRIBED FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF A MEDICAL 
COLLEGE, STARTING A NEW  OR HIGHER COURSE OF STUDY OR TRAINING AND 
INCREASING THE ADMISSION CAPACITY 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
4.1       Section 10A of the IMC Act, 1956 deals with the procedure for obtaining permission for 
establishment of a new medical college, starting a new or higher course of study or training and  
increasing the admission capacity. There also exist Minimum Standard Requirements for a Medical 
College for 50 admissions annually, Regulations, 1999 and similar regulations for 100 admissions and 
150 admissions separately.   These regulations provide for a specific area requirement for various 
departments both in the medical colleges and teaching hospitals, staff strength required and equipment 
for various departments.    
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
4.2       By and large, the feedback which the Committee received with regard to the procedure and 
various norms/conditions prescribed for opening a new medical college, starting a new course and 
increasing the intake capacity emphasized their efficacy and necessity for checking the mushroom 
growth of medical colleges.  However, it was pointed  out time and again that these norms need to be 
implemented stringently and objectively.   Besides that, some reservations were also voiced about the 
practicability of some of the norms, like requirement of minimum land specially for hilly, tribal and 
metropolitan  areas, very high amount of bank guarantee, requirement of infrastructure in the medical 
college/teaching hospital etc.    The Committee recommends that  the MCI should undertake an exercise 
for reviewing the various norms so as to  examine their viability in the present scenario and bringing  
about necessary modifications therein without compromising the quality. 
ACTION TAKEN 
4.1&4.2           The minimum requirement for starting a medical college with annual intake capacity of 
50, 100,150 seats was worked out by the Council in consultation with all concerned and notified in the 
year 1999.  Similarly, the Council's regulations on starting new or higher course of study and increase in 
the admission capacity was notified in the year 2000.  As per the practice these regulations are normally 
reviewed after five and a half years trial time during which the first batch of students admitted under the 
new regulations complete their course. The Council thereafter obtains feedback from the Universities, 
State Governments and others concerned before making recommendation to the Central Government for 
effecting appropriate amendments in the regulations. Some of the regulations of the Council have 
become due for review in the light of the judgment of the 11 Judges Constitution Bench of the Supreme 
Court delivered on 31.10.2002.  The recommendations made by the Committee will also be considered 
during the review. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
4.4       It can be said that with  the final authority vested in the Central Govt and MCI, mushrooming of 
medical colleges leading to regional imbalance and commercialization of medical education has been 
checked considerably.   However,  the Committee observes that there are certain practical problems also 
which go against the student interest.   There are instances where medical college once started is not able 
to  fulfill the commitments made at the initial stage, thereby losing recognition and thus playing with the 
future of students enrolled in that college.   The Committee is of the view that there is a need for 
building up a mechanism whereby maximum standards are to be met at the very beginning.   Reports are 
there where college is started on the basis of Essentiality Certificate and conditional approval.   
However, in the very second year, conditions are not met.    In such a scenario, either the college is 
allowed to function so as to safeguard the interest of students or students are shifted to a recognized 
medical college.   Both the situations cannot  be considered to be desirable and this should not be 
allowed to happen. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
4.5   The Committee is, therefore, of the view that both the Central Govt. and MCI should have a more 
cautious approach while giving approval for a new medical college.   There is a need for assessing  the 
background of a  trust, specially its involvement in medical field and non-commercial approach before 
Page 27 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

grant of any permission.   The Committee, therefore, recommends that definition of the term ‘trust’ 
should be incorporated in the relevant provisions of the IMC Act, 1956.  
ACTION TAKEN 
4.4&4.5           The minimum requirement for starting a medical college with annual intake capacity of 
50, 100,150 seats was worked out by the Council in consultation with all concerned and notified in the 
year 1999.  Similarly the Council's regulations on starting new or higher course of study and increase in 
the admission capacity was notified in the year 2000.  As per the practice these regulations are normally 
reviewed after five and a half years trial time during which the first batch of students admitted under the 
new regulations complete their course. The Council thereafter obtains feedback from the Universities, 
State Governments and others concerned before making recommendation to the Central Government for 
effecting appropriate amendments in the regulations. Some of the regulations of the Council have 
become due for review in the light of the judgment of the 11 Judges Constitution Bench of the Supreme 
Court delivered on 31.10.2002.  The recommendations made by the Committee will also be considered 
during the review. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
4.6       The Committee has been given to understand that a general view of the requirement of medical 
manpower is taken by the State Govts  while providing for establishing a new medical college.   The 
prescribed form of Essentiality  Certificate included in the  Establishment of Medical Colleges 
Regulations, 1999 requires the State Govts to indicate details of existing medical manpower in the State, 
doctor-population ratio in the State and the justification for  opening of the proposed medical college. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
4.7       The Committee is not inclined to agree with the view of the Department that although it is 
necessary to have an All India assessment of medical manpower requirement, it cannot be made a  pre-
condition for starting a new college.   The Committee strongly feels that the responsibility of the Central 
Govt does not end with the production of Essentiality Certificate by State Govt.   The  Committee would 
like to refer to Sub-Section (7) of Section 10A of the IMC Act, 1956 which deals with recommendation 
of the Council and approval/disapproval by Central  Govt. for opening of a new college.   One of the 
factors to be considered as enumerated in clause (f) is the requirement of manpower in the field of 
practice of medicine.   The Committee is, therefore, of the view that both Central and the State Govts 
should specifically ensure whether there is a requirement in the  real sense for establishing a medical 
college in a particular area before giving its approval for the same. 
ACTION TAKEN 
4.6&4.7           At present the need for establishing a medical college at a particular area is to be 
considered by the State Government at the time of grant of Essentiality Certificate to the proposed 
college and the MCI is also required to take into consideration the manpower requirement in the 
particular area before recommending for grant of permission to the new college.  The MCI would evolve 
an effective mechanism for strict adherence to these provisions while undertaking review of their 
regulations. 
VI        POOR CONDITION OF GOVT. MEDICAL COLLEGES  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
6.4       The Committee also observes  that NE region of the country  is virtually starved of spread of  
medical education as very few medical  colleges  have been established  there so far.    The Committee 
has been informed that besides the scheme for setting up of North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional 
Institute of Health and Medical Sciences which has been approved by the Central Govt. at a  total cost of 
Rs. 422.60 crores, two proposals from State Govts. of  Meghalaya and Tripura are under consideration.  
The Committee is, however, of the view that Central Govt. initiative is very much required for setting up 
medical colleges in NE states.   The Committee hopes that the Central Govt. would initiate immediate 
action in this direction. 
ACTION TAKEN 
6.4       There is a provision available to the North-Eastern States for seeking financial assistance for 
various developmental activities including setting up of medical colleges from the Non-lapsable Central 
Page 28 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Pool of Resources at the disposal of the Deptt. of Development of North-Eastern Region after the 
technical scrutiny of such proposals has been made by the nodal Ministries.  The Government would 
also consider through appropriate amendments in the Regulations for providing certain relaxation in the 
requirements laid down by MCI for setting up of new colleges as would be possible without 
compromising on the standard of medical education offered. 
VIII      NRI QUOTA IN GOVT. MEDICAL COLLEGES  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
8.2       As per the Postgraduate Medical Education Regulations, 2000, there is a  provision for adopting 
any of the following procedures for admission to PG courses :- 
(i)         On the basis of merit as determined by a competitive test conducted by the State Govt. or by the 
competent   authority appointed by the State Govt. or by the university/group of universities in the same 
state; or  
On the  basis of merit as determined by a centralized competitive test held at the national level; or  
On the basis of the individual  cumulative performance at the first, second and third MBBS 
examinations, if such examinations have been passed from the same university; or 
Combination of (i) and (iii).The State Govts. have the option to choose any one of the options for 
admission to PG courses.   
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
8.3       The Committee has been given to understand  that the present procedure of allocation  of seats in 
different disciplines of postgraduate courses was mainly based on an entrance examination conducted at 
the state or the national level.   Thus, the merit position decided the choice of discipline which was  not  
considered to be an ideal position.   It resulted in frustration among students as there was every 
possibility of students not getting the choice of their discipline  ultimately leading to lack of 
commitment on their part.   An indirect consequence of this system of PG admission was that an 
important component of MBBS training  i.e. internship was totally neglected by the students due to their 
remaining busy in the preparation for admission to Postgraduate course.   The  Committee, therefore, 
feels that alongwith entrance test, feasibility of having  individual cumulative performance at the first, 
second and third MBBS examination and also aptitude of the students being  made the criteria for 
admission to Postgraduate courses may be explored. 
ACTION TAKEN 
8.2&8.3           The Council's Postgraduate Medical Education Regulations were notified in the year 
2000 which also lays down the criteria to be adopted for selection of students.  These Regulations were 
finalised after obtaining the views of the Universities, State Govts. and others concerned. As  the 
recommendation made by the Committee calls for amendment in the Regulations, the same shall be 
considered in consultation with the Universities and others concerned..  
XII      TRAINING 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
12.3     The Committee would also like to point out that there is also a need for encouraging the 
participation of more and more medical teachers in CME Programmes, workshops, conferences, 
seminars etc. by making available the required funds for this purpose.   MCI/Central Govt. should 
pursue this aspect also with the concerned authorities in the states. 
ACTION TAKEN 
12.3     The MCI (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 prescribes a mandatory 
30 hours attendance in CME programmes over a period of five years for all medical practitioners.  
Nevertheless, the MCI would also address the Universities and medical colleges to encourage the 
participation of more number of teachers in the CME programmes. 
XIII     ASSESSMENT OF TEACHERS 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
13.1     During the course of its discussion with  both teaching and student community  and  also experts, 
one issue on which divergent views emerged was the need for assessment of medical college teachers by 
students.   The Committee was given to understand that from an idealistic and futuristic point of view, 
Page 29 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

assessment of teachers by students is acceptable.   But there were very strong reservations also.   One 
view was that the concept is not suitable due to non-uniformity in the selection procedure of teachers.   
Besides, social and political set up will also have further adverse effect.   The other view was that it can 
be implemented but only by those students who are sincere, intelligent and regular in their studies.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that a scientific and professional mechanism for conducting such an 
assessment in a fair/transparent and equitable manner needs to be evolved before taking any initiative in 
this direction. 
ACTION TAKEN 
13.1     This recommendation will be kept in view while undertaking review of the Council's regulations 
for evolving a suitable mechanism for assessment of teachers by the students.  
XVIII  INDIAN MEDICAL SERVICE  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
18.1     The Committee observes that  teachers of Govt. medical colleges are governed by varying 
service conditions, by and large, dependent on the financial health of the Institution.  As a result, 
although MCI Regulations specifically provide for Full-time medical teachers, there are different 
categories  of medical teachers – Full-time, Honorary, teachers on contract, teachers entitled to private 
practice.   Salary  and other incentives payable to a  Govt. medical  teacher also vary from state to state.  
There are states where inter-change between teaching and non-teaching cadre is permissible,  other 
states are there where  district identity of teaching cadre is being maintained.   Besides that, Govt. 
medical college teachers  are also liable  to be transferred within the state.   Another problem pointed out 
is that these teachers are   under dual control – State Health Department and Directorate of  Medical 
Education. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION  
18.2     During the course of its deliberations, the issue for having an Indian Medical Service on the lines 
of IAS/IPS was raised.   The Committee observes that although it is a welcome idea, there are some 
inherent problems which may arise later on.   First is the difference between  the nature of jobs.   
Medical Service is mostly research-oriented, teaching job whereas IAS/IPS   is administration based 
service.   Secondly, it may not be  feasible as regional interest are not likely to be served.   The 
Committee  would also like to point out that there were strong reservations about  transfer policy being 
followed in the States.   Feedback which  the Committee received during its study-visits was that 
teachers, by and large were not in favour of being transferred even within a  State.   Not only this,  
Health being a State subject, it will be very difficult to create such a cadre and its implementation would, 
therefore, be difficult for obvious reasons.   The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that this issue 
needs to be subjected to wide-scale discussions in the medical fraternity before taking any decision. 
ACTION TAKEN 
18.1&18.2       The suggestions of the Committee for placing the proposal for creation of Indian Medical 
Service for discussion among the medical fraternity will be taken into account for initiating such a 
discussion. 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee is  aware of the provision of Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, which lays down 
that any University having a medical faculty is entitled to send one member to the Council.   
However, the problem is that some Universities are still un-represented  in the Medical Council as 
they do not have a Senate in existence.   In view of this, the Committee recommends that sincere 
efforts be made for the constitution of Senate in such Universities so as to enable them to be  
represented in the Indian Medical Council.(Para No.3.5)  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee notes that the Medical Council of India has proposed  appropriate  amendments 
in the Act for the purpose  of strengthening the Council with more regulatory authority. The 
Page 30 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Committee, however, feels that empowering the Council alone will not remedy the situation, as 
monitoring of the standards of Medical Education by State-run Medical colleges/universities has 
to be done from close quarters.   The Committee, reiterates its recommendation that despite the  
administrative and financial constraints, the possibility of setting up four regional councils in 
Southern, Northern, Eastern and Western parts of the country should be explored simultaneously 
by both the Central Government and the Medical Council of India.  The Department should take 
up the establishment of State Medical Councils in the States where they are not presently existing, 
besides reviewing their role. (Para No.3.11)   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee is of the view that the Department appears to have tried to evade any reply 
to the particular case of B.R.D. Medical College, Gorakhpur, U.P. which is the most glaring 
example of the tardy application of MCI regulations.  The Committee, therefore,  reiterates its 
earlier recommendation that a time-bound and result oriented inspection procedure is required to 
be  laid down if standard of medical education is to be maintained.  The Committee would also 
like the Department to respond to its observation that rates of different categories of inspections 
need to be reviewed and made reasonable as they are too high. (Para No.5.4 to 5.6) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            Despite the recommendations made by the Committee from time to time in this regard, 
constraints of the government including that of the State Governments and with due regard to the 
judgments given by the apex court from time to time, the Committee feels that the process 
regarding admission needs to be made as fair as possible.  The role of money, whether it is in the 
form of the capitation fee or under the table or in any other form must come to an end.  It has to 
be recognized that the influence of money here has a chair reaction thereby affecting the poorest 
of the poor and the middle class of the society who cannot bear the costly treatment in posh 
private hospitals whether it is a case of minor treatment, surgery or for that matter the major 
surgery.  These hospitals, clinics etc. have become shops where the first question that is asked to a 
patient whether the expenditure on his treatment is going to be reimbursed so that they can use 
their razor on the pocket of the patient accordingly. (Para No.7.4) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE: 
The Committee in its 112th Report noted that no time-frame had been specified for updating the  
curriculum and that the review of the Graduate Medical Education Regulations could not be  
completed even after the lapse of a period of  twelve months since this report was presented.   The 
Committee views  this lackadaisical approach of  the Department seriously and    observes that not 
only the said review be expedited but the fixed curriculum should also be updated at regular 
intervals. (Para No.10.1to 10.4) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee has been informed that  the curriculum for MBBS,  as prescribed in the Graduate 
Medical Regulations, 1997,  is mandatory for all concerned to follow. However, it was brought to 
the notice of the Committee that these regulations were not being followed by all the Universities, 
resulting in variation in the standards of medical education being imparted in different medical 
colleges. The Committee feels existence of rules in the Rules book is one thing and having no rule 
is better  than having one  and not being able to ensure its adherence. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that a permanent mechanism  should be evolved to ensure 
strict adherence of  said regulations by all the concerned universities. (Para No.10.5) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that the MCI agrees with its observation about the heavy 
curriculum at under graduate level as well as need for optimizing it.  The Department, however, has not 
indicated its plan or intention of undertaking their exercise which it ought to have done in its reply.  The 
Committee would like to know steps taken/proposed in this  regard. (Para No.10.6 to 10.8) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE: 
            The Committee would like to refer to the reply of the Department to Para 12.4 of the ATN 
Page 31 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

wherein the  Department,  in response to the recommendation of the Committee to attract bright 
students towards teaching, replied that in the absence of an organisation like UGC for providing 
financial assistance in the field of medical education, there can be no Central initiative for 
attracting the bright students towards teaching profession. 
            The Committee would like to mention that the proposal for having a  Central agency on 
the  pattern of UGC and AICTE was initially discussed in a meeting taken by the Member, 
Planning Commission and the broad guidelines for establishing  such a Commission  were also  
worked out.   However,  subsequently in 1997, with the approval of the then Health Minister  it 
was decided to keep the proposal in abeyance. The Committee further notes that the Draft 
National Health Policy 2001, envisages the setting up of Medical Grants Commission for funding 
new Govt. medical colleges and upgrading the existing Govt. medical colleges   The Committee is, 
therefore, not inclined  to accept that the Medical Grants Commission cannot be established due 
to scarcity of funds and strongly recommends that the Department should take all necessary 
measures for the establishment of Medical Grants Commission. (Para No.11.9)    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE: 
The Committee feels that the steps taken by the Department to deal with the acute shortage of 
teachers in  non-clinical and Para clinical subjects would not serve the desired purpose unless, the 
teaching profession as a whole was made attractive.   Moreover, there is, in general, an acute 
shortage of teachers in almost all subjects.   The Committee, therefore,  feels that the Department 
should endeavour to find a permanent solution for this problem. (Para No.12.4)   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            While the Committee consider if necessary that doctors must serve rural areas.  There 
cannot be two opinions about it.  However, with regard to the duration of the period the 
Committee has  a flexible approach.  In view of the long  gestation period in this cases, the 
Committee feels that an effective system with lesser duration of even six months should suffice.  
Doctors should be given the choice to adopt a village nearest to their place of residence or work.  
They should be required to maintain a record of their visits, which should be at least 3 days’ a 
weak, and the name and address of patients attended with the nature of disease and the diagnosis.  
The record of visit should as far as possible, be signed by any member/functionary of the 
Panchayat but this should not be compulsory. (Para No.15.5) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE: 
            The Committee does not quite agree that exemption of `ECMR’ under the Emigration Act 
is a reason for the problem of brain-drain.   The Committee would like this to be substantiated 
with facts and figures that during the last 10-15 years, the exodus of doctors has come down 
considerably due to expansion in the medical and health facilities in this Country.   The 
Committee feels that brain drain is a serious malady and that in medical profession where lot of 
tax payers money is spent on the education and training of medical students.  Tackling this 
problem may be difficult but not impossible.  What is needed is to adopt a carrot and stick policy 
in curbing this malady; purely punitive measures would not do.  Department should with the help 
of Department of Science & Technology work out a multi pronged strategy for curbing the brain 
drain in a time bound manner. (Para No.16.1) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE: 
The Committee expresses its displeasure that comments/views on the draft Clinical Establishment 
Regulation Bill, which was circulated to the State Govts. and other agencies in February, 2001, 
have still not been received and desires that the matter may be finalized without further delay. 
(Para No.17.2) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Department has not responded to the Committees recommendation that government 
institutions generating income should be allowed to retain such income in the maintenance and 
upgradation of their institutions.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation in this 
regard and expects that Department to respond to it at the earliest. (Para No.21.5) 
Page 32 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            Large number of vacancies in the teaching faculty of AIIMS and PGI “due to litigations 
and administrative difficulties”, does not augur well for the present as well as future of these 
premier institutions. While litigation presupposes selective application of rules etc. administrative 
difficulties are due to inadequate or inefficient management.  The Committee would like to 
impress on these institutions to get rid of unnecessary technicalities and recommends that the 
Department should help them to have out of Court settlements of the cases in a time bound 
manner. (Para No.21.6)   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee reiterates its recommendation regarding pursuing states to make it 
compulsory for all the medical institutions to have permanent grievance redressal forums.  
(Para No.22.1)   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
            The Committee concern about the crises of hostel accommodation, both in Hospitals as well 
as medical colleges, have not been responded to in the reply.  Issue of low stipend payable to 
students raised by the Committee has also been left out.  The Committee would like to have 
response of the department in these regards. 
            As regards private tuitions by the teachers and taking extra CME classes, the Department 
should prepare a guideline if it is not there, and get it circulated twice a year indicating penalties 
for teachers taking private tuition or not taking extra CME classes. (Para No.23.3) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee notes that neither the MCI nor the Department have said anything in response to 
its concern about lack of proper incentives and conducive environment for medical research as 
also about poor response to the research projects undertaken by ICMR.  The Committee would 
like to have specific comments on these points. (Para No.25.1) 
MINUTES 
II 
SECOND  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th  January, 2003 in Committee Room No. 139, 
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Shri Arjun Singh               Chairman 
MEMBERS 
            RAJYA SABHA 
Dr. Abrar Ahmed 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj  
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Kirti Jha Azad 
Shri G. S. Basavaraj 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Baliram Kashyap 
Shri Brij Lal Khabri 
Shri Y.G. Mahajan 
Dr. Manda Jagannath 
Smt. Nivedita Mane 
Smt. Jas Kaur Meena 
Dr. Ran
jit Kumar Panja 
Page 33 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Smt. Kumudini Patnaik 
Smt. Renu Kumari 
Shri Devendra Singh Yadav 
            SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer 
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
  2.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee then 
took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 120th Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department. of Secondary and Higher Education and identified  the 
following points/ issues for clarifications from the Department: 
Criteria/guidelines regarding opening of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs). 
Criteria/guidelines regarding opening of Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs). 
Admission procedure in KVs specially in Parliamentary Constituencies where there are no KVs. 
Transfer Policy of Teachers/Staff in KVs specially posting of both husband and wife at the same station.
Slow pace of construction of JNVs and KVs . 
Improvement in school Laboratories and Libraries. 
Transfer  of students of JNVs to different states as part of national integration leading to aberration and 
frustration among students. 
Vacancies of teachers and staff in Colleges and Universities and Role of UGC in filling of vacancies. 
Status of Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) regarding implementation of reservation policy. 
Implementation of the scheme for Education of SC/ST Girls in Rajasthan, non-release of funds on time 
and diversion of funds for other purposes. 
Underutilisation of funds under various heads like UGC, NCERT, etc. 
Neglect of Research activities in NCERT. 
Undue delay in making the National Council of Rural Institutes (NCRI) functional. 
2.1                   The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 113th Report 
of the Committee on Technical Education relating to Department. of Secondary and Higher Education 
and identified  the following points/ issues for clarifications of the Department: 
Emphasis on increase in number of students in Govt. Engineering colleges than Private Engineering 
Colleges to enable poor students to get engineering education. 
Staffing pattern of All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE). Presently, most of the Manpower 
is on deputation. 
General complaints regarding recognition of Private Institutions not fulfilling the requisite standard. 
Uniformity in educational qualifications prescribed for various technical courses like Engineering, 
Architecture, Pharmacy etc. 
2.2       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 114th Report of the 
Committee on Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes relating to Department. of Elementary 
Education and Literacy. The Committee was of the view that the Education  Secretaries  of some of the 
states  be heard by it in respect of implementation of various elementary education schemes in their 
respective states. 
2.3       The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 121st  Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Department of Women and Child 
Development and  identified the following points/issues for clarifications of the Department: 
Status regarding increase in the honorarium of Anganwadi workers and Anganwadi Helpers.  
Non-availability of proper structure/building for running Anganwadi Centres.  
Review of the Schemes of Indira  Mahila  Yojana  and  Rashtriya  Mahila Kosh in view of the general 
impression that these Schemes are not achieving their objectives of economic empowerment of poor 
women. 
Page 34 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Utility of Short Stay Homes.   
  
2.4       The Committee was also of the view that it should visit the states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, 
Kerala to have on-the-spot study of the implementation of the various schemes/ programmes related to 
women.  
2.5     The Committee, then, took-up for consideration the Action Taken Note on 122nd   Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 relating to Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and 
identified the following points/issues for clarifications of the Department: 
Non-adherence of instructions regarding associating the MPs with the activities of Nehru Yuva Kendra 
Sangathan (NYKS). 
Under-utilisation of funds under National Service Scheme (NSS). 
Shrinking of activities under National Service Scheme (NSS) and Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan 
(NYKS). 
Utilisation and maintenance of stadia after International events. 
3.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.30 P.M. for lunch  and then again adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
to meet again at 2.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21
st January, 2003. 
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
  
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th April, 2003 in Committee Room `A`,  First 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
Dr. Manda Jagannath        in the Chair 
MEMBERS 
            RAJYA SABHA 
Dr. Akhilesh Das 
Shri B.P. Apte 
Shri Bachani Lekhraj 
Prof. R.B.S. Varma 
Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik 
Shri Lalhmingliana 
Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey 
Smt. Vanga Geetha 
LOK SABHA 
Shri Ram Rati Bind 
Shri Kanti  Lal Bhuria 
Shri Baliram Kashyap 
Shri A.F. Golam Osmani 
Shri S.B.P.B.K.Satyanarayana Rao 
Dr. N. Venkataswamy 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Joint Secretary 
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Committee Officer  
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer 
2.          In the absence of the Chairman, Dr. Manda Jagannath was voted to the Chair. 
3.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee, then, 
took up  consideration of the following Reports: 
One Hundred twenty-fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred sixteenth Re
port of the Committee on 
Page 35 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm

Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Health; 
One Hundred twenty-sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred seventeenth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Family Welfare; 
One Hundred twenty-seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred eighteenth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy; 
One Hundred twenty-eighth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred-nineteenth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Elementary Education and Literacy; 
One Hundred twenty-ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred twentieth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2002-2003) relating to the Department of Secondary and Higher Education; 
One Hundred thirtieth Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in One Hundred twenty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) 
relating to the Department of Women and Child Development; 
One Hundred thirty-first Report on Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in One Hundred twenty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) 
relating to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
One Hundred thirty-second  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred fourteenth Report of the Committee on 
Implementation of Elementary Education Schemes; 
One Hundred thirty-third  Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred twelfth Report of the Committee on Medical 
Education; and 
One Hundred thirty-fourth  Report on Action Taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in One Hundred thirteenth Report of the Committee on 
Technical Education. 
4.         After some discussion,  the Committee adopted the above reports. The Committee also decided 
that these  Report may be presented to Rajya Sabha and /laid in Lok Sabha  on the 10th April, 2003.  The 
Committee, in this connection, authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Prof. 
R.B.S. Varma and  Smt. Chandra Kala Pandey  to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and  Dr. M. 
Jagannath and in his absence Shri Ramdas Rupala Gavit to lay the same in the Lok Sabha.   
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. 
Page 36 of 36133rdReportofHRd
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/HRD/Report133rd.htm