Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2015/Phalguna, 1936 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
264
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Bill, 2014
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th February, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th February, 2015)

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FOURTH REPORT
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Bill, 2014
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th February, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th February, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2015/Phalguna, 1936 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (v)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—45
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 46—54
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 55—66
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 67 —190

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2014)
#1. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda — Chairman
*2. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
RAJYA SABHA
3. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
4. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
5. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
6. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Shri Basawaraj Patil
9. Shri Sharad Pawar
10. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
12. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
13. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
14. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
15. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali
16. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
$17. Dr. Ramshankar Katheria
18. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
19. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
20. Shri Chand Nath
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N.K. Premachandran
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
26. Shri Sumedanand Sarswati
27. Shri M.I. Shanavas
28. Dr. Nepal Singh
29. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
30. Shri P.R. Sundaram
31. Shri Ajay Tamta
32. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
(i)
# Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda was elevated to Minister of Health and Family Welfare on 9.11.2014.
* Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated as a member and Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 26.11.2014.
$ Dr. Ramshankar Katheria was elevated to Minister of State, Human Resource Development on 9.11.2014.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred and
Sixty Fourth Report of the Committee on the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Bill, 2014.
*
2. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014 was introduced in the Lok
Sabha on the 12
th August, 2014. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred ** the Bill to the Committee
on 19 th September, 2014 for examination and report.
3. The Bill seeks to consolidate and amend the law relating to children alleged and found to
be in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection by catering to their basic
needs through proper care, protection, development, treatment, social re-integration, by adopting
a child-friendly approach in the adjudication and disposal of matters in the best interest of
children and for their rehabilitation through processes provided, and institutions and bodies
established. The Committee issued a Press Release on 29
th September, 2014 for eliciting public
opinion on the Bill. The Committee received a total number of 38 memoranda in response to the
Press Release. The Committee held extensive deliberations on the Bill with the stakeholders which
included Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, representatives of various
organizations like Tulir-Centre for the Prevention and Healing of Child Sexual Abuse, Indian
Alliance for Child Rights, Save the Children, Butterflies, Centre for Child and the Law and
Prayas. The Committee also heard the Member Secretary, National Commission for Protection of
Child Rights and Secretary, Central Adoption Resource Authority on the Bill. The Committee also
took note of the written submissions of the other stakeholders. Views of the stakeholders and
comments of the Department were taken note of while formulating the observations and
recommendations of the Committee.
4. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:
(i) Background Note on the Bill received from the Ministry of Women and Child
Development;
(ii) Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the Ministry of Women and Child
Development;
(iii) V erbatim record of the oral evidence taken on the Bill;
(iv) Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary, Ministry of Women and
Child Development;
(v) Memoranda received from organizations/individuals; and
(vi) Replies to questionnaires received from the Ministry of Women and Child
Development.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated the 12 th August, 2014.
** Rajya Sabha Secretariat Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 52379 dated the 22 nd September, 2014.

4. The Committee considered the Bill in five sittings held on 21 st October and 15 th December, 2014,
2nd and 28 th January and 16 th February, 2015.
5. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 16 th February, 2015.
6. For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of Committee have been
printed in bold letters at end of Report.
NEW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA
February 16, 2015 Chairman,
Magha 27, 1936 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development.
(iv)

ABBREVIATIONS
CARA : Central Adoption Resource Authority
CCs : Children’s Court
CCL : Child in Conflict with Law
CNCP : Child in Need of Care and Protection
CrPC : Code of Criminal Procedure
CWCs : Child Welfare Committees
DCPU : District Child Protection Unit
HAMA : Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act
ICDS : Integrated Child Development Scheme
ICPS : Integrated Child Protection Scheme
JJBs : Juvenile Justice Boards
LSG : Local Self Government
NCPCR : National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
NCRB : National Crime Records Bureau
NGOs : Non Governmental Organisations
NHRM : National Health Rural Mission
NSS : National Service Scheme
PTA : Parent Teacher Association
POCSO : Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act
RTE : Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2005
SAA : State Adoption Agencies
SARA : S tate Adoption Resource Agency
SCPCR : State Commission for Protection of Child Rights
SJPU : Special Juvenile Police Unit
SMCs : School Management Committees
SSA : Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
UNCRC : United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
(v)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014 was introduced in Lok
Sabha on the 12 th August, 2014 and referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with
the Speaker, Lok Sabha on the 19
th September, 2014 for examination and report.
1.2 The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014 seeks to consolidate and
amend the law relating to children alleged and found to be in conflict with law and children in need
of care and protection by catering to their basic needs through proper care, protection,
development, treatment, social re-integration, by adopting a child-friendly approach in the
adjudication and disposal of matters in the best interest of children and for their rehabilitation
through processes provided, and institutions and bodies established, hereinunder and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:–
“The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children, ratified by India on
11
th December, 1992, requires the State Parties to undertake all appropriate measures in case
of a child alleged as, or accused of, violating any penal law, including (a) treatment of
the child in a manner consistent with the promotion of the child’ s sense of dignity and
worth (b) reinforcing the child’s respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of
others (c) taking into account the child’ s age and the desirability of promoting the child’ s
reintegration and the child’ s assuming a constructive role in society.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act was enacted in 2000 to provide
for the protection of children. The Act was amended twice in 2006 and 2011 to address gaps
in its implementation and make the law more child-friendly. During the course of the
implementation of the Act, several issues arose such as increasing incidents of abuse of
children in institutions, inadequate facilities, quality of care and rehabilitation measures in
Homes, high pendency of cases, delays in adoption due to faulty and incomplete processing,
lack of clarity regarding roles, responsibilities and accountability of institutions and
inadequate provisions to counter offences against children such as corporal punishment, sale
of children for adoption purposes, etc. which have highlighted the need to review the
existing law.
Further, increasing cases of crimes committed by children in the age group of 16-18 years
in recent years make it evident that the current provisions and system under the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, are ill equipped to tackle child
offenders in this age group. The data collected by the National Crime Records Bureau
establishes that crimes by children in the age group of 16-18 years have increased,
especially in certain categories of heinous offences.
Numerous changes are required in the existing Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 to address the above mentioned issues and therefore, it is proposed to
repeal existing Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 and re-enact
a comprehensive legislation”.
1.4 Giving a background of the Bill, the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development,
in his deposition before the Committee on the 21
st October, 2014, submitted that the Juvenile

2
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 was in operation for more than a decade. The
Act was amended twice in 2006 and 2011 to make it more child-friendly and to remove
discriminatory references to children suffering from certain diseases. In 2009-10, the Government
introduced the Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS) to provide financial resources to State
Governments and Union Territory Administrations to implement the Act. During its implementation
in the last 13 years many issues arose constraining its effective implementation. One of such issues
was increase in heinous offences by the children. On a specific query regarding the problem areas
noticed during the implementation of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2000, the Committee was informed of the following problem areas:–
– delays in various processes under the Act, such as decisions by Child Welfare Committees
(CWCs) and Juvenile Justice Boards (JJBs), leading to high pendency of cases.
– delay in inquiry of cases leading to children languishing in Homes for years altogether
for committing petty offences.
– increase in reported incidents of abuse of children in institutions.
– inadequate facilities, quality of care and rehabilitation measures in Homes, especially
those that are not registered under the Act, resulting in problems such as children
repeating offences, abuse of children and runaway children.
– disruption of adoption and delays in adoption due to faulty and incomplete processing
and lack of timelines.
– lack of clarity regarding roles, responsibilities, functions and accountability of Child
Welfare Committees and Juvenile Justice Boards.
– limited participation of the child in the trial process, delays in rehabilitation plan and
social investigation report for every child.
– lack of child-friendly procedures by Juvenile Justice Boards and conduct of Board
sittings in Courts in many districts.
– lack of any substantive provision regarding orders to be passed if a child apprehended
for allegedly committing an offence was found innocent.
– no specific provisions for reporting of abandoned or lost children to appropriate
authority in order to ensure their adequate care and protection under the Act.
– non-registration of institutions under the Juvenile Justice Act and inability of the States
to enforce registration due to lack of any penal provisions for non-compliance.
– lack of any check-list of rehabilitation and re-integration services to be provided by
institutions registered under this Act.
– inadequate provisions to counter offences against children such as corporal punishment,
sale of children for adoption purposes, ragging etc; and
– increase in heinous offences committed by children and lack of any specific provisions
to deal with such children.
It was also informed that the Ministry adopted a consultative process to address these
issues with the concerned stakeholders. Based on those consultations and considering the
suggestions of the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice that the Act may be
repealed and re-enacted due to numerous amendments proposed, otherwise it may lead to
confusions in implementation, the Ministry came up with the proposed legislation.

3
1.5 The Secretary informed the Committee that in 2007, the Central Government had framed
the model rules for implementation of the Juvenile Justice Act. These rules were either adopted in
toto or adapted as per the requirements of the respective State Governments. As these rules lacked
statutory status, they were subject to different interpretations by stakeholders. In order to bring
uniformity in understanding and to ensure easy applicability of the law, several provisions of the
model rules of 2007 have also been incorporated in the proposed legislation.
1.6 Highlighting key provisions of the Bill, the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development cited the chapter on the children in conflict with law which contained provisions to
deal with child offenders of heinous crimes in 16-18 years of age. According to him, the current
provisions and the system under the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 were not equipped to tackle such
child offenders. Therefore, special provisions were being made to address heinous offences such
as rape, murder and grievous hurt by children above the age of 16 years which will act as a
deterrent for child offenders committing heinous crimes. This would address the issue of increased
lawlessness in the society to some extent and will also protect the rights of victim to justice. If
the Juvenile Justice Board, after conducting a preliminary inquiry relating to the physical and mental
capacity of the child, ability to understand consequences of the offence and his circumstances,
comes to the conclusion that there is a need for further trial in such cases, it has been given the
option to transfer the matter to the Children’s Court, which is the Session Court having jurisdiction
to try heinous offences. If after trial, a child is found guilty of committing a heinous offence by
the Children’s Court, then such a child is proposed to be sent to a place of safety for reformation
and rehabilitation up to the age of twenty-one years. After completing the age of twenty-one years,
an evaluation of the child is to be conducted by the Children’s Court after which either the child
is released on probation or transferred to an adult jail for the rest of the term of imprisonment.
He emphasized that the Juvenile Justice System was based on the principle of restorative justice
and such children during their stay in the place of safety would be provided with many reformative
measures such as education, health, nutrition, de-addiction, treatment of disease, vocational training,
skill development, life skill education and counselling. The child would be transferred to a jail after
completing 21 years, only if he was incorrigible and the measures in the place of safety did not
result in his becoming a contributing member of the society. The Secretary also stated that as per
the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, provisions of prohibiting death sentence and life
imprisonment were being retained in the proposed legislation.
1.7 The Ministry of Women and Child Development highlighted the following key provisions
also:–
– In order to address high pendency of cases relating to non-serious offences by children,
where it has been seen that cases against children who have committed petty offences
have been pending for years altogether, the proposed legislation provides for termination
of proceedings in case the inquiry of such offences remains inconclusive after a period
of six months;
– In order to check abuse of children in institutions, conducting of at least one inspection
visit every month of homes by Juvenile Justice Board and Child Welfare Committee has
been included in the Bill which was earlier given under the Rules instead of the law.
The provision of inspection committees has also been strengthened by including number
of visits and reporting mechanism of the committees for the effective functioning of the
homes;
– A separate new chapter on Adoption has been included in the proposed legislation.
To streamline adoption procedures for orphan, abandoned and surrendered children, the
existing Central Adoption Resource Authority (CARA) has been given the status of a

4
statutory body to enable it to perform its functions better. The chapter includes detailed
provisions relating to adoption and punishments for not complying with the laid down
procedure;
– In order to bring more clarity about the roles, responsibilities and powers of JJB and
CWC, detailed provisions related to these have been included in the proposed legislation,
which were earlier included in the Model Rules, 2007;
– Detailed procedure for declaration of child as ‘legally free for adoption’ by CWC has
been prescribed to include timelines for such declaration, that is two months for
children who are up to two years of age and within four months for children above two
years of age;
– Reporting of abandoned or lost children within twenty four hours to the Child Welfare
Committee or local police or District Child Protection Unit or Childline Services has
been made mandatory. Non-reporting is regarded as an offence with a punishment of
imprisonment up to six months or fine of ten thousand rupees;
– The proposed legislation makes it mandatory for all child care institutions to register and
proposes stringent penalty in case of non-compliance, which is missing in the existing
Juvenile Justice Act;
– Detailed rehabilitation and re-integration services are proposed to be provided by
institutions registered under the Act such as food, shelter, clothing, medical attention,
education, skill development, life skill education, recreational activities, vocational
training, de-addiction and treatment of disease where required, birth registration, etc;
and
– The existing Juvenile Justice Act covers only limited offences committed against a child
such as cruelty, exploitation, employment for begging, giving intoxicating liquor or
narcotic drug, etc. Several new offences against children are proposed to be added,
which are so far not adequately covered under any other law, such as: sale and
procurement of children for any purpose including illegal adoption, corporal punishment,
ragging, use of child by militant groups, offences against disabled children and
kidnapping and abduction of child.
1.8 The Committee appreciates that the proposed legislation has the laudable objective of
providing for proper care, protection, development, treatment and social re-integration of children
in difficult circumstances by adopting a child-friendly approach. The Committee has been given to
understand that a number of problem-areas pertaining to very crucial issues were being faced in
the implementation of the earlier Act of 2000. Besides that, increasing trend of heinous crimes
being committed by children in the recent times has also compelled a re-thinking in handling of
child offenders in the age-group of 16-18 years. Committee’s attention was drawn to the National
Crime Records Bureau data, substantiating the Ministry’s contention that there was a significant
increase in the number of children apprehended for heinous crimes in the age-group of 16-18. The
Ministry also highlighted the age-group and involvement of juvenile offenders in some of the
publicised cases of rape in recent times which even triggered public debate in the country, as one
of the reason for concluding that the present Juvenile Justice System was inadequate to address
the situation. The Committee, however, takes a cautious note of the background issues that have
led the Ministry to repeal the Juvenile Justice Act of 2000 and come up with the proposed legislation.
1.9 The Committee strongly feels that issues relating to care and protection of children are very
sensitive and involve complexities. Formulation of any law in this area, therefore, needs to be
tackled very cautiously and objectively, taking care of all allied aspects.

5
1.10 Against this backdrop, the Committee before initiating its deliberation process, decided to
seek the views of all concerned. Accrodingly, a Press Release inviting memoranda/suggestions on
various provisions of the Bill from all the stakeholders was issued on the 29
th September, 2014.
The Press Release elicited a good response from the stakeholders. Out of the 38 memoranda
received from the stakeholders, prominent were from the National Human Rights Commission,
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights, Centre for Child and the Law, Pro-Child,
HAQ, PRAY AS, CARA, India Alliance for Child Rights, Save the Children, Butterflies, CRY , Mumbai
Working Group on Juvenile Justice and other groups and individuals.
II. CONSULTANTATIVE PROCESS
2.1 As the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014 seeks to repeal and
reenact the Juvenile Justice Act of 2000 and provide for legal frame-work relating to juveniles in
conflict with law and children in need of care and protection in addition to providing for proper
care, protection and treatment of children by adopting a child-friendly approach and their
rehabilitation through institutional help, the views of all the major stakeholders were very vital to
make it an effective piece of legislation. The Committee, accordingly, initiated the consultative
process by making specific enquiries from the Ministry in this regard.
2.2 The Committee was informed that the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Bill, 2014 was drafted after going through an intensive consultative process involving all
stakeholders. The Ministry had held there Regional Consultations from June to November, 2011 to
seek views and suggestions for amending the Juvenile Justice Act of 2000. A National Consultation
was also held with the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations, representatives of civil
society and other stakeholders in June, 2011. The Ministry, then, constituted a Review Committee
in October, 2011, under the Chairpersonship of the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Women and
Child Development which had Members from the concerned Ministries, State Governments, civil
society, experts and academicians to review the existing legislation for making it more effective.
This Review Committee also included Member, National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
(NCPCR), nominated Members of Child Welfare Committees from the States of Maharashtra and
Uttar Pradesh, nominated Members of Juvenile Justice Boards from Delhi and Kerala,
representatives of the Departments of Social Welfare, Women and Child Development from the
States of Assam, Delhi, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and the representatives of NGOs Tulir, Salam
Balak Trust, Balsakha and Concern for Working Children. This Review Committee also had special
invitees from the ministries of Home Affairs, Labour and Employment, Human Resource
Development, Panchayati Raj, Social Justice and Empowerment, Health and Family Welfare and
Law and Justice, Department of Legal Affairs.
2.3 The Ministry had also informed the Committee that the draft Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Bill, 2014 was also placed on its website on the 18
th June, 2014 for fifteen
days for inviting comments from the civil society and individuals. More than 250 Civil Society
Organisations, individuals and experts gave detailed and comprehensive comments on the draft Bill.
The Ministry also received comments from the State Commissions for Protection of Child Rights,
Child Welfare Committees, Juvenile Justice Boards and State Adoption Agencies across the country.
The draft Bill was also sent to all the State Governments/UT Administrations and the National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights for their comments. Thereafter, a Cabinet Note on the
Bill was circulated to the Ministries/Departments of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs
and Legislative Department) Human Resource Development (Department of School Education and
Literacy), Labour and Employment, Home Affairs, Minority Affairs, Tribal Affairs, Social Justice
and Empowerment (Department of Disability Affairs), Finance (Department of Expenditure),
External Affairs, Overseas Indian Affairs and the Planning Commission for their comments and
suggestions.

6
2.4 Committee’s attention was drawn to some of the major suggestions received by the Ministry
from the stakeholders on the draft Bill which inter-alia included the following:–
– Amending the applicability of the Bill by not extending it to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir as the proposed legislation falls under entry 5 of List III Concurrent List of
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;
– Considering exclusion of same sex couples from adopting children;
– Need for clarity on the kind of offences committed by children and the procedures for
inquiry and trial;
– Review of provisions for children committing heinous offences;
– Deputy Commissioner or District Magistrate not to be designated the Chairperson of the
Child Welfare Committee;
– Final adoption order not to be passed by the Principal Magistrate of Juvenile Justice
Board, Juvenile Board is a criminal court and is meant for children in conflict with law
whereas adoption is a civil matter for children in need of care and protection and is a
sensitive, social, inheritance and legal issue;
– Review of the time period within which the adoption application should be disposed and
enhancing the period of reconsideration given by Child Welfare Committee in case of a
surrendered child;
– Inclusion of child friendly procedures for child victims;
– Onus on Central and State Governments to spread awareness on the provisions of the
Act; and
– Review of punishments for offences committed against children.
2.5 From the feedback made available to the Committee by the Ministry, it was evident that the
Ministry undertook a thorough consultative process with all the stakeholders, while drafting this
piece of legislation. However, a closer scrutiny of the suggestions reveals that major concerns of
the stakeholders right from the rationale of repealing the Juvenile Justice Act of 2000 to the
constitutional safeguards and India’s commitment to UN Conventions, provisions relating to children
in conflict with law and their protection, rehabilitative and reformatory nature of juvenile justice
system have not been given due importance by the Ministry while drafting the proposed legislation.
The Committee is dismayed to note that inspite of such a huge feedback made available to the
Ministry, it failed to analyse and incorporate many of the valid suggestions of the stakeholders on
some crucial provisions in the proposed legislation. Keeping this in view, the Committee decided
to interact with some of the major stakeholders who were also part of the Ministry’s consultative
process. Accordingly, the Committee heard the views of Tulir - Centre for the prevention and
healing of Child Sexual Abuse, India Alliance for Child Rights, Save the Children, Butterflies,
National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR), Central Adoption Resource Authority
(CARA), Maharukh Adenwalla, Supreme Court lawyer, Centre for Child and the Law and Prayas.
The Committee’s interaction with these stakeholders proved to be very fruitful.
2.6 The Committee, during its deliberations with the stakeholders, found that their views on some
of the critical issues remained the same as they were before the Ministry. The Committee is surprised
to note that many observations and suggestions of the stakeholders have not found place in the
proposed legislation. According to the representative of Tulir-Centre for the Prevention and Healing
of Child Sexual Abuse, it was surprising that a whole new legislation was being envisaged instead
of amending and strengthening the Act of 2000. On National Crime Records Bureau data it was
observed that there have been some lacunae in the way this data was being collated, compiled and

7
analyzed by the police and that one should be circumspect about the need to decrease the age to 16
years based on NCRB’s data. Commenting on child in conflict with law, it was submitted that to send
a child to an adult court required a sentencing policy which the country did not have presently. The
Observation Homes or Special Homes were mini-incarceration homes affording no opportunities for
children in conflict with law. In the Criminal Justice System, with few exceptions, it was the poor
who was at complete disadvantage. On adoption issue, the representative opined that the surrender
of a child should be in the physical presence of the Child Welfare Committee. Presently, the children’s
homes get surrender deed from the parents and then present it to the Child Welfare Committee which
did not have the ability to ascertain from the actual surrendering parents whether they were
surrendering the child. Surrendering parents should also be given information by the CWC that they
have requisite amount of time to claim the child back. On the children found begging, the
representative opined that such a children were presumed to be in need of care and protection and
their cases should be decided in the jurisdiction in which they were found begging. Raising specific
reservation on the provision in clause 75, the stakeholder opined that this provision was worrying as
it needed to be looked at in relation to section 23 of POCSO Act.
2.7 The representative of Save the Children was also of the view that the Act of 2000 was
good and there was no need for re-enactment. Commenting on the objective of the Bill, the
representative observed that some clauses of the Bill actually violate the objective itself in addition
to violating UNCRC principles and the Constitution of India. A lot of misinformation about the
juvenile crimes was being spread through media which required relooking. Research has shown that
adolescence was a specific stage of development where the brain is not fully developed and
matured, therefore, the adolescents were more prone to reckless behaviour. A lot of children who
end up offending were also the children in need of care and protection requiring extra attention.
The whole philosophy of juvenile jurisprudence centred around the quality of restoration,
rehabilitation and reform and not around incarceration into jails and throwing children with adults
into a system where they would get further brutalized. About the NCRB data, the representative
opined that juvenile crimes account for only 1.2 per cent and that this percentage had remained
constant over 2012 and 2013. Even most cases of rape were either love or elopement cases where
girl’s parents subsequently charged the boy with rape. Thus, numerous instances of children and
younger people being falsely apprehended cannot be ignored. The representative was of the definite
view that the definition of ‘heinous’ should be removed and also that clause 19 of the Bill may
be reviewed as the Act of 2000 had a provision in section 16 to deal with children above 16 years
who had committed offences of a very serious nature. Section 16 of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000
conformed to not only the Juvenile jurisprudence but also to UNCRC, India’s constitutional
provisions and the Supreme Court judgements.
2.8 The representative of the India Alliance for Child Rights observed that the provisions of the
proposed legislation did not cover the comprehensive rights of the children. The terms ‘care’ and
‘protection’ have also not been defined in the proposed legislation. The representative had specific
reservation on clubbing the children in conflict with law with the children in need of care and
protection. According to the representative, all children in situations of vulnerability should come
under the ambit of law and that it should be defined in the proposed Bill. A Child born through
surrogacy must also find mention in the proposed Bill.
2.9 The representative of Butterflies was of the view that the juvenile justice legislation in any
country should be reformative and not punitive. The 2000 Act was a progressive legislation and
reformative in nature. About the crimes committed by children between 2012 and 2013, the
representative opined that it was just 1.2 per cent of a population of 472 million children in our
country which was very small and miniscule in comparison to America. The number of children
who come under serious and heinous crime was miniscule and a good number of such offences
were sexual offences. Further, children involved in heinous crimes such as murder and rape were

8
more amenable to reforms and should be given a chance of fresh start in life. Commenting on the
proceeding in the JJBs, the representative observed that cases involving children were brought
before them, the JJBs look into the cases, transfer and retransfer them putting a child into a
psychological pressure requiring rethinking. There were no services for children in terms of
counselling, case work, treatment and mediation, indicating failure of juvenile justice system. The
representative further submitted that according to this legislation, a child between 16-18 would be
transferred to a special home and he will remain there upto the age of 21 years. After this he would
be assessed and if not reformed would be sent to an adult prison. It was emphasized that if the
system has failed him once how could he be failed again. Referring to the confusion on the roles
of District Child Protection Units, the Juvenile Justice Boards and the Child Welfare Committees,
the representative submitted that the District Child Protection Unit was meant for preventive things
and JJB and CWC were part of the legal system, therefore, clear demarcations were required.
Under the proposed legislation, the DCPU has Secretarial services and staff and the CWC and JJBs
would be taking from their services which would not be practical. The CWC and JJB should have
their own staff and people. The representative also opined that there should be special probationary
officers only for children. The representative expressed reservation on one month time given to a
parent after the parent has surrendered the child.
2.10 The representative of NCPCR pointed out that there were implementation problems at
district level and due to a weak monitoring mechanism the need for the present legislation arose.
Terming clause 7 of the Bill a major lacuna, the representative pointed out that it was contradictory
of clause 3 of the Bill which contained the principle of presumption of innocence upto the age of
18 years. Referring to clauses 15 (3), 16, 19 (3) and 20 of the Bill, the representative submitted
that the issue of registration of birth and issuance of certificate by the Village Panchayats or the
municipality was itself questionable and that there was need to ensure registration of every birth
in the country. The representative further submitted that Juvenile Justice Boards and their members
were not in a position to conduct and analyse the physical and mental capacity of the child or the
circumstances which led the child to commit a heinous crime. It was pointed out that if a child’s
case was tried by the children’s court, his record would never be destroyed and this would be a
huge disadvantage for the child and the whole process of reformation would take a back seat. The
representative suggested that clause 46 of the Bill should be expanded to include children of
families without sufficient means of subsistence, dysfunctional families, harmless children, children
displaced due to various reasons and children of incarcerated parents. It was also suggested that
clause 76 of the Bill, which dealt with punishment for cruelty to child, needed elaboration with
classification of the crime on the basis of nature and severty for fixing of maximum quantum of
punishment so that penal provisions were provided for uncaring and callous parents and guardians
also. The representative also suggested inclusion of the word “traffic” in clause 82 of the Bill.
Concluding, the representative of NCPCR suggested that education, health and counselling should
be made mandatory for every child in need of care and protection.
2.11 The representative of the Central Adoption Resource Authority suggested changes in the
definitions of the terms ‘abandoned child’, ‘adoption’, ‘Child Welfare Officer’, ‘guardian’ and
‘registered’. In clause 28(4), the representative suggested three years’ experience in place of seven
years and in clause 28(6) it was pointed out that once the CWC members were trained it must
be ensured that they worked for a reasonable period, hence two terms each for a period of three
years were suggested. The representative submitted that since the CWC also functioned as the
complainant authority for any abuse or neglect of child, not only in child care institutions, but also
in any family set-up, therefore clause 31(xvi) must also include ‘family’. In clause 59(2) it was
suggested to include the social workers of District Child Protection Unit or State Adoption
Resource Agency for conducting home study for the purpose of Adoption. In clause 60(1), the
representative suggested for not specifying the time period of 30 days because different criteria had
been set up to address the needs of different kinds of children in the draft adoption guidelines of

9
the Authority. In clause 60(10), the representative suggested that the prospective adoptive parents
should be given custody of the child on the NOC issued by CARA. Further under clause 62(1)
the NOC given by CARA for inter country adoption should be recognised along with other papers.
In clause 63(2), the representative suggested inclusion of the word expeditiously’ in place of four
months as adoption process itself depended upon several agencies working together. Further in
clause 66(4), the representative was against the hard measures in case the specialised adoption
agencies defaulted. Concluding, the representative submitted that in clause 70(4) the steering
Committee should meet on quarterly basis or in such frequent intervals as may be prescribed.
2.12 Maharukh Adenwalla, Supreme Court lawyer submitted before the Committee that the existing
juvenile justice law was an extremely good piece of legislation for protection and promotion of
children, both in need of care and protection and in conflict with law. It also conformed to our
international commitments as well as constitutional provisions as contained in Article 14, 15(3) and
20(1). According to the stakeholder, our Constitution allowed for special laws for protection of
children because they were vulnerable and have some special characteristics due to which they could
not be attributed same culpability as adults. Referring to the report of the Indian Jail Committee
1919-1920, the stakeholder submitted that it was well settled that children should not be treated as
adult offenders. Referring to figures relating to juvenile crimes, it was pointed out that only 1.2 per
cent of total crimes in our country was committed by juveniles and 20 out of this 1.2 per cent, only
7 per cent comprised things like murder and rape. The number was extremely few which could be
tackled under the current system. It was emphasised that section 16 of the Act of 2000 had a
specific provision to deal with children between 16-18 years who had committed serious offences
which was well within the existing juvenile system and that there was no need to push juvenile
offenders into adult criminal system. Commenting on the international convention of keeping 18 years
as the age of the child, the stakeholder submitted that our country accepted this and there were a
number of laws where the age of child was kept at 18 years such as Contract Act, Motor Vehicles
Act, etc. The stakeholder had specific objections to the provisions as contained in clauses 2(33),
2(45) and 2((54) which had divided offences into petty, serious and heinous offences and clause 7
of the Bill which were violating not only the principles of juvenile justice but also of Article 20(1)
of the Constitution. Expressing strong reservation on clause 19(3), the stakeholder submitted that it
was discriminatory and violative of Article 15(3) of the Constitution. Commenting on the
implementation part of the juvenile justice law, the representative submitted that the institutions
envisaged under the Act have not either been set up or functional in the States and there was no
representation of academics in JJBs. It was pointed out that rehabilitation has not been defined in the
present legislation and after care provisions have also been weakened.
2.13 The representative of the Centre for Child and the Law submitted before the Committee that
the existing juvenile justice system had a potential for reparation, healing and reformation which was
sought to be erased by the proposed legislation. Under the existing law, if a child, in conflict with
law, between the age of 16-18 years was found to have committed an offence by the Juvenile Justice
Board, there was a range of rehabilitative dispositions that could be passed by the Juvenile Justice
Board. These rehabilitative dispositions included admonition, community service, imposition of a fine,
probation, group counselling and an extreme measure of deprivation of liberty by way of placement
of the child in a special home for three years. These alternatives were in absolute compliance with
UN Convention on the rights of the child. In the proposed legislation, however, the Juvenile Justice
Board, a body meant to dispose cases in the best interest of children, was being obligated to decide
whether a child should be pushed into the adult system on the basis of a preliminary inquiry. The
representative was of the opinion that it was a highly arbitrary inquiry violating several rights under
the Constitution as well as the U.N. Convention on the rights of the child. Strong reservation was
also expressed on the inclusion of the term “heinous offence” which was in complete contradiction
of the UNCRC. Regarding the procedure to be carried out after a child attained the age of 21 years,
it was pointed out that there were no tools available in the world to assess the mental maturity and

10
capacity of a child. The stakeholder further pointed out that the existing juvenile justice system
required greater commitment in terms of financial allocation, training and cadre-building for its
effective implementation. It was emphasized that if the social investigation, individual care plan and
monitoring were done effectively, it would enable the rehabilitation of the juvenile. In addition to this,
the rights of the victims were also needed to be ensured.
2.14 The representative of PRAYAS submitted before the Committee that the underlying principle
of the existing juvenile justice system in the country was to keep a separate system of law and
justice for the juveniles. This system provided for care and protection to homeless, working,
shelter-less and very poor children in the country, thus covering 95 per cent of children in need
of care and protection. It was only less than 5 per cent children who commit crimes and come
under juvenile system. It was further submitted that while upholding the constitutional validity of
the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000, the Supreme Court concluded that there were only a few number
of children committing crimes and that there was no need to reduce the age of 18 years. It was
emphasized that the problem lied not with the law but its implementation. There was section 16
in the existing Act to deal with children in the age group of 16-18 years who were involved in
the heinous crimes. Under the proposed legislation, these children have been sought to be treated
differently without any justification. The representative expressed strong reservations on the
provision as contained in clauses 16, 17, 19 and 22 and on some of the definitions in the proposed
legislation. The representative was of considered opinion that children in the age group of 16-18
should not be put in adult criminal system in any circumstance.
2.15 In brief, the Committee finds the following observations of the stakeholders which have not
been addressed by the Ministry, while coming up with the proposed legislation:
– India had a long legislative history of dealing with the protection of children which is
being eroded by the proposed legislation. Indian Penal Code (1860), CrPC (1898-1973)
distinguished amongst the children/adolescent in the age group of 7 to 12, 12-21,
provided for exemptions and no punishments; Children’s Act (1960), provided to deal
with neglected, delinquent children, juvenile boys below 16 years and girls below 18
years, Juvenile Justice Act, (1986) replicated definition of Juvenile from the Children’s
Act; Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 ensured India’s
compliance UNCRC, provided for authorities and mechanisms to deal with juveniles in
conflict with law and children in need of care and protection;
– Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 was a very sound,
progressive piece of legislation, reformatory in nature, only needed strengthening;
– National Crime Records Bureau data should be viewed with circumspection, as it does
not reflect disposal of cases;
– number of crimes committed by children between 2012-13 just 1.2 per cent of a
population of 472 million children which is miniscule, a good number of offences
committed by children are sexual offences which were love affairs and elopement cases;
– research has shown that adolescence is a particular age where brain has not fully
developed;
– children are more amenable to reforms;
– children cannot be attributed same standards of culpability as adults due to their immaturity;
– for children in conflict with law there needs to be a balance between sentencing,
punishment, deterrence and rehabilitation;
– philosophy of juvenile jurisprudence centres around quality of restoration, rehabilitation and
reform restorative justice approach is gaining international recognition across the world;

11
– some sections of the Bill violate UNCRC principles and constitutional provisions; and
– some sections of the Bill are regressive in nature-introduction of transfer system for
children between 16-18 years alleged to have committed heinous offences to be tried
and treated as an adult marks a shift from rehabilitation to retribution, introduction of
heinous categories of crimes and apprehending a juvenile after completing 21 years for
a heinous crime committed between 16-18 years and be tried as an adult are regressive
and retributive features.
2.16 The Committee had very extensive and meaningful deliberations with all the stakeholders
appearing before it. Besides that, the Committee was also benefitted by the exhaustive briefs
submitted by the stakeholders. It was mainly because of this exercise, the Committee managed to
get insight into some of the critical aspects pertaining to the proposed legislation. It enabled the
Committee to make an in-depth and objective analysis of the Bill. The Committee places on
record its deep sense of appreciation for all the stakeholders for their contribution and for
making the task of the Committee easier.
III. CRITICAL ISSUES NOT COVERED IN THE BILL
3.1 The Committee, during its interactions and deliberations found that there were a number of
critical issues /areas of concern, especially relating to the provisions of children in conflict with
laws which have not been given adequate consideration by the Ministry. In the following
paragraphs, the Committee has made an objective analysis in this regard. The Committee is of the
considered view that all these critical issues merit serious consideration and need to be reflected
appropriately in the proposed legislation.
Applicability of the National Crime Records Bureau Data
3.2 One of the key provisions in the proposed legislation that attracted a lot of debate from the
stakeholders was relating to the children in conflict with law. The Secretary, Ministry of Women
and Child Development contended before the Committee that the National Crime Records Bureau
data showed that the number of children apprehended for heinous crimes, especially in the age
group of 16-18 years, had gone up significantly in the recent times. From 531 murders in 2002,
the figure had gone up to 1, 007 in 2013, for rape and assault with intent to outrage the modesty
of women, the figures have gone up from 485 and 522 to 1, 424 and 1, 884 respectively during
the same period. According to the Secretary, these were disturbing figures. The background note
on the Bill submitted by the Ministry also stated that special provisions in the proposed law have
been made to address heinous offences committed by children above the age of 16 years, which
would act as a deterrent for child offenders committing such crimes. On a specific query regarding
the number of heinous offences committed by children in the age group of 16-18 years during the
last three years and the current year, the Committee was provided with the following All India
figures by the Ministry:–
Years Murder Rape Kidnapping & Dacoity
Abduction
2010 600 651 436 105
2011 781 839 596 142
2012 861 887 704 207
2013 845 1,388 933 190

12
Committee’s attention was also drawn to the following data of the National Crime Records
Bureau by many stakeholders appearing before it, which indicated the percentage of juvenile crimes
to total cognizable crimes committed in India from 2003 up to 2013:–
National Crime Records Bureau (Crimes in India, 2013)
Year Total Cognizable Total Juvenile Percentage of Juvenile
Crimes Crimes Crimes to Total Cognizable
Crimes
2003 1716120 17819 1.7
2004 1832015 19229 1.8
2005 1822602 18939 1.7
2006 1878293 21088 1.9
2007 1989673 22865 2.0
2008 2093379 24535 2.1
2009 2121345 23926 2.0
2010 2224831 22740 1.9
2011 2325575 25125 2.1
2012 2387188 27936 2.3
2013 2647722 31725 2.6
3.3 Almost all the stakeholders heard by the Committee questioned the wisdom of the Ministry
in relying on the NCRB data for bringing out such drastic provisions for children in conflict with
law in the age-group of 16-18 years. According to the representative of Tulir-Centre for the
Prevention and Healing of Child Sexual Abuse, great circumspection was required in analysing the
NCRB data as the same was collated and compiled by the police. Similarly, the representatives of
Save the Children and Butterflies were of the view that NCRB data itself indicated that the juvenile
crimes account for only 1.2 per cent of the total crimes committed in the country and also that
the figures of juvenile crimes remained constant in 2012 and 2013. Maharukh Adenwalla, Supreme
Court Lawyer also submitted that only 1.2 per cent of the total crimes were committed by the
juveniles in our country, a small number which could be handled within the existing juvenile
system. She further submitted that of this 1.2 per cent, only 7 per cent comprised of crimes like
murder and rape. According to the representative of Prayas, only a very small number i.e 1 to
2 per cent of children committed crimes out of the population of 42 per cent children in the
country.
3.4 According to the stakeholders, the NCRB data on juvenile crimes has been highly
misrepresented to re-enact the proposed law and to bring the children in the age-group of 16-18
years under the purview of the criminal justice system, a highly retrograde step likely to serve no
purpose. It was emphasized that the NCRB data was based on FIR and was not about children
who were found guilty but was of those alleged to have committed an offence. It was pointed out
that the percentage of juvenile crimes to total crimes in India has been a miniscule 1.2 per cent
only and that the percentage of violent crimes committed by juveniles could even be smaller. It was
contended that there was misconception amongst the public th at the number of children committing
offences, more particularly violent offences, such as rape and murder, was on the increase.

13
3.5 The National Crime Records Bureau Report itself contradicted this conception according to
which a good number of children were being acquitted every year as they were found not guilty.
Committee’s attention was also drawn towards the Ministry of Home Affairs publication ‘Crime in
India, 2012’ which also showed that juvenile crime was 1.2 per cent of the total crimes committed.
The Committee was apprised that the juvenile crime from the period 1990 to 2012 ranged between
0.5 to 1.2 per cent of total crimes committed in India. The average of juvenile crime to total crime
during these 22 years has been only 0.8 per cent. The percentage of juvenile crime to total crime
increased in 2001 when the age limit for male juveniles was raised to 18 years but it was still 0.9
per cent and had remained stabilized thereafter.
3.6 Committee’s attention was also drawn towards the data pertaining to violent crimes
registered against juveniles in the year 2012. The percentage of violent crimes registered against
the juveniles in 2012 was only 15.6 per cent of total IPC crimes committed by juveniles in 2012
of which murder (990) and rape (1,175) constituted only 7.7 per cent of total IPC crimes
committed by juveniles (27,936). The afore-mentioned data denotes that violent crimes, such as
murder and rape, were a small percentage of crimes registered against juveniles. This has been the
general trend, even after the age of juvenility was increased from 16 to 18 years in 2001.
3.7 Committee also took note of ‘Crimes in India, 2013’ which again showed juvenile crimes
to be 1.2 per cent of the total crimes committed. Total IPC crimes committed by juveniles in 2013
were 31, 725, out of which 1,884 were rape and (5.93 per cent of total IPC crimes) and 1,007
murders which constituted 5.93 and 3.17 per cent of the total IPC crimes. Hence, 9.1 per cent
of total IPC crimes constituted rape and murder. Further, the increase in number of rape cases in
2013 could be attributed to the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 which
increased the age of consent to sexual activity from 16 to 18 years. With the advent of POCSO
Act 2012, sexual activity which was earlier treated as consensual was criminalised, resulting in a
significant surge in rape and kidnapping/abduction cases against women.
3.8 Further, a significant number of cases of rape and kidnapping included love cases and
consensus elopement where girl’s parents charged the boy with rape subsequently. Numerous
instances of children being falsely apprehended by the police also could not be ignored. From this
data, it is evident that juvenile crime is a miniscule proportion of total crime committed and that
the same is not significantly increasing. Such small numbers can most easily be dealt with under
the juvenile justice system with appropriate infrastructure and human resources. Furthermore, when
we compare these numbers with the child population, it is evident that the increase is mostly
hypothecated rather than a reality. Juvenile crimes were only 1.2 per cent in 2012 and 2013 as
compared to the child population of 472 million in 2013. Moreover, it is important to note that a
similar increase has been noted in crimes committed against women by the general population in
2013 also. The above data indicates that there is no basis to conclude that the pattern of juvenile
crime in relation to overall pattern of crime in the country has altered in any significant manner.
3.9 Another area of concern highlighted by the stakeholders was the socio-economic
background of the juvenile offenders in conflict with law. It was submitted that majority of juvenile
offenders came from poor, illiterate families and were homeless or living without parents. The data
of the National Crime Records Bureau, 2000 to 2010, denotes that about 60 per cent of juveniles
apprehended came from families whose income was less than `25,000/- per annum, and 20 per-
cent from families whose income was between `25,000/- to `50,000/- per annum, aggregating to
80 per cent of juveniles arrested during that period. In 2010, 30,303 juveniles were arrested, out
of which 6,339 were illiterate and 11,086 had studied till primary level. Hence, it is not the stringent
punishment for juvenile offenders that will result in reduction of juvenile crime, attempts should be
made to improve the socio-economic condition of families thereby satisfying the developmental
needs of children. In 2013, 50.24 per cent of the juveniles apprehended came from families whose

14
income was less than `25,000/- per annum, and 27.31 per cent from families whose income was
between `25,000/- to `50,000/- per annum, aggregating to 77.55 per cent of juveniles arrested. It
was emphasized that it would be the deprived and poor children who would be arrested and thrown
into jails through the proposed legal changes.
3.10 When attention of the Ministry was drawn to the reliability of NCRB data, it was admitted
that there were not many cases of children committing serious and heinous crimes. However, it
was also emphasized that the data maintained by NCRB revealed that the percentage of offences
committed by children in the age-group of 16-18 years had increased to total crimes committed
by children across all ages. It was also informed that a crime-wise review of offences committed
by children in the age-group of 16-18 years revealed that cases of assault on women with intent
to outrage their modesty had increased from 154 in 2010 to 1142 in 2013 and cases of rape by
such children had increased from 651 in 2010 to 1388 in 2013.
3.11 The Committee was also given to understand that the current prvisions and system under
the JJ Act were ill-equipped to tackle child offenders in the age-group of 16-18 years, who had
committed heinous offences, with the awareness that children could get away with relatively lighter
punishment under the existing Juvenile Justice system. It was also pointed out that the Delhi gang
rape in December, 2012, the Shakti Mill rape case in Mumbai in July, 2013 and the Guwahati rape
case in September, 2013 involving child offenders had also triggered a debate across the country
about the inadequacy of punishment awarded to children who committed heinous crimes. A weak
law could not be a determent and therefore to address the increasing trend of crimes by children,
the new Bill has been introduced.
3.12 Keeping in view the analysis of NCRB data and delibration with the stakeholders, the
Committee is not inclined to agree with the following justification given in the Statement of Objects
and Reasons to the Bill:
“---increasing cases of crimes committed by children in the age group of 16-18 years in
recent years makes it evident that the current provisions and system under the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, are ill-equipped to tackle child
offenders in this age-group. The data collected by the National Crime Records Bureaus
establishes that crimes by children in the age-group of 16-18 years have increased especially
in certain categories of heinous offences.”
The detailed interactions with all the stakeholders on the authenticity, viability and relevance
of NCRB data in the context of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014
has presented an entirely different scenario.
3.13 The Committee finds the submissions of the stakeholders very valid. The Committee
takes note of the view of National Commission for Protection of Child Rights that NCRB
data was based on FIRs and did not provide information on the conviction of children in the
age-group of 16-18 years or otherwise. It is true that FIR/complaint was merely an
information regarding occurrence of an offence. The Committee is of the firm opinion that
increased reporting of crime against children in the specific age-group should not
necessarily lead to assumption of increased conviction of juvenile in the crime. The realistic
figure of involvement of juvenile in heinous crime needs to be based on completion of
investigation, filing of final report by the police before the court and pronouncement of
judgment.
3.14 Statistics made available to the Committee clearly indicate that the incidence of juvenile
crime only increased from 0.9 in 1999 and 2000 to 1.6 in 2001 when age of juvenility was raised
to 18 years. Not only this, these figures thereafter have retained their stable proportionality,
fluctuating between 1.7 to 2.3. Another related issue which cannot be ignored is that with the

15
enactment of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 that increased the age of
consent to sexual activity from 16 to 18 years, reporting of such cases also showed an increasing
trend. With the advent of the POSCO Act in 2012, sexual activity earlier treated as consensual was
criminalised, resulting in a significant surge in reporting of rape and kidnapping/abduction cases
against women.
3.15 The Committee would also like to point out that an increase has also been noted in
2013 in crimes committed against women by the general population (adults) - a 32.1 per-
cent increase regarding rape, and a 35.6 per cent increase in registration of cases regarding
kidnapping and abduction of women and girls. Thus, it would not be wrong to conclude that
the pattern of juvenile crime in relation to overall pattern of crime in the country has
altered in any significant manner. There is a similar trend of increase in crimes committed
against women in both the juvenile and general population. Lastly, one must also not forget
that it is only natural that the highest age-group will contribute the largest to the total of
crime committed by juveniles. The objective analysis of the data of the National Crime
Records Bureau placed before the Committee makes it abundantly clear that the percentage
of juvenile crimes in India i.e 1.2 per cent of the total child population of the country is
quite low. Secondly, some incidents of juvenile crime, though a cause of serious concern
should not be the basis for introducing drastic changes in the existing juvenile justice
system. The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the Salil Bali
vs. Union of India (2013) where the Supreme Court has very aptly observed:
“There are, of course, exceptions where a child in the age-group of 16 to 18 may
have developed criminal propensities, which would make it virtually impossible for
him/her to be re-integrated into mainstream society, but such examples are not of
such proportions as to warrant any charge in thinking, since it is probably better to
try and re-integrate children with criminal propensities into mainstream society,
rather than to allow them to develop into hardened criminals, which does not augur
well for the future.”
3.16 One must not forget that juvenile justice law is based on a strong foundation of
reformation and rehabilitation, rather than on retribution. Therefore, drastic changes
proposed in some key areas of the existing system of juvenile justice need very deep
introspection. It is all the more surprising that the Ministry has very comfortably chosen
to ignore the views of all the major stakeholders in this regard. As rightly pointed out by
some of the witnesses, better implementation of the Act and more public awareness were
required to be focussed upon to curb the recent cases of juvenile crime.
Violation of constitutional provisions
3.17 Almost all the stakeholders heard by the Committee were of the considered opinion that
some of the provisions of the proposed legislation were violative of the constitutional provisions
as contained in Articles 14, 15 (3), 20(1) and 21. It was specifically pointed out by Save the
Children, Prayas, Cenre for Law and Child and Maharukh Adenwalla, Supreme Court Lawyer that
provisions of clauses 2(33), 2(45), 2(54), 7, 16, 19(3) and 20 of the proposed legislation seeking
to bring major changes in juvenile justice system were in contravention of these constitutional
provisions.
3.18 Article 14 of the Constitution obligates the State not to deny to any person equality before
law or equal protection of laws within the territory of India. It was pointed out that in India the
concept of equality was not the formal equality as was observed in USA but was that of
proportional equality which recognised that everyone was not equal and that the State was obligated
to enact laws in favour of the weak and disadvantaged section of the society. Proportional equality

16
was based on that of right to equal treatment in similar circumstances and that the persons who
were unequally circumstanced could not be treated at par. It was submitted that through Article
14, it was recognised that weaker and vulnerable sections required special/additional protection.
Further, Article 15(3) of the Constitution permited the State to enact special laws for the protection
of children.
3.19 Thus, it can be concluded that the Constitution recognised that children being vulnerable,
have special needs requiring special protection and care. Based on these two Articles, many laws
have been enacted for the benefit of women and children and one such legislation was the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 which was based on a premise that the
juveniles have some characteristics intrinsic to their age, requiring both differential treatment and
opportunities for reformation and rehabilitation. Even before this Act the juvenile justice
jurisprudence in the country had always accorded differential treatment to the juveniles recognising
their peculiarities and need for reformation.
3.20 Committee’s attention was also drawn to two chapters of the Report of the Indian Jails
Committee 1919-1920 to emphasize that the juvenile justice system in the country had always
recognised the fact that the ordinary healthy child criminal was mainly the product of unfavourable
environment and that he was entitled to a fresh chance under better surroundings. Further, that a
child who committed crime could not have the same full knowledge and realization of the nature
and consequences of his act as an adult. Another observation said that familiarization of these
young offenders with prison life and their possible contamination by older offenders was to be
avoided. Another observation stated that special efforts should be made to bring them under
reforming influences and to improve their minds by education both general and special as well as
by religions and moral teaching. It was difficult to provide such special treatment in an ordinary
jail.
3.21 From the above, the Committee can only conclude that the existing juvenile system
is not only reformative and rehabilitative in nature but also recognises the fact that 16-18
years is an extremely sensitive and critical age requiring greater protection. Hence, there
is no need to subject them to different or adult judicial system as it will go against
Articles 14 and 15(3) of the Constitution.
3.22 It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that clauses 7 and 21 of the proposed
legislation were also unconstitutional and contrary to the established principle of juvenile justice. It
is the characteristics inherent in a child that requires child offenders to be treated differently from
adult. Therefore, it would be the age of the person on the date on which the offence was
committed that would determine whether such person was to be dealt with under the juvenile
justice system or the criminal justice system. Clause 7 of the Bill allows for a person who was
a juvenile on the date of offence to be dealt with under the criminal justice system if arrested on
completion of 21 years of age. This provision violates Article 20(1) of the Constitution which
provides that no person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force
at the time of the commission of the act charged as an offence nor be subjected to a penalty
greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the
commission of the offence. Hence, under clause 7 of the Bill, a person would be subjected to a
penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the time of
commission of the offence.
3.23 Clause 21 of the Bill, which allows the Children’s Court to transfer a child in conflict
with law on attaining 21 years of age from a place of safety to jail is also violative of not only
Article 20(1) but also of established principle of juvenile justice which prohibits co-mingling of a
child offender with hardened criminals. It was forcefully contended by the stakeholders that why
should treatment of a child become harsher on crossing a particular age. When our system does

17
not allow a child below 18 to drive, vote, enter into contracts, engage a lawyer, sue and take legal
action, marry or own property why that child be allowed to go to adult criminal justice system.
The Committee also notes that introducing children into the criminal justice system amounts to
violation of Article 21 (Protection of life and personal liberty) as the procedures contained therein
are not commensurate with the requirements of children. The juvenile justice system has
child-appropriate procedures keeping in mind the best interest of the child.
3.24 Furthermore, there were provisions in the Act of 2000 itself i.e. Section 16 to deal with
children between 16-18 who have committed serious crime which were within the juvenile system
and there was no need to push those children into adult criminal system, a move which could be
described as retributive only.
3.25 When the issue of violation of constitutional provisions in the proposed legislation was taken
up with the Ministry, it was strongly contested. Contention of the Ministry was that the children
below the age of 18 years are proposed to be treated equally. Hence, there was no violation of
Article 14[Equality before law]. Only exception was that in case of children in the age-group of
16-18 years, who commit heinous offences such as rape or murder, a detailed treatment was
proposed in the Bill. It was also mentioned that in case of heinous offences committed by children
between the age-group of 16-18 years, a longer reformatory period was required. Similarly, no
provision of the Bill was violative of Article 15 [Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion,
race, caste, sex or place of birth] and Article 21 [Protection of life and personal liberty].
3.26 The Committee is not convinced by the clarification given by the Ministry. As an
example, clause 7 of the Bill is in clear violation of Articles 14 and 20 of the Constitution.
An artificial differentiation between children apprehended before 21 years and those
apprehended after 21 years of age is proposed to be created. The Committee strongly feels
that this categorization has no rationale. A person who was a child when the offence was
committed will be treated as an adult on account of a failure on the part of the
investigating agencies in apprehending him/her. The existing system that allows all juveniles
to be treated within the juvenile justice system does not offend the right to equality under
the Constitution. Altering the existing system under the guise of promoting the rights of
victims of the right to equality is, therefore, highly suspect.
3.27 The Committee takes note of serious reservations/apprehensions voiced by majority
of stakeholders with regard to certain provisions of the proposed legislation not being in
conformity with a number of Articles of the Constitution. The Committee has been given
to understand that in the Act of 2000, there was no such contravention. The Committee
would like to point out that such changes may lead to uncalled for situation in future. This
becomes all the more worrisome as the most vulnerable section of the society, our children
are likely to be adversely affected. The Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that all
the relevant clauses of the Bill need to be reviewed in the light of constitutional provisions
and modified so as to adhere to the Constitution.
Violation of UN Conventions
3.28 Committee’s attention was drawn to some of the international conventions which recognised
that a child who had committed an offence required rehabilitation and should be dealt with
differently than an adult offender. It was pointed out by Save the Children, Prayas, Centre for Law
and Child and Maharukh Adenwalla, Supreme Court Lawyer that the UN Declarations, Rules,
Conventions and General Comments adopted/issued on the international platform denoted the
progressive realization of the right of a child, being a person under 18 years, to be dealt with by
the juvenile justice system without any exception. It was emphasized that UN Convention on the
Rights of the Child was built on the principle that all children were born with fundamental

18
freedoms and all human beings had some inherent rights. Reference was also made to United
Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice known as Beijing Rules,
which entailed that a child or young person who had committed an offence should be treated by
the law differently from an adult.
3.29 Committee’s attention was also drawn to the Convention of the Rights of the Child which
were acceded to by the Government of India in 1992. Article 1 of the CRC defined a child to mean
every human being below the age of 18 years unless under the law applicable to the child, majority
is attained earlier. The Majority Act, 1875 provided that the age of majority for those domiciled in
India was 18 years. The stakeholders were of the considered opinion that many provisions of the
proposed legislation were in contravention of the UN Convention on Rights of the Child. Some of
these provisions are indicated below:–
Violative Provisions of the Bill
1
Transfer system: Clauses 15(3), 19(3), 20(1),
20(3) and 21
Institutionalization under clauses 20(3) 21(2)
and 22
Preliminary inquiry under clause 16(1)
Clause 21(1) : Evaluation by Children’s Court
whether child has undergone reformation and
can make meaningful contributions to society.
Clause 19(1) : Exclusion of children between 16
and 18 years found to have committed a
heinous offence from rehabilitative dispositions
that can be passed by JJB.
Clauses 19(3) and 20(1) : Transfer by JJB of a
child in conflict with law to the Children’s Court
and trial and sentencing by a Children’s Court.
Clauses 20(3) and 21(2)(ii) : Transfer to prison
UN Convention on the Rights of the Child
2
Article 2 : prohibition on non-crimination read
with General Comment No. 10 on juvenile justice.
Article 3 : best interest considerations
(rehabilitation, re-integration, and restorative justice
objectives) must outweigh considerations of the
need of public safety, sanctions and retribution.
Article 37(b): deprivation of liberty to be a
measure of last resort and for the shortest
possible period of time.
Article 6 : Right to life
All forms of life imprisonment to be abolished.
Article 40(2)(b)(i) : Presumption of innocence
which also prohibits the prejudging of the outcome.
Article 37(b) : Arbitrary deprivation of liberty.
Violation of the prohibition on arbitrary
deprivation of liberty under Article 37(b).
Violation of the principle of deprivation of
liberty to be a measure of last resort under
Article 37(b) and requirement of alternative
dispositions under Article 40(4).
Article 40(1) : Right to be treated with dignity
and which reinforces the desirability of
promoting the child’s re-integration.
Article 37(c) : Separation of juveniles from adults
which does not mean “that a child placed in a
facility for children has to be moved to a facility
for adults immediately after he/she turns 18.”

19
3.30 It may not be out of place to take note of the concluding observations of the Committee
on the Rights of the Child : India (dated 23rd February, 2000) which says–
“Definition of the child - 26. In the light of article 1, the Committee is concerned that the
various age limits set by the law are not in accordance with the general principles and other
provisions of the Convention. Of particular concern to the Committee is the very low age
of criminal responsibility under the Penal Code, which is set at seven years: and the
possibility of trying boys between 16 and 18 years as adults. The Committee recommends
that the State party review its legislation with a view to ensuring that age limits conform
to the principles and provisions of the Convention, and that it take greater efforts to enforce
those minimum-age requirements.”
Administration of juvenile justice (articles 37, 40 and 39) - 79. The Committee is concerned
over the administration of juvenile justice in India and its incompatibility with articles 37,
40 and 39 of the Convention and other relevant international Standards. The Committee is
also concerned at the very young age of criminal responsibility - 7 years - and the
possibility of trying boys between 16 and 18 years of age as adults. The Committee is
further concerned at the overcrowded and unsanitary conditions of detention of children,
including detention with adults. The Committee recommends that the State party review its
laws in the administration of juvenile justice to ensure that they are in accordance with the
Convention, especially articles 37, 40 and 39 and other relevant international standards such
as the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice
(the Beijing Rules). The Committee also recommends that the State party consider rising the
age of criminal responsibility and ensure that persons under 18 years are not tried as adults.
3.31 On being asked to clarify the status of the proposed legislation vis-a-vis the International
Conventions, it was categorically stated by the Ministry that the Bill was not in contradiction with
the International Instruments to which India was signatory. Attention of the Committee was drawn
towards the various provisions of the Bill which were in consonance with such International
Instruments.
3.32 It was also pointed out by the Ministry that with regard to differential treatment of children
in the age group of 16-18 years who committed heinous crimes, it was noted that the international
instruments did not specify any age limit. The United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Administration of Juvenile Justice (Beijing Rules) under the section on “Scope of the Rules and
definitions used” does not prescribe the age limit for making determination of a juvenile of offender.
It only states that a juvenile is a child or young person who, under the respective legal systems,
may be dealt with for an offence in a manner which is different from an adult. The United Nations
1
Clause 7 : Trial as adults of children
apprehended after completion of 21 years for
committing serious or heinous offences.
Clause 25(3) : preservation of records of
juvenile sent to jail by the Children’s Court.
2
Violation of the prohibition on no retroactive
juvenile justice under Article 40(2)(a) + Article
15, ICCPR.
Violation of the right to privacy under Articles
16 and 40(2)(b)(vii) which applies to “all stages
of the proceedings” including “from the initial
contact with law enforcement up until the final
decision by a competent authority, or release
from supervision, custody or deprivation of
liberty.”

20
Convention on the Rights of Child (UNCRC) has set a clear age limit in only two articles. These
two articles are article 37, which states that no child under the age of 18 years should be given
capital punishment of life imprisonment without the possibility of release and Article 38, which
states that no child under the age of 15 years should be recruited into the armed forces or
participate directly in hostilities. In two more articles, the Convention urges countries to set a
minimum age and gradually raise that age. These are Article 32 on child labour and Article 40 on
criminal responsibility. Article 40 does not state that the age of criminal responsibility should be 18
years. Given the reality that children tend to mature faster and at much younger ate, it is important
to define the age of criminal responsibility at a level which is in tune with the current scenario.
3.33 It was also emphasized by the Ministry that India was a sovereign country and the laws
of the country were made by the Parliament. It was true that India had ratified several international
instruments and due importance was given to the principles of these instruments and they were
being incorporated in the policies and laws as far as feasible. However, lot of societal changes had
taken place since the General Declarations of the Rights of the Child was signed in 1924,
Declaration of the Rights of the Child signed in 1959 and UN Convention as the Rights of the Child
signed in 1992. The Committee was also informed that clause 16 of the United Nations Rules for
the Protection of Juvenile deprived of their Liberty, 1990 stated that Rules were to be implemented
in the context of the economic, social and cultural conditions prevailing in the country.
3.34 The Committee, while taking note of the observations of the stakeholders about the
commitments of the country in the context of various international conventions and the compliance
status as indicated by the Ministry, would like to emphasize that the universal truth which nobody
can dispute is that a child who has committed an offence requires protection and treatment
differential from that of an adult. CRC states that a child is a person who has not completed 18
years of age. With the advent of CRC, on the international platform, persons under 18 years have
been recognized as children. Ambiguity, if any, has been ended vide the General Comment No. 10
which categorically states that principles relating to juvenile justice should apply to all persons
below 18 years of age, without exclusion.
3.35 In this context, the Committee made an attempt to trace the compliance of UNCRC on
juvenile justice in the country. It was in 2000 that the CRC Committee had criticized discriminatory
definition of Juvenile in JJ Act, 1986. JJ Act, 2000 was subsequently, was enacted and the term
‘juvenile’ was defined to mean all persons below 18 years. Thereafter, urged India was also asked
by CRC Committee to clarify that the date on which offence was committed and not when the
juvenile was apprehended was relevant. Accordingly, JJ Act was amended in 2006 to clarify that
the date of reckoning would be the date on which offence was committed. Then in 2007, CRC
Committee’s General Comment No. 10 on juvenile justice expressly recommended countries to
change laws that allowed the treatment of juveniles aged 16-17 as adults to ensure non-
discriminatory application to all children below 18 years. UN Committee has also expressed concern
about the proposed JJ Bill, 2014 and urged to ensure that age of criminal responsibility in the Rules
was respected and that children were not detained with adults.
3.36 The Committee finds no merit in the contention of the Ministry that lot of societal
changes have taken place with the signing of UN Convention the Rights of the Child in 1992
and relook at our laws was required so as to revise them as per the current needs. The
Committee is somewhat surprised to note the apparent contradiction in the above position
and the following paras of the proposed of the Preamble in the Bill:
“AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to re-enact the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 to make comprehensive provisions for children
alleged and found to be in conflict with law and children in need of care and
protection, taking into consideration the standards prescribed in the Convention on

21
the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the Beijing Rules), the United Nations
Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (1990), the Hague
Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Inter-country.
Adoption (1993), and other related international instruments.”
The Committee can only conclude that as per the well-established practice, the
proposed legislation has to contain provisions which adhere to all the enumerated objectives
in the real sense.
Violation of Supreme Court Judgements
3.37 The Committee was given to understand that there were minimum five judgements of the
Supreme Court, namely Rohtas (1978), Raghbir (1981) Abujar Hussain (2012), Salil Bali (2013) and
Subramaniam Swamy (2014) which have been set aside by the proposed Bill. In each of these
judgements, it was categorically provided that all children should be dealt with under the juvenile
justice system.
3.38 The Committee notes that in 2013, in Salil Bali vs. GOI, the Supreme Court, while
upholding the constitutional validity of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2000 had observed that the Act of 2000 was in tune with the provisions of the Constitution
and the various declarations and conventions adopted by the world community represented by the
United Nations. Recognising children’s vulnerability in the same judgement, the Supreme Court had
held that children were amongst the most vulnerable sections in any society. Upholding 18 years
as the age of juvenility, it was also observed that the age of eighteen has been fixed on account
of the understanding of experts in child psychology and behavioural pattern and that till such an
age the children in conflict with law could still be redeemed and restored to mainstream society,
instead of becoming hardened criminals in future. Acknowledging rehabilitative spirit of the juvenile
justice legislation, it said that the essence of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 and the Rules framed
thereunder in 2007, was restorative and not retrobutive, providing for rehabilitation and reintegration
of children in conflict with law into mainstream society. Opining that the difficult cases of children
between 16 to 18 years should also be dealt with within the juvenile justice system, it clearly
observed that there are exceptions where a child in the age group of 16-18 years may have
developed criminal propensities, which would make it virtually impossible for him/her to be
reintegrated into mainstream society, but such examples were not of such proportions as to warrant
any change in thinking, since it was probably better to try and re-integrate children with criminal
propensities into mainstream society, rather than to allow them to develop into hardened criminals.
3.39 The Committee observes that in Dr. Subramaniam Swamy and Ors vs, Raju and Other
(2014) case also, the Supreme Court had observed that there was a considerable body of world
opinion that all persons under 18 ought to be treated as juveniles and separate treatment ought to
be meted out to them so far as offences committed by such persons were concerned. The avowed
object was to ensure their rehabilitation in the society and to enable the young offenders to become
useful members of the society in later years. India has accepted the above position and legislative
wisdom has led to the enactment of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 in its present form.
3.40 From the above, the Committee can conclude that the underlying principle of the
juvenile justice system has always been to treat all children who have committed offences
within the juvenile justice system and differential treatment or sending the child to the
adult criminal justice system had always been excluded by the Supreme Court. The
Committee is constrained to observe that observations/judgements of the Apex Court of the
country have simply been ignored. The Committee takes a serious view of this development.
Implementation of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000.

22
3.41 The Committee had the opportunity to interact with a number of NGOs working at the
grass-root level with children and closely associated with the implementation of the JJ Act, 2000.
The one disturbing fact which kept on emerging during these discussions was the very
discouraging status of implementation of the JJ Act, 2000.
3.42 The Committee was given to understand that while some States like Delhi, Maharashtra
(Mumbai), Karnataka (Bangalore), Andhra Pradesh (Hyderbad) and few other districts within these
States implemented the legal provisions for children well, most other states and districts lagged
behind. States that pro-actively pushed for greater convergence with NGOs, police, Administration
capacities of child protection structures and making them effective. However, in States like UP,
Bihar and Madhya Pradesh, Statutory bodies, i.e. CWCs and JJBs were not in place, accountability
mechanism of these bodies was poorly defined and there was no monitoring or performance
appraisal of these bodies and other support mechanisms for building their capacities were absent.
Rehabilitation facilities were very poor and psychological conselling and treatment were practically
non-existent.
3.43 The Committee also took note of the view of the National Human Rights Commission on
the implementation aspect of the Act which stated that there had been gross failure in the existing
juvenile justice system primarily because its provisions, in particular those relating to rehabilitation,
vocational training and social reintegration, had not been implemented in d letter and spirit. The
need of the hour was to give effect to the provisions contained in the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000
and Rules framed thereunder so that children in conflict with law as well as those in need of care
and protection were provided the requisite infrastructure, prescribed standards of care in
institutions, education, counselling, vocational training, individual care plan, as per their
development needs and best interest.
3.44 Committee’s attention was drawn to the following implementation flaws:–
– Insufficient Investments: Juvenile Justice covers almost 40 per cent of national
population (0- 18 years) but the investments made to develop infrastructure, recruit
qualified staff, restoration, rehabilitation, education of CNCP and CCL children are
woefully inadequate. The budget for child protection has always been least ‘Out of total
union budget, only 0.04% are allocated for the child protection’. This covers Juvenile
Justice System, child labour and provision for orphan and street children. These low
investments result in different financial outlays in different states. The training support
is not uniform and the secretariat support to CWC and JJB is limited and most
importantly the investment into developing infrastructure is negligible. The percentage
share of children’s budget within the Union Budget has been reduced from 4.76% in
2012-13 to 4.64% in 2013-14. Worryingly, maximum cuts have been made in the
component of child protection, especially at a time when the Centre is pushing for the
implementation of the Juvenile Justice Act and the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act. The total expenditure for the Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS)
has been reduced from `400 crores to `300 crores this year, which is a 25% cutback,
as against the backdrop of the 12th Planning Commission having estimated the need for
operationalization of child protection programmes at `5300 crores over the Plan period
i.e. `1060 crores per year.
– Lack of adequate number of JJB’s and CWC’s: I nadequate number of CWCs and
JJBs, and many JJBs and CWCs exist only on paper, and are not functioning. Further,
the more populous districts are likely to produce larger CWC caseloads and need
additional CWCs. However, despite this, the most populous district in India, i.e. Thane
district in Maharashtra, with a population of over 1.1 crores has just one CWC. This
is the same as Sindhudurg district with a population of less than 8.5 lakh. One CWC

23
for more than one district is noted to be severely inadequate for a State like Delhi with
around 51,000 street children alone. The case loads of the existing CWCs have been
found to be very high; in 2010, a total of 2725, 2494, 1357, and 1141 were heard by
each of the four CWCs. It is also found that many of the State Governments are yet
to start a separate girls and boys observation homes in every district. The CWC has
limited teeth as they can only raise the issue with the Child Welfare department but the
department is their monitoring authority and the Head of department is also the Head of
Advisory Board in most of the states, hence monitoring is not effective.
– In the absence of common guidelines in the states, appointments of CWC and JJB
members have been made without following norms. There were also long delays in
making these appointments that rendered these statutory bodies ineffective during those
periods. The uniform understanding on the functions and deliverables amongst the
appointed members suffered in absence of orientation and regular trainings.
– Lack of Homes : Despite the fact that there are several homes being run by the
Government and other civil society organisations, there is still dearth of homes to
accommodate both CNCP and CCL. A study conducted by Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment, GoI clearly stated that “the proportion of homes where children in
conflict with law and those in need of care and protection live together is about 20%
of the total sample”5. The lack of institutional infrastructure and trained manpower in
the states has blunted the whole objective of this legislation.
– Lack of Monitoring: There is no Institution nominated either at state level or at
national level to monitor the progress and provide support to the child protection
structures. The JJ Act requires concurrent training and capacity building of CWC, JJB,
Police, Child care institution officials and other stakeholders. However there is no such
training institution at the state level. The central training institution of NIPCCD provides
capsule courses of two days, which is inadequate as all the members are not sufficiently
trained. The National Rural Health Mission that came into existence much later in April,
2005 successfully developed different training modules for “Asha/Sahiya” that built the
capacities of the field staff, but there are no such uniform, standardised training efforts
made to build capacity of stakeholders dealing with JJ Act.
– Constitution of Special Juvenile Police Units (SJPU) – The crucial appointments of
child welfare officers in police stations have not been looked into seriously. In most
states, it is observed that the second officer at police station is assigned or designated
as “Child Welfare Officer”. In the absence of structured trainings, these designated
officers were constrained to perform and meet the needs of their new role. ‘There are
number of incidences of violation of procedures of handling of juveniles by the police.
Infact the indifference of police towards this law is one of the most disappointing
features. The basic idea of this law has not been internalized by the police due to
insufficient training and orientation. The instances of changing the age of juvenile into
adult range while writing the FIR by the police are often heard. Handcuffing and
keeping the juvenile in police lockup is not unusual’.
– Lack of coordination: Effective coordination among the various statutory bodies, their
accountabilities, performance appraisals, training and capacity building, infrastructure
support services, poorly defined terms of references for the statutory bodies or their
roles are the major challenges in operationalization of this law.
– The implementation of CWC and JJB orders by the authority has been limited and
delayed. The CWC and JJB have no financial authority or human resources and are

24
dependent on State Government or district administration. Due to lack of infrastructure
or specific funds, follow up action has been delayed and limited.
– many States fall short of structures like the Child Welfare Committees, children’s homes
or shelter homes, every State is expected to  constitute CWCs in every district, many
States have only few CWCs serving the care and protection needs of the entire State.
Similar is the case with homes which leave many children uncared, unprotected and
victimised;
– there are no institutional facilities, qualified and experienced personnel for the care of
mentally ill especially abandoned and destitute children;
– many institutions have serious staff shortages and the appointed staff lacked the
mandated qualifications, most homes lack satisfactory number of trained professionals;
– in several institutions strategic decision making positions and front line positions are
filled by inadequately qualified and inexperienced personnels. There is no provision for
their training also;
– capacity building of care givers and other staff is not accorded adequate priority. Many
of the issues that affect children’s lives also affect the staff especially the poor quality
of infrastructure facilities;
– though the Act of 2000 and JJ Model Rules, 2007 envisaged periodical inspection of
homes by the inspection Committees to monitor the functioning of the homes, it is
found to be rare and in cases where such visits occurred their effectiveness is
unknown. In most cases it is perceived to be a norm fulfilling exercise;
– the alternative care options like adoption, foster care and sponsorship requires to be
streamlined and strengthened. Procedural delays in adoption cases require to be
addressed effectively.
– the components of foster care should include recruitment and training of foster carers,
matching foster carers to children, on-going care planning and work towards
reintegration, monitoring placements, on-going support for children and foster carers
and support for care leaving.
– most homes lack spacious dormitories causing congestion, inadequate number of toilets
leading to health and hygiene issues, lack of recreation facilities, life skill education
including vocational training, counselling, mental health programmes, socio-cultural
activities etc.
– there is no study available on the children who have been reintegrated/rehabilited in the
society after they have left child care homes.
– no separate cadre of officials under JJ Act i.e probation officers, superintendents, care
takers, counsellors, care workers, vocational/educational teachers and therapists;
– observation homes/special homes have inadequate infrastructure;
– lack of constructive programmes for detainees who are left to drift; and culture of
homes similar to junior jails.
3.45 The Committee is constrained to observe the very discouraging implementation
status of the JJ Act, 2000. The Committee strongly feels that along with amendments in
the JJ Act, focussed attention has to be given to the implementation of the Act, as
envisaged. Otherwise like the JJ Act, 2000, proposed new legislation will virtually remain

25
on paper. The Committee is of the firm view that the Ministry, being the nodal authority
at the centre, can play the role of a motivator and facilitator in coordination with all the
implementing agencies at the state level. The Committee is also of the view that if the
systems envisaged in the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 are given effect to by the respective
agencies i.e. the Central Government, the State Governments and other institutions
involved in the juvenile justice system, then the system itself can achieve the intended
outcome i.e to provide for justice, care and protection of children in conflict with law and
children in need of care and protection. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
systems and procedures contemplated under the existing Act need to be uniformly
established by all the stakeholders.
Public Awareness for Child Care and Protection
3.46 During the course of the deliberations on the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Bill, 2014, Committee’s attention was constantly drawn to the lack of public awareness
about the rights of the child and issues relating to their care and protection. On specific queries
in this regard from the stakeholders, it emerged that the society was not very receptive to the
issues relating to child care and protection, as childhood was not considered as a separate phase
in the life of a human being and care and protection was based on dominant ideas in different
socio-cultural contexts in the country. As a result, children were treated as private property of their
parents. Sometimes child care and protection were ignored in the name of ‘socialisation’. It was
the considered opinion of the stakeholders that concentrated efforts were required to be taken by
the Government including local self-government, non-government organizations, religious bodies/
institutions, educational institutions and other civil society movements to sensitize society on issues
related to child care and protection. To achieve this end, the scope of the definition of child care
and protection may also be widened. A right based approach reaffirming UNCRC and Constitutional
provisions should be followed in the process of defining childhood. Contribution of experts in the
area of child rights and childhood are vital for widening the definition. Massive campaign
programmes may also be undertaken to sensitize the family and society print, visual and social
media could be used for campaigning. Role of Local Self Government (LSG) is crucial in
empowering families to take care of their children in collaboration with other institutions in the
neighbourhood. Linking the families to various schemes/programmes of Government is also
necessary to help them to get their entitlements. ICDS, SSA programme, NHRM/UHRM, Ladli
scheme etc should be made part of this programme. The model of kinship care practiced in the
State of Mizoram could also be advocated.
3.47 The stakeholders also highlighted that training programmes on prevention, detection and
response towards issues related to child care and protection be organized for parents, children,
teachers, LSG members, community/religious leaders, police personnel, health professionals, media
professionals and Government functionaries on regular intervals. Collaboration with voluntary
organizations, NGOs and School of Social Work could also be helpful in conducting training
programmes. In addition to the training programmes on child care and protection issues, sessions
on parenting skills need to be conducted for parents. Schools should make an attempt to reach to
the parents and children through their engagement in School Management Committee (SMCs),
Parent Teacher Association (PTA) and NSS programmes. The suggestion of RTE, i.e. 50 per cent
of members of SMC should be from economically and socially disadvantaged communities need to
be implemented. This would be beneficial in reaching to more parents from disadvantaged sections,
thereby increasing retention level and learning outcomes of children. Furthermore, it sensitizes
teachers about the social realities of children from poor disadvantaged communities. Religious
institutions and resident welfare associations should reach to the people with this message.
Seminars and workshops could be organized in universities and colleges to sensitize the student

26
community. NGOs, voluntary organizations and other civil society movements could anchor
programmes like exhibitions, rallies, public meetings, seminars, street plays, competitions etc. on
various themes related to child care and protection.
3.48 The Committee finds the above suggestions of the stakeholders to be very crucial for
achieving the goals of care and protection for children. The Committee feels that some of
the suggestions could prove to be preventive in nature, especially in the case of children
in conflict with law.
Monitoring
3.49 Bringing any piece of legislation into force starts with issue of Gazettee Notification. Real
work starts thereafter by getting it implemented at different levels, Implementation can be effective
if all the concerned agencies work in coordination with each other. However, it is often seen that
this most crucial area generally remains the most neglected. Laws which are mandated to impact
issues like care and protection of the most vulnerable section of our society need to have a very
effective and vibrant monitoring mechanism.
3.50 The Committee made an attempt to have an idea of the efficacy of the JJ Act, 2000.
However, its interaction with all the stakeholders presented a very discouraging scenario. The
Committee was given to understand that majority of the child care institutions were marred by
complaints of poor infrastructure, and staff behaviour and high rates of abuse perpetrated by adults
in homes/institutions. Child Care institutions, instead of giving proper care and protection have
often left children vulnerable and resulted in their exploitation.
3.51 On a request of the Committee, the Ministry shared the State-wise details of the Child
Welfare Committees and the Juvenile Justice Boards. The details were as indicated below:
Sl. No. Name of State/UT No. of Districts CWCs JJBs
12 3 4 5
1. Andaman and Nicobar island 3 1 1
2. Andhra Pradesh 23 23 23
(including Telangana)
3. Arunachal Pradesh 17 16 16
4. Assam 27 27 27
5. Bihar 38 38 38
6. Chandigarh 1 1 1
7. Chhattisgarh 27 27 17
8. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 1 1 1
9. Daman and Diu 2 2 2
10. Delhi 9 7 2
11. Goa 2 2 2
12. Gujarat 26 26 26
13. Haryana 21 21 21

27
12 3 4 5
14. Himachal Pradesh 12 12 12
15. Jammu and Kashmir 22 – –
16. Jharkhand 24 24 21
17. Karnataka 30 31 30
18. Kerala 14 14 14
19. Lakshadweep 1 1 1
20. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 50
21. Maharashtra 35 35 35
22. Manipur 9 9 9
23. Meghalaya 7 7 7
24. Mizoram 8 8 8
25. Nagaland 11 11 11
26. Odisha 30 30 30
27. Puducherry 4 3 4
28. Punjab 22 22 22
29. Rajasthan 33 33 33
30. Sikkim 4 4 4
31. Tamil Nadu 32 32 32
32. Tripura 8 4 8
33. Uttarakhand 13 13 13
34. Uttar Pradesh 75 72 72
35. West Bengal 19 19 19
T
OTAL: 660 626 612
3.52 The Committee was also informed of the following State-wise pendency of cases in the
Child Welfare Committees and the Juvenile Justice Boards:
(a): State-wise Pendency of Cases in Child Welfare Committees
Sl. No. State 01.04.2011 01.04.2012 01.04.2013 30.09.2014
12 3 4 5 6
1. Andhra Pradesh
(including Telangana) 163 155 293 123
2. Assam 156 189 409 330
3. Chandigarh – – – 0

28
12 3 4 5 6
4. Chhattisgarh – – 161 663
5. Daman and Diu – – 0 0
6. Delhi – 2432 1533 1759
7. Gujarat – 861 833 115
8. Haryana – 118 118 226
9. Himachal Pradesh – – – 25
10. Kerala – – – 992
11. Karnataka – – 773 –
12. Madhya Pradesh – 321 – –
13. Meghalaya – – 34 39
14. Mizoram 4 4 30 48
15. Nagaland – – 25 –
16. Odisha – – 255 1194
17. Puducherry 3 3 4 3
18. Punjab – – – 1
19. Rajasthan 1987 893 484 1657
20. Sikkim 1 1 1 6
21. Tamil Nadu 935 1317 838 818
22. Tripura – – 105 211
(b): State-wise Pendency of Cases in Juvenile Justice Board
Sl. No. State 01.04.2011 01.04.2012 01.04.2013 30.09.2014
12 3 4 5 6
1. Andhra Pradesh
(including Telangana) 315 341 516 55
2. Assam 1592 1703 1812 1852
3. Chandigarh – – – 12
4. Chhattisgarh – – 6394 6840
5. Daman and Diu – – 0 9
6. Delhi – 338 370 9
7. Gujarat – 10778 1 1707 12831
8. Haryana – 1714 1925 2035

29
12 3 4 5 6
9. Himachal Pradesh – – – 507
10. Kerala – – – 1047
11. Karnataka – – 1547 –
12. Madhya Pradesh – 13783 – –
13. Meghalaya – – 22 143
14. Mizoram 80 135 92 42
15. Nagaland – – 46 –
16. Odisha – – 591 4735
17. Puducherry 35 57 63 61
18. Punjab – – – 1299
19. Rajasthan 6813 6776 5174 8647
20. Sikkim 35 41 28 14
21. Tamil Nadu 2811 3300 3586 5066
22. Tripura – – 18 54
From the above details, the Committee notes that out of 660 districts in the country, 626
have Child Welfare Committees and 612 Juvenile Justice Boards in existence. However, if the
pendency of cases both in the Child Welfare Committees and the Juvenile Justice Boards is looked
into a disturbing scenario emerged. Delhi had maximum number of cases pending in the Child
Welfare Committees followed by Rajasthan, Nagaland, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Chandigarh. All these
States had district-wise CWCs and JJBs, except Delhi which had 7 and 2 CWCs and JJBs
respectively for 9 districts. Similarly, Gujarat had highest number of cases pending in the Juvenile
Justice Boards followed by Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu and Odisha. Again with the
exception of Chhattisgarh all the States had district-wise CWCs and JJBs. From the above details,
the Committee can only conclude that CWCs and JJBs were not fully functional. Reasons for this
could be lack of funds, inadequate facilities and absence of trained manpower. In addition,
procedural delays could also not be ignored.
3.53 Committee’s attention was drawn to the following gaps in the monitoring of Child Care
institutions:
– Frame-work of monitoring under the JJ Act has actually not been brought into practice
across must States.
– The structural framework of monitoring has gaps as there are parallel monitoring
mechanisms through CWCs, district officials, inspection committees with no flow of
information or convergence between them on the inspect framework.
– Generally, inspect committees randomly ask questions to children about their lives and
abuse within home in the presence of others and many a times do more harm than
good.

30
As per the information made available to the Committee, as on 2012, out of the 35 States/
UTs in the country, in 16 States/UTs, the Inspection Committees were either not constituted or no
information was available. Besides that, constitution of Inspection Committees in 4 States was in
process. There were also States, where although the Inspection Committees were constituted, but
no details about inspections done by them were available.
3.54 On being asked about suggestions for an effective monitoring mechanism, following worth-
noting initiatives were given by the stakeholders:
– Constitution of an independent monitoring authority having representatives of SCPCR,
Human Rights, Experts of Child Care and Protection;
– the Principal responsibility of monitoring institutions should be that of the District
Women and Child Development Officer;
– A local visitors Body must be attached to each Home for children. It must visit the
home at least once a month or immediately on receipt of a complaint;
– A State Rapid Action Team to be drawn from mental health, medicine, disability and
child rights experts, social work, academic and law that would be empowered to visit
and investigate all centres throughout the State;
– All child care institutions should be placed under a nodal department which holds
responsibility for implementing the JJ Act and ICPS so that uniform standards of care
are ensured;
– At the national level, a centralised knowledge centre and monitoring unit needs to be
created;
– Mechanism of inquiry for cases of abuse reputed from institutions should be
standardized; and
– Mandatory periodic assessment of child care institutions by a team of independent
experts.
3.55 The Committee would appreciate if all the above suggestions are taken note of by
the Ministry and implemented in the right spirit. The Committee notes that the National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights is assigned the role of examining reviewing the
safeguards provided by or under any law for the protection of child rights and recommend
measures for the effective implementation. The Committee hopes that monitoring of all the
agencies/bodies involved in the implementation of the Act is taken up in the right earnest
and all the bottlenecks noticed/identified in the JJ Act, 2000 are eliminated.
3.56 The Committee observes that the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2000 was enacted after the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 was repealed. Likewise, the Act
of 2000 is sought to be repealed by the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Bill, 2014. The Committee was given to understand by some of the stakeholders that
required amendments in the Act of 2000 would have served the purpose and there was no
need of bringing in a new law. The Committee, however, on a comparative analysis of the
Act of 2000 and the proposed law finds that the Bill is a comprehensive legislation when
compared with the Act of 2000. The Bill provides for general principles of care and
protection of children, procedures in case of children in need of care and protection in
conflict with law, rehabilitation and social re-integration measures for such children and
offences committed against children.

31
IV. The Committee observes that there are quite a few new provisions in the Bill which will
go a long way in fulfilling its objectives. Broadly speaking, the Committee welcomes the proposed
law. However, there are certain very critical areas/aspects in the context of some of the provisions
in the Bill which need to be relooked. The Committee makes the following recommendations/
observations on such provisions of the Bill.
CLAUSE 1: SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT
4.1.1 Sub clause (1) of Clause 1 dealing with the title of the Act reads as follows:
“(1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2014.”
4.2 Objections were raised on the title of the Bill by many stakeholders which included many
State Governments as well as NGOs. It was pointed out that whereas the words ‘juvenile in
conflict with law’ have been replaced by ‘child in conflict with law’, in the entire text of the Bill,
title still continues to include the words ‘Juvenile Justice’. It was felt that the word ‘juvenile’
generally has negative connotations.
4.3 On this issue being taken up with the Ministry, it was clarified that the change in
nomenclature has been made from ‘juvenile’ to ‘child’ or ‘child in conflict with law’, as necessary,
across the Act. This has been proposed as it was felt that the word ‘juvenile’ carries a negative
connotation and has been used for children committing crimes and resulting in stigma for children
in conflict with law and also hampering their social re-integration. It was also submitted that similar
change had not been proposed in the title of the Bill as it is was felt it would be inappropriate to
change the title, which after a decade of implementation is well understood by most of the
stakeholders such as police, legal authorities, Child Care Institutions, institutions under the Act and
the civil society. A new title may result in confusion in the field and may hamper effective
implementation of the Bill.
4.4 The Committee is somewhat surprised by the contradictory stand taken by the
Ministry. Inspite of agreeing that the word ‘juvenile’ carries a negative connotation and
used for children committing crimes, the Ministry is not ready to suitably modify the title.
The Committee would like to point out that the main objective of the Bill is to make the
law relating to children alleged and found to be in conflict with law and also children in
need of care and protection. Common usage of the word ‘juvenile’ is vis-à-vis a child who
has committed an offence. Apparently, the existing title gives an impression that this Act
deals with children who have committed offence. The title of the Bill should reflect the
childfriendly approach. The Committee recommends the title of the Bill to be changed as
Justice for children (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014.
V. CLAUSE 2: DEFINITIONS
5.1 Clause 2(2): This sub-clause deals with the definition of the word ‘adoption’.
“Adoption means the process through which the adopted child is permanently separated from
his biological parents and becomes the legitimate child of his adoptive parents with all the
rights, privileges and responsibilities that are attached to a legitimate child.”
5.2 Objections were raised to the use of word ‘legitimate’ in the context of a child. It was felt that
the use of language that classifies children as legitimate or illegitimate was not in the best interests of
children. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the words ‘legitimate child of his
adoptive parents’ may be read as ‘lawful child of his adoptive parents’ and the words “that are
attached to be legitimate child’ may be read as ‘that are attached to a biological child.’

32
5.3 Clause 2(5): This sub-clause deals with the definition of the word “aftercare” and reads as:
“Aftercare means making provision of support, financial or otherwise, to persons, who have
completed the age of eighteen years but have not completed the age of twenty-one years,
and have left any institutional care to join the mainstream of the society.”
5.4 The Committee observes that social re-integration and rehabilitation of children in need of
care and protection as well as children alleged and found to be in conflict with law are the most
crucial areas of proposed legislation. Experience of grass-root level NGOs has been that aftercare
is the most important programme for the juvenile/young offenders and also for the children in
difficult circumstances and considering the fact that majority of them happen to be extremely poor
and deprived in the age group of 16-21 years they need to be guided and protected. The Committee
observes that the definition of ‘aftercare’ restricts its availability to only persons between 18-21
years who have left institutional care. It was also possible that a child may leave an institution
before he/she attains the age of 18 years and be in need of after-care services.
5.5 The Committee notes that the Bill provides a narrow definition and is a digression
from internationally recognised and recommended concept and principles of aftercare.
Rehabilitation of children who are in need of care and protection or those in conflict with
law cannot always end by the age of 18 and who have left any institutional care or the Child
Justice System to join the mainstream of the society as this would also provide for children
out of institutional care for their rehabilitation. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that the definition of the term ‘aftercare’ may be modified as follows:
“Aftercare” means making provision of support, financial or otherwise, to persons,
who have not completed the age of twenty-one years and have left any institutional
care to help them integrate with society.
5.6 Clause 2(14)(i): This sub-clause gives definition of the term “child in need of care and
protection” as a child who is found without any home or settled place of abode and without any
ostensible means of subsistence.
5.7 The Committee feels that a child does not first have to become a victim and then
be in need of care and protection. Both care and protection rights exist before the point of
affliction and a vulnerable child is always in need of both the safeguards. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that this definition may be made more clear and specific.
5.8 Clause 2(14)(ii): As per this sub-clause, a child found working in contravention of
labour laws for the time being in force or is found begging, or living on the street would
be considered to be in need of care and protection. It was pointed out to the Committee
that a reference to labour laws would restrict the extension of care and protection measures
to only those children who come under the protection ambit of labour laws. As a result,
children between 14 and 18 years engaged in labour would be deprived of rehabilitation
measures available under the Bill. Agreeing with the apprehension of the stakeholders, the
Committee recommends that the words “in contravention of labour laws for the time being
in force” may be deleted from the definition.
5.9 Clause 2(14)(viii): As per this sub-clause, a child who is being or is likely to be abused,
tortured or exploited for the purpose of sexual abuse or illegal acts would be considered to be in
need of care and protection.
5.10 The Committee notes that this sub-clause leaves those children who may have been
abused in the past. The Committee feels that children who have been abused may face
stigma, trauma and may be in need of support, as well as linkages to services. The
Committee is of the view that this sub-clause should apply to both children who have been

33
abused or may be abused at any point of time. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that the words ‘has been’ may be added after the word ‘who’.
5.11 Clause 2(35): The word ‘ juvenile’ has been defined to mean a child below the age of
eighteen years.
5.12 The Committee is of the view that when the definition of the word ‘child’ has been included
under the definition clause, and the word ‘juvenile’ is considered not to be appropriate because of
the element of negativity involved in its meaning, the definition of the word ‘juvenile’ may not be
included under the definition clause.
VI. CLAUSE 4: JUVENILE JUSTICE BOARD
6.1 This clause provides for constitution of one or more Juvenile Justice Boards by the State
Government for every district for exercising the powers and discharging the duties conferred under
this Act. It provides for the composition of the Board as indicated below:
“A Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First
Class not being Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate (hereinafter
referred to as Principal Magistrate) with at least three years of experience and two social
workers from two different reputed non-governmental organisations selected in such manner
as may be prescribed, of whom at least one shall be a woman, forming a Bench and every
such Bench shall have the powers conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on
a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may be, a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class.”
It also states that no social worker shall be appointed as a member of the Board unless the
person has been actively involved in health, education or welfare activities pertaining to children for
at least seven years or is a practicing professional with degree in child psychology, psychiatry,
sociology or law.
6.2 A comparative analysis of the composition of the JJ Board as envisaged in the proposed
legislation with that provided in the JJ Act, 2000 indicates no significant change as in both the
Boards, Metropolitan Magistrate/Judicial Magistrates of the first class and two social workers of
whom one being a woman would be there. The only difference is that while the Metropolitan/
Judicial Magistrate will have to have at least three years of experience, the two social workers will
have to be from two different NGOs. Further, the social worker will have to be actively involved
in health, education or welfare activities pertaining to children for at least seven years or a
practicing professional with a degree in child psychology, psychiatry, sociology or law.
6.3 These additions in qualifying criteria of social workers for being members were not found
acceptable by majority of the witnesses appearing before the Committee. The Committee finds
merit in their reservations. It is true that the proposed legislation restricts the appointment of social
workers as members of the Juvenile Justice Board to only representatives of non-governmental
organizations. By this limitation, academics and other professionals not associated with non-
governmental organizations are excluded, thereby depriving a child of inputs from this sector. The
Committee was given to understand that juveniles in conflict with law have benefited from the
experience and expertise of social work members who are academics, mental health professionals,
etc.
6.4 The Committee was further informed that a large number of children were languishing in
various reform homes because of delay in decisions by the Juvenile Justice Boards. The reasons
for pendency of cases include inadequate sittings of the Board, Principal Magistrates having
additional charge of JJBs, less sensitivity of JJB towards children (and therefore treating them at
par with adult), posting of Principal Magistrates as JJB chairperson against their wishes. It has also

34
been observed that in many cases Principal Magistrates lacked adequate experience and sensitivity
in dealing with juvenile crimes. It was also emphasized that metropolitan Judicial Magistrates being
over-burdened with too many responsibilities, had their own limitations so far as mandate of JJB
was concerned.
6.5 The Committee is of the view that in order to strengthen the functioning of JJB, it
is necessary that the Chairperson is in a position to give adequate time and attention to his
responsibilities. One suggestion which has come to the Committee is to have a retired District
and Sessions Judge as the Chairperson of JJB. Secondly, the Committee also feels that
restricting the nomination of social workers from reputed NGOs only and that too having
seven years’ experience would be a very restrictive provision. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the composition of JJB needs to be reviewed and required changes made.
6.6 Committee attention was also drawn to the fact that while the Bill lays down certain
eligibilities and disqualifications for members of CWCs and JJBs, but it does not lay down any
provision for constitution of a selection committee to select the members and its procedures etc.
Different States follow different selection procedures. As a federal republic, States are free to
frame their own Rules with respect to the juvenile justice legislation and most matters concerning
children. While some States set up a Selection Committee, others do not, thereby compromising
on a fair and transparent selection process. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that it
will be prudent if the Bill establishes the importance of ensuring a proper, fair and
transparent selection process and clearly lays a complaints-cum-oversight mechanism for
functioning of individual members, including requirement for constitution and functioning
of a Selection Committee or a Selection-cum-oversight mechanism and a fair process of
selection. The Committee would appreciate if the provisions related to the composition of
the Selection Committee and the Selection Process are included in the Bill so as to ensure
uniformity and transparency which can be easily replicated from Rules 91 and 92 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Rules, 2007 with appropriate modifications.
6.7 The Committee was also given to understand that in some cases, there has been
found to be a conflict of interest, as members also hold positions in the management of
child care institutions in the very district for which they have been appointed. If that be
so, the Committee feels that a provision needs to be included requiring members to resign
from an office of profit on being appointed a Member of the Board.
VII. CLAUSE 6: PLACEMENT OF PERSONS, WHO COMMITTED AN OFFENCE, WHEN
THE PERSON WAS BELOW THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN YEARS
7.1 This clause deals with the placement of persons, who committed an offence, when the
person was below the age of eighteen years. The clause reads as:
“(1) Any person, who has completed eighteen years of age, but is below twenty-one years
of age and is apprehended for committing an offence when he was below the age of
eighteen years, then, such person shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be treated
as a child during the process of inquiry.
(2) The person referred in sub-section (1), if not released on bail by the Board shall be
placed in a place of safety during the process of inquiry.
(3) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be treated as per the procedure specified
under the provisions of this Act.”
7.2 It was pointed out by some stakeholders that this provision allowed differential treatment
of a person who has completed eighteen years of age but is below twenty one years of age for

35
an offence committed when he/she was below the age of 18 years simply because the state
machinery was unable to bring him into the juvenile justice system when needed and would amount
to a violation of all constitutional guarantees and other national commitments. Further, there is no
legal or constitutional obligation on any person to surrender before the police for an alleged
offence. It arbitrarily presumes that the delay in production of such person before the Court is
caused by the accused. Also, obligation of the State Parties under Article 40 of CRC means “that
every person under the age of 18 years at the time of the alleged commission of an offence must
be treated in accordance with the rules of juvenile justice.”
7.3 The Committee understands that the intention of clause 6 should be to ensure that a person
who has crossed the age of juvenility should not be allowed to mingle with children in an
observation home as he may have a detrimental effect on them. On the other hand, owing to
psychological reasons, such person may require concerted specialized treatment which may not be
available or possible in the observation home. The Committee also observes that the intention
cannot be that all persons apprehended between the age of 18 and 21 years should be placed in
a place of safety and not an observation home and such decision should be left to wisdom of the
Board. The fact remains that a child in conflict with the law is defined as a person who is alleged
or found to have committed an offence and who has not completed the age of 18 years as on
the date of commission of the offence. Allowing any exceptions would amount to a violation of
this definition and the principles of juvenile justice.
7.4 The Committee agrees with views of the stakeholders that age on date of committing of
the offence should determine whether the person should be dealt with under the JJ system or
criminal justice system. The Committee recommends that such a person who is not a juvenile
should not be allowed to mingle with children in an observation home and should be kept
separately. The words ‘but is below twenty one years of age’ may be deleted from clause 6.
VIII. CLAUSE 7: PLACEMENT OF A PERSON ABOVE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS FOR
COMMITTING ANY OFFENCE WHEN HE WAS A CHILD
8.1 This clause provides that if any person, who is apprehended after completing the age of
twenty one years, for committing any serious or heinous offence when such person was between
the age of sixteen to eighteen years, then, he shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be tried
as an adult.
8.2 Besides the general issues, the Committee had the opportunity to interact at length with the
stakeholders on the various provisions of the proposed legislation. The Committee notes that,
besides modifications of existing provisions in the JJ Act, 2000, certain new provisions form part
of the Bill. Clause 7 is one such provision. Very strong objections and apprehensions about the
likely impact of this provision were voiced by all the stakeholders appearing before it. Deletion of
clause was emphatically advocated by them.
8.3 On being asked about the rationale for having such a provision, the Ministry classified that
under clause 7, it was proposed that persons above the age of 21 years were to be apprehended
for committing a serious or heinous offence when he was a child, then he was proposed to be
tried as an adult. It would encourage persons to come forward and inform about the offences
committed so that they remained under the Juvenile Justice System. The Committee was also given
to understand that during the implementation of the JJ Act, 2000, it was seen that adults who had
committed an offence when they were below the age of 18 years were kept along with children
in Observation Homes or Special Homes. This had resulted in abuse and exploitation of children
by adults. It was felt that keeping in view the best interest of children, it was necessary they were
separated from adults. Accordingly, anyone above the age of 21 years apprehended for committing
an offence when he was a child be treated and kept under the adult criminal system.

36
8.4 The Committee views with serious concern the kind of argument put forth by the
Ministry, while justifying the inclusion of a provision like clause 7. The Committee fails to
comprehend as to how could such a provision would encourage persons to come forward and
inform about the offences committed by them so that they could remain under the Juvenile
Justice System. The Committee would like to point out that unless a person is proved
guilty, he cannot be treated like an offender. Secondly, the perception that a person in the
agegroup of 16-18 years alleged to be committing a serious or heinous offence would be
mature enough to come forward to inform about his offence so as to ensure his remaining
under the Juvenile Justice System seems to be far from convincing.
8.5 After analysing all the facts placed before it, the Committee is left with no other
alternative but to conclude that concerns expressed by all the stakeholders are very genuine
and cannot be ignored. The Committee is also of the view that clause 7 is in clear violation
of Article 20(1) of the Constitution which states that:
“No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of the law in force at
the time of the Commission of the act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a
penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the
time of the commission of the offence.”
A plain reading of clause 7 clearly indicates that a person who was a child when the
offence was committed will be treated as an adult on account of failure on the part of the
investigating agencies in apprehending him/her. Besides this, the Committee also observes
that this provision is also in complete violation of the right to equality under Article 14
which states that:
“The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection
of the laws within the territory of India.”
Again, clause 7 creates an artificial differentiation between children apprehended
before 21 years and those apprehended after 21 years of age. The Committee finds no
rationale in such a categorization.
8.6 The Committee was also informed that this provision would also violate Article 15 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political rights, a non-derogable right under the
convention which reads as follows:
“No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any act or omission
which did not constitute a criminal offence, under national or international law, at the
time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that
was applicable at the time when the criminal offence was committed.”
The Committee also takes note of Supreme Court judgments in Umesh Chandra
(1982), Arnit Das (2000), Arnit Das (2001) and Pratap Singh (2005). The five judges
Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court in Pratap Singh held the age on the date of
offence to be determinative of the application of the Juvenile Justice Act. The observation
of the Supreme Court in its judgement (SLPC(vi) No. 1953 of 2013) in Dr. Subramanian
Swamy Vs. Raju, Member, JJB pointed out that:
“..If the legislaure has adopted the age of 18 as the dividing line between juveniles and
adults and such a decision is constitutionally permissible, the enquiry by the Courts must
come to an end. Even otherwise there is a considerable body of world opinion that all
under 18 persons ought to be treated as juveniles and separate treatment ought to be
meted out to them so far as offences committed by such persons are concerned.”

37
8.7 Keeping in view the very specific constitutional provisions, international conventions and
Supreme Court judgments, the Committee simply fails to comprehend the absurdity and the
arbitrary nature of clause  7. The Committee finds no logical reason why persons apprehended
after they have crossed 21 years should face serious disadvantage or how this severe provision
furthers the goals of criminal justice. The Committee also takes note of the fact that there
have been several legal controversies surrounding this very question. The JJ Act, 2000 was
amended in 2006 precisely in order to clarify that the date of reckoning will be the date on
which the offence was allegedly committed and not when the juvenile was apprehended.
8.8 The Committee is of the firm opinion that clause 7 is discriminatory in itself,
undermines the constitutional provisions as well as international commitments and ignores
the Supreme Court directives. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that such a
provision should not be a part of the proposed legislation and be deleted.
IX. CLAUSE 15: INQUIRY BY BOARD REGARDING CHILD IN CONFLICT WITH LAW.
9.1 Clause 15( 3): The clause deals with the procedure for inquiry by JJ Board with regard to
a child in conflict with law :
“A preliminary inquiry in case of heinous offences under section 16 shall be disposed of
by the Board within a period of one month from the date of first production of the child
before the Board.”
9.2 The Committee notes that this sub-clause requires JJB to conclude a preliminary inquiry in
case of heinous offences within a period of one month from the date of first production of the
child before the Board. During its deliberations with stakeholders, the Committee was given to
understand that in normal course of crimes committed by adults, no chargesheet can be filed within
the stipulated period. However, as per this sub-clause, JJB is required to take a decision of
transferring such a child to the Children’s Court within a period of one month without a proper
investigation by the investigating agency or before such investigation is completed and the child is
prima facie  found to have committed such heinous offences. This provision proceeds on the
assumption that the alleged offence has been committed by the child and is contrary to the
presumption of being innocent till proved guilty. It thus violates Fundamental Rights
guaranteed under Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution by directing JJB to inquire into the
culpability prior to prima facie  establishment of the guilt. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that the period of preliminary inquiry by JJ Board may be suitably enhanced.
X. CLAUSE 16: PRELIMINARY INQUIRY INTO HEINOUS OFFENCES BY THE BOARD
10.1 This clause reads as:
“(1) In case of a heinous offence committed by a child who has completed or is above the
age of sixteen years, the Board shall conduct a preliminary inquiry with regard to his mental
and physical capacity to commit such offence, ability to understand the consequences of the
offence and the circumstances in which he committed the offence, and may pass an order
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 19:
Provided that for such an inquiry, the Board may take the assistance of experienced
psychologists, psycho-social workers and other experts.
(2) Where the Board is satisfied on preliminary inquiry that the matter should be disposed
of by the Board, then the Board shall follow the procedure, as far as may be, for trial in
summons case under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Provided that the inquiry under this section shall be completed within the period specified
in section 15.”

38
10.2 This clause specifically deals with cases of such children who have completed or are above
the age of sixteen years and have committed a heinous offence. Procedure regarding holding a
preliminary inquiry in such cases has been enumerated in this provision. In other words, a
distinction is sought to be made between children below and above sixteen years of age in the
context of gravity of an offence. The Committee notes that such a provision was not part of the
JJ Act, 2000. Very strong views were expressed by all the stakeholders appearing before the
Committee about the viability of a provision which prime facie  seemed to be very discriminatory.
10.3 The foremost flaw pointed out was that this provision required JJB to assess whether a
child above sixteen years of age who has committed a heinous offence has the physical and mental
capability to commit the offence, along with circumstances in which he has committed the offence.
In other words, it implies an assumption that the child has already committed the alleged offence.
This enquiry in an essence would be a sentencing decision that is arrived at even before the guilt
is established. It was emphasized that such an action would denote complete violation of the
presumption of innocence, a central tenet of the juvenile justice as well as the criminal justice
system. Also, such an arbitrary and irrational procedure clearly contravenes the fundamental
guarantees made under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
10.4 D ifferential treatment of children who have completed or are above 16 years and below the
age of 18 and are in conflict with law as a result of commission of heinous crimes are to be tried
as an adult under the criminal justice system was also in complete contravention to the UNCRC
and the Bill’s stated purpose of adopting a child friendly approach in the adjudication and disposal
of matters in the best interests of children. It was further pointed out that in fact the subsequent
trial shall also not be a fair trail as the preliminary inquiry has already labelled the child as “capable
of committing crime”.
10.5 Another significant deficiency brought to the notice of the Committee was that the
assumption that an accurate assessment of mental capacity/maturity for the purpose of transfer of
the trial of the care to the Children’s Court was possible when this was not true. Not only this,
such an assessment would be fraught with errors and arbitrariness and would allow inherent biases
to determine which child was to be transferred to an adult court. The very presumption that
persons between 16 and 18 years were competent to stand trial just as adults was also not free
from very genuine doubts.
10.6 The Committee also takes note of the fact that this clause binds Juvenile Justice
Board (JJB) to conduct a ‘preliminary enquiry within one month in respect of heinous
offences committed by children above 16 years regarding their mental and physical capacity
and understanding of consequences, etc. and pass orders under section 19 including,
transferring the child for trial by children’s court or the sessions court in the absence of
children’s court. The Committee would like to point out that considering the fact that large
number of innocent children are being involved in crimes, which was evident from the
decisions of JJBs across the country, it is impossible to conduct such a complex enquiry
within a period of one month. Such a provision will amount to complete denial of
fundamental rights, justice, fair and discriminate proceedings and also the negation of basic
principles and provisions of Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act, 2000 itself.
10.7 The Committee is of the view that all children below 18 years are amenable and should
be treated in the same manner because of the fact that their involvement in offending acts
was primarily due to either environmental factors or their unique developmental features
such as risk taking nature, less future orientation, adventurism, etc., or both. The Committee
would also like to point out that the process suggested for treating 16-18 years children
involved in heinous offences, i.e. preliminary inquiry by JJB and professional team, then
based on their decision to Children’s Court (CC) then decision by CC regarding where to be

39
tried, then sending the child back to JJB for trial would lead to multiple and repeated trials
before different authorities that would psychologically drain him/her. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that this entire process needs a relook and review.
10.8 Lastly, the Committee also observes that the clause envisages that the Juvenile
Justice Boards shall conduct a preliminary inquiry with regard to his mental and physical
capacity to commit such offence, ability to understand the consequences of the offence, with
the assistance of experienced psychologists, psycho-social workers and other experts. One
can not ignore the fact that there is a severe shortage of competent psychologists, psycho-
social workers and other experts and this will adversely affect the quality of inquiry and
timely disposal of cases.
10.9 The Committee is in full agreement with the very comprehensive views of the
stakeholders that clause 7 is discriminatory and all children below 18 years should be
treated as children. The proposed legislation is meant for children alleged and found to be
in conflict with law and the definition of both the terms ‘child’ and ‘child in conflict with
law’ mean a person who has not completed eighteen years of age. Accordingly, the question
of envisaging a differential treatment for children above sixteen years of age should not
arise. Such a move would lead to contravention of international laws and also the stated
purpose of the Bill.
XI. CLAUSE 19: ORDERS REGARDING CHILD FOUND TO BE IN CONFLICT WITH LAW
11.1 This clause reads as:
“1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a child irrespective of age has committed
a petty offence, or a serious offence, or a child below the age of sixteen years has
committed a heinous offence, then, notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any
other law for the time being in force, and based on the nature of offence, specific need
for supervision or intervention, circumstances as brought out in the social investigation
report and past conduct of the child, the Board may, if it so thinks fit,—
(3) Where the Board after preliminary inquiry under section 16 comes to the conclusion that
there is a need for further trial of the said child as an adult, then the Board may order
transfer of the trial of the case to the Children’s Court having jurisdiction to try such
offences”
11.2 All the stakeholders appearing before the Committee voiced their concerns about the
differential procedure envisaged for children between 16-18 years under the inquiry to be
conducted by JJ Board. It was emphatically advocated that the distinction made between heinous
and other offences in the Bill would deny children between 16 to 18 years of their rights under
the juvenile justice system. The discretion to pass any of the rehabilitative orders for children
between 16 and 18 years as listed under clause 19(1) and 19(2) as compared with 19(3) of the
Bill was discriminatory is nature. The Committtee was given to understand that the juvenile justice
system which had evolved under the international child rights law was based upon the fact that
mental, cognitive and emotional capacity of the child was not sufficiently developed till he/she
attained the age of 18 years and, therefore, should not be held responsible for the omissions/
commissions made. There was a need to continue with the differential approach and treatment
adopted towards children in conflict with law as being followed presently. However, implementation
of sub-clause (3) would lead to automatic transfers of several children aged 16 and above, alleged
to have committed a heinous offence, to the adult criminal justice system. These children would
thus be denied of orders aimed at care, protection, development, treatment and social reintegration,
a legislative commitment stated in the Preamble of the Bill itself.

40
11.3 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that transferring cases of children in conflict
with law to Children’s Court would not be different from putting them under the formal judicial
proceedings. Children’s Courts were the sessions courts where cases of children coming in contact
with law were dealt with. These were not dedicated courts dealing exclusively with children cases
and were in the same premises of the regular criminal courts. The procedure followed was
according to CrPC which did not consider juvenility and impact of trial on children’s physical,
mental and emotional condition. Also referring such cases to Children’s Courts was against the
international instruments adopted and ratified by India and against the principles of the constitution.
11.4 The general consensus was that the Board should have the jurisdiction to make orders with
respect to all children in conflict with the law and no such child should be subjected to any other
judicial authority. The transfer of children above 16 years alleged to have committed a heinous
offence would deprive them of the right of rehabilitative orders under clause 19(1) and the right
to equality. The preliminary inquiry would go against the “principle of presumption of innocence”,
and the trial before the Children’s Court would compromise the “principles of dignity and worth,
best interests, positive measures, non-waiver of rights, non-stigmatizing semantics, equality and
non-discrimination, and institutionalization as a measure of last resort”, all of which are
“fundamental” to the understanding, interpretation, implementation, and application of the Bill under
clause 3. For instance, the principle of best interest required that “all decisions regarding the child
shall be based on the primary consideration that they are in the best interest of the child and to
help the child to develop full potential.” A decision to transfer a child to the Children’s Court or
to an adult jail was not justified in the light of this principle.
11.5 In view of the above, the Committee recommends that clause 19, especially clause
19(3) needs to be reviewed. Committee’s observation is substantiated by the fact that the
concept of Children’s Court was specifically designed to try offences against children and
not offences by them. These courts were essentially Sessions Courts that have been given
the additional task of ensuring speedy trials of offences against children. Therefore, by all
interpretations they were courts for adults. The Committee would like to point out that the
objective of creating a separate Act for children was to have a separate system for children
in conflict with law and not include them in the criminal justice system. There is no doubt
that this sub-clause diminishes the distinction between child victims and children in conflict
with law by entitling the courts under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
2012, the jurisdiction to adjudicate the cases involving children in conflict with law.
11.6 The Committee also recommends that all relevant clauses (clauses 6, 7, 16, 19, 20)
dealing with Children’s Courts and differential treatment of children between 16-18 years
of age need to be reviewed in that light of its observations and recommendations.
XII. CLAUSE 28 : CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
12.1 This clause deals with the Child Welfare Committee Sub-clause 28(8) provides that the
District Magistrate shall conduct a quarterly review of the functioning of the Committee. The
Committee notes that the Child Welfare Committee is a quasi-judicial body whereas the
District Magistrate is the executive. Thus, subjecting CWC to a review by the District
Magistrate would lead to infringement of its powers. The Committee feels that since CWC
is appointed by the State Government, it is appropriate for CWC to report to and be
accountable to the State Government. The review of the functioning and pendency of cases
before CWC, if vested in its appointing authority will also facilitate addressing bottlenecks
for its efficient functioning, including the decision to set up additional CWCs, if required.
It is important to note that under the JJ Act, 2000, the process to review pendency of cases
before the CWC is with the State Government (section 33(3) of the Act, 2000 refers).

41
Clause 37(4) regarding submission of a quarterly report on the disposal/pendency of cases
to the District Magistrate by CWC may also be amended accordingly.
XIII. CLAUSE 36: THE CLAUSE DEALS WITH THE SURRENDER OF CHILDREN
13.1 This clause reads as:
“(1) A parent or guardian, who for physical, emotional and social factors beyond their
control, wishes to surrender a child, shall produce the child before the Committee.
(3) The parents or guardian who surrendered the child, shall be given one month time to
reconsider their decision and in the intervening period the Committee shall either allow
after due inquiry, the child to be with the parents or guardian under supervision, or place
the child in a Specialised Adoption Agency, if he or she is below six years of age, or a
children’ s home if he is above six years.”
13.2 It was pointed out that the period given to the parent/guardian to reconsider their decision
to surrender the child for adoption has been kept at one month. Thus, a child is to be declared
legally free for adoption by the Child Welfare Committee within one month of such child being
surrendered. It was submitted that while recognizing that the adoption process should be completed
expeditiously, it was also imperative to recognize that the welfare of the child was paramount. One
must not forget that every child has a right to be brought up in a nurturing family environment-
and not be separated from his/her birth family. Chances were there that parents surrendering/
relinquishing the child could be taking the decision under compelling circumstances and under
immense emotional and social pressure. In the best interest of the child, a child should be separated
from biological family only in exceptional circumstances.
13.3 It was emphasized that adoption permanently severed the child from his biological parents,
therefore, sufficient opportunity should be given to the parent to reconsider the decision to
surrender the child for adoption. It was, therefore, suggested that the period to reconsider such
a decision should remain at 60 days as contained in the JJ Act 2000 and the CARA Guidelines.
13.4 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that the existing legal framework
provided for two months’ re-consideration period for a woman intending to surrender her
child, and this should be retained. The time period of one month was considered to be
insufficient, given that the woman needed to recover from the physical and emotional stress
of delivery first, before she was able to even think clearly about what to do with her baby.
Agreeing with the view of the stakeholders, the Committee recommends that time period
of sixty days should be kept for surrender of a child.
XIV. CLAUSE 47: THIS CLAUSE DEALS WITH CHILDREN LEA VING CHILD CARE
INSTITUTION
14.1 This clause reads as:
“Any child leaving a child care institution on completion of eighteen years of age may be
provided with a onetime financial support in order to facilitate child’ s re-integration into
the mainstream of the society in the manner as may be prescribed.”
14.2 The Committee notes that the concept of aftercare has been reduced to one time financial
care for children leaving institutions. This is very limiting both in sense of its coverage to all
children in need of care and protection as well as conflict with law as well as in terms of nature
of the programme. The said provision in real sense defeats the very objective of aftercare. It will
leave out a large number of children (as critiqued in the definition of aftercare). Also providing one

42
time monetary support without counselling, psycho-socio-legal aid, follow up, training/education
support, residential support, mentoring etc. would not solve the purpose of aftercare. The
Committee strongly feels that that aftercare should be visualized as a full-fledged
programme which includes a range of services towards enabling mainstreaming of young
adults who have been children in need of care and protection or children in conflict with
law. The programme should be in consonance with the financial norms laid down by the
Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS). Rightfully, aftercare includes shelter, education,
vocational training, apprenticeship and life-skills education to be able to integrate into the
community as a self-reliant/independent individual.
14.3 The Committee also takes note of the fact that the JJ Act, 2000 and ICPS have both
conceptualized aftercare as a programme with multiple activities. Since the law provides for
other forms of non-institutional care also, children placed in family as well as such
alternative care may also require after care. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the
provisions contained in Section 44 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2000 and Rule 38 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of children) Rules, 2007,
should be retained.
XV. CLAUSE 57: ADOPTION
15.1 Sub-clauses (1) and (2) of this clause read as follows:
“(1) Adoption shall be resorted to for ensuring right to family for the orphan, abandoned
and surrendered children, as per the provisions of this Act, the rules made thereunder and
the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(2) Adoption of a child from a relative by another relative, irrespective of their religion,
can be made as per the provisions of this Act and the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.”
15.2 It was pointed out that there was no uniform law in India for adoptions, only personal laws
were prevalent i.e. Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act 1956, which concerned the adoption of
the children by Hindu adoptive parents. The proposed change in the J.J. Act for inter-religious
adoptions was a step in the right and secular direction towards a Common Code, and also
complying with the observation made by the Supreme Court in Writ Petition (Civil) no. 470 of
2005, wherein it had been ruled that any person can adopt a child under the JJ Act, 2000
irrespective of the religion he/she follows and even if the personal laws of the particular religion
did not permit it, the Act was a secular law enabling any person to take a child in adoption
irrespective of the religion. The proposed law, which was in line with the recent ruling of the
Supreme Court as mentioned here in above would give right to adopt a child to Muslims,
Christians, Jews, Parsis and all other communities. As of now, Muslims, Christians, Jews and Parsi
community have the legal competence of only guardianship under the Guardianship and Wards Act,
1890, wherein one possesses only legal right on the child till he/she turns an adult, and the
biological parents have a right to intervene during that period.
15.3 The other view - point which was put forth before the Committee was that clause 57 (2)
would cause confusion with respect to similar adoptions allowed under the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act. In case of Hindu Adoption between relatives, there was a completely different set
of procedures referred to in HAMA. It was pointed out that the Bill contained a non-obstant clause
in the very beginning making JJ Act the over-riding law in all matters concerning adoption,
rehabilitation and reintegration of children in need of care and protection and section 5(1) of HAMA
makes all adoption of a Hindu Child by a Hindu void if carried out under any other law. This Bill
also does not provide clarity on the procedures that shall be followed in case of adoption between

43
relatives and whether and how section 58 and other related sections of the Bill on adoption shall
be applicable in such cases. It was suggested that following proviso may be added to clause 57(2).
“Provided that adoption of a Hindu child by a Hindu relative shall continue to be governed
by HAMA.”
15.4 The Committee takes note of divergent views coming from stakeholders about clause
57 and viability thereof. The Committee would appreciate if this clause is reviewed, in the
light of the implications and also sensitivity involved once this provision comes into effect.
XVI. CLAUSE 60: THE CLAUSE DEALS WITH PROCEDURE FOR INTER-COUNTRY
ADOPTION OF AN ORPHAN OR ABANDONED OR SURRENDERED CHILD
16.1 This clause reads as:
“(1) If an orphan or abandoned or surrender ed child could not be placed with an Indian
or non-resident Indian prospective adoptive parent despite the joint effort of the specialized
adoption agency and State Agency within thirty days from the date the child.”
16.2 This clause provides that if an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child could not be
placed with an Indian prospective adoptive parent or NRI, despite the joint effort of the specialized
adoption agency and State Agency within thirty days from the date the being declared legally free
for adoption, then the child shall be free for inter-country adoption. Details of the procedure for
such adoption have also been included under this provision which were not there in the earlier Act.
16.3 During its deliberations with different stakeholders, one serious objection which was raised
again and again was the time-line of thirty days for setting a child free for inter-country adoption.
It was pointed out that in the best interest of the child, preference should be given to place a child
in in-country adoption. To achieve this aim, it was required to give the Special Adoption Agency
and the State Agency sufficient time to identify prospective adoptive parents within the country.
It was emphasized to extend the time line from thirty to sixty days.
16.4 Committee’s attention was drawn towards multiple procedures to be followed before the
papers for adoption may be ready for submission in the court. Such procedures included child
study report, additional medical examinations as permissible to parents, matching with Prospective
Adoption Parents (PAP) wherein each would have its own response time, followed by procedural
documentation. Also, many children are transferred across districts to a State Adoption Agency
(SAA) only after being declared legally free for adoption. Therefore, the time taken by the State
Adoption Agency (SAA) may even be higher in these cases.
16.5 On this issue being taken of with the Ministry, the Committee was given to understand that
the existing adoption guidelines were under revision and it was envisaged that there would be less
role of recognized adoption agencies in adoption placement. Adoption process was proposed to be
made entirely online through the CARINGS (Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance
System), a web-based IT application which would be under the direct control of the Central
Adoption Resource Authority. The prospective adoptive parents would be able to match online and
adoption procedure would be further simplified. In case, the adoption agency did not consider a
parent eligible for adoption, it had to give justification for its decision. Further, the activities of
adoption agencies shall be monitored on-line by State Adoption Resource Agency (SARA) and
CARA (Central Adoption Resource Authority). The Guidelines also provide different timelines for
different categories of children, i.e. normal, physically and mentally challenged children, older
children and siblings. Efforts would be made for every child to get a family with resident Indians
and NRIs before they were considered for inter-country adoptions. The intention was to facilitate
expeditious de-institutionalization of children through adoption.

44
16.6 The Committee is of the view that children need a permanent family/home and would
prefer domestic adoption rather than inter country adoption. The emphasis should be on
domestic adoption and only where such domestic adoptee parents are not available should
inter-country adoption be considered.
16.7 The Committee also agrees with the stand of the stakeholders about thirty days
period being too short. The Committee strongly feels that adherence to this above
mentioned period of thirty days is like an enabling process, to let majority of children to
be opted for inter-country adoptions and hence requires a review. The Committee would also
like to point out that the period of thirty days as provided for in the clause 60(1) of the
Bill contradicts the period of two months provided for the courts to finalize adoption under
the proposed Section 62(2).
16.8 The provision 60(1) of the Bill that allows the child for inter-country adoption after
one month is unacceptable. Inter-country adoptions may be resorted to only in cases when
there is a problem in finding suitable prospective adoptive parents due to special needs of
the child. The Committee would like to suggest that in the event an adoption agency cannot
find an Indian parent on their wait list roster, there should be a mechanism to intimate
other adoption agencies about the availability of a child in their adoptive centre. All efforts
should be made to give a child to an Indian parent. Moreover, the inter-country adoption
should be made only by ensuring that it is used appropriately through proper regulation,
and, importantly, the ratification of the Hague convention.
XVII. CLAUSE: 69 CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AUTHORITY
17.1 This clause provides that the Central Adoption Resource Agency existing before the
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been constituted as the Central Adoption
Resource Authority and also enumerates the functions to be performed by the Authority.
17.2 The Committee observes that at present there is no general adoption law in India.
CARA which is expected to function as a regulatory authority has not been able to discharge
its mandate effectively as a registered society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, providing a machinery to
ensure the welfare of children in need of care and protection or in conflict with law, made
a brief provision for adoption. The Committee finds that the emphasis of the proposed
legislation is on non-institutional care of children by strengthening the status and role of
CARA which is envisaged to be an apex body for adoption. CARA is mandated to monitor
and regulate in-country and inter-country adoptions. It is also required to act as a clearing
house for information about children eligible for adoptions, develop PR campaigns;
undertake research and evaluation; monitor and regulate the work of recognized and
associated agencies; liaison with the other Central Authorities and foreign missions and
ensure post-adoption follow-up and care for the adopted children. The Committee welcomes
this initiative and hopes that this will lead to streamlining the adoption procedure and
removing the complexities involved therein at present.
XVIII. CLAUSE 106: JUVENILE JUSTICE FUND
18.1 This clause reads as:
“ (1) The State Government may create a fund in such name as it thinks fit for the welfare
and rehabilitation of the children dealt with under this Act.
(2) There shall be credited to the fund such voluntary donations, contributions or
subscriptions as may be made by any individual or organisation.

45
(3) The fund created under sub-section (1) shall be administered by the Department of the
State Government implementing this Act in such manner and for such purposes as may be
prescribed.”
18.2 The Committee welcomes the proposal for creation of a Juvenile Justice Fund by
each State Government. Funds collected under such a Fund are to be used for the welfare
and rehabilitation of children dealt with under the Act. The Committee would like to point
out that while the objective of such a fund is laudable, every effort would need to be made
by all concerned to administer the fund objectively with the interest and welfare of needy
children remaining the top priority.
XIX. CONCLUSION
19. The Committee accepts the remaining provisions of the Bill. The Committee is of the
view that with modifications recommended by it in respect of some clauses, the proposed
legislation can be considered a very comprehensive law mandated for care and protection of
children as well as to provide justice to children in conflict with law. The Committee,
however, has a word of caution. Concerted efforts at all levels by all the implementing
agencies will have to be made vigorously so as to ensure that the proposed law does not
remain confined to notification stage.
20. The enacting formula and the title are adopted with consequential changes.
21. The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the
amendments/additions suggested by it.
22. The Committee would like the Ministry to submit a note with reasons on the
recommendations/suggestions which could be incorporated in the Bill.

46
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
III. CRITICAL ISSUES NOT COVERED IN THE BILL
Applicability of the National Crime Records Bureau Data.
The Committee is of the firm opinion that increased reporting of crime against
children in the specific age-group should not necessarily lead to assumption of increased
conviction of juvenile in the crime. The realistic figure of involvement of juvenile in
heinous crime needs to be based on completion of investigation, filing of final report by the
police before the court and pronouncement of judgment. (Para 3.13)
The objective analysis of the data of the National Crime Records Bureau placed
before the Committee makes it abundantly clear that the percentage of juvenile crimes in
India i.e. 1.2 per cent of the total child population of the country is quite low. Some
incidents of juvenile crime, though a cause of serious concern, should not be the basis for
introducing drastic changes in the existing juvenile justice system. The Committee would
like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the Salil Bali vs. Union of India (2013) where
the Supreme Court has very aptly observed:
“There are, of course, exceptions where a child in the age-group of 16 to 18 may
have developed criminal propensities, which would make it virtually impossible for
him/her to be re-integrated into mainstream society, but such examples are not of
such proportions as to warrant any charge in thinking, since it is probably better to
try and re-integrate children with criminal propensities into mainstream society,
rather than to allow them to develop into hardened criminals, which does not augur
well for the future.” (Para 3.15)
One must not forget that juvenile justice law is based on a strong foundation of
reformation and rehabilitation, rather than retributive. Therefore, drastic changes proposed
in some key areas of the existing system of juvenile justice need very deep introspection.
It is all the more surprising that the Ministry has very comfortably chosen to ignore the
views of all the major stakeholders in this regard. As rightly pointed out by some of the
witnesses, better implementation of the Act and more public awareness were required to be
focussed upon to curb the recent cases of juvenile crime. (Para 3.16)
The Committee can only conclude that the existing juvenile system is not only
reformative and rehabilitative in nature but also recognises the fact that 16-18 years is an
extremely sensitive and critical age requiring greater protection. Hence, there is no need
to subject them to different or adult judicial system as it will go against Articles 14 and
15(3) of the Constitution. (Para 3.21)
Clause 7 of the Bill is in clear violation of Articles 14 and 20 of the Constitution.
An artificial differentiation between children apprehended before 21 years and those
apprehended after 21 years of age is proposed to be created. The Committee strongly feels
that this categorization has no rationale. A person who was a child when the offence was
committed will be treated as an adult on account of a failure on the part of the
investigating agencies in apprehending him/her. The existing system that allows all juveniles
46

47
to be treated within the juvenile justice system does not offend the right to equality under
the Constitution. Altering the existing system under the guise of promoting the rights of
victims of the right to equality is, therefore, highly suspect. (Para 3.26)
The Committee takes note of serious reservations/apprehensions voiced by majority
of stakeholders with regard to certain provisions of the proposed legislation not being in
conformity with a number of Articles of the Constitution. The Committee has been given
to understand that in the Act of 2000, there was no such contravention. The Committee
would like to point out that such changes may lead to uncalled for situation in future. This
becomes all the more worrisome as the most vulnerable section of the society, our children
are likely to be adversely affected. The Committee is, therefore, of the firm view that all
the relevant clauses of the Bill need to be reviewed in the light of constitutional provisions
and modified so as to adhere to the Constitution. (Para 3.27)
Violation of UN Conventions
The Committee finds no merit in the contention of the Ministry that lot of societal
changes have taken place with the signing of UN Convention the Rights of the Child in 1992
and relook at our laws was required so as to revise them as per the current needs. The
Committee is somewhat surprised to note the apparent contradiction in the above position
and the following paras of the proposed of the Preamble in the Bill:
“AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to re-enact the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 to make comprehensive provisions for children
alleged and found to be in conflict with law and children in need of care and
protection, taking into consideration the standards prescribed in the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the
Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the Beijing Rules), the United Nations
Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (1990), the Hague
Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Inter-country.
Adoption (1993), and other related international instruments.”
The Committee can only conclude that as per the well-established practice, the
proposed legislation has to contain provisions which adhere to all the enumerated objectives
in the real sense. (Para 3.36)
Violation of Supreme Court Judgements
The Committee can conclude that the underlying principle of the juvenile justice
system has always been to treat all children who have committed offences within the
juvenile justice system and differential treatment or sending the child to the adult criminal
justice system had always been excluded by the Supreme Court. The Committee is
constrained to observe that observations/judgements of the Apex Court of the country have
simply been ignored. The Committee takes a serious view of this development. (Para 3.40)
Implementation of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000
The Committee is constrained to observe the very discouraging implementation
status of the JJ Act, 2000. The Committee strongly feels that along with amendments in the
JJ Act, focussed attention has to be given to the implementation of the Act, as envisaged.
Otherwise like the JJ Act, 2000, proposed new legislation will virtually remain on paper. The
Committee is of the firm view that the Ministry, being the nodal authority at the centre,
can play the role of a motivator and facilitator in coordination with all the implementing

48
agencies at the state level. The Committee is also of the view that if the systems envisaged
in the Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 are given effect to by the respective agencies i.e. the
Central Government, the State Governments and other institutions involved in the juvenile
justice system, then the system itself can achieve the intended outcome i.e. to provide for
justice, care and protection of children in conflict with law and children in need of care and
protection. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the systems and procedures
contemplated under the existing Act need to be uniformly established by all the
stakeholders. (Para 3.45)
Monitoring
The Committee notes that the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
is assigned the role of examining reviewing the safeguards provided by or under any law for
the protection of child rights and recommend measures for the effective implementation.
The Committee hopes that monitoring of all the agencies/bodies involved in the
implementation of the Act is taken up in the right earnest and all the bottlenecks noticed/
identified in the JJ Act, 2000 are eliminated. (Para 3.55)
The Committee observes that the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2000 was enacted after the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 was repealed. Likewise, the Act
of 2000 is sought to be repealed by the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Bill, 2014. The Committee was given to understand by some of the stakeholders that
required amendments in the Act of 2000 would have served the purpose and there was no
need of bringing in a new law. The Committee, however, on a comparative analysis of the
Act of 2000 and the proposed law finds that the Bill is a comprehensive legislation when
compared with the Act of 2000. The Bill provides for general principles of care and
protection of children, procedures in case of children in need of care and protection in
conflict with law, rehabilitation and social re-integration measures for such children and
offences committed against children. (Para 3.56)
IV. CLAUSE 1: SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT
The Committee would like to point out that the main objective of the Bill is to make
the law relating to children alleged and found to be in conflict with law and also children
in need of care and protection. Common usage of the word ‘juvenile’ is vis-a-vis a child who
has committed an offence. Apparently, the existing title gives an impression that this Act
deals with children who have committed offence. The title of the Bill should reflect the
child-friendly approach. The Committee recommends the title or the Bill to be changed as
Justice for children (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014. (Para 4.4)
V. CLAUSE 2: DEFINITIONS
Objections were raised to the use of word ‘legitimate’ in the context of a child. It
was felt that the use of language that classifies children as legitimate or illegitimate was
not in the best interests of children. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
words ‘legitimate child of his adoptive parents’ may read as ‘lawful child of his adoptive
parents’ and the words “that are attached to be legitimate child’ may read as ‘that are
attached to a biological child.’ (Para 5.2)
The Committee notes that the Bill provides a narrow definition and is a digression
from internationally recognised and recommended concept and principles of aftercare.
Rehabilitation of children who are in need of care and protection or those in conflict with

49
law cannot always end by the age of 18 and who have left any institutional care or the Child
Justice System to join the mainstream of the society as this would also provide for children
out of institutional care for their rehabilitation. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that the definition of the term ‘aftercare’ may be modified as follows:
“Aftercare” means making provision of support, financial or otherwise, to persons,
who have not completed the age of twenty-one years and have left any institutional
care to help them integrate with society. (Para 5.5)
The Committee feels that a child does not first have to become a victim and then
be in need of care and protection. Both care and protection rights exist before the point of
affliction and a vulnerable child is always in need of both the safeguards. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that this definition may be made more clear and specific.
(Para 5.7)
Clause 2(14)(ii): As per this sub-clause, a child found working in contravention of
labour laws for the time being in force or is found begging, or living on the street would
be considered to be in need of care and protection. It was pointed out to the Committee
that a reference to labour laws would restrict the extension of care and protection measures
to only those children who come under the protection ambit of labour laws. As a result,
children between 14 and 18 years engaged in labour would be deprived of rehabilitation
measures available under the Bill. Agreeing with the apprehension of the stakeholders, the
Committee recommends that the words “in contravention of labour laws for the time being
in force’ may be deleted from the definition. (Para 5.8)
The Committee feels that children who have been abused may face stigma, trauma
and may be in need of support, as well as linkages to services. The Committee is of the
view that this sub-clause should apply to both children who have been abused or may be
abused at any point of time. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the words ‘has
been’ may be added after the word’ who’. (Para 5.10)
The Committee is of the view that when the definition of the word ‘child’ has been
included under the definition clause, and the word ‘juvenile’ is considered not to be
appropriate because of the element of negativity involved in its meaning, the definition of
the word ‘juvenile’ may not be included under the definition clause. (Para 5.12)
VI. CLAUSE 4: JUVENILE JUSTICE BOARD
The Committee is of the view that in order to strengthen the functioning of JJB, it
is necessary that the Chairperson is in a position to give adequate time and attention to
his responsibilities. One suggestion which has come to the Committee is to have a retired
District and Sessions Judge as the Chairperson of JJB. Secondly, the Committee also feels
that restricting the nomination of social workers from reputed NGOs only and that too
having seven years’ experience would be a very restrictive provision. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the composition of JJB needs to be reviewed and required
changes made. (Para 6.5)
Committee attention was also drawn to the fact that while the Bill lays down certain
eligibilities and disqualifications for members of CWCs and JJBs, but it does not lay down
any provision for constitution of a selection committee to select the members and its
procedures etc. Different States follow different selection procedures. As a federal republic,
States are free to frame their own Rules with respect to the juvenile justice legislation and
most matters concerning children. While some States set up a Selection Committee, others
do not, thereby compromising on a fair and transparent selection process. The Committee,

50
accordingly, recommends that it will be prudent if the Bill establishes the importance of
ensuring a proper, fair and transparent selection process and clearly lays a complaints-cum-
oversight mechanism for functioning of individual members, including requirement for
constitution and functioning of a Selection Committee or a Selection-cum-oversight
mechanism and a fair process of selection. The Committee would appreciate if the
provisions related to the composition of the Selection Committee and the Selection Process
are included in the Bill so as to ensure uniformity and transparency which can be easily
replicated from Rules 91 and 92 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Rules, 2007
with appropriate modifications. (Para 6.6)
The Committee was also given to understand that in some cases, there has been
found to be a conflict of interest, as members also hold positions in the management of
child care institutions in the very district for which they have been appointed. If that be
so, the Committee feels that a provision needs to be included requiring members to resign
from an office of profit on being appointed a Member of the Board. (Para 6.7)
VII. CLAUSE 6: PLACEMENT OF PERSONS, WHO COMMITTED AN OFFENCE, WHEN
THE PERSON WAS BELOW THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN YEARS
The Committee agrees with views of the stakeholders that age on date of committing
of the offence should determine whether the person should be dealt with under the JJ
system or criminal justice system. The Committee recommends that such a person who is
not a juvenile should not be allowed to mingle with children in an observation home and
should be kept separately. The words ‘but is below twenty one years of age’ may be deleted
from clause 6. (Para 7.4)
VIII. CLAUSE 7: PLACEMENT OF A PERSON ABOVE AGE OF TWENTY-ONE YEARS FOR
COMMITTING ANY OFFENCE WHEN HE WAS A CHILD
The Committee views with serious concern the kind of argument put forth by the
Ministry, while justifying the inclusion of a provision like clause 7. The Committee fails to
comprehend as to how could such a provision would encourage persons to come forward and
inform about the offences committed by them so that they could remain under the Juvenile
Justice System. The Committee would like to point out that unless a person is proved
guilty, he cannot be treated like an offender. Secondly, the perception that a person in the
age-group of 16-18 years alleged to be committing a serious or heinous offence would be
mature enough to come forward to inform about his offence so as to ensure his remaining
under the Juvenile Justice System seems to be far from convincing. (Para 8.4)
After analysing all the facts placed before it, the Committee is left with no other
alternative but to conclude that concerns expressed by all the stakeholders are very genuine
and cannot be ignored. The Committee is also of the view that clause 7 is in clear violation
of Article 20(1) of the Constitution which states that:
“No person shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of the law in force at
the time of the Commission of the act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a
penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force at the
time of the commission of the offence.”
A plain reading of clause 7 clearly indicates that a person who was a child when the
offence was committed will be treated as an adult on account of failure on the part of the
investigating agencies in apprehending him/her. Besides this, the Committee also observes
that this provision is also in complete violation of the right to equality under Article 14
which states that:

51
“The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection
of the laws within the territory of India.”
Again, clause 7 creates an artificial differentiation between children apprehended
before 21 years and those apprehended after 21 years of age. The Committee finds no
rationale in such a categorization. (Para 8.5)
The Committee was also informed that this provision would also violate Article 15 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political rights, a non-derogable right under the
convention which reads as follows:
“No one shall be held guilty of any criminal offence on account of any act or omission
which did not constitute a criminal offence, under national or international law, at the
time when it was committed. Nor shall a heavier penalty be imposed than the one that
was applicable at the time when the criminal offence was committed.”
The Committee also takes note of Supreme Court judgments in Umesh Chandra
(1982), Arnit Das (2000), Arnit Das (2001) and Pratap Singh (2005). The five judges
Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court in Pratap Singh held the age on the date of
offence to be determinative of the application of the Juvenile Justice Act. The observation
of the Supreme Court in its judgement (SLPC(vi) No. 1953 of 2013) in Dr. Subramanian
Swamy Vs. Raju, Member, JJB pointed out that
“…If the legislature has adopted the age of 18 as the dividing line between juveniles and
adults and such a decision is constitutionally permissible, the enquiry by the Courts must
come to an end. Even otherwise there is a considerable body of world opinion that all
under 18  persons ought to be treated as juveniles and separate treatment ought to be
meted out to them so far as offences committed by such persons are concerned.”
(Para 8.6)
Keeping in view the very specific constitutional provisions, international conventions
and Supreme Court judgments, the Committee simply fails to comprehend the absurdity and
the arbitrary nature of clause 7. The Committee finds no logical reason why persons
apprehended after they have crossed 21 years should face serious disadvantage or how this
severe provision furthers the goals of criminal justice. The Committee also takes note of
the fact that there have been several legal controversies surrounding this very question.
The JJ Act, 2000 was amended in 2006 precisely in order to clarify that the date of
reckoning will be the date on which the offence was allegedly committed and not when the
juvenile was apprehended. (Para 8.7)
The Committee is of the firm opinion that clause 7 is discriminatory in itself,
undermines the constitutional provisions as well as international commitments and ignores
the Supreme Court directives. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that such a
provision should not be a part of the proposed legislation and be deleted. (Para 8.8)
IX. CLAUSE 15: INQUIRY BY BOARD REGARDING CHILD IN CONFLICT WITH LAW
As per this sub-clause, JJB is required to take a decision of transferring such a child
to the Children’s Court within a period of one month without a proper investigation by the
investigating agency or before such investigation is completed and the child is prima facie
found to have committed such heinous offences. This provision proceeds on the assumption
that the alleged offence has been committed by the child and is contrary to the presumption
of being innocent till proved guilty. It thus violates Fundamental Rights guaranteed under
Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution by directing JJB to inquire into the culpability prior

52
to prima facie  establishment of the guilt. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
period of preliminary inquiry by JJ Board may be suitably enhanced. (Para 9.2)
X. CLAUSE 16: PRELIMINARY INQUIRY INTO HEINOUS OFFENCES BY THE BOARD
The Committee would like to point out that considering the fact that large number
of innocent children are being involved in crimes, which was evident from the decisions of
JJBs across the country, it is impossible to conduct such a complex enquiry within a period
of one month. Such a provision will amount to complete denial of fundamental rights,
justice, fair and discriminate proceedings and also the negation of basic principles and
provisions of Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act, 2000 itself. (Para 10.6)
The Committee would also like to point out that the process suggested for treating
16-18 years children involved in heinous offences, i.e. preliminary inquiry by JJB and
professional team, then based on their decision to Children’s Court (CC) then decision by
CC regarding where to be tried, then sending the child back to JJB for trial would lead to
multiple and repeated trials before different authorities that would psychologically drain
him/her. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that this entire process needs a relook
and review. (Para 10.7)
The Committee is in full agreement with the very comprehensive views of the
stakeholders that clause 7 is discriminatory and all children below 18 years should be
treated as children. The proposed legislation is meant for children alleged and found to be
in conflict with law. And the definition of both the terms ‘child’ and ‘child in conflict with
law’ mean a person who has not completed eighteen years of age. Accordingly, the question
of envisaging a differential treatment for children above sixteen years of age should not
arise. Such a move would lead to contravention of international laws and also the stated
purpose of the Bill. (Para 10.9)
XI. CLAUSE 19: ORDERS REGARDING CHILD FOUND TO BE IN CONFLICT WITH
LAW
The Committee would like to point out that the objective of creating a separate Act
for children was to have a separate system for children in conflict with law and not include
them in the criminal justice system. There is no doubt that this sub-clause diminishes the
distinction between child victims and children in conflict with law by entitling the courts
under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, the jurisdiction to
adjudicate the cases involving children in conflict with law. (Para 11.5)
The Committee also recommends that all relevant clauses (clauses 6, 7, 16, 19, 20)
dealing with Children’s Courts and differential treatment of children between 16-18 years of
age need to be reviewed in that light of its observations and recommendations. (Para 11.6)
XII. CLAUSE 28: CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that the Child Welfare Committee is a quasi-judicial body
whereas the District Magistrate is the executive. Thus, subjecting CWC to a review by the
District Magistrate would lead to infringement of its powers. The Committee feels that since
CWC is appointed by the State Government, it is appropriate for CWC to report to and be
accountable to the State Government. The review of the functioning and pendency of cases
before CWC, if vested in its appointing authority will also facilitate addressing bottlenecks
for its efficient functioning, including the decision to set up additional CWCs, if required.

53
It is important to note that under the JJ Act, 2000, the process to review pendency of cases
before the CWC is with the State Government (section 33(3) of the Act, 2000 refers).
Clause 37(4) regarding submission of a quarterly report on the disposal/pendency of cases
to the District Magistrate by CWC may also be amended accordingly. (Para 12.1)
XIII. CLAUSE 36: THE CLAUSE DEALS WITH THE SURRENDER OF CHILDREN
Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that the existing legal frame-work
provided for two months’ re-consideration period for a woman intending to surrender her
child, and this should be retained. The time period of one month was considered to be
insufficient, given that the woman needed to recover from the physical and emotional stress
of delivery first, before she was able to even think clearly about what to do with her baby.
Agreeing with the view of the stakeholders, the Committee recommends that time period
of sixty days should be kept for surrender of a child. (Para 13.4)
XIV. CLAUSE 47: THIS CLAUSE DEALS WITH CHILDREN LEA VING CHILD CARE
INSTITUTION
The Committee strongly feels that that aftercare should be visualized as a full-
fledged programme which includes a range of services towards enabling mainstreaming of
young adults who have been children in need of care and protection or children in conflict
with law. The programme should be in consonance with the financial norms laid down by the
Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS). Rightfully, aftercare includes shelter, education,
vocational training, apprenticeship and life-skills education to be able to integrate into the
community as a self-reliant/independent individual. (Para 14.2)
The Committee also takes note of the fact that the JJ Act, 2000 and ICPS have both
conceptualized aftercare as a programme with multiple activities. Since the law provides for
other forms of non-institutional care also, children placed in family as well as such
alternative care may also require after care. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the
provisions contained in Section 44 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2000 and Rule 38 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of children) Rules, 2007,
should be retained. (Para 14.3)
XV. CLAUSE 57: ADOPTION
The Committee takes note of divergent views coming from stakeholders about clause
57 and viability thereof. The Committee would appreciate if this clause is reviewed, in the
light of the implications and also sensitivity involved-once this provision comes into effect.
(Para 15.4)
XVI. CLAUSE 60: THE CLAUSE DEALS WITH PROCEDURE FOR INTER-COUNTRY
ADOPTION OF AN ORPHAN OR ABANDONED OR SURRENDERED CHILD
The Committee is of the view that children need a permanent family/home and would
prefer domestic adoption rather than inter country adoption. The emphasis should be on
domestic adoption and only where such domestic adoptee parents are not available should
inter- country adoption be considered. (Para 16.6)
The Committee also agrees with the stand of the stakeholders about thirty days
period being too short. The Committee strongly feels that adherence to this above

54
mentioned period of thirty days is like an enabling process, to let majority of children to
be opted for inter-country adoptions and hence requires a review. The Committee would also
like to point out that the period of thirty days as provided for in the clause 60(1) of the
Bill contradicts the period of two months provided for the courts to finalize adoption under
the proposed Section 62(2). (Para 16.7)
The provision 60(1) of the Bill that allows the child for inter country adoption after
one month is unacceptable. Inter country adoptions may be resorted to only in cases when
there is a problem in finding suitable prospective adoptive parents due to special needs of
the child. The Committee would like to suggest that in the event an adoption agency cannot
find an Indian parent on their wait list roster, there should be a mechanism to intimate
other adoption agencies about the availability of a child in their adoptive centre. All efforts
should be made to give a child to an Indian parent. Moreover, the inter-country adoption
should be made only by ensuring that it is used appropriately through proper regulation,
and, importantly, the ratification of the Hague convention. (Para 16.8)
XVII. CLAUSE: 69 CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AUTHORITY
The Committee finds that the emphasis of the proposed legislation is on non-
institutional care of children by strengthening the status and role of CARA which is
envisaged to be an apex body for adoption. CARA is mandated to monitor and regulate in-
country and inter-country adoptions. It is also required to act as a clearing house for
information about children eligible for adoptions, develop PR campaigns; undertake research
and evaluation; monitor and regulate the work of recognized and associated agencies;
liaison with the other Central Authorities and foreign missions and ensure post-adoption
follow-up and care for the adopted children. The Committee welcomes this initiative and
hopes that this will lead to streamlining the adoption procedure and removing the
complexities involved therein at present. (Para 17.2)
XVIII. CLAUSE 106: JUVENILE JUSTICE FUND
The Committee welcomes the proposal for creation of a Juvenile Justice Fund by
each State Government. Funds collected under such a Fund are to be used for the welfare
and rehabilitation of children dealt with under the Act. The Committee would like to point
out that while the objective of such a fund is laudable, every effort would need to be made
by all concerned to administer the fund objectively with the interest and welfare of needy
children remaining the top priority. (Para 18.2)
XIX. CONCLUSION
The Committee accepts the remaining provisions of the Bill. The Committee is of the
view that with modifications recommended by it in respect of some clauses, the proposed
legislation can be considered a very comprehensive law mandated for care and protection of
children as well as to provide justice to children in conflict with law. The Committee,
however, has a word of caution. Concerted efforts at all levels by all the implementing
agencies will have to be made vigorously so as to ensure that the proposed law does not
remain confined to notification stage. (Para 19)

55
MINUTES

IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the
21st October, 2014 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Tiruchi Siva — In the Chair
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
3. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
6. Shri Basawaraj Patil
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
8. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
9. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
10. Dr. Ramshankar Katheria
11. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
12. Shri Hari Om Pandey
13. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
14. Shri N.K. Premchandran
15. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
16. Shri Sumedanand Sarswati
17. Shri M.I. Shanavas
18. Shri Nepal Singh
19. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
20. Shri P.R. Sundram
21. Shri Ajay Tamta
22. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
57

58
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014
(I) Ministry of Women and Child Development
(i) Shri V .S. Oberoi, Secretary
(ii) Dr. V ivek Joshi, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri Ashi Kapoor, Deputy Secretary
(iv) Shri B.K. Sahu, Deputy Director, CARA
(v) Shri Naveen Yadav, Under Secretary
(II) T ulir Centre for the Prevention and Healing of Child Sexual Abuse
Ms. Vidya Reddy, Director
(III) Indian Alliance for Child Rights
Ms. Razia Ismail Abbassi, Director
(IV) Save the Children
Ms. Shireen Vakil Miller, Advocacy Director
(V) Butterflies
Ms. Rita Panicker, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development and the
representatives of four NGGs i.e. Tulir Centre for Prevention and Healing of Child Sexual Abuse,
Indian Alliance for Child Rights, Save the Children and Butterflies on the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Bill, 2014.
3. The Committee first heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development on the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014. The Secretary
pointed out that this Bill was a comprehensive legislation seeking to provide for the general
principles of care and protection of children, procedure in case of children in need of care and
protection and children in conflict with law, rehabilitation and social re-integration measures for
such children and adoption of orphan, abandoned and surrendered children and other connected
matters in the best interest of children. The members raised a number of queries on the various
provisions of the Bill, some of which were replied to by the Secretary. The Committee decided to
send a detailed questionnaire to the Ministry for their written replies.
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of Tulir Centre for
Prevention and Healing of Child Sexual Abuse, Indian Alliance for Child Rights, Save the Children
and Butterflies on the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014. The members
raised a number of queries on various provisions of the Bill, some of which were replied to by
the representatives. The Committee, thereafter, decided to send a questionnaire for the written
replies of the representatives.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 
P.M.

59
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the
15th December, 2014 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
2. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
3. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
4. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Basawaraj Patil
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
7. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
8. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
9. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
10. Shri Chand Nath
11. Shri Hari Om Pandey
12. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
13. Shri N.K. Premachandran
14. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran
15. Dr. Nepal Singh
16. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
17. Shri P.R. Sundaram
18. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014
I. National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
1. Shri Asheem Srivastav, Member Secretary
II. Central Adoption Resource Authority
2. Shri Veerendra Mishra, Secretary
3. Shri Jagannath Pati, Joint Director
59

60
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Member Secretary, National Commission for Protection of Child
Rights and the Secretary, Central Adoption Resource Authority on the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Bill, 2014.
3. The Committee, first, heard the views of the Member Secretary, National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights on various provisions of the Bill. The members raised a number of
queries, some of which were replied to by the Member Secretary, National Commission for
Protection of Child Rights. The Committee, thereafter, decided to send a detailed questionnaire for
the written replies of the Commission.
4. Further, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Central Adoption Resource
Authority on various issues relating to adoption. The members raised a number of queries on the
various provisions relating to adoption in the Bill. The Secretary, Central Adoption Resource
Authority replied to some of the queries.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.25 
P.M.

61
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the
2nd January, 2015 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
2. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Basawaraj Patil
5. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
8. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
9. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
10. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
11. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
12. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
13. Shri N.K. Premachandran
14. Shri Mullappally Ramachandran
15. Dr. Nepal Singh
16. Shri Ajay Tamta
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014
I. Ms. Maharukh Adenwalla, Advocate, Mumbai
II. Centre for Child and the Law
(i) Ms. Arlene Manoharan, Programme Head
(ii) Ms. Swagata Raha, Sr. Legal Researcher
61

62
III. PRA Y AS
(i) Shri Amod Kanth, General Secretary
(ii) Shri Kumar Rohit
(iii) Shri A.K. Singh
(iv) Shri Vishwajeet Ghoshal
(v) Ms. Deepshikha Singh
(vi) Shri Amitabh Srivastava
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of Ms. Maharukh Adenwalla, Advocate, Mumbai, the Centre for Child
and the Law, Bengaluru and the General Secretary, PRAYAS, Delhi on the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Bill, 2014.
3. The Committee, first, heard the views of Ms. Maharukh Adenwalla, Advocate on various
provisions of the Bill. The members raised a number of queries, some of which were replied to
by her.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Centre for Child and the Law made a detailed
presentation on various provisions of the Bill before the Committee. The members raised a number
of queries, some of which were replied to by the representatives.
5. The Committee, then, heard the presentation of the General Secretary, PRAYAS on various
provisions of the Bill. The members raised a number of queries, some of which were replied to
by the General Secretary, PRAYAS.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.

63
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the
28th January, 2015 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
2. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
3. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
4. Prof. Bhalchandra Mungekar
5. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
7. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
8. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
9. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
10. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
11. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
12. Shri Chand Nath
13. Shri Hari Om Pandey
14. Shri N.K. Premachandran
15. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
16. Dr. Nepal Singh
17. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
18. Shri Ajay Tamta
19. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to have a clause-by-clause discussion on the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Bill, 2014.
63

64
3. The Committee then had a clause-by-clause discussion on the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Bill, 2014. Members of the Committee gave their views and suggestions on
various provisions of the Bill. The Committee directed the Secretariat to prepare a draft report on
the Bill.
4. The Committee decided to meet again on the 16
th February, 2015.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 P.M.

65
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the
16th February, 2015 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
2. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
3. Prof. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
5. Shri Basawaraj Patil
6. Shri Sharad Pawar
7. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
8. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
10. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
11. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
12. Shri Chand Nath
13. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
14. Shri N.K. Premachandran
15. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
16. Shri Sumedanand Sarswati
17. Shri M.I. Shanavas
18. Dr. Nepal Singh
19. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
20. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 264
th Report on the ‘Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Bill, 2014’.
65

66
3. The Committee then considered the draft 264 th Report on the ‘Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Bill, 2014’ and adopted the same after some discussion.
4. The Committee then decided to present/lay the above mentioned Report in both the Houses
of Parliament on 25 th February, 2015. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence
Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda, M.P., Rajya Sabha to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and
Shri N.K. Premachandran and in his absence Dr. Bhagirath Prasad M.P., Lok Sabha to lay the
Report in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.

67
ANNEXURES

69
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 99 of 2014
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
BILL, 2014
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  OF CARE AND PROTECTION  OF CHILDREN
3. General principles to be followed in administration of Act.
CHAPTER III
JUVENILE  J USTICE  B OARD
4. Juvenile Justice Board.
5. Placement of person, who ceases to be a child during the process of inquiry.
6. Placement of persons, who committed an offence, when the person was below
the age of eighteen years.
7. Placement of a person above the age of twenty-one years for committing any offence
when he was a child.
8. Procedure in relation to Board.
9. Powers, functions and responsibilities of the Board.
10. Procedure to be followed by a Magistrate who has not been empowered under this
Act.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROCEDURE  IN RELATION TO CHILDREN  IN CONFLICT  WITH LAW
11. Apprehension of child alleged to be in conflict with law.
12. Role of person in whose change child in conflict with laws placed.
13. Bail to a person who is apparently a child alleged to be in conflict with law.
14. Information to parents, guardian or Probation Officer.
15. Inquiry by Board regarding child in conflict with law.
16. Preliminary Inquiry into heinous offences by the Board.
17. Review of pendency of Inquiry.
18. Orders regarding a child not found to be in conflict with law.

70
CLAUSES
19. Orders regarding child found to be in conflict with law.
20. Powers of Children’s Court.
21. Child attained age of twenty-one years and yet to complete prescribed term of stay
in place of safety.
22. Order that may not be passed against a child in conflict with law.
23. Proceeding under Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure not to apply
against child.
24. No joint proceedings of child in conflict with law and person not a child.
25. Removal of disqualification on the findings of an offence.
26. Special provision in respect of pending cases.
27. Provision with respect of runaway child in conflict with law.
CHAPTER V
C
HILD  WELFARE  COMMITTEE
28. Child Welfare Committee.
29. Procedure in relation to Committee.
30. Powers of the Committee.
31. Functions and responsibilities of the Committee.
CHAPTER VI
PROCEDURE  IN RELATION TO CHILDREN  IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
32. Production before Committee.
33. Mandatory reporting regarding a child found separated from guardian.
34. Offence of non-reporting.
35. Penalty for non-reporting.
36. Surrender of children.
37. Inquiry.
38. Orders passed regarding a child in need of care and protection.
39. Procedure for declaring a child legally free for adoption.
CHAPTER VII
R
EHABILITATION  AND SOCIAL  RE-INTEGRATION
40. Process of rehabilitation and social re-integration.
41. Restoration of child in need of care and protection.
42. Registration of child care institutions.
43. Penalty for non-registration of child care institutions.
44. Open Shelter.
45. Foster care.
46. Sponsorship.
47. After care of children leaving child care institution.
48. Observation Homes.
49. Special Homes.
50. Place of Safety.

71
CLAUSES
51. Children’s Home.
52. Fit facility.
53. Fit person.
54. Rehabilitation and re-integration services in institutions registered under this Act and
management thereof.
55. Inspection of institutions registered under this Act.
56. Evaluation of functioning of structures.
CHAPTER VIII
A
DOPTION
57. Adoption.
58. Eligibility of prospective adoptive parents.
59. Procedure for adoption by Indian prospective adoptive parents living in India.
60. Procedure for inter-country adoption of an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child.
61. Procedure for inter-country relative adoption.
62. Court procedure and penalty against payment in consideration of adoption.
63. Additional procedural requirements and documentation.
64. Effect of adoption.
65. Reporting of adoption.
66. Specialised Adoption Agencies.
67. Adoption of children residing in institutions not registered as adoption agencies.
68. State Adoption Resources Agency.
69. Central Adoption Resource Authority.
70. Steering Committee of Authority.
71. Powers of Authority.
72. Annual Report of Authority.
73. Grants by Central Government.
74. Accounts and audit of Authority.
CHAPTER IX
O
THER OFFENCES  AGAINST  CHILDREN
75. Prohibition on disclosure of identity of children.
76. Punishment for cruelty to child.
77. Employment of child for begging.
78. Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug or psychotropic substance to
a child.
79. Using a child for vending, peddling, carrying, supplying or smuggling any intoxicating
liquor, narcotic drug or psychotropic substance.
80. Exploitation of a child employee.
81. Punitive measures for adoption without following prescribed procedures.
82. Sale and procurement of children for any purpose.
83. Corporal punishment.
84. Use of child by militant groups or other adults.
85. Kidnapping and abduction of child.

72
CLAUSES
86. Offences committed on disabled children.
87. Classification of offences and designated court.
88. Abetment.
89. Alternative punishment.
90. Offence committed by child under this Chapter.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
91. Attendance of parent or guardian of child.
92. Dispensing with attendance of child.
93. Placement of a child suffering from disease requiring prolonged medical treatment in
an approved place.
94. Transfer of a child who is mentally ill or addicted to alcohol or other drugs.
95. Presumption and determination of age.
96. Transfer of a child to place of residence.
97. Transfer of child between children’s homes, or special homes or fit facility or fit
person in different parts of India.
98. Release of a child from an institution.
99. Leave of absence to a child placed in an institution.
100. Reports to be treated as confidential.
101. Protection of action taken in good faith.
102. Appeals.
103. Revision.
104. Procedure in inquiries, appeals and revision proceedings.
105. Power of the Committee or the Board to amend its own orders.
106. Juvenile Justice Fund.
107. State Child Protection Society and District Child Protection Unit.
108. Child Welfare Police Officer and Special Juvenile Police Unit.
109. Power to make rules.
110. Repeal and savings.
111. Power to remove difficulties.

73
AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
ON 26 TH N OVEMBER , 2012
Bill No. 99 of 2014
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
BILL, 2014
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to children alleged and
found to be in conflict with law and children in need of care
and protection by catering to their basic needs through proper
care, protection, development, treatment, social re-integration,
by adopting a child-friendly approach in the adjudication and
disposal of matters in the best interest of children and for
their rehabilitation through processes provided, and
institutions and bodies established, hereinunder and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS, the provisions of the Constitution confer powers
and impose duties, under clause ( 3) of article 15, clauses ( e) and ( f)
of article 39, article 45 and article 47, on the State to ensure that
all the needs of children are met and that their basic human rights
are fully protected;
A
ND W HEREAS, the Government of India has acceded on the
11th December, 1992 to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
adopted by the General Assembly of United Nations, which has
prescribed a set of standards to be adhered to by all State parties
in securing the best interest of the child;
73

74
AND W HEREAS, it is expedient to re-enact the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 to make comprehensive
provisions for children alleged and found to be in conflict with law
and children in need of care and protection, taking into
consideration the standards prescribed in the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for
the Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the Beijing Rules), the
United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of
their Liberty (1990), the Hague Convention on Protection of
Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption
(1993), and other related international instruments.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the provisions of this Act shall apply to all
matters concerning children in need of care and protection and
children in conflict with law, including —
(i) apprehension, detention, prosecution, penalty or
imprisonment, rehabilitation and social re-integration of
children in conflict with law;
(ii) procedures and decisions or orders relating to
rehabilitation, adoption, re-integration, and restoration of
children in need of care and protection.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “abandoned child” means a child deserted by his
biological or adoptive parents or guardians, who has been
declared as abandoned by the Committee after due inquiry;
(2) “adoption” means the process through which the
adopted child is permanently separated from his biological
parents and becomes the legitimate child of his adoptive
parents with all the rights, privileges and responsibilities that
are attached to a legitimate child;
(3) “adoption regulations” means the regulations framed
by the authority and notified by the Central Government in
respect of adoption;
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and application.
56 of 2000.
Definitions.

75
(4) “administrator” means any district official not below
the rank of Deputy Secretary to the State, on whom
magisterial powers have been conferred;
(5) “aftercare” means making provision of support,
financial or otherwise, to persons, who have completed the
age of eighteen years but have not completed the age of
twenty-one years, and have left any institutional care to join
the mainstream of the society;
(6) “authorised foreign adoption agency” means a
foreign social or child welfare agency that is authorised
by the Central Adoption Resource Authority on the
recommendation of their Central Authority or Government
department of that country for sponsoring the application of
non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or persons of
Indian origin or foreign prospective adoptive parents for
adoption of a child from India;
(7) “Authority” means the Central Adoption Resource
Authority constituted under section 69;
(8) “begging” means—
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place or
entering into any private premises for the purpose of
soliciting or receiving alms, under any pretence;
(ii) exposing or exhibiting with the object of
obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound, injury,
deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any
other person or of an animal;
(9) “best interest of child” means the basis for any
decision taken regarding the child, to ensure fulfilment of his
basic rights and needs, identity, social well-being and physical,
emotional and intellectual development;
(10) “Board” means a Juvenile Justice Board constituted
under section 4;
(11) “Central Authority” means the Government
department recognised as such under the Hague Convention
on Protection of Children and Cooperation in Intercountry
Adoption (1993);
(12) “child” means a person who has not completed
eighteen years of age;
(13) “child in conflict with law” means a child who is
alleged or found to have committed an offence and who has
not completed eighteen years of age on the date of
commission of such offence;

76
(14) “child in need of care and protection” means a
child—
(i) who is found without any home or settled
place of abode and without any ostensible means of
subsistence; or
(ii) who is found working in contravention of
labour laws for the time being in force or is found
begging, or living on the street; or
(iii ) who resides with a person (whether a
guardian of the child or not) and such person—
(a) has injured, exploited, abused or
neglected the child or has violated any other law
for the time being in force meant for the
protection of child; or
(b) has threatened to kill, injure, exploit or
abuse the child and there is a reasonable
likelihood of the threat being carried out; or
(c) has killed, abused, neglected or
exploited some other child or children and there
is a reasonable likelihood of the child in question
being killed, abused, exploited or neglected by
that person; or
(iv) who is mentally ill or mentally or physically
challenged or suffering from terminal or incurable
disease, having no one to support or look after or
having parents or guardians unfit to take care, if found
so by the Board or the Committee; or
(v) who has a parent or guardian and such parent
or guardian is found to be unfit or incapacitated, by the
Committee or the Board, to care for and protect the
safety and well-being of the child; or
(vi) who does not have parents and no one is
willing to take care of, or whose parents have
abandoned or surrendered him; or
(vii) who is missing or run away child, or whose
parents cannot be found after making reasonable inquiry
in such manner as may be prescribed; or
(viii) who is being or is likely to be abused,
tortured or exploited for the purpose of sexual abuse or
illegal acts; or
(ix) who is found vulnerable and is likely to be
inducted into drug abuse or trafficking; or

77
(x) who is being or is likely to be abused for
unconscionable gains; or
(xi) who is victim of or affected by any armed
conflict, civil unrest or natural calamity; or
(xii) who is at imminent risk of marriage before
attaining the age of marriage and whose parents, family
members, guardian and any other persons are likely to
be responsible for solemnisation of such marriage;
(15) “child friendly” means any behaviour, conduct,
practice, process, attitude, environment or treatment that is
humane, considerate and in the best interest of the child;
(16) “child legally free for adoption” means a child
declared as such by the Committee after making due inquiry
under section 39;
(17) “Children’s Home” means a Children’s Home,
established or maintained, in every district or group of
districts, by the State Government, either by itself, or through
a voluntary or non-governmental organisation, and is
registered as such for the purposes specified in section 51;
(18) “Child Welfare Officer” means an officer attached
to a Children’s Home, for carrying out the directions given by
the Committee or, as the case may be, the Board with such
responsibility as may be prescribed;
(19) “Child Welfare Police Officer” means an officer
designated as such under sub-section ( 1) of section 108;
(20) “Children’s Court” means a court established under
the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 or
a Special Court under the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 2012, wherever existing and where such courts
have not been designated, the Court of Sessions having
jurisdiction to try offences under the Act;
(21) “child care institution” means Children Home,
Open Shelter, Observation Home, Special Home, Place of
Safety, Specialised Adoption Agency and a fit facility
recognised under this Act for providing care and protection to
children, who are in need of such services;
(22) “court” means a civil court, which has jurisdiction
in matters of adoption and guardianship and may include the
District Court, Family Court and City Civil Courts;
(23) “Committee” means a Child Welfare Committee
constituted under of section 28;
(24) “corporal punishment” means the subjecting of a
child by any person to physical punishment that involves the
deliberate infliction of pain as retribution for an offence, or
for the purpose of disciplining or reforming the child;
4 of 2006.
32 of 2012.

78
(25) “childline services” means a twenty-four hours
emergency outreach service for children in crisis which links
them to emergency or long-term care and rehabilitation
service;
(26) “District Child Protection Unit” means a Child
Protection Unit for a District, established by the State
Government under section 107, which is the focal point to
ensure the implementation of this Act and other child
protection measures in the district;
(27) “fit facility” means a facility being run by a
governmental organisation or a registered voluntary or non-
governmental organisation, prepared to temporarily own the
responsibility of a particular child for a specific purpose, and
such facility is recognised as fit for the said purpose, by the
Committee, as the case may be, or the Board, under sub-
section ( 1) of section 52;
(28) “fit person” means any person, prepared to own
the responsibility of a child, for a specific purpose, and such
person is identified after inquiry made in this behalf and
recognised as ‘fit’ for the said purpose, by the Committee or,
as the case may be, the Board, to receive and take care of
the child;
(29) “foster care” means placement of a child, by the
Committee for the purpose of alternate care in the domestic
environment of a family, other than the child’s biological
family, that has been selected, qualified, approved and
supervised for providing such care;
(30) “foster family” means a family found suitable by
the District Child Protection Unit to keep children in foster
care under section 45;
(31) “guardian” in relation to a child, means his natural
guardian or any other person having, in the opinion of the
Committee or, as the case may be, the Board, the actual
charge of the child, and recognised by the Committee or, as
the case may be, the Board as a guardian in the course of
proceedings;
(32) “group foster care” means a family like care
facility for children in need of care and protection who are
without parental care, aiming on providing personalised care
and fostering a sense of belonging and identity, through family
like and community based solutions;
(33) “heinous offences” includes the offences for
which the minimum punishment under the Indian Penal Code
or any other law for the time being in force is imprisonment
for seven years or more;
45 of 1860.

79
(34) “inter-country adoption” means adoption of a child
from India by non-resident Indian or by a person of Indian
origin or by a foreigner;
(35) “juvenile” means a child below the age of eighteen
years;
(36) “narcotic drug” and “psychotropic substance” shall
have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985;
(37) “no objection certificate” for inter-country
adoption means a certificate issued by the Central Adoption
Resource Authority for the said purpose;
(38) “Non-Resident Indian” means a person who holds
an Indian passport and is presently residing abroad for more
than one year;
(39) “notification” means the notification published in
the Official Gazette of India, or as the case may be, in the
Gazette of a State, and the expression “notify” shall be
construed accordingly;
(40) “observation home” means an observation home
established and maintained in every district or group of
districts by a State Government, either by itself, or through a
voluntary or non-governmental organisation, and is registered
as such, for the purposes specified in sub-section ( 1) of
section 48;
(41) “open shelter” means a facility for children,
established and maintained by the State Government, either by
itself, or through a voluntary or non-governmental
organisation under sub-section ( 1) of section 44, and
registered as such, for the purposes specified in that section;
(42) “orphan” means a child—
(i) who is without biological or adoptive parents
or legal guardian; or
(ii) whose legal guardian is not willing to take, or
capable of taking care of the child;
(43) “overseas citizen of India” means a person
registered as such under the Citizenship Act, 1955;
(44) “person of Indian origin” means a person, any of
whose lineal ancestors is or was an Indian national, and who
is presently holding a Person of Indian Origin Card issued by
the Central Government;
(45) “petty offences” includes the offences for which
the maximum punishment under the Indian Penal Code or any
other law for the time being in force is imprisonment up to
three years;
61 of 1985.
57 of 1955.
45 of 1860.

80
(46) “place of safety” means any place or institution,
not being a police lockup or jail, established separately or
attached to an observation home or a special home, as the
case may be, the person in-charge of which is willing to
receive and take care of the children alleged or found to be
in conflict with law, by an order of the Board or the
Children’s Court, both during inquiry and ongoing
rehabilitation after having been found guilty for a period and
purpose as specified in the order;
(47) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made
under this Act;
(48) “probation officer” means an officer appointed by
the State Government as a probation officer under the
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 or the Legal-cum-Probation
Officer appointed by the State Government under District
Child Protection Unit;
(49) “prospective adoptive parents” means a person or
persons eligible to adopt a child as per the provision of
section 58;
(50) “public place” shall have the same meaning
assigned to it in the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956;
(51) “registered”, with reference to child care
institutions or agencies or facilities managed by the State
Government, or a voluntary or non-governmental organisation,
means observation homes, special homes, place of safety,
children’s homes, open shelters or specialised adoption agency
or fit facility or any other institution that may come up in
response to a particular need or agencies or facilities
authorised and registered under section 42, for providing
residential care to children, on a short-term or long-term
basis;
(52) “relative”, in relation to a child for the purpose of
adoption under this Act, means a paternal uncle or aunt, or a
maternal uncle or aunt, or paternal grandparent or maternal
grandparent;
(53) “State Agency” means the State Adoption Resource
Agency set up by the State Government for dealing with
adoption and related matters under section 68;
(54) “serious offences” includes the offences for which
the punishment under the Indian Penal Code or any other law
for the time being in force, is imprisonment between three to
seven years;
(55) “special juvenile police unit” means a unit of the
police force of a district or city or, as the case may be, any
other police unit like railway police, dealing with children and
designated as such for handling children under section 108;
20 of 1958.
104 of 1956.
45 of 1860.

81
(56) “special home” means an institution established by
a State Government or by a voluntary or non-governmental
organisation, registered under section 49, for housing and
providing rehabilitative services to children in conflict with
law, who are found, through inquiry, to have committed an
offence and are sent to such institution by an order of the
Board;
(57) “Specialised Adoption Agency” means an institution
established by the State Government or by a voluntary or
non-governmental organisation and recognised under
section 66, for housing orphans, abandoned and surrendered
children, placed there by order of the Committee, for the
purpose of adoption;
(58) “sponsorship” means provision of supplementary
support, financial or otherwise, to the families to meet the
medical, educational and developmental needs of the child;
(59) “State Government”, in relation to a Union
territory, means the Administrator of that Union territory
appointed by the President under article 239 of the
Constitution;
(60) “surrendered child” means a child, who is
relinquished by the parent or guardian to the Committee, on
account of physical, emotional and social factors beyond their
control, and declared as such by the Committee;
(61) all words and expressions used but not defined in
this Act and defined in other Acts shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
GENERAL PRINCIPLES  OF CARE AND PROTECTION  OF CHILDREN
3. The Central Government, the State Governments, the
Board, and other agencies, as the case may be, while implementing
the provisions of this Act shall be guided by the following
fundamental principles, namely:––
(i) Principle of presumption of innocence: Any child
shall be presumed to be an innocent of any mala fide or
criminal intent up to the age of eighteen years.
(ii) Principle of dignity and worth : All human beings
shall be treated with equal dignity and rights.
(iii) Principle of participation : Every child shall have a
right to be heard and to participate in all processes and
decisions affecting his interest and the child’s views shall be
taken into consideration with due regard to the age and
maturity of the child.
General
principles to
be followed in
administration
of Act.

82
(iv) Principle of best interest : All decisions regarding
the child shall be based on the primary consideration that they
are in the best interest of the child and to help the child to
develop full potential.
(v) Principle of family responsibility : The primary
responsibility of care, nurture and protection of the child shall
be that of the biological family or adoptive or foster parents,
as the case may be.
(vi) Principle of safety: All measures shall be taken to
ensure that the child is safe and is not subjected to any harm,
abuse or maltreatment while in contact with the care and
protection system, and thereafter.
(vii ) Positive measures : All resources are to be
mobilised including those of family and community, for
promoting the well-being, facilitating development of identity
and providing an inclusive and enabling environment, to
reduce vulnerabilities of children and the need for intervention
under this Act.
(viii ) Principle of non-stigmatising semantics :
Adversarial or accusatory words are not to be used in the
processes pertaining to a child.
(ix) Principle of non-waiver of rights : No waiver of
any of the right of the child is permissible or valid, whether
sought by the child or person acting on behalf of the child,
or a Board or a Committee and any non-exercise of a
fundamental right shall not amount to waiver.
(x) Principle of equality and non-discrimination : There
shall be no discrimination against a child on any grounds
including sex, caste, ethnicity, place of birth, disability or
offence committed, and equality of access, opportunity and
treatment shall be provided to every child.
(xi) Principle of right to privacy and confidentiality :
Every child shall have a right to protection of his privacy and
confidentiality, by all means and throughout the judicial
process.
(xii) Principle of institutionalisation as a measure of
last resort: A child shall be placed in institutional care as a
step of last resort after making a reasonable inquiry.
(xiii) Principle of repatriation and restoration : Every
child in the juvenile justice system shall have the right to be
re-united with his family at the earliest and to be restored to
the same socio-economic and cultural status that he was in,
before coming under the purview of this Act, unless such
restoration and repatriation is not in his best interest.

83
(xiv) Principle of fresh start : All past records of any
child under the Juvenile Justice system should be erased
except in special circumstances.
(xv) Principle of diversion : Measures for dealing with
children in conflict with law without resorting to judicial
proceedings shall be promoted unless it is in the best interest
of the child or the society as a whole.
(xvi) Principles of natural justice : Basic procedural
standards of fairness shall be adhered to, including the right
to a fair hearing, rule against bias and the right to review, by
all persons or bodies, acting in a judicial capacity under this
Act.
CHAPTER-III
JUVENILE J USTICE B OARD
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the State Government shall, constitute for
every district, one or more Juvenile Justice Boards for exercising
the powers and discharging its functions relating to children in
conflict with law under this Act.
(2) A Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of the First Class not being Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate (hereinafter referred to as
Principal Magistrate) with at least three years of experience and two
social workers from two different reputed non-governmental
organisations selected in such manner as may be prescribed, of
whom at least one shall be a woman, forming a Bench and every
such Bench shall have the powers conferred by the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the
case may be, a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class.
(3) No social worker shall be appointed as a member of the
Board unless such person has been actively involved in health,
education, or welfare activities pertaining to children for atleast
seven years or a practicing professional with a degree in child
psychology, psychiatry, sociology or law.
(4) No person shall be eligible for selection as a member of
the Board, if he ––
(i) has any past record of violation of human rights or
child rights;
(ii) has been convicted of an offence involving moral
turpitude, and such conviction has not been reversed or has
not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence;
(iii) has been removed or dismissed from service of the
Central Government or a State Government or an undertaking
or corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government
or a State Government;
Juvenile Justice
Board.2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

84
(iv) has ever indulged in child abuse or employment of
child labour or any other violation of human rights or
immoral act.
(5) The State Government shall ensure that induction training
and sensitisation of all members including Principal Magistrate of the
Board on care, protection, rehabilitation, legal provisions and justice
for children, as may be prescribed, is provided within a period of
sixty days from the date of appointment.
(6) The term of office of the members of the Board and the
manner in which such member may resign shall be such, as may be
prescribed.
(7) The appointment of any member of the Board, except the
Principal Magistrate, may be terminated after holding an inquiry by
the State Government, if he ––
(i) has been found guilty of misuse of power vested
under this Act; or
(ii) fails to attend the proceedings of the Board
consecutively for three months without any valid reason; or
(iii) fails to attend less than three-fourths of the sittings
in a year; or
(iv) becomes ineligible under sub-section ( 4) during his
term as a member.
5. Where an inquiry has been initiated in respect of any child
under this Act, and during the course of such inquiry, the child
completes the age of eighteen years, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force,
the inquiry may be continued by the Board and orders may be
passed in respect of such person as if such person had continued
to be a child.
6. (1) Any person, who has completed eighteen years of age,
but is below twenty-one years of age and is apprehended for
committing an offence when he was below the age of eighteen
years, then, such person shall, subject to the provisions of this
section, be treated as a child during the process of inquiry.
(2) The person referred in sub-section ( 1), if not released on
bail by the Board shall be placed in a place of safety during the
process of inquiry.
(3) The person referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be treated
as per the procedure specified under the provisions of this Act.
7. Any person, who is apprehended after completing the age
of twenty-one years, for committing any serious or heinous offence
when such person was between the age of sixteen to eighteen years,
then he shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be tried as an
adult.
Placement of
person, who
ceases to be a
child during the
process of
inquiry.
Placement of
persons, who
committed an
offence, when
the person was
below the age
of eighteen
years.
Placement of a
person above the
age of twenty-
one years for
committing any
offence when he
was a child.

85
8. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and shall observe
such rules in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings,
as may be prescribed and shall ensure that all procedures are child
friendly and that the venue is not intimidating to the child and does
not resemble as regular courts.
(2) A child in conflict with law may be produced before an
individual member of the Board, when the Board is not in sitting.
(3) A Board may act notwithstanding the absence of any
member of the Board, and no order passed by the Board shall be
invalid by the reason only of the absence of any member during any
stage of proceedings:
Provided that there shall be atleast two members including the
Principal Magistrate present at the time of final disposal of the case
or in making an order under sub-section ( 3) of section 19.
(4) In the event of any difference of opinion among the
members of the Board in the interim or final disposal, the opinion
of the majority shall prevail, but where there is no such majority,
the opinion of the Principal Magistrate, shall prevail.
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force but save as otherwise expressly provided
in this Act, the Board constituted for any district shall have the
power to deal exclusively with all the proceedings under this Act,
relating to children in conflict with law, in the area of jurisdiction
of such Board.
(2) The powers conferred on the Board by or under this Act
may also be exercised by the High Court and the Children’s Court,
when the proceedings come before them under section 20 or in
appeal, revision or otherwise.
(3) The functions and responsibilities of the Board shall
include ––
(a) ensuring the informed participation of the child and
the parent or guardian, in every step of the process;
(b) ensuring that the child’s rights are protected
throughout the process of apprehending the child, inquiry,
aftercare and rehabilitation;
(c) ensuring availability of legal aid for the child
through the legal services institutions;
(d) wherever necessary the Board shall provide an
interpreter or translator, having such qualifications,
experience, and on payment of such fees as may be
prescribed, to the child if he fails to understand the language
used in the proceedings;
Procedure in
relation to
Board.
Powers,
functions and
responsibilities
of the Board.

86
(e) directing the Probation Officer, or in case a
Probation Officer is not available to the Child Welfare Officer
or a social worker, to undertake a social investigation into the
case and submit a social investigation report within a period
of fifteen days from the date of first production before the
Board to ascertain the circumstances in which the alleged
offence was committed;
(f) adjudicate and dispose of cases of children in
conflict with law in accordance with the process of inquiry
specified in section 15;
(g) transferring to the Committee, matters concerning
the child alleged to be in conflict with law, stated to be in
need of care and protection at any stage, hereby recognising
that a child in conflict with law can also be a child in need
of care simultaneously and there is a need for the Committee
and the Board to be both involved;
(h) disposing of the matter and passing a final order
that includes an individual care plan for the child’s
rehabilitation, including follow up by the Probation Officer or
the District Child Protection Unit or a member of a non-
governmental organisation, as may be required;
(i) conducting inquiry for declaring “fit persons”
regarding care of children in conflict with law;
(j) conducting at least one inspection visit every month
of residential facilities for children in conflict with law and
recommend action for improvement in quality of services to
the District Child Protection Unit and the State Government;
(k) order the police for registration of first information
report for offences committed against any child in conflict
with law, under this Act or any other law for the time being
in force, on a complaint made in this regard;
(l) order the police for registration of first information
report for offences committed against any child in need of
care and protection, under this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, on a written complaint by a Committee
in this regard;
(m) conducting regular inspection of jails meant for
adults to check if any child is lodged in such jails and take
immediate measures for transfer of such a child to the
observation home; and
(n) any other function as may be prescribed.
10. (1) When a magistrate, not empowered to exercise the
powers of the Board under this Act is of the opinion that the person
alleged to have committed the offence and brought before him is a
child, he shall, without any delay, record such opinion and forward
the child immediately along with the record of such proceedings to
the Board having jurisdiction.
Procedure to be
followed by a
Magistrate who
has not been
empowered
under this Act.

87
(2) In case a person alleged to have committed an offence
claims before a court other than a Board, that the person is a child
or was a child on the date of commission of the offence, or if the
court itself is of the opinion that the person was a child on the date
of commission of the offence, the said court shall make an inquiry,
take such evidence as may be necessary (but not an affidavit) to
determine the age of such person, and shall record a finding on the
matter, stating the age of the person as nearly as may be:
Provided that such a claim may be raised before any court
and it shall be recognised at any stage, even after final disposal of
the case, and such a claim shall be determined in accordance with
the provisions contained in this Act and the rules made thereunder
even if the person has ceased to be a child on or before the date
of commencement of this Act.
(3) Subject to provisions of section 7, if the court finds that
a person has committed an offence and was a child on the date of
commission of such offence, it shall forward the child to the Board
for passing appropriate orders and the sentence, if any, passed by
the court shall be deemed to have no effect.
(4) In case a person under this section is required to be kept
in protective custody, while the person’s claim of being a child is
being inquired into, such person may be placed, in the intervening
period in a place of safety.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH LAW
11. (1) As soon as a child alleged to be in conflict with law
is apprehended by the police, such child shall be placed under the
charge of the special juvenile police unit or the designated child
welfare police officer, who shall produce the child before the Board
without any loss of time but within a period of twenty-four hours
of apprehending the child excluding the time necessary for the
journey, from the place where such child was apprehended:
Provided that in no case, a child alleged to be in conflict with
law shall be placed in a police lockup or lodged in a jail.
(2) The State Government shall make rules consistent with
this Act,—
(i) to provide for persons through whom (including
registered voluntary or non-governmental organisations) any
child alleged to be in conflict with law may be produced
before the Board;
(ii) to provide for the manner in which the child alleged
to be in conflict with law may be sent to an observation home
or place of safety, as the case may be.
Apprehension
of child
alleged to be
in conflict
with law.

88
12. Any person in whose charge a child in conflict with law
is placed, shall while the order is in force, have responsibility of the
said child, as if the said person was the child’s parent and
responsible for the child’s maintenance:
Provided that the child shall continue in such person’s charge
for the period stated by the Board, notwithstanding that the said
child is claimed by the parents or any other person except when the
Board is of the opinion that the parent or any other person are fit
to exercise charge over such child.
13. (1) When any person, who is apparently a child and is
alleged to have committed a bailable or non-bailable offence, is
apprehended or detained by the police or appears or brought before
a Board, such person shall, notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the
time being in force, be released on bail with or without surety or
placed under the supervision of a probation officer or under the care
of any fit person:
Provided that such person shall not be so released if there
appears reasonable grounds for believing that the release is likely to
bring that person into association with any known criminal or
expose the said person to moral, physical or psychological danger or
the person’s release would defeat the ends of justice, and the Board
shall record the reasons for denying the bail and circumstances that
led to such a decision.
(2) When such person having been apprehended is not
released on bail under sub-section ( 1) by the officer-in-charge of the
police station, such officer shall cause the person to be kept only
in an observation home in such manner as may be prescribed until
the person can be brought before a Board.
(3) When such person is not released on bail under sub-
section ( 1) by the Board, it shall make an order sending him to an
observation home or a place of safety, as the case may be, for such
period during the pendency of the inquiry regarding the person, as
may be specified in the order.
(4) When a child in conflict with law is unable to fulfil the
conditions of bail order within seven days of the bail order, such
child shall be produced before the Board for modification of the
conditions of bail.
14. (1) Where a child alleged to be in conflict with law is
apprehended, the officer designated as Child Welfare Police Officer
of the police station, or the special juvenile police unit to which
such child is brought, shall, as soon as possible after apprehending
the child, inform —
(i) the parent or guardian of such child, if they can be
found, and direct them to be present at the Board before
which the child is produced; and
Bail to a
person who is
apparently a
child alleged
to be in
conflict with
law.
Role of
person in
whose charge
child in
conflict with
law is placed.
2 of 1974.
Information
to parents,
guardian or
Probation
Officer.

89
(ii) the probation officer, or if no probation officer is
available, a Child Welfare Officer, for preparation and
submission within two weeks to the Board, a social
investigation report containing information regarding the
antecedents and family background of the child and other
material circumstances likely to be of assistance to the Board
for making the inquiry.
(2) Where a child is released on bail, the probation officer or
the Child Welfare Officer shall be informed by the Board.
15. (1) Where a child alleged to be in conflict with law is
produced before Board, the Board shall hold an inquiry in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and may pass such
orders in relation to such child as it deems fit under sections 18 and
19 of this Act.
(2) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within
a period of four months from the date of first production of the
child before the Board, unless the period is extended, for a
maximum period of two more months by the Board, having regard
to the circumstances of the case and after recording the reasons in
writing for such extension.
(3) A preliminary inquiry in case of heinous offences under
section 16 shall be disposed of by the Board within a period of one
month from the date of first production of the child before the
Board.
(4) If inquiry by the Board under sub-section ( 2) for petty or
serious offences remains inconclusive even after the extended
period, the proceedings shall stand terminated:
Provided that for heinous offences, in case the Board requires
further extension of time for completion of inquiry, the same shall
be granted by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or, as the case may be,
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, for reasons to be recorded in
writing.
(5) The Board shall take the following steps to ensure fair and
speedy inquiry, namely:—
(a) at the time of initiating the inquiry, the Board shall
satisfy itself that the child in conflict with law has not been
subjected to any ill-treatment by the police or by any other
person, including a lawyer or probation officer and take
corrective steps in case of such ill-treatment;
(b) in all cases under the Act, the proceedings shall be
conducted in simple manner as possible and care shall be
taken to ensure that the child, against whom the proceedings
have been instituted, is given child-friendly atmosphere during
the proceedings;
Inquiry by
Board
regarding
child in
conflict with
law.

90
(c) every child brought before the Board shall be given
the opportunity of being heard and participate in the inquiry;
(d) cases of petty offences, shall be disposed of by the
Board through summary proceedings, as per the procedure
prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(e) inquiry of serious offences shall be disposed of by
the Board, by following the procedure, for trial in summons
cases under the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973;
(f) inquiry of heinous offences,—
(i) for child below the age of sixteen years as on
the date of commission of an offence shall be disposed
of by the Board under clause ( e);
(ii) for child above the age of sixteen years as on
the date of commission of an offence shall be dealt
with in the manner prescribed under section 16.
16. (1) In case of a heinous offence committed by a child
who has completed or is above the age of sixteen years, the Board
shall conduct a preliminary inquiry with regard to his mental and
physical capacity to commit such offence, ability to understand the
consequences of the offence and the circumstances in which he
committed the offence, and may pass an order in accordance with
the provisions of sub-section ( 3) of section 19:
Provided that for such an inquiry, the Board may take the
assistance of experienced psychologists, psycho-social workers and
other experts.
(2) Where the Board is satisfied on preliminary inquiry that
the matter should be disposed of by the Board, then the Board shall
follow the procedure, as far as may be, for trial in summons case
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:
Provided that the inquiry under this section shall be completed
within the period specified in section 15.
17. (1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate shall review the pendency of cases of the
Board once in every three months, and shall direct the Board to
increase the frequency of its sittings or may recommend the
constitution of additional Boards.
(2) The number of cases pending before the Board, duration
of such pendency, nature of pendency and reasons thereof shall be
reviewed in every six months by a high level committee consisting
of the Executive Chairperson of the State Legal Services Authority,
who shall be the Chairperson, the Home Secretary, the Secretary
responsible for the implementation of this Act in the State and a
representative from a voluntary or non-governmental organisation to
be nominated by the Chairperson.
Preliminary
Inquiry into
heinous offences
by the Board.
Review of
pendency of
Inquiry.

91
(3) The information of such pendency shall also be furnished
by the Board to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate and the District Magistrate on quarterly
basis in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government.
18. (1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that the child
brought before it has not committed any offence, then
notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the Board shall pass order to that effect.
(2) In case it appears to the Board that the child referred to
in sub-section ( 1) is in need of care and protection, it may refer the
child to the Committee with appropriate directions.
19. (1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a child
irrespective of age has committed a petty offence, or a serious
offence, or a child below the age of sixteen years has committed a
heinous offence, then, notwithstanding anything contrary contained
in any other law for the time being in force, and based on the
nature of offence, specific need for supervision or intervention,
circumstances as brought out in the social investigation report and
past conduct of the child, the Board may, if it so thinks fit,—
(a) allow the child to go home after advice or
admonition by following appropriate inquiry and counselling to
such child and to his parents or the guardian;
(b) direct the child to participate in group counselling
and similar activities;
(c) order the child to perform community service under
the supervision of an organisation or institution, or a specified
person, persons or group of persons identified by the Board;
(d) order the child or parents or the guardian of the
child to pay fine:
Provided that, in case the child is working, it may be
ensured that the provisions of any labour law for the time
being in force are not violated;
(e) direct the child to be released on probation of good
conduct and placed under the care of any parent, guardian or
fit person, on such parent, guardian or fit person executing a
bond, with or without surety, as the Board may require, for
the good behaviour and child’s well-being for any period not
exceeding three years;
(f) direct the child to be released on probation of good
conduct and placed under the care and supervision of any fit
facility for ensuring the good behaviour and child’s well-being
for any period not exceeding three years;
Orders
regarding a
child not
found to be in
conflict with
law.
Orders
regarding
child found to
be in conflict
with law.

92
(g) direct the child to be sent to a special home, for
such period, not exceeding three years, as it thinks fit, for
providing reformative services including education, skill
development, counselling, behaviour modification therapy, and
psychiatric support during the period of stay in the special
home:
Provided that if the conduct and behaviour of the child
has been such that, it would not be in the child’s interest, or
in the interest of other children housed in a special home, the
Board may send such child to the place of safety.
(2) If an order is passed under clauses ( a) to ( g) of sub-
section ( 1), the Board may, in addition pass orders to—
(i) attend school; or
(ii) attend a vocational training centre; or
(iii) attend a therapeutic centre; or
(iv) prohibit the child from visiting, frequenting or
appearing at a specified place; or
(v) undergo a de-addiction programme.
(3) Where the Board after preliminary inquiry under
section 16 comes to the conclusion that there is a need for further
trial of the said child as an adult, then the Board may order transfer
of the trial of the case to the Children’s Court having jurisdiction to
try such offences.
20. (1) After the receipt of preliminary inquiry from the Board
under section 16, the Children´s Court may decide that—
(i) there is a need for trial of the child as an adult as
per the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
and pass appropriate orders after trial subject to the
provisions of this section and section 22; or
(ii) there is no need for trial of the child as an adult
and may conduct an inquiry as a Board and pass appropriate
orders in accordance with the provisions of section 18.
(2) The Children’s Court shall ensure that the final order, with
regard to a child in conflict with law, shall include an individual care
plan for the rehabilitation of child, including follow up by the
probation officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social
worker.
(3) The Children’s Court shall ensure that the child who is
found to be in conflict with law is sent to a place of safety till he
attains the age of twenty-one years and thereafter, the person shall
be transferred to a jail:
Powers of
Children’s
Court.
2 of 1974.

93
Provided that the reformative services including educational
services, skill development, alternative therapy such as counselling,
behaviour modification therapy, and psychiatric support shall be
provided to the child during the period of his stay in the place of
safety.
(4) The Children’s Court shall ensure that there is a periodic
follow up report every year by the probation officer or the District
Child Protection Unit or a social worker, as required, to evaluate the
progress of the child in the place of safety and to ensure that there
is no ill-treatment to the child in any form.
(5) The reports under sub-section ( 4) shall be forwarded to
the Children´s Court for record and follow up, as may be required.
21. (1) When the child in conflict with the law attains the age
of twenty-one years and is yet to complete the term of stay, the
Children´s Court shall provide for a follow up by the probation
officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker or
by itself, as required, to evaluate if such child has undergone
reformative changes and if the child can be a contributing member
of the society and for this purpose the progress records of the child
under sub-section ( 4) of section 20, along with evaluation of
relevant experts are to be taken into consideration.
(2) After the completion of the procedure specified under sub-
section ( 1), the Children’s Court may—
(i) decide to release the child on such conditions as it
deems fit which includes appointment of a monitoring
authority for the remainder of the prescribed term of stay;
(ii) decide that the child shall complete the remainder
of his term in a jail:
Provided that each State Government shall maintain a list of
monitoring authorities and monitoring procedures as may be
prescribed.
22. No child in conflict with law shall be sentenced to death
or for life imprisonment without the possibility of release, for any
such offence, either under the provisions of this Act or under the
provisions of the Indian Penal Code or any other law for this time
being in force.
23. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or any preventive detention law
for the time being in force, no proceeding shall be instituted and no
order shall be passed against any child under Chapter VIII of the
said Code.
Child attained
age of
twenty-one
years and yet
to complete
prescribed
term of stay
in place of
safety.
Order that may
not be passed
against a child
in conflict with
law.
Proceeding
under Chapter
VIII of the
Code of
Criminal
Procedure not
to apply
against child.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

94
24. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 223 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the
time being in force, there shall be no joint proceedings of a child
alleged to be in conflict with law, with a person who is not a child.
(2) If during the inquiry by the Board or by the Children’s
Court, the person alleged to be in conflict with law is found that he
is not a child, such person shall not be tried along with a child.
25. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, a child who has committed an offence
and has been dealt with under the provisions of this Act shall not
suffer disqualification, if any, attached to a conviction of an offence
under such law.
(2) The Board shall make an order directing the Police or the
Children’s Court and its own registry that the relevant records of
such conviction shall be destroyed after the expiry of the period of
appeal or, as the case may be, a reasonable period as may be
prescribed.
(3) In case of a heinous offence when such a case is
transferred to a Children’s Court under section 19, the Children’s
Court shall keep the record of the child only when the child is sent
to a jail.
26. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all
proceedings in respect of a child alleged or found to be in conflict
with law pending before any Board or court on the date of
commencement of this Act, shall be continued in that Board or
court as if this Act had not been enacted.
27. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
any other law for the time being in force, any police officer may
take charge of a child in conflict with law who has run away from
a special home or an observation home or a place of safety or from
the care of a person or institution under whom the child was placed
under this Act.
(2) The child referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be produced,
within twenty four hours, preferably before the Board which passed
the original order in respect of that child, if possible, or, to the
nearest Board where the child is found.
(3) The Board shall ascertain the reasons for the child having
run away and pass appropriate orders for the child to be sent back
either to the institution or person from whose custody the child had
run away or any other similar place or person, as the Board may
deem fit:
Provided that the Board may also give additional directions
regarding any special steps that may be deemed necessary, for the
best interest of the child.
No joint
proceedings
of child in
conflict with
law and
person not a
child.
Removal of
disqualification
on the findings
of an offence.
2 of 1974.
Special
provision in
respect of
pending cases.
Provision
with respect
of run away
child in
conflict with
law.

95
(4) No additional proceeding shall be instituted in respect of
such child.
CHAPTER V
CHILD W ELFARE C OMMITTEE
28. (1) The State Government shall by notification in the
Official Gazette constitute for every district, one or more Child
Welfare Committees for exercising the powers and to discharge the
duties conferred on such Committees in relation to children in need
of care and protection under this Act and ensure that induction
training and sensitisation of all members of the committee is
provided within two months from the date of notification.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, and four
other members as the State Government may think fit to appoint, of
whom atleast one shall be a woman and another, an expert on the
matters concerning children.
(3) The District Child Protection Unit shall be provide with a
Secretary and other staff that may be required for secretarial
support to the Committee for its effective functioning by the State
Government.
(4) No person shall be appointed as a member of the
Committee unless such person has been actively involved in health,
education or welfare activities pertaining to children for atleast seven
years or is a practicing professional with a degree in child
psychology or psychiatry or law or social work or sociology or
human development.
(5) No person shall be appointed as a member unless he
possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed.
(6) No person shall be appointed for a period of more than
three years as a member of the Committee.
(7) The appointment of any member of the Committee shall
be terminated by the State Government after making an inquiry, if—
(i) he has been found guilty of misuse of power vested
on him under this Act;
(ii) he has been convicted of an offence involving
moral turpitude and such conviction has not been reversed or
he has not been granted full pardon in respect of such
offence;
(iii) he fails to attend the proceedings of the Committee
consecutively for three months without any valid reason or he
fails to attend less than three-fourths of the sittings in a year.
(8) The District Magistrate shall conduct a quarterly review of
the functioning of the Committee.
Child Welfare
Committee.

96
(9) The Committee shall function as a Bench and shall have
the powers conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on
a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may be, a Judicial
Magistrate of the First Class.
(10) The District Magistrate shall be the grievances redressal
authority for the Child Welfare Committee and anyone connected
with the child, may file a petition before the District Magistrate,
who shall consider and pass appropriate orders.
29. (1) The Committee shall meet at least twenty days in a
month and shall observe such rules and procedures with regard to
the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
(2) A visit to an existing child care institution by the
Committee, to check its functioning and well being of children shall
be considered as a sitting of the Committee.
(3) A child in need of care and protection may be produced
before an individual member of the Committee for being placed in
a Children’s Home or fit person when the Committee is not in
session.
(4) In the event of any difference of opinion among the
members of the Committee at the time of taking any decision, the
opinion of the majority shall prevail but where there is no such
majority, the opinion of the Chairperson shall prevail.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
Committee may act, notwithstanding the absence of any member of
the Committee, and no order made by the Committee shall be invalid
by reason only of the absence of any member during any stage of
the proceeding:
Provided that there shall be atleast three members present at
the time of final disposal of the case.
30. (1) The Committee shall have the authority to dispose of
cases for the care, protection, treatment, development and
rehabilitation of children in need of care and protection, as well as
to provide for their basic needs and protection.
(2) Where a Committee has been constituted for any area,
such Committee shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, but save as otherwise
expressly provided in this Act, have the power to deal exclusively
with all proceedings under this Act relating to children in need of
care and protection.
31. The functions and responsibilities of the Committee shall
include—
(i) taking cognizance of and receiving the children
produced before it;
Procedure in
relation to
Committee.
Powers of the
Committee.
2 of 1974.
Functions and
responsibilities
of the
Committee.

97
(ii) conducting inquiry on all issues relating to and
affecting the safety and wellbeing of the children under this
Act;
(iii) directing the Child Welfare Officers or probation
officers or District Child Protection Unit or Non-
Governmental Organisations to conduct social investigation
and submit a report before the Committee;
(iv) conducting inquiry for declaring “fit persons” for
care of children in need of care and protection;
(v) directing placement of a child in foster care;
(vi) ensuring care, protection, appropriate rehabilitation
or restoration of children in need of care and protection,
based on the child’s individual care plan and passing
necessary directions to parents or guardians or fit persons or
children’s homes or fit facility in this regard;
(vii) selecting registered institution for placement of
each child requiring institutional support, based on the child’s
age, gender, disability and needs and keeping in mind the
available capacity of the institution;
(viii) conducting atleast two inspection visits per month
of residential facilities for children in need of care and
protection and recommending action for improvement in
quality of services to the District Child Protection Unit and
the State Government;
(ix) certifying the execution of the surrender deed by
the parents and ensuring that they are given time to reconsider
their decision as well as making all efforts to keep the family
together;
(x) ensuring that all efforts are made for restoration of
abandoned or lost children to their families following due
process, as may be prescribed;
(xi) declaration of orphan, abandoned and surrendered
child as legally free for adoption after due inquiry;
(xii) taking suo moto cognizance of cases and reaching
out to children in need of care and protection, who are not
produced before the Committee, provided that such decision
is taken by atleast three members;
(xiii) taking action for rehabilitation of sexually abused
children who are reported as children in need of care and
protection to the Committee by Special Juvenile Police Unit or
local police, as the case may be, under the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012;
(xiv) dealing with cases referred by the Board under
sub-section ( 2) of section 18;
32 of 2012.

98
(xv) co-ordinate with the police, labour department and
other agencies involved in the care and protection of children
with support of the District Child Protection Unit or the State
Government;
(xvi) in case of a complaint of abuse of a child in any
child care institution, the Committee shall conduct an inquiry
and give directions to the police or the District Child
Protection Unit or labour department or childline services, as
the case may be;
(xvii) accessing appropriate legal services for children;
(xviii) such other functions and responsibilities, as may
be prescribed.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
32. (1) Any child in need of care and protection may be
produced before the Committee by any of the following persons,
namely:—
(i) any police officer or special juvenile police unit or
a designated Child Welfare Police Officer or any officer of
District Child Protection Unit or inspector appointed under
any labour law for the time being in force;
(ii) any public servant;
(iii ) Childline Services or any voluntary or non-
governmental organisation or any agency as may be
recognised by the State Government;
(iv) Child Welfare Officer or probation officer;
(v) any social worker or a public spirited citizen;
(vi) by the child himself; or
(vii) any nurse, doctor or management of a nursing
home, hospital or maternity home:
Provided that the child shall be produced before the
Committee without any loss of time but within a period of twenty-
four hours excluding the time necessary for the journey.
(2) The State Government may make rules consistent with
this Act, to provide for the manner of submitting the report to the
Committee and the manner of sending and entrusting the child to
children’s home or shelter home or fit facility or fit person, as the
case may be, during the period of the inquiry.
Production
before
Committee.

99
33. (1) Any individual or a police officer or any functionary
of any organisation or a nursing home or hospital or maternity
home, who or which finds and takes charge, or is handed over a
child who appears or claims to be abandoned or lost, or a child who
appears or claims to be an orphan without family support, shall
within twenty-four hours (excluding the time necessary for the
journey), give information to the Childline Services or the nearest
police station or to a Child Welfare Committee or to the District
Child Protection Unit, or hand over the child to a child care
institution registered under this Act, as the case may be.
(2) The information regarding a child referred to in sub-
section ( 1) shall be mandatorily uploaded on a portal as may be
specified by the Central Government or the Committee or the
District Child Protection Unit or the child care institution, as the
case may be.
34. If information regarding a child as required under
section 33 is not given within the period specified in the said
section, then, such act shall be regarded as an offence.
35. Any person who has committed an offence under
section 34 shall be liable to imprisonment up to six months or fine
of ten thousand rupees or both.
36. (1) A parent or guardian, who for physical, emotional and
social factors beyond their control, wishes to surrender a child,
shall produce the child before the Committee.
(2) If, after prescribed process of inquiry and counselling, the
Committee is satisfied, a surrender deed shall be executed by the
parent or guardian, as the case may be, before the Committee.
(3) The parents or guardian who surrendered the child, shall
be given one month time to reconsider their decision and in the
intervening period the Committee shall either allow, after due inquiry,
the child to be with the parents or guardian under supervision, or
place the child in a Specialised Adoption Agency, if he or she is
below six years of age, or a children’s home if he is above six
years.
37. (1) On production of a child or receipt of a report under
section 32, the Committee shall hold an inquiry in such manner as
may be prescribed and the Committee, on its own or on the report
from any person or agency as specified in sub-section ( 2) of
section 32, may pass an order to send the child to the children’s
home or shelter home or a fit facility or fit person, and for speedy
social investigation by a social worker or Child Welfare Officer or
Child Welfare Police Officer:
Provided that all children below six years of age, who are
orphan, surrendered or appear to be abandoned shall be placed in a
Specialised Adoption Agency, where available.
Mandatory
reporting
regarding a
child found
separated
from
guardian.
Offence of
non-reporting.
Penalty for
non-reporting.
Surrender of
children.
Inquiry.

100
(2) The social investigation shall be completed within fifteen
days so as to enable the Committee to pass final order within four
months of first production of the child:
Provided that for orphan, abandoned or surrendered children,
the time for completion of inquiry shall be as specified in
section 39.
(3) After the completion of the inquiry, if Committee is of the
opinion that the said child has no family or ostensible support or is
in continued need of care and protection, it may send the child to
a Specialised Adoption Agency if the child is below six years of age,
children’s home or to a fit facility or person or foster family, till
suitable means of rehabilitation are found for the child, as may be
prescribed, or till the child attains the age of eighteen years:
Provided that the situation of the child placed in a children’s
home or with a fit facility or person or a foster family, shall be
reviewed by the Committee, as may be prescribed.
(4) The Committee shall submit a quarterly report on the
nature of disposal of cases and pendency of cases to the District
Magistrate in the manner as may be prescribed, for review of
pendency of cases.
(5) After review under sub-section ( 4), the District Magistrate
shall direct the Committee to take necessary remedial measures to
address the pendency, if necessary and send a report of such
reviews to the State Government, who may cause the constitution
of additional Committees, if required:
Provided that if the pendency of cases continues to be
unaddressed by the Committee even after three months of receiving
such directions, the State Government shall terminate the said
Committee and shall constitute a new Committee.
(6) In anticipation of termination of the Committee and in
order that no time is lost in constituting a new Committee, the State
Government shall maintain a standing panel of eligible persons to be
appointed as members of the Committee.
(7) In case of any delay in the constitution of a new
Committee under sub-section ( 5), the Child Welfare Committee of a
nearby district shall assume responsibility in the intervening period.
38. The Committee on being satisfied through the inquiry that
the child before the Committee is a child in need of care and
protection, may, on consideration of Social Investigation Report
submitted by Child Welfare Officer and taking into account the
child’s wishes in case the child is sufficiently mature to take a view,
pass one or more of the following orders, namely:—
(a) declaration that a child is in need of care and
protection;
Orders passed
regarding a
child in need
of care and
protection.

101
(b) restoration of the child to parents or guardian or
family with or without supervision of Child Welfare Officer or
designated social worker;
(c) placement of the child in Children’s Home or fit
facility or Specialised Adoption Agency for the purpose of
adoption for long term or temporary care, keeping in mind the
capacity of the institution for housing such children, either
after reaching the conclusion that the family of the child
cannot be traced or even if traced, restoration of the child to
the family is not in the best interest of the child;
(d) placement of the child with “fit person” for long
term or temporary care;
(e) foster care orders under section 45;
(f) sponsorship orders under section 46;
(g) directions to persons or institutions or facilities in
whose care the child is placed, regarding care, protection and
rehabilitation of the child, including directions relating to
immediate shelter and services such as medical attention,
psychiatric and psychological support including need-based
counselling, occupational therapy or behaviour modification
therapy, skill training, legal aid, educational services, and other
developmental activities, as required, as well as follow-up and
coordination with the District Child Protection Unit or State
Government and other agencies;
(h) declaration that the child is legally free for adoption
under section 39.
(2) The Committee may also pass orders for —
(i) declaration of fit persons for foster care;
(ii) getting one time after care support under section 47
of the Act; or
(iii) any other order related to any other function as
may be prescribed.
39. (1) In case of orphan and abandoned child, the Committee
shall make all efforts for tracing the parents or guardians of the
child and on completion of such inquiry, if it is established that the
child is either an orphan having no one to take care, or abandoned,
the Committee shall declare the child legally free for adoption:
Provided that such declaration shall be made within a period
of two months from the date of production of the child, for
children who are up to two years of age and within four months for
children above two years of age:
Procedure for
declaring a
child legally
free for
adoption.

102
Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in
this regard in any other law for the time being in force, no first
information report shall be registered against any biological parent in
the process of inquiry relating to an abandoned or surrendered child
under this Act.
(2) In case of surrendered child, the institution where the
child has been placed by the Committee on an application for
surrender, shall bring the case before the Committee immediately on
completion of the period specified in section 36, for declaring the
child legally free for adoption.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, a child of a mentally retarded parents or a
unwanted child of victim of sexual assault, such child may be
declared free for adoption by the Committee, by following the
procedure under this Act.
(4) The decision to declare an orphan, abandoned or
surrendered child as legally free for adoption shall be taken by
atleast three members of the Committee.
(5) The Committee shall inform the State Agency and Central
the Authority regarding the number of children declared as legally
free for adoption and number of cases pending for decision in the
manner as may be prescribed, every month.
CHAPTER VII
R
EHABILITATION AND S OCIAL R E-INTEGRATION
40. (1) The process of rehabilitation and social integration of
children under this Act shall be undertaken, based on the individual
care plan of the child, preferably through family based care such as
by restoration to family or guardian with or without supervision or
sponsorship, or adoption or foster-care:
Provided that all efforts shall be made to keep siblings placed
in institutional or non-institutional care, together, unless it is in their
best interest not to be kept together.
(2) For children in conflict with law the process of
rehabilitation and social integration shall be undertaken in the
observation homes if the child is not released on bail or in special
homes or place of safety or fit facility or with a fit person, if placed
there by the order of the Board.
(3) The children in need of care and protection who are not
placed in families for any reason may be placed in an institution
registered for such children under this Act or with a fit person or
a fit facility, on a temporary or long-term basis, and the process of
rehabilitation and social integration shall be undertaken wherever the
child is so placed.
Process of
rehabilitation
and social re-
integration.

103
(3) The children in need of care and protection who are
leaving institutional care or children in conflict with law leaving
special homes on attaining eighteen years of age, may be provided
financial support as specified in section 47, to help them to re-
integrate into the mainstream of the society.
41. (1) The restoration and protection of a child shall be the
prime objective of any children’s home, Specialised Adoption Agency
or open shelter.
(2) The children’s home, specialised adoption agency or an
open shelter, as the case may be, shall take such steps as are
considered necessary for the restoration and protection of a child
deprived of his family environment temporarily or permanently
where such child is under their care and protection.
(3) The Committee shall have the powers to restore any child
in need of care and protection to his parents, guardian or fit person,
as the case may be, after determining the suitability of the parents
or guardian or fit person to take care of the child, and give them
suitable directions.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “restoration
and protection of a child” means restoration to—
(a) parents;
(b) adoptive parents;
(c) foster parents;
(d) guardian; or
(e) fit person.
42. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, all institutions, whether run by a State
Government or by voluntary or non-governmental organisations,
which are meant, either wholly or partially, for housing children in
need of care and protection or children in conflict with law, shall, be
registered under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed, within
a period of six months from the date of commencement of this Act,
regardless of whether they are receiving grants from the Central
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government or not:
Provided that the institutions having valid registration under
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 on
the date of commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been
registered under this Act.
(2) At the time of registration under this section, the State
Government shall determine and record the capacity and purpose of
the institution and shall register the institution as a Shelter Home, or
Children’s Home or open shelter or Specialised Adoption Agency or
Observation Home or Special Home or Place of Safety, as the case
may be.
Registration
of child care
institutions.
Restoration
of child in
need of care
and protection.
56 of 2000.

104
(3) On receipt of application for registration under sub-
section ( 1), from an existing or new institution housing children in
need of care and protection or children in conflict with law, the
State Government may grant provisional registration, within one
month from the date of receipt of application, for a maximum
period of six months, in order to bring such institution under the
purview of this Act, and shall determine the capacity of the Home
which shall be mentioned in the registration certificate:
Provided that if the said institution does not fulfill the
prescribed criteria for registration, within the period specified in
sub-section ( 1), the provisional registration shall stand cancelled and
the provisions of sub-section ( 5) shall apply.
(4) If the State Government does not issue a provisional
registration certificate within one month from the date of
application, the proof of receipt of application for registration shall
be treated as provisional registration to run an institution for a
maximum period of six months.
(5) If the application for registration is not disposed of within
six months by any officer or officers of any State Government, it
shall be regarded as dereliction of duty on their part by their higher
controlling authority and appropriate departmental proceedings shall
be initiated.
(6) The period of registration of an institution shall be five
years, and it shall be subject to renewal in every five years.
(7) The State Government may, after following the procedure
as may be prescribed, cancel or withhold registration, as the case
may be, of such institutions which fail to provide rehabilitation and
reintegration services as specified in section 54 and till such time
that the registration of an institution is renewed or granted, the State
Government shall manage the institution.
(8) Any child care institution registered under this section
shall be duty bound to admit children, subject to the capacity of the
institution, as directed by the Committee, whether they are receiving
grants from the Central Government or, as the case may be, the
State Government or not.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time-being in force, the inspection committee appointed under
section 55, shall have the powers to inspect any institution housing
children, even if not registered under this Act to determine whether
such institution is housing children in need of care and protection.
43. Any person, or persons, in-charge of an institution
housing children in need of care and protection and children in
conflict with law, who fails to comply with the provisions of sub-
section ( 1) of section 42, shall be punished with imprisonment
which may extend to one year or a fine of not less than one lakh
rupees or both:
Penalty for
non-
registration of
child care
institutions.

105
Provided that every thirty days delay in applying for
registration shall be considered as a separate offence.
44. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain, by
itself or through voluntary or non-governmental organisations, as
many open shelters as may be required, and such open shelters shall
be registered as such, in the manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The open shelters referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall
function as a community based facility for children in need of
residential support, on short term basis, with the objective of
protecting them from abuse or weaning them, or keeping them,
away from a life on the streets.
(3) The open shelters shall send every month information, in
the manner as may be prescribed, regarding children availing the
services of the shelter, to the District Child Protection Unit and the
Committee.
45. (1) The children in need of care and protection may be
placed in foster care, including group foster care for their care and
protection through orders of the Committee, after following the
procedure as may be prescribed in this regard, in a family which
does not include the child’s biological or adoptive parents or in an
unrelated family recognised as suitable for the purpose by the State
Government, for a short or extended period of time.
(2) The selection of the foster family shall be based on
family’s ability, intent, capacity and prior experience of taking care
of children.
(3) All efforts shall be made to keep siblings together in foster
families, unless it is in their best interest not to be kept together.
(4) The State Government, after taking into account the
number of children, shall provide monthly funding for such foster
care through District Child Protection Unit after following the
procedure, as may be prescribed, for inspection to ensure well being
of the children.
(5) In cases where children have been placed in foster care
for the reason that their parents have been found to be unfit or
incapacitated by the Committee, the child’s parents may visit the
child in the foster family at regular intervals, unless the Committee
feels that such visits are not in the best interest of the child, for
reasons to be recorded therefor; and eventually, the child may return
to the parent’s homes once the parents are determined by the
Committee to be fit to take care of the child.
(6) The foster family shall be responsible for providing
education, health and nutrition to the child and shall ensure the
overall well being of the child in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
Open shelter.
Foster care.

106
(7) The State Government may make rules for the purpose of
defining the procedure, criteria and the manner in which foster care
services shall be provided for children.
(8) The inspection of foster families shall be conducted every
month by the Committee in the form as may be prescribed to check
the well-being of the child and whenever a foster family is found
lacking in taking care of the child, the child shall be removed from
that foster family and shifted to another foster family as the
Committee may deem fit.
(9) No child regarded as adoptable by the Committee shall be
given for long-term foster care.
46. (1) The State Government shall make rules for the
purpose of undertaking various programmes of sponsorship of
children, such as individual to individual sponsorship, group
sponsorship or community sponsorship.
(2) The criteria for sponsorship shall include,—
(i) where mother is a widow or divorced or abandoned
by family;
(ii) where children are orphan and are living with the
extended family;
(iii ) where parents are victims of life threatening
disease;
(iv) where parents are incapacitated due to accident and
unable to take care of children both financially and physically.
(3) The duration of sponsorship shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(4) The sponsorship programme may provide supplementary
support to families, to children’s homes and to special homes to
meet medical, nutritional, educational and other needs of the
children, with a view to improving their quality of life.
47. Any child leaving a child care institution on completion of
eighteen years of age may be provided with a one-time financial
support in order to facilitate child’s reintegration into the mainstream
of the society in the manner as may be prescribed.
48. (1) The State Government shall establish and maintain in
every district or a group of districts, either by itself, or through
voluntary or non-governmental organisations, observation homes,
which shall be registered under section 42 of this Act, for
temporary reception, care and rehabilitation of any child alleged to
be in conflict with law, during the pendency of any inquiry under
this Act.
Sponsorship.
After care of
children
leaving Child
care
Institution.
Observation
Homes.

107
(2) Where the State Government is of the opinion that any
registered institution other than a home established or maintained
under sub-section ( 1), is fit for the temporary reception of such
child alleged to be in conflict with law during the pendency of any
inquiry under this Act, it may register such institution as an
observation home for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act,
provide for the management and monitoring of observation homes,
including the standards and various types of services to be provided
by them for rehabilitation and social integration of a child alleged to
be in conflict with law and the circumstances under which, and the
manner in which, the registration of an observation home may be
granted or withdrawn.
(4) Every child alleged to be in conflict with law who is not
placed under the charge of parent or guardian and is sent to an
observation home shall be segregated according to the child’s age
and gender, after giving due consideration to physical and mental
status of the child and degree of the offence committed.
49. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain
either by itself or through voluntary or non-governmental
organisations, special homes, which shall be registered as such, in
the manner as may be prescribed, in every district or a group of
districts, as may be required for rehabilitation of those children in
conflict with law who are found to have committed an offence and
who are placed there by an order of the Juvenile Justice Board
made under section 19.
(2) The State Government may, by rules, provide for the
management and monitoring of special homes, including the
standards and various types of services to be provided by them
which are necessary for social re-integration of a child, and the
circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the
registration of a special home may be granted or withdrawn.
(3) The rules made under sub-section ( 2) may also provide
for the segregation and separation of children found to be in conflict
with law on the basis of age, gender, the nature of offence
committed by them and the child’s mental and physical status.
50. (1) The State Government shall set up atleast one place
of safety in a State registered under section 42, so as to place a
person above the age of eighteen years or child in conflict with law,
who is between the age of sixteen to eighteen years and is accused
of or convicted for committing a heinous offence.
(2) Every place of safety shall have separate arrangement and
facilities for stay of such children or persons during the process of
inquiry and children or persons convicted of committing an offence.
(3) The State Government may, by rules, prescribe the types of
places that can be designated as place of safety under sub-section ( 1)
and the facilities and services that may be provided therein.
Special
Homes.
Place of
Safety.

108
51. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain, in
every district or group of districts, either by itself or through
voluntary or non-governmental organisations, children’s homes,
which shall be registered as such, for the placement of children in
need of care and protection for their care, treatment, education,
training, development and rehabilitation.
(2) The State Government shall designate any children’s home
as a home fit for children with special needs delivering specialised
services, depending on requirement.
(3) The State Government may, by rules, provide for the
monitoring and management of children’s homes including the
standards and the nature of services to be provided by them, based
on individual care plans for each child.
52. (1) The Board or the Committee shall recognise a facility
being run by a Governmental organisation or a voluntary or non-
governmental organisation registered under any law for the time
being in force to be fit to temporarily take the responsibility of a
child for a specific purpose after due inquiry regarding the suitability
of the facility and the organisation to take care of the child in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board or the Committee may withdraw the
recognition under sub-section ( 1) for reasons to be recorded in
writing.
53. (1) The Board or the Committee shall, after due
verification of credentials, recognise any person fit to temporarily
receive a child for care, protection and treatment of such child for
a specified period and in the manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board or Committee, as the case may be, may
withdraw the recognition granted under sub-section ( 1) for reasons
to be recorded in writing.
54. (1) The services that shall be provided, by the institutions
registered under this Act in the process of rehabilitation and re-
integration of children, shall be in such manner as may be
prescribed, which may include—
(i) basic requirements such as food, shelter, clothing
and medical attention as per the prescribed standards;
(ii) equipment such as wheel-chairs, prosthetic devices,
hearing aids, braille kits, or any other suitable aids and
appliances as required, for children with special needs;
(iii) appropriate education, including supplementary
education, special education, and appropriate education for
children with special needs:
Children’s
Home.
Fit facility.
Fit person.
Rehabilitation
and re-
integration
services in
institutions
registered under
this Act and
management
thereof.

109
Provided that for children between the age of six to
fourteen years, the provisions of the Right of Children to Free
and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 shall apply;
(iv) skill development;
(v) occupational therapy and life skill education;
(vi) mental health interventions, including counselling
specific to the need of the child;
(vii) recreational activities including sports and cultural
activities;
(viii) legal aid where required;
(ix) referral services for education, vocational training,
de-addiction, treatment of diseases where required;
(x) case management including preparation and follow
up of individual care plan;
(xi) birth registration;
(xii) assistance for obtaining the proof of identity,
where required; and
(xiii) any other service that may reasonably be provided
in order to ensure the well being of the child, either directly
by the State Government, registered or fit individuals or
institutions or through referral services.
(2) Every institution shall have a Management Committee, to
be set up in a manner as may be prescribed, to manage the
institution and monitor the progress of every child.
(3) The officer in-charge of every institution, housing children
above six years of age, shall facilitate setting up of children’s
committees for participating in such activities as may be prescribed,
for the safety and well-being of children in the institution.
55. (1) The State Government shall appoint inspection
committees for the State and district, as the case may be, for all
institutions registered or recognised to be fit under this Act for such
period and for such purposes, as may be prescribed.
(2) Such inspection committees shall mandatorily conduct
visits to all facilities housing children in the area allocated, atleast
once in three months in a team of not less than three members, of
whom atleast one shall be a woman and one shall be a medical
officer, and submit reports of the findings of such visits within a
week of their visit, to the District Child Protection Units or State
Government, as the case may be, for further action.
(3) On the submission of the report by the inspection
committee within a week of the inspection, appropriate action shall
be taken within a month by the District Child Protection Unit or the
State Government and a compliance report shall be submitted to the
State Government.
35 of 2009.
Inspection of
institutions
registered under
this Act.

110
56. (1) The Central Government or State Government may
independently evaluate the functioning of the Board, Committee,
special juvenile police units, registered institutions, or recognised fit
facilities and persons, at such period and through such persons or
institutions as may be prescribed by that Government.
(2) In case such independent evaluation is conducted by both the
Governments, the evaluation made by the Central Government shall prevail.
CHAPTER VIII
A
DOPTION
57. (1) Adoption shall be resorted to for ensuring right to
family for the orphan, abandoned and surrendered children, as per
the provisions of this Act, the rules made thereunder and the
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(2) Adoption of a child from a relative by another relative,
irrespective of their religion, can be made as per the provisions of
this Act and the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(3) Nothing in this Act shall apply to the adoption of children
made under the provisions of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance
Act, 1956.
(4) All inter-country adoptions shall be done only as per the
provisions of this Act and the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.
(5) Any person, who takes or sends a child to a foreign
country or takes part in any arrangement for transferring the care
and custody of a child to another person in a foreign country
without a valid order from the Court, shall be punishable as per the
provisions of sub-section ( 1) of section 81.
58. (1) The prospective adoptive parents shall be physically
fit, financially sound, mentally alert and highly motivated to adopt a
child for providing a good upbringing to him.
(2) In case of a couple, the consent of both the spouses for
the adoption shall be required.
(3) A single or divorced person can also adopt, subject to
fulfilment of the criteria and in accordance with the provisions of
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) A single male is not eligible to adopt a girl child.
(5) Any other criteria that may be specified in the adoption
regulations framed by the Authority.
59. (1) Indian prospective adoptive parents living in India,
irrespective of their  religion, if interested to adopt an orphan or
abandoned or surrendered child, may apply for the same to a
specialised adoption agency, in the manner as provided in the
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
Evaluation of
functioning of
structures.
Adoption.
Eligibility of
prospective
adoptive
parents.
78 of 1956.
Procedure for
adoption by
Indian
prospective
adoptive
parents living
in India.

111
(2) The specialised adoption agency shall prepare the home
study report of the prospective adoptive parents and upon finding
them eligible, will refer a child declared legally free for adoption to
them along with the child study report and medical report of the
child, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed
by the Authority.
(3) On the receipt of the acceptance of the child from the
prospective adoptive parents along with the child study report and
medical report of the child signed by such parents, the specialised
adoption agency shall give the child in pre-adoption foster care and
file an application in the court for obtaining the adoption order, in
the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.
(4) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the
specialised adoption agency shall send immediately the same to the
prospective adoptive parents.
(5) The progress and wellbeing of the child in the adoptive
family shall be followed up and ascertained in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
60. (1) If an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child could
not be placed with an Indian or non-resident Indian prospective
adoptive parent despite the joint effort of the specialised adoption
agency and State Agency within thirty days from the date the child
has been declared legally free for adoption, such child shall be free
for inter-country adoption.
(2) An eligible non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India
or persons of Indian origin shall be given priority in inter-country
adoption of Indian children.
(3) A non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India, or
person of Indian origin or a foreigner, who are prospective adoptive
parents living abroad, irrespective of their religion, if interested to
adopt an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child from India, may
apply for the same to an authorised foreign adoption agency, or
Central Authority or a concerned Government department in their
country of habitual residence, as the case may be, in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central
Authority, or a concerned Government department, as the case may
be, shall prepare the home study report of such prospective adoptive
parents and upon finding them eligible, will sponsor their application
to Authority for adoption of a child from India, in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(5) On the receipt of the application of such prospective
adoptive parents, the Authority shall examine and if it finds the
applicants suitable, then, it will refer the application to one of the
specialised adoption agencies, where children legally free for
adoption are available.
Procedure for
inter-country
adoption of an
orphan or
abandoned or
surrendered
child.

112
(6) The specialised adoption agency will match a child with
such prospective adoptive parents and send the child study report
and medical report of the child to such parents, who in turn may
accept the child and return the child study and medical report duly
signed by them to the said agency.
(7) On receipt of the acceptance of the child from the
prospective adoptive parents, the specialised adoption agency shall
file an application in the court for obtaining the adoption order, in
the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.
(8) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the
specialised adoption agency shall send immediately the same to
Authority, State Agency and to the prospective adoptive parents, and
obtain a passport for the child.
(9) The Authority shall intimate about the adoption to the
immigration authorities of India and the receiving country of the
child.
(10) The prospective adoptive parents shall receive the child
in person from the specialised adoption agency as soon as the
passport and visa are issued to the child.
(11) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central
Authority, or the concerned Government department, as the case may
be, shall ensure the submission of progress reports about the child in
the adoptive family and will be responsible for making alternative
arrangement in the case of any disruption, in consultation with
Authority and concerned Indian diplomatic mission, in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(12) A foreigner or a person of Indian origin or an overseas
citizen of India, who has habitual residence in India, if interested to
adopt a child from India, may apply to Authority for the same along
with a no objection certificate from the diplomatic mission of his
country in India, for further necessary actions as provided in the
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
61. (1) A relative living abroad, who intends to adopt a child
from his relative in India shall obtain an order from the court and
apply for no objection certificate from Authority, in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(2) The Authority shall on receipt of the order under sub-
section ( 1) and the application from either the biological parents or
from the adoptive parents, issue no objection certificate under
intimation to the immigration authority of India and of the receiving
country of the child.
(3) The adoptive parents shall, after receiving no objection
certificate under sub-section ( 2), receive the child from the
biological parents and shall facilitate the contact of the adopted child
with his siblings and biological parents from time to time.
Procedure for
inter-country
relative
adoption.

113
62. (1) Before issuing an adoption order, the court shall
satisfy itself that ––
(a) the adoption is for the welfare of the child; ( b) due
consideration is given to the wishes of the child having regard
to the age and understanding of the child; and ( c) that neither
the prospective adoptive parents has given or agreed to give
nor the specialised adoption agency or the parent or guardian
of the child in case of relative adoption has received or agreed
to receive any payment or reward in consideration of the
adoption, except as permitted under the adoption regulations
framed by the Authority towards the adoption fees or service
charge or child care corpus.
(2) The adoption proceedings shall be held in camera and the
case shall be disposed of by the court within a period of two
months from the date of filing.
63. (1) The documentation and other procedural requirements,
not expressly provided in this Act with regard to the adoption of an
orphan, abandoned and surrendered child by Indian prospective
adoptive parents living in India, or by non-resident Indian or
overseas citizen of India or person of Indian origin or foreigner
prospective adoptive parents, shall be as per the adoption regulations
framed by the Authority.
(2) The specialised adoption agency shall ensure that the
adoption case of prospective adoptive parents is disposed of within
four months from the date of receipt of application and the
authorised foreign adoption agency, Authority and State Agency shall
track the progress of the adoption case and intervene wherever
necessary, so as to ensure that the time line is adhered to.
64. A child in respect of whom an adoption order is issued
by the court, shall become the child of the adoptive parents, and the
adoptive parents shall become the parents of the child as if the child
had been born to the adoptive parents, for all purposes, including
intestacy, with effect from the date on which the adoption order
takes effect, and on and from such date all the ties of the child in
the family of his or her birth shall stand severed and replaced by
those created by the adoption order in the adoptive family:
Provided that any property which has vested in the adopted child
immediately before the date on which the adoption order takes effect
shall continue to vest in the adopted child subject to the obligations, if
any, attached to the ownership of such property including the
obligations, if any, to maintain the relatives in the biological family.
65. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, information regarding all adoption orders
issued by the concerned courts, shall be forwarded to Authority on
monthly basis in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations
framed by the Authority, so as to enable Authority to maintain the
data on adoption.
Court procedure
and penalty
against payment
in consideration
of adoption.
Additional
procedural
requirements
and
documentation.
Effect of
adoption.
Reporting of
adoption.

114
66. (1) The State Government shall recognise one or more
institutions or organisations in each district as a Specialised Adoption
Agency, in such manner as may be provided in the adoption
regulations framed by the Authority, for the rehabilitation of orphan,
abandoned or surrendered children, through adoption and non-
institutional care.
(2) The State Agency shall furnish the name, address and
contact details of the Specialised Adoption Agencies along with
copies of certificate or letter of recognition or renewal to Authority,
as soon as the recognition or renewal is granted to such agencies.
(3) The State Government shall get every Specialised Adoption
Agency inspected at least once in a year and take necessary
remedial measures, if required.
(4) In case any Specialised Adoption Agency is in default in
taking necessary steps on its part as provided in this Act or in the
adoption regulations framed by the Authority, for getting an orphan
or abandoned or surrendered child legally free for adoption from the
Committee or in completing the home study report of the
prospective adoptive parents or in obtaining adoption order from the
court within the stipulated time, such Specialised Adoption Agency
shall be punishable with a fine which may extend up to fifty
thousand rupees and in case of repeated default, the recognition of
the Specialised Adoption Agency shall be withdrawn by the State
Government.
67. (1) All the institutions registered under this Act, which
may not have been recognised as Specialised Adoption Agencies,
shall also ensure that all orphan or abandoned or surrendered
children under their care are reported, produced and declared legally
free for adoption, by the Committee as per the provisions of
section 39.
(2) All institutions referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall develop
formal linkages with nearby Specialised Adoption Agency and shall
furnish details of the children declared legally free for adoption to
that Specialised Adoption Agency along with all relevant records in
the manner as may be prescribed, for the placement of such
children in adoption.
(3) If any such institution contravenes the provisions of sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), it shall be liable to fine of fifty
thousand rupees for each instance to be imposed by the registering
authority and it may also attract de-recognition in the event of
persistent flouting of such provisions.
68. (1) The State Government shall set up a State Adoption
Resource Agency for dealing with adoptions and related matters in
the State under the guidance of Authority.
(2) The State Agency, wherever already exists, shall be
deemed to be set up under this Act.
Specialised
Adoption
Agencies.
Adoption of
children
residing in
institutions
not registered
as adoption
agencies.
State
Adoption
Resource
Agency.

115
69. The Central Adoption Resource Agency existing before the
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been
constituted as the Central Adoption Resource Authority under this
Act to perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to promote in-country adoptions and to facilitate
inter-State adoptions in co-ordination with State Agency;
(b) to regulate inter-country adoptions;
(c) to frame regulations on adoption and related matters
from time to time as may be necessary;
(d) to carry out the functions of the Central Authority
under the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and
Cooperation in respect of Inter-country Adoption;
(e) any other function as may be prescribed.
70. (1) The Authority shall have a Steering Committee with
following members:
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development, Government of India, who shall be the
Chairperson— ex officio ;
(b) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development, Government of India, dealing with Authority—
ex officio ;
(c) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development, Government of India, dealing with Finance—
ex officio ;
(d) one State Adoption Resource Agency and two
Specialised Adoption Agencies;
(e) one adoptive parent and one adoptee;
(f) one advocate or a professor having at least ten
years of experience in family law;
(g) Member-Secretary, who shall also be Chief
Executive Officer of the organisation.
(2) Criteria for the selection or nomination of the Members
mentioned at ( d) to ( f), their tenure as well as the terms and
conditions of their appointment shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The Steering Committee shall have the following functions,
namely:—
(a) to oversee the functioning of Authority and review
its working from time to time so that it operates in most
effective manner;
(b) to approve the annual budget, annual accounts and
audit reports as well as the action plan and annual report of
Authority;
Central
Adoption
Resource
Authority.
Steering
Committee of
Authority.

116
(c) to adopt the recruitment rules, service rules,
financial rules of Authority as well as the other regulations for
the exercise of the administrative and programmatic powers
within the organisation, with the prior approval of the Central
Government;
(d) any other function that may be vested with it by the
Central Government from time to time.
(4) The Steering Committee shall meet once in a month in the
manner as may be prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall function from its headquarter and
through its regional offices as may be set up as per its functional
necessity.
71. (1) For the efficient performance of its functions,
Authority shall have the following powers, namely:—
(a) to issue instructions to any Specialised Adoption
Agency or a children home or any child care institution
housing any orphan, abandoned or surrendered child, any
State Agency or any authorised foreign adoption agency and
such directions shall be complied by such agencies;
(b) recommending to the concerned Government or
Authority to take appropriate action against any official or
functionary or institution under its administrative control, in
case of persistent non-compliance of the instructions issued
by it;
(c) forwarding any case of persistent non-compliance
of its instructions by any official or functionary or institution
to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and the
Magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed
to hear the same as if the case has been forwarded to him
under section 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(d) any other power that may be vested with it by the
Central Government.
(2) In case of any difference of opinion in an adoption case,
including the eligibility of prospective adoptive parents or of a child
to be adopted, the decision of Authority shall prevail.
72. (1) The Authority shall submit an annual report to the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report of
Authority to be laid before each House of Parliament.
73. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority by
way of grants such sums of money as the Central Government may
think fit for being utilised for performing the functions of Authority
under this Act.
Powers of
Authority.
Annual Report
of Authority.
Grants by
Central
Government.
2 of 1974.

117
(2) The Authority may spend such sums of money as it thinks
fit for performing the functions, as prescribed under this Act, and
such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants
referred to in sub-section ( 1).
74. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts
in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be
specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of
the Authority under this Act shall, have the same rights and
privileges and the Authority in connection with the audit of
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and
other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government by Authority.
(5) The Central Government shall cause the audit report to be
laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of
Parliament.
CHAPTER IX
O
THER OFFENCES  AGAINST  CHILDREN
75. (1) No report in any newspaper, magazine, news-sheet or
audio-visual media or other forms of communication regarding any
inquiry or investigation or judicial procedure, shall disclose the
name, address or school or any other particular, which may lead to
the identification of a child in conflict with law or a child in need
of care and protection or a child victim or witness of a crime,
involved in such matter, under any other law for the time being in
force, nor shall the picture of any such child be published:
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Board
or Committee, as the case may be, holding the inquiry may permit
such disclosure, if in its opinion such disclosure is in the best
interest of the child.
(2) The Police shall not disclose any record of the child for
the purpose of character certificate or otherwise in cases where the
case has been closed or disposed off.
Accounts and
audit of
Authority.
Prohibition on
disclosure of
identity of
children.

118
(3) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section ( 1)
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months or fine which may extend to two lakh rupees or both.
76. Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over, a
child, assaults, abandons, abuses, exposes or wilfully neglects the
child or causes or procures the child to be assaulted, abandoned,
abused, exposed or neglected in a manner likely to cause such child
unnecessary mental or physical suffering, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine of one lakh rupees or with both:
Provided that if such offence is committed by any person
employed by or managing an organisation, which is entrusted with
the care and protection of the child, he shall be punished with
rigorous imprisonment which may extend up to five years, and fine
which may extend up to five lakhs rupees:
Provided further that on account of the aforesaid cruelty, if
the child is physically incapacitated or develops a mental illness or
is rendered mentally unfit to perform regular tasks or has risk to life
or limb, such person shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment, not less than three years but which may be extended
up to ten years and shall also be liable to fine of five lakhs rupees.
77. (1) Whoever employs or uses any child for the purpose
of begging or causes any child to beg shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and shall
also be liable to fine of one lakh rupees:
Provided that, if for the purpose of begging, the person
amputates or maims the child, he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term not less than seven years which may
extend up to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine of five lakh
rupees.
(2) Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over the
child, abets the commission of an offence under sub-section ( 1),
shall be punishable with the same punishment as provided for in
sub-section ( 1) and such person shall be considered to be unfit
under sub-clause ( v) of clause ( 14) of section 2:
Provided that the said child, shall not be considered a child in
conflict with law under any circumstances, and shall be removed
from the charge or control of such guardian or custodian and
produced before the Committee for appropriate rehabilitation.
78. Whoever gives, or causes to be given, to any child any
intoxicating liquor or any narcotic drug or tobacco products or
psychotropic substance, except on the order of a duly qualified
medical practitioner, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable
to a fine which may extend up to one lakh rupees.
Punishment
for cruelty
to child.
Employment
of child for
begging.
Penalty for
giving
intoxicating
liquor or
narcotic drug or
psychotropic
substance to a
child.

119
79. Whoever uses a child, for vending, peddling, carrying,
supplying or smuggling any intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance, shall be liable for rigorous imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable
to a fine up to one lakh rupees.
80. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, whoever ostensibly engages a child and keeps
him in bondage for the purpose of employment or withholds his
earnings or uses such earning for his own purposes shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years and shall also be liable to fine of one lakh rupees.
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this sub-section, the term
“employment” shall also include selling goods and services, and
entertainment in public places for economic gain.
81. If any person or organisation offers or gives or receives,
any orphan, abandoned or surrendered child, for the purpose of
adoption without following the provisions or procedures as provided
in this Act, such person or organisation shall be punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
upto three years, or with fine of one lakh rupees, or with both:
Provided in case where the offence is committed by a
recognised adoption agency, in addition to the above punishment
awarded to the persons in-charge of, and responsible for the
conduct of the day-to-day affairs of the adoption agency, the
registration of such agency under section 42 and its recognition
under section 66 shall also be withdrawn for a minimum period of
one year.
82. Any person who sells or buys a child for any purpose
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine of one lakh
rupees:
Provided that where such offence is committed by a person
having actual charge of the child, including employees of a hospital
or nursing home or maternity home, the term of imprisonment shall
not be less than three years and may extend up to seven years.
83. (1) Any person in-charge of or employed in a child care
institution, who subjects a child to corporal punishment with the aim
of disciplining the child, shall be liable, on the first conviction, to
a fine of ten thousand rupees and for every subsequent offence,
shall be liable for imprisonment which may extend to three months
or fine or with both.
Using a child
for vending,
peddling,
carrying,
supplying or
smuggling any
intoxicating
liquor, narcotic
drug or
psychotropic
substance.
Exploitation of
a child
employee.
Punitive
measures for
adoption
without
following
prescribed
procedures.
Sale and
procurement
of children
for any
purpose.
Corporal
punishment.

120
(2) If a person employed in an institution referred to in sub-
section ( 1), is convicted of an offence under that sub-section, such
person shall also be liable for dismissal from service, and shall also
be debarred from working directly with children thereafter.
(3) In case, where any corporal punishment is reported in an
institution referred to in sub-section ( 1) and the management of
such institution does not cooperate with any inquiry or comply with
the orders of the Committee or the Board or court or State
Government, the person in-charge of the management of the
institution shall be liable for punishment with imprisonment for a
term not less than three years and shall also be liable to fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees.
84. (1) Any non-State, self-styled militant group or outfit
declared as such by the Central Government, if recruits or uses any
child for any purpose, shall be liable for rigorous imprisonment for
a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to
fine of five lakh rupees.
(2) Any adult or an adult group uses children for illegal
activities either individually or as a gang shall be liable for rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine of five lakh rupees.
85. For the purposes of this Act, the provisions of
sections 359 to 369 of the Indian Penal Code, shall mutatis
mutandis apply to a child or a minor who is under the age of
eighteen years and all the provisions shall be construed accordingly.
86. Whoever commits any of the offences referred to in this
Chapter on any child who is disabled as so certified by a medical
practitioner, then, such person shall be liable to twice the penalty
provided for such offence.
Explanation .— For the purpose of this Act, the term
‘disability’ shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under
clause (i) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.
87. (1) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with
imprisonment for a term more than seven years, then, such offence
shall be cognizable, non-bailable and triable by a Children’s Court.
(2) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with
imprisonment for a term of three years and above, but not more
than seven years, then, such offence shall be cognizable, non-
bailable and triable by a Magistrate of the First Class.
(3) Where an offence, under this Act, is punishable with
imprisonment for less than three years or with fine only, then, such
offence shall be non-cognizable, bailable and triable by any Magistrate.
88. Whoever abets any offence under this Act, if the act
abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, shall be
punished with the punishment provided for that offence.
Use of child
by militant
groups or
other adults.
Kidnapping
and abduction
of child.
45 of 1860.
1 of 1966.
Offences
committed
on disabled
children.
Classification
of offences
and designated
court.
Abetment.

121
Explanation.— An act or offence is said to be committed in
consequence of abetment, when it is committed in consequence of
the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy or with the aid,
which constitutes the abetment.
89. Where an act or omission constitutes an offence
punishable under this Act and also under any other law for the time
being in force, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any such
law, the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable for
punishment under such law which provides for punishment which
is greater in degree.
90. Any child who commits any offence under this Chapter
shall be considered as a child in conflict with law under this Act.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
91. The Committee or the Board, as the case may be, before
which a child is brought under any of the provisions of this Act,
may, whenever it so thinks fit, require any parent or guardian
having the actual charge of the child to be present at any proceeding
in respect of that child.
92. (1) If, at any stage during the course of an inquiry, the
Committee or the Board is satisfied that the attendance of the child is
not essential for the purpose of inquiry, the Committee or the Board,
as the case may be, shall dispense with the attendance of a child and
limit the same for the purpose of recording the statement and
subsequently, the inquiry shall continue even in the absence of the child
concerned, unless ordered otherwise by the Committee or the Board.
(2) Where the attendance of a child is required before the
Board or the Committee, such child shall be entitled to travel
reimbursement for self and one escort accompanying the child as
per actual expenditure incurred, by the Board, or the Committee or
the District Child Protection Unit, as the case may be.
93. When a child, who has been brought before the
Committee or the Board, is found to be suffering from a disease
requiring prolonged medical treatment or physical or mental
complaint that will respond to treatment, the Committee or the
Board, as the case may be, may send the child to any place
recognised as a fit facility as prescribed for such period as it may
think necessary for the required treatment.
94. (1) Where it appears to the Committee or the Board that any
child kept in a special home or an observation home or a children’s
home or a shelter home or in an institution in pursuance of the
provisions of this Act, is a mentally ill person or addicted to alcohol or
other drugs which lead to behavioural changes in a person, the
Committee or the Board, may order removal of such child to a
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in accordance with the
provisions of the Mental Health Act, 1987 or the rules made thereunder.
Alternative
punishment.
Offence
committed by
child under this
Chapter.
Attendance
of parent or
guardian of
child.
Dispensing
with
attendance of
child.
Placement of a
child suffering
from disease
requiring
prolonged
medical
treatment in
an approved
place.
Transfer of a
child who is
mentally ill or
addicted to
alcohol or
other drugs.
14 of 1987.

122
(2) In case the child had been removed to a psychiatric
hospital or psychiatric nursing home under sub-section ( 1), the
Committee or the Board may, on the basis of the advice given in the
certificate of discharge of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric
nursing home, order to remove such child to an Integrated
Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts or similar centres maintained by the
State Government for mentally ill persons (including the persons
addicted to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance) and such
removal shall be only for the period required for the inpatient
treatment of such child.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts” shall
have the meaning assigned to it under the scheme called
“Central Sector Scheme of Assistance for Prevention of
Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse and for Social
Defence Services” framed by the Central Government in the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment or any other
corresponding scheme for the time being in force;
(b) “mentally ill person” shall have the same meaning
assigned to it in clause ( l) of section 2 of the Mental Health
Act, 1987;
(c) “psychiatric hospital” or “psychiatric nursing home”
shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause ( q) of
section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987.
95. (1) Where, it is obvious to the Committee or the Board,
based on the appearance of the person brought before it under any
of the provisions of this Act (other than for the purpose of giving
evidence) that the said person is a child, the Committee or the Board
shall record such observation stating the age of the child as nearly
as may be and proceed with the inquiry under section 15 or
section 37, as the case may be, without waiting for further
confirmation of the age.
(2) In case, the Committee or the Board has reasonable
grounds for doubt regarding whether the person brought before it is
a child or not, the Committee or the Board, as the case may be,
shall undertake the process of age determination, by seeking
evidence by obtaining —
(i) the date of birth certificate from the school, or the
matriculation or equivalent certificate from the concerned
examination Board, if available; and in the absence thereof;
(ii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a
municipal authority or a panchayat;
(iii) and only in the absence of ( i) and ( ii) above, age
shall be determined by an ossification test or any other latest
medical age determination test conducted on the orders of the
Committee or the Board:
Presumption
and
determination
of age.
14 of 1987.
14 of 1987.

123
Provided such age determination test conducted on the order
of the Committee or the Board shall be completed within fifteen
days from the date of such order.
(3) The age recorded by the Committee or the Board to be
the age of person so brought before it shall, for the purpose of this
Act, be deemed to be the true age of that person.
96. (1) If during the inquiry it is found that a child hails from
a place outside the jurisdiction, the Board or Committee, as the case
may be, shall, if satisfied after due inquiry that it is in the best
interest of the child and after due consultation with the Committee
or the Board of the child’s home district, order the transfer of the
child, as soon as possible, to the said Committee or the Board, along
with relevant documents and following such procedure as may be
prescribed:
Provided that such transfer can be made in case of a child in
conflict with law, only after the inquiry has been completed and
final order passed by the Board:
Provided further that in case of inter-State transfer, the child
shall be, if convenient, handed over to the Committee or the Board,
as the case may be, of the home district of the child, or to the
Committee or the Board in the capital city of the home State.
(2) Once the decision to transfer is finalised, the Committee
or Board, as the case may be, shall give an escort order to the
Special Juvenile Police Unit to escort the child, within fifteen days
of receiving such order:
Provided that a girl child shall be accompanied by a woman
police officer:
Provided further that where a Special Juvenile Police Unit is
not available, the Committee or Board, as the case may be, shall
direct the institution where the child is temporarily staying or
District Child Protection Unit, to provide an escort to accompany
the child during travel.
(3) The State Government shall make rules to provide for
travelling allowance to the escorting staff for the child, which shall
be paid in advance.
(4) The Committee or the Board, as the case may be,
receiving the transferred child will process for restoration or
rehabilitation or social reintegration, as provided in this Act.
97. (1) The State Government may at any time, on the
recommendation of a Committee or Board, as the case may be,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and keeping the best
interest of the child in mind, order the child’s transfer from any
children’s home or special home or fit facility or fit person, to a
home or facility, within the State with prior intimation to the
concerned Committee or the Board:
Transfer of a
child to place
of residence.
Transfer of
child between
children’s
homes, or
special homes
or fit facility
or fit person
in different
parts of India.

124
Provided that for transfer of a child between similar home or
facility or person within the same district, the Committee or Board,
as the case may be, of the said district shall be competent to issue
such an order.
(2) If transfer is being ordered by a State Government to an
institution outside the State, this shall be done only in consultation
with the concerned State Government.
(3) The total period of stay of the child in a children’s home
or a special home shall not be increased by such transfer.
(4) Orders passed under sub-section ( 1) and ( 2) shall be
deemed to be operative for the Committee or the Board, as the case
may be, of the area to which the child is sent.
98. (1) When a child is kept in a children’s home or special
home, on a report of a probation officer or social worker or of
Government or a voluntary or non-governmental organisation, as the
case may be, the Committee or the Board may consider, the release
of such child, either absolutely or on such conditions as it may
think fit to impose, permitting the child to live with parents or
guardian or under the supervision of any authorised person named
in the order, willing to receive and take charge, educate and train
the child, for some useful trade or calling or to look after the child
for rehabilitation:
Provided that if a child who has been released conditionally
under this section, or the person under whose supervision the child
has been placed, fails to fulfil such conditions, the Board or
Committee may, if necessary , cause the child to be taken charge of
and to be placed back in the concerned home.
(2) If the child has been released on a temporary basis, the
time during which the child is not present in the concerned home
in pursuance of the permission granted under sub-section ( 1) shall
be deemed to be part of the time for which the child is liable to be
kept in the children or special home:
Provided that in case of a child in conflict with law fails to
fulfill the conditions set by the Board as mentioned in sub-
section ( 1), the time for which he is still liable to be kept in the
institution shall be extended by the Board for a period equivalent to
the time which lapses due to such failure.
99. (1) The Committee or the Board, as the case may be, may
permit leave of absence to any child, to allow him, on special
occasions like examination, marriage of relatives, death of kith or
kin or accident or serious illness of parent or any emergency of like
nature, under supervision, for a period generally not exceeding seven
days in one instance, excluding the time taken in journey.
(2) The time during which a child is absent from an institution
where he is placed, in pursuance of such permission granted under
this section, shall be deemed to be part of the time for which he is
liable to be kept in the children’s home or special home.
Release of a
child from an
institution.
Leave of
absence to a
child placed
in an
institution.

125
(3) If a child refuses, or has failed to return to the children’s
home or special home, as the case may be, on the leave period
being exhausted or permission being revoked or forfeited, the Board
or Committee may, if necessary, cause him to be taken charge of
and to be taken back to the concerned home:
Provided that when a child in conflict with law has failed to
return to the special home on the leave period being exhausted or
on permission being revoked or forfeited, the time for which he is
still liable to be kept in the institution shall be extended by the Board
for a period equivalent to the time which lapses due to such failure.
100. ( 1) All reports related to the child and considered by the
Committee or the Board shall be treated as confidential:
Provided that the Committee or the Board, as the case may
be, may, if it so thinks fit, communicate the substance thereof to
another Committee or Board or to the child or to the child’s parent
or guardian, and may give such Committee or the Board or the child
or parent or guardian, an opportunity of producing evidence as may
be relevant to the matter stated in the report.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the victim
shall not be denied access to their case record, orders and relevant
papers.
101. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Central Government, or the State Government or any
person acting under the directions of the Central Government or
State Government, as the case may be, in respect of anything which
is done in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of this
Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder.
102. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any person
aggrieved by an order made by the Committee or the Board under
this Act may, within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer
an appeal to the Children’s Court, except for decisions by the
Committee related to Foster Care and Sponsorship After Care for
which the appeal shall lie with the District Magistrate:
Provided that the Court of Sessions, or the District
Magistrate, as the case may be, may entertain the appeal after the
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the
appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in
time and such appeal shall be decided within a period of thirty days.
(2) No appeal shall lie from,—
(a) any order of acquittal made by the Board in respect
of a child alleged to have committed an offence; or
(b) any order made by a Committee in respect of
finding that a person is not a child in need of care and
protection.
Reports to be
treated as
confidential.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Appeals.

126
(3) No second appeal shall lie from any order of the Court of
Session, passed in appeal under this section.
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Children’s Court
may file an appeal before the High Court in accordance with the
procedure specified in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
103. The High Court may, at any time, either on its own
motion or on an application received in this behalf, call for the
record of any proceeding in which any Committee or Board or
Children’s Court, or Court has passed an order, for the purpose of
satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any such order and
may pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit:
Provided that the High Court shall not pass an order under
this section prejudicial to any person without giving him a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
104. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Act, a
Committee or a Board while holding any inquiry under any of the
provisions of this Act, shall follow such procedure as may be
prescribed and subject thereto, shall follow, as far as may be, the
procedure laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for
trial of summons cases.
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act,
the procedure to be followed in hearing appeals or revision proceedings
under this Act shall be, as far as practicable, in accordance with the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
105. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions for appeal and
revision contained in this Act, the Committee or the Board may, on
an application received in this behalf, amend any orders passed by
itself, as to the institution to which a child is to be sent or as to
the person under whose care or supervision a child is to be placed
under this Act:
Provided that during the course of hearing for amending any
such orders, there shall be at least two members of the Board of
which one shall be the Principal Magistrate and at least three
members of the Committee and all persons concerned, or their
authorised representatives, whose views shall be heard by the
Committee or the Board, as the case may be, before the said orders
are amended.
(2) Clerical mistakes in orders passed by the Committee or
the Board or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or
omission may, at any time, be corrected by the Committee or the
Board, as the case may be, either on its own motion or on an
application received in this behalf.
106. (1) The State Government may create a fund in such
name as it thinks fit for the welfare and rehabilitation of the children
dealt with under this Act.
2 of 1974.
Revision.
Procedure in
inquiries,
appeals and
revision
proceedings.
2 of 1974.
Power of the
Committee or
the Board to
amend its own
orders.
Juvenile Justice
Fund.

127
(2) There shall be credited to the fund such voluntary
donations, contributions or subscriptions as may be made by any
individual or organisation.
(3) The fund created under sub-section ( 1) shall be
administered by the Department of the State Government
implementing this Act in such manner and for such purposes as may
be prescribed.
107. Every State Government shall constitute a Child
Protection Society for the State and Child Protection Unit for every
District, consisting of such officers and other employees as may be
appointed by that Government, to take up matters relating to
children with a view to ensure the implementation of this Act,
including the establishment and maintenance of institutions under
this Act, notification of competent authorities in relation to the
children and their rehabilitation and co-ordination with various
official and non-official agencies concerned and to discharge such
other functions as may be prescribed.
108. (1) In every police station, at least one officer, not
below the rank of assistant sub-inspector, with aptitude, appropriate
training and orientation may be designated as the child welfare
police officer to exclusively deal with children either as victims or
perpetrators, in co-ordination with the police, voluntary and non-
governmental organisations.
(2) To co-ordinate all functions of police related to children,
the State Government shall constitute Special Juvenile Police Units
in each district and city, headed by a police officer not below the
rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police or above and consisting
of all police officers designated under sub-section ( 1) and two
social workers having experience of working in the field of child
welfare, of whom one shall be a woman.
(3) All police officers of the Special Juvenile Police Units shall
be provided special training, especially at induction as child welfare
police officer, to enable them to perform their functions more
effectively.
(4) Special Juvenile Police Unit also includes Railway police
dealing with children.
109. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act:
Provided that the Central Government may, frame model rules
in respect of all or any of the matters with respect to which the
State Government is required to make rules and where any such
model rules have been framed in respect of any such matter, they
shall apply to the State mutatis mutandis until the rules in respect
of that matter are made by the State Government and while making
any such rules, they conform to such model rules.
State Child
Protection
Society and
District Child
Protection
Unit.
Child Welfare
Police Officer
and Special
Juvenile Police
Unit.
Power to make
rules.

128
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely :—
(i) manner of inquiry in case of a missing or run away
child or whose parents cannot be found under sub-
clause ( vii) of clause ( 14) of section 2;
(ii) responsibilities of the Child Welfare Officer attached
to a Children’s Home under clause ( 18) of section 2;
(iii) qualifications of the members of the Board under
sub-section ( 2) of section 4;
(iv) induction training and sensitisation of all members
of the Board under sub-section ( 6) of section 4;
(v) term of office of the members of the Board and the
manner in which such member may resign under sub-
section ( 6) of section 4;
(vi) time of the meetings of the Board and the rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meeting under sub-section ( 1) of section 8;
(vii) qualifications, experience and payment of fees of
an interpreter or translator under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 3)
of section 9;
(viii) any other function of the Board under clause ( n)
of sub-section ( 3) of section 9;
(ix) persons through whom any child alleged to be in
conflict with law may be produced before the Board and the
manner in which such a child may be sent to an observation
home or place of safety under sub-section ( 2) of section 11;
(x) manner in which a person apprehended and not
released on bail by the officer-in-charge of the police station
may be kept in an observation home until such person is
brought before a Board under sub-section ( 2) of section 13;
(xi) format for information on pendency in the Board to
the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate and District magistrate on quarterly bases under
sub-section ( 3) of section 17;
(xii) monitoring procedures and list of monitoring
authorities under sub-section ( 2) of section 21;
(xiii) manner in which the relevant records of the child
may be destroyed by the Board, police or the court under
sub-section ( 2) of section 25;
(xiv) qualifications of the members of the Child Welfare
Committee under sub-section ( 5) of section 28;

129
(xv) rules and procedures with regard to transaction of
business at the meetings of the Child Welfare Committee
under sub-section ( 1) of section 29;
(xvi) process of restoration of abandoned or lost
children to their families under clause ( x) of section 31;
(xvii) manner of submitting the report to the Committee
and the manner of sending and entrusting the child to
children’s home or shelter home or fit facility or fit person
under sub-section ( 2) of section 32;
(xviii) manner of holding an inquiry by the Child
Welfare Committee under sub-section ( 1) of section 37;
(xix) manner in which a child may be sent to a
Specialised Adoption Agency if the child is below six years of
age, children’s home or to a fit facility or person or foster
family, till suitable means of rehabilitation are found for the
child including manner in which situation of the child placed
in a children’s home or with a fit facility or person or foster
family, may be reviewed by the Committee under sub-
section ( 3) of section 37;
(xx) manner in which a quarterly report may be
submitted by the Committee to the District Magistrate for
review of pendency of cases under sub-section ( 4) of
section 37;
(xxi) any other order related to any other function of
the Committee under clause ( iii ) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 38;
(xxii) information to be given every month by the
Committee to State Agency and Authority regarding number of
children declared legally free for adoption and number of
cases pending under sub-section ( 5) of section 39;
(xxiii) manner in which all institutions under this Act
shall be registered under sub-section ( 1) of section 42;
(xxiv) procedure for cancelling or withholding
registration of an institution that fails to provide rehabilitation
and reintegration services under sub-section ( 7) of section 42;
(xxv) manner in which information shall be send every
month by the open shelter to the District Child Protection Unit
to the Committee under sub-section ( 3) of section 44;
(xxvi) procedure for placing children in foster care
including group foster care under sub-section ( 1) of
section 45;
(xxvii) procedure for inspection of children in foster
care under sub-section ( 4) of section 45;

130
(xxviii) manner in which foster family shall provide
education, health and nutrition to the child under sub-
section ( 6) of section 45;
(xxix) procedure and criteria in which foster care
services shall be provided to children under sub-section ( 7) of
section 45;
(xxx) format for inspection of foster families by the
Committee to check the well being of children under sub-
section ( 8) of section 45;
(xxxi) purpose of undertaking various programmes of
sponsorship of children, such as individual to individual
sponsorship, group sponsorship or community sponsorship
under sub-section ( 1) of section 46;
(xxxii) duration of sponsorship under sub-section ( 3) of
section 46;
(xxxiii) manner of providing one time financial support
to any child leaving institutional care on completing eighteen
years of age under section 47;
(xxxiv) management and monitoring of observation
homes, including the standards and various types of services
to be provided by them for rehabilitation and social integration
of a child alleged to be in conflict with law and the
circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the
registration of an observation home may be granted or
withdrawn under sub-section ( 3) of section 48;
(xxxv) management and monitoring of special homes
including the standards and various types of services to be
provided to them under sub-section ( 2) and sub-section ( 3) of
section 49;
(xxxvi) monitoring and management of children’s homes
including the standards and the nature of services to be
provided by them, based on individual care plans for each
child under sub-section ( 3) of section 51;
(xxxvii) manner in which a Board or the Committee
shall recognise, a facility being run by a Governmental
Organisation or a voluntary or non-governmental organisation
registered under any law for the time being in force, fit to
temporarily take the responsibility of a child for a specific
purposeafter due inquiry regarding the suitability of the facility
and the organisation to take care of the child under sub-
section ( 1) of section 52;
(xxxviii) procedure of verification of credentials, for
recognising any person fit to temporarily receive a child for
care, protection and treatment of such child for a specified
period by the Board or the Committee under sub-section ( 1)
of section 53;

131
(xxxix) manner in which services shall be provided by
an institution under this Act for rehabilitation and reintegration
of children and standards for basic requirements such as
food, shelter, clothing and medical attention under sub-
section ( 1) of section 54;
(xl) manner in which Management Committee shall be
set up by each institution for management of the institution
and monitoring of the progress of every child under sub-
section ( 2) of section 54;
(xli) activities that may be taken up by children’s
committees under sub-section ( 3) of section 54;
(xlii) appointment of inspection committees for all
institutions registered or recognised fit, for the state and
district under sub-section ( 1) of section 55;
(xliii) manner in which Central Government or State
Government may independently evaluate the functioning of the
Board, Committee, special juvenile police units, registered
institutions, or recognised fit facilities and persons, including
the period and through persons or institutions under sub-
section ( 1) of section 56;
(xliv) manner in which institutions shall furnish details
of children declared legally free for adoption to the Specialised
Adoption Agency under sub-section ( 2) of section 67;
(xlv) any other function of the Authority under
clause ( e) of section 69;
(xlvi) criteria for the selection or nomination of the
Members of the Steering Committee of the Authority and their
tenure as well as the terms and conditions of their
appointment under sub-section ( 2) of section 70;
(xlvii) manner in which Steering Committee of the
Authority shall meet under sub-section ( 4) of section 70;
(xlviii) manner in which the Authority shall submit an
annual report to the Central Government under sub-section ( 1)
of section 72;
(xlix) functions of the Authority under sub-section ( 2)
of section 73;
(l) manner in which the Authority shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts under sub-section ( 1) of section 74;
(li) period that the Committee or Board may think
necessary for the treatment of children who are found
to be suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical
treatment or physical or mental complaint that will respond to
treatment to a fit facility under section 93;

132
(lii) procedure for transfer of child under sub-
section ( 1) section 96;
(liii) provision for travelling allowance to the escorting
staff for the child under sub-section ( 3) of section 96;
(liv) procedure to be followed by the Committee or a
Board while holding any inquiry, appeal or revision under sub-
section ( 1) of section 104;
(lv) manner in which juvenile justice fund shall be
administered under sub-section ( 3) of section 106;
(lvi) functioning of the Child Protection Society for the
State and Child Protection Units for every district under
section 107;
(lvii) any other matter which is required to be or may
be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or regulation.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State
Legislature.
110. (1) The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken under the said Acts shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
111. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
the period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) However, order made under this section shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Repeal and
savings.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
56 of 2000.

133
133
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Article 15 of the Constitution, inter alia , confers upon the
State powers to make special provision for children. Articles 39 (e)
and (f), 45 and 47 further makes the State responsible for ensuring
that all needs of children are met and their basic human rights are
protected.
2. The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Children,
ratified by India on 11th December, 1992, requires the State Parties
to undertake all appropriate measures in case of a child alleged as,
or accused of, violating any penal law, including ( a) treatment of the
child in a manner consistent with the promotion of the child’s sense
of dignity and worth ( b) reinforcing the child’s respect for the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of others ( c) taking into
account the child’s age and the desirability of promoting the child’s
reintegration and the child’s assuming a constructive role in society.
3. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act
was enacted in 2000 to provide for the protection of children. The
Act was amended twice in 2006 and 2011 to address gaps in its
implementation and make the law more child-friendly. During the
course of the implementation of the Act, several issues arose such
as increasing incidents of abuse of children in institutions,
inadequate facilities, quality of care and rehabilitation measures in
Homes, high pendency of cases, delays in adoption due to faulty
and incomplete processing, lack of clarity regarding roles,
responsibilities and accountability of institutions and, inadequate
provisions to counter offences against children such as corporal
punishment, sale of children for adoption purposes, etc. have
highlighted the need to review the existing law.
4. Further, increasing cases of crimes committed by children
in the age group of 16-18 years in recent years makes it evident
that the current provisions and system under the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, are ill equipped to
tackle child offenders in this age group. The data collected by the
National Crime Records Bureau establishes that crimes by children
in the age group of 16-18 years have increased especially in certain
categories of heinous offences.
5. Numerous changes are required in the existing Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 to address the
above mentioned issues and therefore, it is proposed to repeal
existing Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000
and re-enact a comprehensive legislation inter alia to provide for
general principles of care and protection of children, procedures in
case of children in need of care and protection and children in

134
conflict with law, rehabilitation and social re-integration measures
for such children, adoption of orphan, abandoned and surrendered
children, and offences committed against children. This legislation
would thus ensure proper care, protection, development, treatment
and social re-integration of children in difficult circumstance by
adopting a child-friendly approach keeping in view the best interest
of the child in mind.
6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; MANEKA SANJAY GANDHI
The 8th August, 2014.

135
135
Notes on clauses
Clause 2.— This clause provides for definitions. It defines the
various expressions used in the proposed legislation which, inter
alia , include the expressions “abandoned child”, “adoption ”,
“adoption guidelines”, “administrator”, “aftercare”, “authorised
foreign adoption agency”, “begging”, “best interest of child”,
“Board”, “Central Adoption Resource Authority”, “Central Authority”,
“child”, “child in conflict with law”, “child in need of care and
protection”, “child friendly”, “child legally free for adoption”, “open
shelter”, “Children’s Home”, “child welfare officer”, “child welfare
police officer”, “children’s Court”, “child care institution”, “court”,
“committee”, “corporal punishment”, “childline services”,“District
child protection unit”, “fit facility”, “fit person”, “foster care”,
“foster family”, “guardian”, “group foster care”, “heinous offences”,
“inter country adoption”, “juvenile”, “narcotic drug and
psychotropic substances”, “no objection certificate”, “Non-resident
Indian”, “notification”, “observation home”, “orphan”, “overseas
citizen of India”, “person of Indian origin”, “petty offences”, “place
of safety”, “prescribed”, “probation officer”, “prospective adoptive
parents”, “public place”, “registered”, “relative”, “State Adoption
Resource Agency”, “Special Juvenile Police Unit”, “Special Home”,
“Specialised Adoption Agency”, “sponsorship”, “State Government”,
“surrendered child”.
It further provides that words and expressions used but not
defined in the proposed legislation but defined in other Acts shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
Clause 3.— This clause provides guidance to the Central
Government, the State Governments, the Board, and other agencies,
through fundamental principles for the implementation of the
provisions of this Act. These fundamental principles are:
(i) Principle of presumption of innocence: Any child is
to be presumed to be innocent of any mala fide or criminal
intent upto the age of eighteen years.
(ii) Principle of dignity and worth : All human beings are
to be treated as equal in dignity and rights.
(iii) Principle of participation : Every child has a right
to be heard and to participate in all processes and decisions
affecting his interest and the child’s views are be taken into
consideration with due regard to the age and maturity of the
child.
(iv) Principle of best interest : All decisions regarding
child are to be based on the primary consideration that they

136
are in the best interest of the child and are to help the child
to develop his full potential.
(v) Principle of family responsibility : The primary
responsibility of care, nurture and protection of the child is
that of the biological family or adoptive or foster parents, as
the case may be.
(vi) Principle of safety: All measures are to be taken to
ensure that the child is safe and is not subjected to any harm,
abuse or maltreatment while in contact with the care and
protection system, and thereafter.
(vii) Positive measures : All resources are to be
mobilized including those of family and community, for
promoting the well-being, facilitating development of identity
and providing an inclusive and enabling environment, to
reduce vulnerabilities of children and the need for intervention
under this Act.
(viii) Principle of non-stigmatizing semantics :
Adversarial or accusatory words are not to be used in
processes pertaining to a child.
(ix) Principle of non-waiver of rights : No waiver of
rights of the child is permissible or valid, whether sought by
the child or person acting on behalf of the child, or a Board
or a Committee and any non-exercise of a fundamental right
shall not amount to waiver.
(x) Principle of equality and non-discrimination : There
shall be no discrimination against a child on any grounds
including sex, caste, ethnicity, place of birth, disability,
offence committed and equality of access, opportunity and
treatment are to be provided to every child.
(xi) Principle of right to privacy and confidentiality :
The child has a right to protection of his privacy and
confidentiality, by all means and throughout the judicial
process.
(xii) Principle of institutionalisation as a measure of
last resort: A child is to be placed in institutional care as a
step of last resort after reasonable inquiry.
(xiii) Principle of repatriation and restoration : Every
child in the juvenile justice system has the right to be re-
united with his family at the earliest and to be restored to the
same socio-economic and cultural status that he was in,
before coming under the purview of the Act, unless such
restoration and repatriation is not in his best interest.
(xiv) Principle of fresh start : All past records of any
child under the juvenile justice system should be erased expect
in special circumstances.

137
(xv) Principle of diversion : Measures for dealing with
children in conflict with law without resorting to judicial
proceedings is to be promoted unless it is in the best interest
of the child or the society as a whole.
(xvi) Principles of natural justice : Basic procedural
standards of fairness shall be adhered to, including the right
to a fair hearing, rule against bias and the right to review, by
all persons or bodies, acting in a judicial capacity under this
Act.
Clause 4.— This clause provides for constitution of one or
more Juvenile Justice Boards by the State Government for every
district for exercising the powers and discharging the duties
conferred or imposed on them in relation to children in conflict with
law under this Act. It also provides for the composition of the
Board, which shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class (not being Chief Metropolitan Magistrate
or Chief Judicial Magistrate) with at least three years of experience
and two social workers from two different reputed non-
governmental organisations. The selection of the members of the
Board shall be done in prescribed manner however; at least one
member of the Board shall be a woman. The Board shall be forming
a Bench and every Bench shall have the powers conferred by the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a Metropolitan Magistrate or,
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class. It also states that the
Magistrate on the Board shall be designated as the Principal
Magistrate.
It is clarified that no social worker shall be appointed as a
member of the Board unless the person has been actively involved
in health, education, or welfare activities pertaining to children for
at least seven years or is a practicing professional with a degree in
child psychology, psychiatry, sociology or law.
It is further clarified that no person shall be eligible for
selection as a member of the Board, if he ––
(i) has any past record of violation of human rights or
child rights;
(ii) has been convicted of an offence involving moral
turpitude, and such conviction has not been reversed or he
has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence;
(iii) has been removed or dismissed from service of the
Central Government or a State Government or an undertaking
or corporation owned or controlled by the Central
Government or a State Government;
(iv) has ever indulged in child abuse or employment of
child labour or any other human rights violations or immoral
act.

138
The clause also states that the State Government shall provide
for the induction training and sensitisation of all members of the
Board including the Principal Magistrate of the Board. The training
shall be provided on care, protection, rehabilitation, legal provisions
and justice for children, within a period of sixty days from the date
of their appointment.
Further, the clause also states that the term of office of the
members of the Board and the manner in which a member may
resign shall be done as may be prescribed. The appointment of any
member of the Board, except of that of the Principal Magistrate,
may be terminated after holding inquiry, by the State Government,
if he ––
(i) he has been found guilty of misuse of power vested
under this Act; or
(ii) fails to attend the proceedings of the Board for
consecutive three months without any valid reason;
(iii) or fails to attend less than three-fourths of the
sittings in a year; or becomes ineligible under sub-section (5)
during his term as member.
Clause 5.— This clause clarifies that when an inquiry has been
initiated in respect of any child under this Act, and during the
course of inquiry, if the child completes the age of eighteen years,
then, the inquiry may be continued by the Board and orders may be
passed in respect of that person as if the person had continued to
be a child.
Clause 6.— This clause states that if a person, who has
completed eighteen years of age but is below twenty one years, is
apprehended for committing an offence when he was below the age
of eighteen years, then the person shall be treated as a child during
the process of inquiry. The Clause further states that if the person
is not released on bail by the Board then the person shall be placed
in a place of safety during the process of inquiry. If the Board after
inquiry comes to the conclusion that the person has committed any
offence, then the person shall be placed in a Place of Safety till he
completes his term.
If the Children’s court after the inquiry comes to the
conclusion that the person has committed any heinous offence, then
such a person shall be placed in the place of safety till he attains
the age of twenty-one years. After completing age of twenty-one
years he shall be transferred to the jail meant for adults.
Clause 7. —This clause provides that if any person, who is
apprehended after completing the age of twenty-one years, for
committing any serious or heinous offence when such person was
between the age of sixteen to eighteen years, then, he shall, subject
to the provisions of this Act, be fried as an adult.

139
Clause 8. —This clause states that the Board shall ensure that
all procedures are child friendly and that the venue is not
intimidating to the child and does not resemble regular courts.
Further, the times at which the Board shall meet and the rules that
shall be observed in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings, shall be prescribed.
This clause also states when the Board is not sitting, a child
in conflict with law may be produced before an individual member
of the Board. It also states that a Board may act even in the absence
of any member of the Board, and no order passed by the Board
shall be invalid in the absence of any member during any stage of
proceedings. This clause clarifies that at the time of final disposal
of the case or in making an order under sub-section ( 3) of section
19 at least two members including the Principal Magistrate shall be
present and in the event of any difference of opinion among the
members of the Board in the interim or final disposal, the opinion
of the majority shall prevail. In case there is no majority then the
opinion of the Principal Magistrate, shall prevail.
Clause 9.— This clause provides the functions and
responsibilities of the Board and also states that the Board
constituted for any district shall have the power to deal exclusively
with all the proceedings under this Act, relating to children in
conflict with law, in the area of jurisdiction of the Board. The
powers conferred on the Board under this Act may also be
exercised by the High Court and the Children’s Court, when the
proceedings come before them under this section or in appeal,
revision or otherwise. The functions and responsibilities of the
Board shall include:
(a) ensuring the informed participation of the child and
the parent or guardian, in every step of the process;
(b) ensuring that the child’s rights are protected
throughout the process of apprehending the child, inquiry,
aftercare and rehabilitation;
(c) ensuring availability of legal aid for the child
through the legal services institutions;
(d) wherever necessary the Board shall provide an
interpreter or translator, having such qualifications,
experience, and on payment of such fees as may be
prescribed, to the child if he fails to understand the language
used in the proceedings;
(e) directing the probation officer, or in case a
Probation Officer is not available to the Child Welfare Officer
or a social worker, to undertake a social investigation into the
case, and submit a social investigation report within a period
of fifteen days from the date of first production before the
Board to ascertain circumstances in which the alleged offence
was committed;

140
(f) adjudicate and dispose of cases of children in
conflict with law in accordance with the process of inquiry
specified in section 14 of the Act;
(g) transferring to the Committee, matters concerning
the child alleged to be in conflict with the law, stated to be
in need of care and protection at any stage, hereby
recognising that a child in conflict with the law can also be
a child in need of care simultaneously and there is a need for
the Committee and the Board to be both involved.
(h) disposing of the matter and passing a final order
that includes an individual care plan for the child’s
rehabilitation, including follow up by the probation officer or
the District Child Protection Unit or a member of a non-
governmental organisation, as may be required;
(i) conducting inquiry for declaring “fit persons”
regarding care of children in conflict with law;
(j) conducting at least one inspection visit every month
of residential facilities for children in conflict with law and
recommend action for improvement in quality of services to
the District Child Protection Unit and State Government;
(k) order the police for registration of First Information
Report for offences committed against any child in conflict
with law, under this Act or any other law, on a complaint
made in this regard;
(l) order the police for registration of First Information
Report for offences committed against any child in need of
care and protection, under this Act or any other law, on a
written complaint by a Committee in this regard;
(m) conducting regular inspection of jails meant for
adults to check if any child is lodged in such jails and take
immediate measures for transfer of such a child to the
observation home.
(n) any other function as may be prescribed.
Clause 10.— This clause provides that when a magistrate who
is not empowered to exercise the powers of Board under this Act
is of the opinion that the person alleged to have committed the
offence and brought before him is a child then in such a case the
magistrate shall, without any delay, record his opinion and forward
the child immediately, and send record of the proceeding, to the
Board having jurisdiction over the proceeding. In case a person
alleged to have committed an offence claims that he was a child on
the date of commission of the offence before a court other than a
Board, or is the court itself is of the opinion that the person was
a child on the date of commission of the offence, then the court
shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may be necessary (but
not an affidavit) to determine the age of the person, and shall record

141
a finding on the matter, stating the age of the person as nearly as
may be. This clause further clarifies that such a claim can be raised
before any court and it shall be recognised at any stage, even after
final disposal of the case. Such a claim shall be determined in terms
of the provisions contained in this Act and the rules made under the
Act even if the person has ceased to be a child on or before the
date of commencement of this Act.
This clause also states that subject to provisions of section 7
if the court finds that a person has committed an offence and was
a child on the date of commission of the offence, it shall forward
the child to the Board for passing appropriate orders and the
sentence. If any order or sentence is passed by the court, it shall
be deemed to have no effect in such case. In case a person under
this clause is required to be kept in protective custody, while the
person’s claim of being a child is being inquired into, then such
person may be placed, in the interim period, in a place of safety.
Clause 11.— This clause provides that as soon as a child
alleged to be in conflict with law is apprehended by the police, then
the child shall be placed under the charge of the special juvenile
police unit or the designated child welfare police officer. The special
juvenile police unit or the designated child welfare police officer
shall produce the child before the Board without any loss of time
but within a period of twenty-four hours of apprehending the child
excluding the time necessary for the journey, from the place where
the child was apprehended. This clause clarifies that in no case, a
child alleged to be in conflict with law, shall be placed in a police
lockup or lodged in a jail. The clause also provides that the State
Government shall make rules consistent with this Act,—
(i) to provide for persons through whom (including
registered voluntary or non-governmental organisations) any
child alleged to be in conflict with law may be produced
before the Board;
(ii) to provide for the manner in which the child alleged
to be in conflict with law may be sent to an observation home
or place of safety, as the case may be.
Clause 12.— This clause provides that any person in whose
charge a child in conflict with law is placed, shall while the order
is in force, have responsibility of the child, as if the said person
was the child’s parent and responsible for the child’s maintenance.
This clause further clarifies that the child shall continue to stay in
the person’s charge for the period stated by the Board. The person
shall continue to have charge of the child even when the child is
claimed by the parents or any other person except when the Board
is of the opinion that the parent or any other person are fit to
exercise charge over such child.
Clause 13.— This clause provides that when any person, who
is apparently a child and is alleged to have committed a bailable or

142
non-bailable offence, is apprehended or detained by the police or
appears or brought before a Board, then such person shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the time being in force, be
released on bail with or without surety or placed under the
supervision of a probation officer or under the care of any fit
person. This clause also clarifies that the person shall not be
released if there appears reasonable grounds for believing that the
release is likely to bring this person into association with any known
criminal or expose the said person to moral, physical or
psychological danger or that the person’s release would defeat the
ends of justice. The Board shall record the reasons for denying the
bail and circumstances that led to such a decision.
This clause also provides when a person having been
apprehended is not released on bail under this clause by the officer
in-charge of the police station, then the officer shall keep the person
in an observation home in such manner as may be prescribed until
the person can be brought before a Board. Further, when the person
is not released on bail by the Board, it shall make an order sending
him to an observation home or a place of safety, during the period
of pendency of the inquiry regarding that person, for a period that
may be specified in the order. This clause states that when a child
in conflict with law is unable to furnish bail within seven days of
the bail order, then such child shall be produced before the Board
for modification of conditions of bail.
Clause 14.— This clause provides that where a child alleged to
be in conflict with law is apprehended, the officer designated as
Child Welfare Police Officer of the police station, or the special
juvenile police unit to which such child is brought, shall, as soon as
possible after apprehending the child, inform—
(i) the parent or guardian of such child, if they can be
found, and direct them to be present at the Board before
which the child is produced; and
(ii) the probation officer, or if no probation officer is
available, a Child Welfare Officer, for preparation and
submission within two weeks to the Board, a social
investigation report containing information regarding the
antecedents and family background of the child and other
material circumstances likely to be of assistance to the Board
for making the inquiry.
This clause also provides that where a child is released on
bail, the probation officer or the Child Welfare Officer shall be
informed by the Board.
Clause 15.— This clause provides that where a child alleged to
be in conflict with law is produced before a Board, then the Board
shall hold an inquiry in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and may pass orders in relation to the child as it deems fit under

143
clauses 18 and 19 of this Act. This clause further provides that the
inquiry under this clause shall be completed within a period of four
months from the date of first production of the child before the
Board, unless the period is extended, for a maximum period of two
more months by the Board, having regard to the circumstances of
the case and after recording the reasons in writing for such
extension.
It also provides that a preliminary inquiry shall be conducted
by the Board in case of heinous offences under clause 16 and shall
be disposed off within a period of one month from the date of first
production of the child before the Board.
In case of petty or serious offences, if inquiry by the Board
remains inconclusive even after the extended period, the
proceedings shall stand terminated. This clause also clarifies that for
heinous offences, in case the Board requires further extension of
time for completion of inquiry, the same shall be granted by the
Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, for
reasons to be recorded in writing.
This clause provides the following steps to be taken by the
Board to ensure fair and speedy inquiry, namely:—
(a) at the time of initiating the inquiry, the Board shall
satisfy itself that the child in conflict with law has not been
subjected to any ill-treatment by the police or by any other
person, including a lawyer or probation officer and take
corrective steps in case of such ill-treatment;
(b) in all cases under the Act, the proceedings shall be
conducted in simple manner as possible and care shall be
taken to ensure that the child, against whom the proceedings
have been instituted, is given child-friendly atmosphere during
the proceedings;
(c) every child brought before the Board shall be given
the opportunity to be heard and participate in the inquiry;
(d) cases of petty offences, shall be disposed off by
the Board through summary proceedings, as per the
procedure prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(e) inquiry of serious offences shall be disposed off by
the Board, by following the procedure, for trial in summons
case under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(f) inquiry in case of heinous offences,—
(i) for child below the age of sixteen years as on
the date of commission of an offence shall be disposed
off by the Board under clause (e);
(ii) for child above the age of sixteen year as on
the date of commission of an offence shall be dealt
with in the manner prescribed under clause 15.

144
Clause 16.— This clause provides that in case of a heinous
offence, committed by a child above the age of sixteen years, the
Board shall conduct a preliminary inquiry with regard to his mental
and physical capacity to commit such offence, ability to understand
the consequences of the offence and the circumstances in which he
committed the offence. This clause also provides that the Board
may thereafter pass an order in accordance with the provisions of
sub-clause (3) of clause 19. This clause also clarifies that the Board
may take the assistance of experienced psychologists, psycho-social
workers and other experts for such an inquiry.
This clause provides that where the Board is satisfied on
preliminary inquiry that the matter should be disposed off by the
Board, then the Board shall follow the procedure, for trial in
summons case under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It is
also clarified that the inquiry under this clause shall be completed
within the period specified under clause 15.
Clause17.— This clause provides that the Chief Judicial
Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall review the
pendency of cases of the Board once in every three months, and
shall direct the Board to increase the frequency of its sittings or
may also recommend the constitution of additional Boards. It also
provides that the number of cases pending before the Board, the
duration of such pendency, the nature of pendency and reasons
thereof shall be reviewed every six months by a high level
committee. This Committee shall be chaired by the Executive
Chairperson of the State Legal Services Authority, consisting of the
Home Secretary, the Secretary responsible for implementation of this
Act in the State and a representative from a voluntary or non-
governmental organisation to be nominated by the Chairperson.
It also provides that the information of such pendency shall
also be furnished by the Board to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and the District Magistrate on
quarterly basis in a format as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
Clause 18.— This clause provides that where a Board is
satisfied on inquiry that the child brought before it has not
committed any offence, then notwithstanding anything contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Board
shall pass order to that effect. It also provides that in case it
appears to the Board that the child referred to in this clause is in
need of care and protection, it may refer the child to the Committee
with appropriate directions.
Clause 19.— This clause provides that where a Board is
satisfied on inquiry that a child irrespective of his age has
committed a petty offence or a serious offence; or a child is below
the age of sixteen years and has committed a heinous offence, then
notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the
time being in force, and based on the nature of offence, specific

145
need for supervision or intervention, circumstances as brought out
in the social investigation report and past conduct of the child, the
Board may, if it so thinks fit may pass any of the following
orders—
(a) allow the child to go home after advice or
admonition following appropriate inquiry and counselling to
such child and to his parents or the guardian;
(b) direct the child to participate in group counselling
and similar activities;
(c) order the child to perform community service under
the supervision of an organisation or institution, or a specified
person, persons or group of persons identified by the Board;
(d) order the child or parents or the guardian of the
child to pay a fine:
Provided that, in case the child is working, it may be
ensured that the provisions of any existing labour laws are not
violated;
(e) direct the child to be released on probation of good
conduct and placed under the care of any parent, guardian or
fit person, on such parent, guardian or fit person executing a
bond, with or without surety, as the Board may require, for
the good behaviour and child’s well-being for any period not
exceeding three years;
(f) direct the child to be released on probation of good
conduct and placed under the care and supervision of any fit
facility for ensuring the good behaviour and child’s well-being
for any period not exceeding three years;
(g) direct the child to be sent to a special home, for
such period, not exceeding three years, as it thinks fit, for
providing reformative services including education, skill
development, counselling, behaviour modification therapy, and
psychiatric support during the period of stay in the special
home or a place of safety, as the case may be:
Sub-clause (g) further clarifies that for committing a petty
offence, the term of stay in a special home or a place of safety,
shall not be more than three months. It also clarifies that if the
conduct and behaviour of the child has been such that, it would not
be in the child’s interest, or in the interest of other children housed
in a special home, the Board may send the child to the place of
safety.
Additionally the clause provides that if an order is passed
under clauses (a) to (g), the Board may also pass orders to—
(i) attend school;
(ii) attend a vocational training centre;

146
(iii) attend a therapeutic centre;
(iv) prohibit the child from visiting, frequenting or
appearing at a specified place;
(v) undergo a de-addiction programme.
Further, this clause states that where, the Board after
preliminary inquiry under cluase 16 comes to the conclusion that
there is a need for further trial of the child as an adult, then the
Board may order transfer of the trial of the case to the Children’s
Court having jurisdiction to try such offences.
Clause 20.— This clause provides that after the receipt of
preliminary inquiry from the Board under clause 16 of the Act, the
Children´s Court may decide that—
(i) there is a need for trial of the child as an adult as
per the provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and
pass appropriate orders after trial subject to provisions of this
section and section 22 or;
(ii) there is no need for trial of the child as an adult and
may conduct an inquiry as Board and pass appropriate orders
in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2)
of section 18.
This clause further states that the Children’s Court shall
ensure that the final order, with regard to a child in conflict with
law, shall include an individual care plan for the rehabilitation of
child, including follow up by the probation officer or the District
Child Protection Unit or a social worker. The Children’s Court shall
ensure that the child who is found to be in conflict with the law is
sent to a place of safety till he attains the age of twenty one years,
thereafter, the person shall be transferred to a jail. It is also clarified
that the reformative services including educational services, skill
development, alternative therapy such as counselling, behaviour
modification therapy, and psychiatric support shall be provided to
the child during the period of his stay in the place of safety.
The clause states that the Children’s Court shall ensure that
there is a periodic follow up report every year by the probation
officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker, to
evaluate the progress of the child in the place of safety and to
ensure that there is no ill-treatment to the child in any form. The
reports under this clause shall be forwarded to the Children´s Court
for record and follow up.
Clause 21.— This clause provides that when a child in conflict
with the law attains the age of twenty-one years and is yet to
complete the term of his stay, the Children´s Court then shall provide
for a follow up by the probation officer or the District Child
Protection Unit or a social worker or by itself. The purpose of the
follow up is to evaluate if the child has undergone reformative
changes and if the child can be a contributing member of the society.

147
The evaluation shall be based on the progress records of the child
under sub-clause (4) of clause 20 of this Act, along with evaluation
of relevant experts. After the completion of the evaluation, the
Children’s Court may—
(i) decide to release the child on such conditions as it
deems fit which includes appointment of a monitoring
authority for the remainder of the prescribed term of stay;
(ii) decide that the child shall complete the remainder of
his term in an adult jail.
The clause further clarifies that each State Government shall
maintain a list of monitoring authorities and monitoring procedures
as may be prescribed under the Rules.
Clause 22.— This clause provides that no child in conflict with
law shall be sentenced to death or for life imprisonment without the
possibility of release, for any such offence, either under the
provisions of this Act or under the provisions of the Indian Penal
Code or under any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 23.— This clause provides that despite anything to the
contrary contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or any
preventive detention law for the time being in force, no proceeding
shall be instituted and no order shall be passed against any child
under Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 24.— This clause provides that despite anything
contained in section 223 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
or in any other law for the time being in force, no joint proceedings
shall be conducted of a child alleged to be in conflict with law with
a person, who is not a child. It also provides that if during the
inquiry by the Board or by the Children’s Court, the person alleged
to be in conflict with law is found to be not a child, then that
person shall not be tried along with a child.
Clause 25.— This clause provides that despite anything that
may be contained in any other law for the time being in force, if
a child who has committed an offence and has been dealt with
under the provisions of this Act shall not suffer any disqualification
attached to a conviction of an offence under any other law. It also
provides that the Board shall make an order, in which it will direct
the police or the court and its own registry to destroy the relevant
records of conviction after the expiry of the period of appeal or a
reasonable period, which shall be prescribed under the rules. The
clause clarifies that in case of a heinous offence committed by a
child and when the case is transferred to a Children’s Court under
clause 19 of this Act, the Children’s Court shall keep the record of
the child, only when the child is sent to an adult jail.
Clause 26.— This clause provides that despite anything
contained in this Act, all proceedings in respect of a child alleged or
found to be in conflict with law which are pending before any

148
Board or court on the date when this Act comes into force, shall
be continued in that Board or court as if this Act has not been
passed.
Clause 27.— This clause provides that despite anything to the
contrary that may be contained in any other law for the time being
in force, any police officer may take charge of a child in conflict
with law who has run away from a special home or an observation
home or a place of safety or from the care of a person or institution
under whom the child was placed under this Act. The clause further
provides that the police officer shall produce the child within
twenty-four hours, preferably before the Board which passed the
original order in respect of that child if possible, or the Board
nearest to where the child is found.
It further provides that the Board shall determine the reasons
for the running away of the child and shall pass appropriate orders
for the child to be sent back either to the institution or person from
whose custody the child had run away or any other similar place or
person, as the Board may deem fit. It also clarifies that the Board
may also give additional directions regarding any special steps that
may be necessary, for the best interest of the child.
Further the clause states that no additional proceeding shall be
instituted in respect of such child.
Clause 28.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall constitute one or more Child Welfare Committees for every
district, for exercising the powers and to discharge the duties
conferred on them in relation to children in need of care and
protection under this Act. These Committees shall be notified in the
Official Gazette and the State Government shall ensure that all
members of the committee are provided with induction training and
sensitisation within two months from the date of notification.
With regard to the composition of the Committee, the clause
states that the Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, and four
other members as the State Government may think fit to appoint, of
whom at least one shall be a woman and another, an expert on
matters concerning children. The District Child Protection Unit shall
also provide a Secretary and other staff that may be required for
secretarial support to the Committee for its effective functioning.
The clause further clarifies that no person shall be appointed
as member of the Committee unless he/she has been actively
involved in health, education, or welfare activities pertaining to
children for atleast seven years or is a practicing professional with
a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or law or social work or
sociology or human development. It is also clarified that no person
shall be appointed as member unless he/she possesses qualifications
that may be prescribed under the Rules of this Act and no person
shall be appointed as member of the Committee for more than three
years. The appointment of any member of the Committee shall be
terminated by the State Government, after inquiry, if—

149
(i) he has been found guilty of misuse of power vested
under this Act;
(ii) he has been convicted of an offence involving moral
turpitude, and such conviction has not been reversed or he
has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence;
(iii) he fails to attend the proceedings of the Committee
for consecutive three months without any valid reason or he
fails to attend less than three-fourths of the sittings in a year.
The clause provides that a quarterly review of the Committee
shall be conducted by the District Magistrate. It also states that the
Committee shall function as a Bench of Magistrates and shall have
the powers conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on
a Metropolitan Magistrate or, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
Further, the clause provides that the District Magistrate shall be the
grievances authority for the Child Welfare Committee and anyone
connected with the child may file a petition before him and he shall
consider the same and may pass appropriate orders.
Clause 29.— This clause provides that the Committee shall
meet at least twenty days in a month and the rules and procedures
in regard to the transaction of its business shall be prescribed in the
Rules. It is clarified that a visit to an existing child care institution
by the Committee, to check its functioning and well being of
children shall be considered as sitting of the Committee.
The Clause further provides that when the Committee is not
in session, a child in need of care and protection may be produced
before an individual member of the Committee for placing the child
in a Children’s Home or with a fit person. In the event of any
difference of opinion among the members of the Committee at the
time of any decision, the opinion of the majority shall prevail. In
case there is no such majority, then the opinion of the Chairperson
shall prevail. It is clarified that the Committee may act, despite the
absence of any member and no order made by the Committee shall
be invalid for such reason during any stage of the proceeding. It is
also clarified that at the time of final disposal order of the case, at
least three members shall be present.
Clause 30.— This clause provides that the Committee shall
have the authority to dispose of cases for the care, protection,
treatment, development and rehabilitation of children, in need of care
and protection, and shall also provide for their basic needs and
protection. Where a Committee has been constituted for any area,
then despite anything contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the Committee shall have the power to deal exclusively
with all proceedings under this Act relating to children in need of
care and protection.
Clause 31.— This clause provides the functions and
responsibilities of the Committee, which include:—

150
(i) taking cognizance of and receiving children
produced;
(ii) conducting inquiry on all issues relating to and
affecting the safety and wellbeing of children under this Act;
(iii) directing the Child Welfare Officers or probation
officers or District Child Protection Unit or Non-
Governmental Organisations to conduct social investigation
and submit a report before the Committee;
(iv) conducting inquiry for declaring “fit persons” for
care of children in need of care and protection;
(v) directing placement of a child in foster care;
(vi) ensuring care, protection, appropriate rehabilitation
or restoration of children in need of care and protection,
based on the child’s individual care plan and passing
necessary directions to parents or guardians or fit persons or
children’s homes or fit facility in this regard;
(vii) selecting registered institution for placement of
each child requiring institutional support, based on the child’s
age, gender, disability and needs and keeping in mind the
available capacity of the institution;
(viii) conducting at least two inspection visits per
month of residential facilities for children in need of care and
protection and recommending action for improvement in
quality of services to the District Child Protection Unit and
the State Government;
(ix) certifying the execution of the surrender deed by
the parents and ensuring that they are given time to
reconsider the decision as well as making all efforts to keep
the family together;
(x) ensuring that all efforts are made for restoration of
abandoned or lost children to their families following due
process, as may be prescribed;
(xi) declaration of orphan, abandoned and surrendered
child as legally free for adoption after due inquiry;
(xii) taking suo motu cognizance of cases and reaching
out to children in need of care and protection, who are not
produced before the Committee provided such decision is
taken by atleast three members;
(xiii) taking action for rehabilitation of sexually abused
children who are reported as children in need of care and
protection to the Committee by Special Juvenile Police Unit or
local police, as the case may be, under the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.

151
(xiv) dealing with cases referred by the Board under
sub-section (2) of section 18 of this Act;
(xv) co-ordinate with the police, labour department and
other agencies involved in the care and protection of children
with support of the District Child Protection Unit or the State
Government;
(xvi) in case of a complaint of abuse of a child in any
child care institution, the Committee shall conduct inquiry and
give directions to the police or the District Child Protection
Unit or labour department or childline services, as the case
may be;
(xvii) accessing appropriate legal services for children.
Clause 32.— This clause provides that any child who is in
need of care and protection may be produced before the Committee
by any of the following persons, namely:—
(i) any police officer or special juvenile police unit or a
designated Child Welfare Police Officer or any officer of
District Child Protection Unit or inspector appointed under
labour laws;
(ii) any public servant;
(iii) Childline Services or any voluntary or non-
governmental organisation or any agency as may be
recognised by the State Government;
(iv) Child Welfare Officer or probation officer;
(v) any social worker or a public spirited citizen;
(vi) by the child himself; or
(vii) any nurse, doctor or management of a nursing
home, hospital or maternity home.
The clause further clarifies that the child shall be produced
before the Committee within twenty-four hours excluding the time
necessary for the journey and without any delay. The State
Government shall make rules consistent with this Act, to provide for
the manner of submitting the report to the Committee and the
manner of sending and entrusting the child to children’s home or
shelter home or fit facility or fit person, during the period of the
inquiry.
Clause 33.— This clause provides for procedure in case an
individual or a police officer or any functionary of any organisation
or a nursing home or hospital or maternity home finds and takes
charge, or is handed over a child and the child appears or claims
to be abandoned or lost, or an orphan without family support. As
per this clause, information regarding such child shall be given
within twenty-four hours (excluding the time necessary for the

152
journey) by persons listed in this clause to Childline Services or the
nearest police station or to a Child Welfare Committee or to the
District Child Protection Unit, or hand over the child to a child care
institution registered under this Act.
It also provides that the information regarding a child referred
to in sub-clause (1) of this clause shall be mandatorily uploaded on
a portal specified by the Central Government or the Committee or
the District Child Protection Unit or the child care institution, as the
case may be.
Clause 34.— This clause provides that if information regarding
a child as required under clause 33 is not given within the stipulated
period, then it shall be regarded as an offence under this Act.
Clause 35.— This clause provides that the persons responsible
for reporting under clause 34 shall be liable to imprisonment up to
six months or fine of rupees 10,000 or both, in case they commit
an offence under clause 34.
Clause 36.— This clause provides that if parent or guardian of
a child, who for physical, emotional and social factors beyond their
control, wish to surrender their child then they shall produce the
child before the Committee. If, the Committee after prescribed
process of inquiry and counselling, is satisfied about the factors
then a surrender deed shall be executed by the parent(s) or guardian
in the manner prescribed under the Rules.
The clause provides that the surrendering parents or guardian,
shall be given one month reconsideration time for surrendering the
child. In the interim period, the Committee after due inquiry, shall
either allow the child to be with his parents or guardians under
supervision, or place the child in a Specialised Adoption Agency, if
he or she is below six years of age, or a children’s home if the
child is above six years.
Clause 37.— This clause provides that the when a child is
produced or a report is received by the Committee under clause 32,
then the Committee shall hold an inquiry in the prescribed manner
under the Rules. The Committee shall either on its own or on the
report from any person or agency as mentioned in sub-clause (2) of
clause 32, may pass an order to send the child to the children’s
home or shelter home or a fit facility or fit person, and for speedy
social investigation by a social worker or child welfare officer or
child welfare police officer. It is clarified that all children below six
years of age, who are orphan, surrendered or appear to be
abandoned shall be placed in a Specialised Adoption Agency, where
available.
It also provides that the social investigation shall be completed
within fifteen days so as to enable the Committee to pass the final
order within four months of first production of the child. It is
clarified that for orphan, abandoned or surrendered children, the
time for completion of inquiry shall be as specified in clause 39.

153
The clause further elaborates that after the completion of the
inquiry, if, the Committee is of the opinion that the child has no family
or ostensible support or is in continued need of care and protection,
then it may send the child, to a Specialised Adoption Agency if the child
is below six years of age, children’s home or to a fit facility or person
or foster family, till suitable means of rehabilitation are found for the
child, or till the child attains the age of eighteen years. It is again
clarified that the situation of the child placed in a children’s home or
with a fit facility or person or a foster family, shall be reviewed by the
Committee, as per the Rules under this Act.
Under the clause, the Committee is required to submit a quarterly
report of the nature of disposal of cases and pendency to the District
Magistrate as per the Rules under this Act, for review of pendency of
cases every three months by the District Magistrate. After review, the
District Magistrate shall direct the Committee to take necessary
remedial measures to address pendency, if necessary and send a report
of reviews to the State Government. The State Government may cause
the constitution of additional Committees, whenever required. It is
clarified that in case the pendency still continues to be unaddressed by
the Committee even after three months of receiving such directions, the
State Government shall terminate the existing Committee and a new
Committee shall be constituted in its place. Further the State
Government is required to maintain a standing panel of eligible persons
to be appointed as members of the Committee, which shall be useful
in anticipation of termination of the Committee and no time shall be lost
in reconstituting a new Committee. In case of any delay in the
constitution of a new Committee under sub-clause (5), in the interim
period, the Child Welfare Committee of a nearby district shall assume
responsibility.
Clause 38.— This clause provides that the Committee after
being satisfied through the inquiry that the child brought before it is
a child in need of care and protection may pass one or more of the
following orders. The Committee shall also consider the Social
Investigation Report submitted by Child Welfare Officer and shall
take into account the child’s wishes in case the child is sufficiently
mature to take a view—
(a) declaration of a child as in need of care and
protection;
(b) restoration of child to the parents or legal guardian
or family with or without supervision of Child Welfare Officer
or designated social worker;
(c) placement of the child in Children’s Home or fit
facility or Specialised Adoption Agency for the purpose of
adoption for long term or temporary care, keeping in mind the
capacity of the institution for housing such children, either
after reaching the conclusion that the family of the child
cannot be traced or even if traced, restoration of the child to
the family is not in the best interest of the child;

154
(d) placement of the child with “fit person” for long
term or temporary care;
(e) foster care orders under section 45 of this Act;
(f) sponsorship orders under section 46 of this Act;
(g) directions to persons or institutions or facilities in
whose care the child is placed, regarding care, protection and
rehabilitation of the child, including directions related to
immediate shelter and services such as medical attention,
psychiatric and psychological support including need-based
counselling, occupational therapy or behaviour modification
therapy, skill training, legal aid, educational services, and other
developmental activities, as required, as well as follow up and
coordination with District Child Protection Unit or State
Government and other agencies;
(h) declaration of child as legally free for adoption
under section 39 of this Act;
The clause also provides that the Committee may also pass
orders for —
(i) declaration of fit persons for foster care; and
(ii) getting one time after care support under section 47
of the Act;
(iii) any other order related to any other function as
may be prescribed.
Clause 39.— This clause provides that in case of orphan and
abandoned child, the Committee shall make all efforts to trace the
child’s parents or guardians. Only after the completion of such
inquiry, if it is established that the child is either an orphan having
no one to take care, or abandoned, the Committee shall declare the
child legally free for adoption. It is clarified that the declaration by
the Committee shall be made within two months from the date of
production of the child, for children who are up to two years of age
and within four months for children above two years of age. It is
further clarified that no first information report shall be registered
against any biological parent in the process of inquiry relating to an
abandoned or surrendered child under this Act, not withstanding
anything contained in this regard in any other law for the time being
in force.
The clause provides that in case of a surrendered child, the
institution where the child has been placed by the Committee, shall
bring the case before the Committee, immediately, on completion of
the re-consideration period as specified under clause 36, for
declaring the child legally free for adoption. Further, in case of a
child of a mentally retarded parents or a unwanted child of victim
of sexual assault, the child may be declared free for adoption by the
Committee, by following the procedure under this Act.

155
It is clarified that the decision to declare an orphan,
abandoned and surrendered child as legally free for adoption shall be
taken by at least three members of the Committee. The Committee
shall every month inform the State Adoption Resource Agency and
Central Adoption Resource Authority regarding the number of
children declared legally free for adoption and number of cases
pending for decision in the manner prescribed under the Rules.
Clause 40.— This clause provides the process of rehabilitation
and social integration of children under this Act. The process shall
be based on the individual care plan of the child, preferably through
family based care i.e., by restoration to family or guardian with or
without supervision or sponsorship, or adoption or foster-care. It is
clarified that all efforts shall be made to keep siblings together when
they are placed in institutional or non-institutional care, unless it is
in their best interest not to be kept together.
For children in conflict with law, the clause states that the
process of rehabilitation and social integration shall be undertaken in
the observation homes if the child is not released on bail or in
special homes or place of safety or fit facility or with a fit person,
if the child is placed there by orders of the Board.
In case of children in need of care and protection who are
not placed in families for any reason may be placed in an institution
registered for such children under this Act or with a fit person or
a fit facility, on a temporary or long-term basis. The process of
rehabilitation and social integration shall be undertaken wherever the
child is so placed by the Committee.
Additionally, the clause provides that children in need of care
and protection who are leaving institutional care or children in
conflict with law leaving special homes on attaining eighteen years
of age, may be provided support through aftercare fund under
clause 47, to help them to reintegrate into society.
Clause 41.— This clause provides that restoration and
protection of a child shall be the prime objective of any children’s
home, Specialised Adoption Agency or open shelter. The children’s
home, specialised adoption agency or an open shelter shall take all
necessary steps for the restoration and protection of a child
deprived of his family environment temporarily or permanently
where the child is under their care and protection. The Committee
also has the power to restore any child in need of care and
protection to his parent, guardian or fit person, after determining the
suitability of the parent or guardian or fit person to take care of the
child, and give them suitable directions.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause “restoration of
and protection of a child” means restoration to—
(a) parents;
(b) adoptive parents;

156
(c) foster parents;
(d) guardian; or
(e) fit person.
Clause 42.— This clause provides that despite anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force, all
institutions, whether they are run by State Government or run by
voluntary or non-governmental organisations, which are meant,
either wholly or partially, for housing children in need of care and
protection as defined under clause (n) of clause 2 or children in
conflict with law, shall, be registered under this Act. The manner of
registration shall be prescribed under the Rules and the registration
shall be done within a period of six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, regardless of whether they are receiving
grants from the Government or not. It is clarified that the
institutions having valid registration under the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, on the date of
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be registered under
this Act as well.
The clause provides that at the time of registration under this
clause, the State Government shall determine and record the
capacity and purpose of the institution and shall register the
institution as a Shelter Home, or Children’s Home or open shelter or
Specialised Adoption Agency or Observation Home or Special Home
or Place of Safety. On receipt of application for registration under
sub-clause (1), from an existing or new institution housing children
in need of care and protection or children in conflict with law, the
State Government may grant provisional registration. The provisional
registration shall be granted within one month of the date of
application, for a maximum period of six months, in order to bring
the institution under the purview of this Act. The State Government
shall also determine the capacity of the Home which shall be
mentioned in the registration certificate. It is clarified that if the said
institution does not fulfil the prescribed criteria for registration,
within the stipulated time, the provisional registration shall be
cancelled and provisions of sub-clause (5) shall apply.
It further states that if the State Government does not issue
a provisional registration certificate within one month of date of
application, the proof of receipt of application shall be treated as
provisional registration to run an organisation for a maximum period
of six months. If the application for registration is not disposed of
within the stipulated period by any officer or officers of concerned
government, it shall be regarded as dereliction of duty on their part
by their higher controlling authority and appropriate departmental
proceedings shall be instituted.
The clause explains that the initial period of registration of an
institution shall be for a period of five years, after which, it shall
be subject to renewal every five years. The State Government may,

157
after following the procedure prescribed in the Rules, cancel or
withhold registration, of an institution which fails to provide
rehabilitation and reintegration services. These services shall be as
prescribed under clause 54 and till such time that the registration of
an institution is renewed or granted. The State Government shall
manage the institution.
Moreover, any registered child care institution under this
clause shall be duty bound to admit children, subject to the capacity
of the institution, as directed by the Committee, whether they are
receiving grants from the government or not. It is also clarified that
despite anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the inspection committee set up under clause 55, shall have
the powers to inspect any institution housing children, even if not
registered under this Act, to determine if such institution is housing
children in need of care and protection.
Clause 43.— This clause provides that any person, or persons,
incharge of an institution housing children in need of care and
protection and children in conflict with law, who fails to comply
with sub-clause (1) of clause 42, shall be punished with
imprisonment which may extend to one year or a fine of not less
than one lakh rupees or both. It is clarified that every thirty days
delay in applying for registration shall be considered as a separate
offence.
Clause 44.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall establish and maintain, by itself or through voluntary or non-
governmental organisations, as many Open Shelters as may be
required. These Open Shelters shall be registered as prescribed
under the Rules. The Open Shelters referred to in sub-clause (1)
shall function as a community based facility for children in need of
residential support, on a short term basis, with the objective of
protecting them from abuse or weaning them, or keeping them,
away from a life on the streets. The Open Shelters are required
under the clause to send information every month to the District
Child Protection Unit and the Committee regarding children availing
services of the shelter. The manner of providing information shall be
prescribed under the Rules.
Clause 45.— This clause provides that children under this Act
may be placed in foster care, including group foster care for their
care and protection through orders of the Committee. The
procedure in this regard shall be prescribed under the Rules. The
foster care means a family which does not include the child’s
biological or adoptive parents or an unrelated family recognised as
suitable for the purpose by the State Government, for a short or
extended period of time. The selection of the foster family shall be
based on family’s ability, intent, capacity and prior experience of
taking care of children. All efforts shall be made to keep siblings
together in foster families, unless it is in their best interest not to
be kept together.

158
The clause further provides that based on the number of
children, the State Government shall provide monthly funding for
foster care through District Child Protection Unit after following the
prescribed procedure for inspection to ensure well being of children.
It is clarified that in case of children who have parents but
are placed in foster care because the parents are unfit or unable to
take care of the child, the child’s parents may visit the child in the
foster family at regular intervals. The Committee may restrict such
visits if it feels that such visits are not in the best interest of the
child. The clause clarifies that eventually, the child may return to the
parent’s homes once the parents are determined by the Committee
to be fit to take care of the child. The foster family shall be
responsible for providing education, health and nutrition to the child
and shall ensure the overall well being of the child, which shall be
prescribed in the Rules. Further, the State Government may make
rules for the purpose of defining procedure, criteria and the manner
in which foster care services shall be provided for children.
Inspection of foster families shall be conducted every month
by the Committee in the format as may be prescribed in the Rules
to check the well-being of the child. Whenever a foster family is
found lacking in taking care of the child, the child shall be removed
from that foster family and shifted to another foster family as may
be deemed fit by the Committee. No child regarded as adoptable by
the Committee shall be given for long term foster care.
Clause 46.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall make rules for the purpose of undertaking various programmes
of sponsorship of children, such as individual to individual
sponsorship, group sponsorship or community sponsorship. The
clause also provides the criteria for sponsorship which includes:
(i) where mother is a widow or divorced or abandoned
by family;
(ii) where children are orphan and are living with the
extended family;
(iii) where parents are victims of life threatening disease;
(iv) where parents are incapacitated due to accident and
unable to take care of children both financially and physically.
The clause states that the duration of sponsorship shall be
prescribed under the Rules. The sponsorship programme may
provide supplementary support to families, to children’s homes and
to special homes to meet medical, nutritional, educational and other
needs of the children, with a view to improving their quality of life.
Clause 47.— This clause provides that any child leaving a child
care institution on completion of eighteen years of age may be
provided with a onetime financial support in order to facilitate his
reintegration into the society. The manner in which this support
shall be provided will be prescribed in the Rules.

159
Clause 48.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall establish and maintain observation homes in every district or a
group of districts, either by itself, or through voluntary or non-
governmental organisations. These Homes shall be registered under
clause 42 of this Act, for temporary reception, care and
rehabilitation of any child alleged to be in conflict with law, during
the pendency of any inquiry under this Act.
The clause provides that if the State Government is of the
opinion that any registered institution other than a home established
or maintained under sub-clause (1), is fit for the temporary
reception of a child alleged to be in conflict with law during the
pendency of any inquiry under this Act, it may register such
institution as an observation home for the purposes of this Act.
The clause also states that the State Government may make
Rules for the management and monitoring of observation homes.
The Rules shall also cover the standards and various types of
services to be provided by observation homes for rehabilitation and
social integration of a child alleged to be in conflict with law and
the circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the
registration of an observation home may be granted or withdrawn.
Lastly, the clause states that every child alleged to be in
conflict with law who is not placed under the charge of parent or
guardian and is sent to an observation home shall be segregated
according to the child’s age and gender. Due consideration shall be
given to physical and mental status of the child and degree of the
offence committed.
Clause 49.— This clause provides that the State Government
may establish and maintain special homes either by itself or through
voluntary or non-governmental organisations. These homes shall be
registered as per the Rules under the Act. The Special homes shall
be established in every district or a group of districts, for
rehabilitation of children in conflict with law who are found to have
committed an offence and who are placed there by order of the
Juvenile Justice Board under clause 19 of this Act.
Under the clause, the State Government may make Rules for
the management and monitoring of special homes, including the
standards and various types of services to be provided by them
which are necessary for social re-integration of a child, and the
circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the
registration of a special home may be granted or withdrawn. The
rules may also provide for the segregation and separation of children
found to be in conflict with law on the basis of age, gender, the
nature of offences committed by them and the child’s mental and
physical status.
Clause 50.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall set up atleast one place of safety in every state. This place of
safety shall be registered under clause 42 of this Act for persons

160
above the age of eighteen years or children in conflict with law,
who are between the ages of sixteen to eighteen years and are
accused or convicted of committing a heinous crime under this Act.
The clause further states that each place of safety shall have
separate arrangement and facilities for stay of children or persons
during the process of inquiry and children or persons convicted of
committing an offence. It also states that the State Government may
make Rules to prescribe the types of places that can be designated
as place of safety under sub-clause (1) and the facilities and
services that may be provided by them.
Clause 51.— This clause provides that the State Government
may establish and maintain, in every district or group of districts
children’s homes, either by itself or through voluntary or non-
governmental organisations. These Children’s homes shall be
registered for the placement of children in need of care and
protection for their care, treatment, education, training, development
and rehabilitation. Further, the State Government shall designate any
children’s home as a home fit for children with special needs
delivering specialised services, depending on requirement.
The clause further states that the State Government may
make rules to provide for the monitoring and management of
children’s homes including the standards and the nature of services
to be provided by them, based on individual care plans for each
child.
Clause 52.— This clause provides that the Board or the
Committee shall recognise an organisation as fit whether it is being
run by a Governmental Organisation or a voluntary or non-
governmental organisation after due inquiry regarding the suitability
of the facility. Such fit organisation registered under any law for the
time being in force shall temporarily take the responsibility of a child
for a specific purpose after due inquiry regarding the suitability of
the facility. The clause also states that rules for recognition of such
a fit facility may also be made. Under the clause, the Board or the
Committee may withdraw the recognition for reasons to be recorded
in writing.
Clause 53.— This clause provides that the Board or the
Committee shall, after due verification of credentials, recognise any
person fit to temporarily receive a child for care, protection and
treatment of such child for a specified period. The rules may also
be prescribed under this clause. Further, the Board or Committee
may withdraw the recognition after recording the reasons in writing.
Clause 54.— This clause provides that the services to be
provided by institutions registered under this Act and the process of
rehabilitation and re-integration of children may include—
(i) basic requirements such as food, shelter, clothing
and medical attention as per the prescribed standards;

161
(ii) equipment such as wheel-chairs, prosthetic devices,
hearing aids, braille kits, or any other suitable aids and
appliances as required, for children with special needs;
(iii) age appropriate education, including supplementary
education, special education, and appropriate education for
children with special needs.
The sub clause further clarifies that for children between six
to fourteen years of age the provisions of the Right of Children to
Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 shall be followed;
(iv) skill development;
(v) occupational therapy and life skill education;
(vi) mental health interventions, including counselling
specific to the need of child;
(vii) recreational activities including sports and cultural
activities;
(viii) legal aid where required;
(ix) referral services for education, vocational training,
de-addiction, treatment of diseases etc., where required;
(x) case management including preparation and follow
up of individual care plan;
(xi) birth registration;
(xii) assistance for obtaining the proof of identity,
where required; and
(xiii) any other service that may reasonably be provided
in order to ensure the well being of the child, either directly
by the State Government, registered or fit individuals or
institutions or through referral services.
It is further provided that each institution shall have a
Management Committee, set up in a manner as may be prescribed
under the rules to manage the institution and monitor the progress
of every child. The officer in-charge of every institution, housing
children above six years of age, shall facilitate setting up of
children’s committees for participating in such activities as may be
prescribed, for the safety and well-being of children in the
institution.
Clause 55.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall appoint inspection committees for all institutions registered or
recognised fit, under this Act. These inspection committees shall be
appointed for the State and districts. The period and purpose of
these Committees shall be prescribed in the rules.
This clause provides that these inspection committees shall
mandatorily conduct visits to all facilities housing children in the

162
area allocated to them. These visits shall be conducted at least once
in three months in a team of not less than three members, of whom
at least one shall be a woman and one shall be a medical officer.
The Inspection Committees shall submit reports of the findings of
their visits within a week of visit, to the District Child Protection
Units or State Government for further action. On the submission of
the report by the inspection committee within a week of the
inspection, appropriate action shall be taken within a month by the
District Child Protection Unit or the State Government and a
compliance report shall be submitted to the State Government.
Clause 56.— This clause provides that the Central Government
or State Government may independently evaluate the functioning of
the Board, Committee, special juvenile police units, registered
institutions, or recognised fit facilities and persons, at such period
and through such persons or institutions as may be prescribed by
that Government. It is further clarified that in case such independent
evaluation is conducted by both the Governments, the evaluation by
the Central Government shall prevail.
Clause 57.— This clause provides that adoption shall be
resorted to for ensuring right to family for the orphan, abandoned
and surrendered children. Further, the adoption shall be as per the
provisions of this Act, the rules and the adoption guidelines. It is
clarified that the adoption of a child from a relative by another
relative, irrespective of their religion, can be made as per the
provisions of this Act and the adoption guidelines. Further, all inter-
country adoptions shall be done only as per the provisions of this
Act and the adoption guidelines. Lastly, the clause states that any
person, who takes or sends a child to a foreign country or takes
part in any arrangement for transferring the care and custody of a
child to another person in a foreign country without a valid order
from the Court, shall be punishable as per the provisions of sub–
clause (1) of clause 80.
Clause 58.— This clause provides that the prospective adoptive
parents shall have to be physically fit, financially sound, mentally
alert and highly motivated to adopt a child for providing a good
upbringing to him. In case of a couple, the consent of both the
spouses for the adoption shall be required. The clause clarifies that
a single or divorced person can also adopt, provided they fulfil the
criteria and are found suitable as per the adoption guidelines. It is
made clear that a single male is not eligible to adopt a girl child. The
clause also provides for any other criteria for prospective adoptive
parents that may be specified in the adoption guidelines.
Clause 59.— This clause provides that an Indian prospective
adoptive parents living in India, irrespective of their religion, if are
interested to adopt an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child,
then they may apply for the same to a specialised adoption agency
and the manner of such adoption shall be provided in the adoption
guidelines. The specialised adoption agency shall prepare the home

163
study report of the prospective adoptive parents. After finding them
eligible, it will refer the child declared legally free for adoption to
them along with the child’s study report and his medical report, in
the manner as provided in the adoption guidelines.
This clause provides that on the receipt of the acceptance of
the child from the prospective adoptive parents along with the child
study report and his medical report signed by the prospective
adoptive parents, the specialised adoption agency shall give the child
in pre-adoption foster care. After giving the child in pre-adoption
foster care, the agency shall file an application in the court for
obtaining the adoption order, in the manner as provided in the
adoption guidelines.
This clause provides that on the receipt of a certified copy of
the court order, the specialised adoption agency shall send it
immediately to the prospective adoptive parents. The progress and
well being of the child in the adoptive family shall be followed
up and ascertained in the manner as provided in the adoption
guidelines.
Clause 60.— This clause provides that if an orphan or
abandoned or surrendered child could not be placed with an Indian
prospective adoptive parent or non-resident Indian despite the joint
effort of the specialised adoption agency and State Agency within
thirty days from the date the child being declared legally free for
adoption, then the child shall be free for inter-country adoption.
This clause provides that an eligible non-resident Indian or
overseas citizen of India or persons of Indian origin shall be given
priority in inter-country adoption of Indian children. The Non-
resident Indian or overseas citizen of India, or a person of Indian
origin or a foreigner, who are prospective adoptive parents living
abroad, irrespective of their religion, if they are interested to adopt
an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child from India, then they
may apply to an authorised foreign adoption agency, or central
authority or a concerned Government department in their country of
habitual residence, in the manner as provided in the adoption
guidelines.
Further, the authorised foreign adoption agency, or central
authority, or a concerned Government department, shall prepare the
home study report of such prospective adoptive parents and upon
finding them eligible, will sponsor their application to Authority for
adoption of a child from India, in the manner as provided in the
adoption guidelines.
On the receipt of the application of such prospective adoptive
parents, the Authority shall examine and if it finds the applicants
suitable, then, it will refer the application to one of the specialised
adoption agencies, where children legally free for adoption are
available.

164
This clause elaborates that the specialised adoption agency
will match a child with such prospective adoptive parents and send
the child study report and medical report of the child to such
parents, who in turn may accept the child and return the child study
and medical report duly signed by them to the agency. On receipt
of the acceptance of the child from the prospective adoptive
parents, the specialised adoption agency shall file an application in
the court for obtaining the adoption order, in the manner as provided
in the adoption guidelines. On the receipt of a certified copy of the
court order, the specialised adoption agency shall send immediately
the same to Authority, State Agency and to the prospective adoptive
parents, and obtain a passport for the child. The Authority shall
intimate about the adoption to the immigration authorities of India
and the receiving country of the child. The prospective adoptive
parents shall receive the child in person from the specialised
adoption agency as soon as the passport and visa are issued to the
child.
It is clarified that the authorised foreign adoption agency, or
central authority, or the concerned government department, shall
ensure the submission of progress reports about the child in the
adoptive family and will be responsible for making alternative
arrangement in the case of any disruption. This shall be done in
consultation with Authority and concerned Indian diplomatic
mission, in the manner as provided in the adoption guidelines.
Finally, a foreigner or a person of Indian origin or an overseas
citizen of India, who has habitual residence in India, if is interested
to adopt a child from India, may apply to Authority for the same
along with a no objection certificate from the diplomatic mission of
his country in India, for further necessary actions as provided in the
adoption guidelines.
Clause 61.— This clause provides that a relative living abroad,
who intends to adopt a child from his relative in India shall obtain
an order from the court and may apply for no objection certificate
from Authority, in the manner as provided in the adoption guidelines.
Authority shall on receipt of the order and the application from
either the biological parents or from the adoptive parents, shall issue
no objection certificate under intimation to the immigration authority
of India and of the receiving country of the child. The adoptive
parents shall, after receiving no objection certificate shall receive the
child from the biological parents and shall facilitate the contact of
the adopted child with his siblings and biological parents from time
to time.
Clause 62.— This clause provides that before issuing an
adoption order, the court shall satisfy itself that: (a) the adoption is
for the welfare of the child; (b) due consideration is given to the
wishes of the child having regard to the age and understanding of
the child; and (c) that neither the prospective adoptive parents has
given or agreed to give nor the specialised adoption agency or the

165
parent or guardian of the child in case of relative adoption has
received or agreed to receive any payment or reward in
consideration of the adoption, except as permitted under the
adoption guidelines towards the adoption fees or service charge or
child care corpus.
Further, the adoption proceedings shall be held in camera and
the case shall be disposed of by the court within a period of two
months from the date of filing.
Clause 63.— This clause provides that the documentation and
other procedural requirements, not expressly provided in this Act
with regard to the adoption of an orphan, abandoned and
surrendered child by Indian prospective adoptive parents living in
India, or by non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or
person of Indian origin or foreigner prospective adoptive parents,
shall be as per the adoption guidelines.
This clause also provides that the specialised adoption agency
shall ensure that the adoption case of prospective adoptive parents
is disposed of within four months from the date of receipt of
application and the authorised foreign adoption agency, Authority and
State Agency shall track the progress of the adoption case and
intervene wherever necessary, so as to ensure that the time line is
adhered to.
Clause 64.— This clause provides that a child in respect of
whom an adoption order is issued by the court, shall become the
child of the adoptive parents, and the adoptive parents shall become
the parents of the child as if the child had been born to the adoptive
parents, for all purposes, including intestacy, with effect from the
date on which the adoption order takes effect, and on and from the
date all the ties of the child in the family of his or her birth shall
stand severed and replaced by those created by the adoption order
in the adoptive family. It is further clarified that any property which
has vested in the adopted child immediately before the date on
which the adoption order takes effect shall continue to be vested in
the adopted child subject to the obligations, if any attached to the
ownership of the property including the obligations, if any, to
maintain the relatives in the biological family.
Clause 65.— This clause provides that despite anything
contained in any other law for the time being in force, information
regarding all adoption orders issued by the concerned courts, shall
be forwarded to Authority on monthly basis in the manner as
provided in the adoption guidelines, so as to enable Authority to
maintain the data on adoption.
Clause 66.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall recognise one or more institutions or organisations in each
district as a Specialised Adoption Agency, in such manner as may be
provided in the adoption guidelines, for the rehabilitation of orphan,
abandoned or surrendered children, through adoption and non-

166
institutional care. It also provides that the State Agency shall furnish
the name, address and contact details of the Specialised Adoption
Agencies along with copies of certificate or letter of recognition or
renewal to Authority, as soon as the recognition or renewal is
granted to such agencies.
It is also provided that the State Government shall get every
Specialised Adoption Agency inspected at least once in a year and
take necessary remedial measures, if required. In case any
Specialised Adoption Agency is in default in taking necessary steps
on its part as stipulated in this Act or in the adoption guidelines for
getting an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child legally free for
adoption from the Committee or in completing the home study
report of the prospective adoptive parent(s) or in obtaining adoption
order from the court within stipulated time, then such Specialised
Adoption Agency shall be punished with a fine which may extend up
to fifty thousand rupees. In case of repeated default, the recognition
of the Specialised Adoption Agency shall be withdrawn by the State
Government.
Clause 67.— This clause provides that all the institutions
registered under this Act, which may not have been recognised as
Specialised Adoption Agencies, shall also ensure that all orphan or
abandoned or surrendered children under their care are reported,
produced and declared legally free for adoption, by the Committee
as per the provisions of clause 39. Further, all institutions under
sub-clause (1) of this clause shall develop formal linkages with
nearby Specialised Adoption Agency and shall furnish details of the
children declared legally free for adoption to that Specialised
Adoption Agency along with all relevant records in the manner
prescribed, for the placement of such children in adoption. This
clause also states that if any such institution contravenes the
provisions of sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (2) of this clause it shall
be liable to fine of fifty thousand rupees in each instance to be
imposed by the registering authority and it may also attract de-
recognition in the event of persistent flouting of such provisions.
Clause 68.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall set up a State Adoption Resource Agency for dealing with
adoptions and related matters in the State under the guidance of
Authority. The State Agency, wherever they already exist, shall be
deemed to be set up under this Act.
Clause 69.— This clause provides that the Central Adoption
Resource Agency existing before the commencement of this Act,
shall be deemed to have been constituted as the Central Adoption
Resource Authority under this Act to perform the following
functions:
(a) to promote in-country adoptions and to facilitate
inter-State adoptions in co-ordination with State Agency;
(b) to regulate inter-country adoptions;

167
(c) to frame guidelines on adoption and related matters
from time to time as may be necessary;
(d) to carry out the functions of the Central Authority
under the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and
Co-operation in respect of Inter-Country Adoption;
(e) any other function that may be prescribed.
Clause 70.— This clause provides that Authority shall have a
Steering Committee with following members :
(a) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development, Government of India, who shall be the
Chairperson— ex officio ;
(b) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development, Government of India, dealing with Authority;
(c) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child
Development, Government of India, dealing with Finance;
(d) one State Adoption Resource Agency and two
Specialised Adoption Agencies;
(e) one adoptive parent and one adoptee;
(f) one advocate or a professor having at least ten
years of experience in family law;
(g) Member-Secretary, who shall also be Chief
Executive Officer of the organisation.
Further, the criteria for the selection or nomination of the
Members mentioned at (d) to (f), their tenure as well as the terms
and conditions of their appointment shall be prescribed under the
rules. The clause provides for the functions of the Steering
Committee as:
(a) to oversee the functioning of Authority and review
its working from time to time so that it operates in most
effective manner;
(b) to approve the annual budget, annual accounts and
audit reports as well as the action plan and annual report of
Authority;
(c) to adopt the recruitment rules, service rules,
financial rules of Authority as well as the other regulations for
the exercise of the administrative and programmatic powers
within the organisation, with the prior approval of the Central
Government;
(d) any other power that may be vested with it by the
Central Government from time to time.
Additionally, the clause states that the Steering Committee
shall meet once in a month in the manner as may be prescribed

168
under the rules and Authority shall function from its headquarter and
through its regional offices as may be set up as per its functional
necessity.
Clause 71.— This clause provides that for the efficient
performance of its functions, Authority shall have the following powers:
(a) to issue instructions to any specialised adoption
agency or a children home or any child care institution
housing any orphan, abandoned or surrendered child, any
State Agency or any authorised foreign adoption agency and
such directions shall be complied by such agencies;
(b) recommending to the concerned Government or
authority to take appropriate action against any official or
functionary or institution under its administrative control, in
case of persistent non-compliance of the instructions issued
by it;
(c) forwarding any case of persistent non-compliance
of its instructions by any official or functionary or institution
to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and the
Magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed
to hear the same as if the case has been forwarded to him
under section 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(d) any other power that may be vested with it by the
Central Government.
Additionally, in case of any difference of opinion in an
adoption case, including the eligibility of prospective adoptive
parents or of a child to be adopted, the decision of Authority shall
prevail.
Clause 72.— This clause provides that Authority shall submit
an annual report to the Central Government in the manner as may
be prescribed under the rules. The Central Government shall cause
the annual report of Authority to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 73.— This clause provides that the Central Government
shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf, pay to the Authority by way of grants, such sums of money
as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for
performing the functions of Authority under this Act. The clause
further states that Authority may spend such sums of money as it
thinks fit for performing the functions, as prescribed under this Act,
and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the
grants referred to in sub-clause (1).
Clause 74.— This clause provides that Authority shall maintain
proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India. The accounts of Authority shall be audited

169
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be
specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with
such audit shall be payable by the Central Adoption Resource
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. Further, the
Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under
this Act shall, have the same rights and privileges and the authority
in connection with the audit of Government accounts. It shall in
particular have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and
to inspect any of the offices of Authority. Further, the accounts of
the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General or
any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the
audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government by Authority. And finally, the Central Government shall
cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
Clause 75.— This clause provides that no report in any
newspaper, magazine, newssheet or audio-visual media or other
forms of communication regarding any inquiry or investigation or
judicial procedure, shall disclose the name, address or school or any
other particular of the child which may lead to the identification of
a child in conflict with law or a child in need of care and protection
or a child victim or witness of a crime, under any Act for the time
being in force. The picture of any such child shall also not be
published. It is clarified that for reasons to be recorded in writing,
the Board or Committee, holding the inquiry may permit such
disclosure, if in its opinion such disclosure is in the best interest of
the child.
Further, the Police shall not disclose any record of the child
for the purpose of character certificate or otherwise in cases where
the case has been closed or disposed off. Any person contravening
the provisions of sub-clause (1) shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or fine
which may extend to two lakh rupees or both.
Clause 76.— This clause provides that whoever, having the
actual charge of, or control over, a child, assaults, abandons,
abuses, exposes or wilfully neglects the child or causes or procures
the child to be assaulted, abandoned, abused, exposed or neglected
in a manner likely to cause such child unnecessary mental or
physical suffering then such person shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine of one lakh rupees or both. It is clarified that if such offence
is committed by any person employed by or managing an
organisation, which is entrusted with the care and protection of the
child, he shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which may
extend up to five years, and fine which may extend up to five lakhs
rupees or both.

170
It is further clarified that on account of the aforesaid
mentioned cruelty, if the child is physically incapacitated or develops
a mental illness or is rendered mentally unfit to perform regular
tasks or has risk to life or limb, then such person shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment, not less than three years but
which may be extended up to ten years and shall also be liable to
fine of five lakhs rupees or both.
Clause 77.— This clause provides that whoever employs or
uses any child for the purpose of begging or causes any child to
beg shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine of one lakh
rupees or both. It is clarified that for the purpose of begging, if the
person amputates or maims the child, he shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than seven years which
may extend up to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine of five
lakh rupees or both.
This clause also provides that whoever, having the actual
charge of, or control over the child, abets the commission of an
offence under sub-clause (1), shall be punishable with the same
punishment as provided for in sub-cluase (1) and such person shall
be considered to be unfit under clause 2 (n) (v) of this Act. Further,
the said child, shall not be considered a child in conflict with law
under any circumstances, and shall be removed from the charge or
control of such guardian or custodian and produced before the
Committee for appropriate rehabilitation.
Clause 78.— This clause provides that whoever gives, or
causes to be given, to any child any intoxicating liquor or any
narcotic drug or tobacco products or psychotropic substance,
except on the order of a duly qualified medical practitioner, shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to a fine which may extend
up to one lakh rupees or both.
Clause 79.— This clause provides that whoever uses a child,
for vending, peddling, carrying, supplying or smuggling any
intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, shall be
liable for rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years and to a fine up to one lakh rupees or both.
Clause 80.— This clause provides that despite anything
contained in any law for the time being in force, whosoever
apparently employs a child for the purpose of employment or keeps
him in bondage for the purpose or withholds his earnings or uses
such earning for his own purposes, he shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years
and shall also be liable to fine of one lakh rupees or both.
Explanation under this clause states that the term ‘employment’
shall also include selling goods and services, and entertainment in
public places for economic gain.

171
Clause 81.— This clause provides that if any person or
organisation offers or gives or receives, any orphan, abandoned or
surrendered child, for the purpose of adoption without following the
provisions or procedures as provided in this Act, then such person
or organisation shall be punishable with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend upto three years, or with
fine of one lakh rupees, or with both. It is clarified that where the
offence is committed by a recognised adoption agency, in addition
to the above punishment awarded to the persons in-charge of, and
responsible for the conduct of the day-to-day affairs of the adoption
agency, the registration of such agency under clause 41 and its
recognition under clause 65 shall also be withdrawn for a minimum
period of one year.
Clause 82.— This clause provides that any person who sells or
buys or procures a child for any purpose shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years
and shall also be liable to fine of one lakh rupees or both. It is
further clarified that where such offence is committed by person
having actual charge of the child, including employees of a hospital
or nursing home or maternity home, the term of imprisonment shall
not be less than three years and may extend up to seven years.
Clause 83.— This clause provides that any person in-charge of
or employed in a child care institution subjects a child to corporal
punishment by intentionally subjecting a child to physical punishment
or mental harassment with the aim of disciplining the child, shall be
liable, on the first conviction, to a fine of ten thousand rupees and
for every subsequent offence, such person shall be liable for
imprisonment which may extend to three months and fine or both.
Further, if a person employed in an institution providing services to
children, is convicted of an offence under this sub-clause then such
person shall also be liable for dismissal from service, and shall also
be debarred from working directly with children thereafter.
It is also provided under the clause that in case, where any
corporal punishment is reported in an institution and the
management of such institution does not cooperate with any inquiry
or comply with the orders of the Committee or the Board or court
or State Government, then the person in-charge of the management
of the institution shall be liable for punishment with imprisonment
for a term not less than three years and shall also be liable to fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
Clause 84.— This clause provides that any non-State, self-
styled militant group or outfit recognised by the Government, if
recruits or uses any child for any purpose, shall be liable for
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
and shall also be liable to fine of five lakh rupees or both. This
clause also states that any adult or an adult group who uses children
for illegal activities either individually or as a gang shall be liable for
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
and shall also be liable to fine of five lakh rupees or both.

172
Clause 85.— This clause provides that for the purposes of this
Act, the provisions of clauses 359 to 369 of the Indian Penal Code,
shall mutatis mutandis apply to a child or a minor who is under the
age of eighteen years and all the provisions shall be construed
accordingly.
Clause 86.— This clause provides that whoever commits any
of the offences referred in Chapter IX on any child who is disabled
as so certified by a medical practitioner, then, such person shall be
liable to twice the penalty provided for such offence. The
explanation under this clause states that the term ‘disability’ shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it under clause ( i) of section
2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.
Clause 87.— This clause provides that where an offence under
this Act is punishable with imprisonment for a term more than seven
years, then, such offence shall be cognizable, non-bailable and
triable by a Children’s Court. Also, where is an offence under this
Act is punishable with imprisonment for a term of three years and
above, but not more than seven years, then, such offence shall be
cognizable, non-bailable and triable by a Magistrate of the first class.
Lastly, where an offence, under this Act, is punishable with
imprisonment for less than three years or with fine only, then, such
offence shall be non-cognizable, bailable and triable by any
Magistrate.
Clause 88.— This clause provides that whosoever abets any
offence under this Act, if the act abetted is committed in
consequence of the abetment, shall, be punished with the
punishment provided for that offence. The explanation under this
clause states that an act or offence is said to be committed in
consequence of abetment, when it is committed in consequence of
the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy or with the aid,
with constitutes the abetment.
Clause 89.— This clause provides that where an act or
omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act and also
under any other law for the time being in force, then,
notwithstanding anything contained in any such law, the offender
found guilty of such offence shall be liable for punishment under
such law which provides for punishment which is greater in degree.
Clause 90.— This clause provides that any child who commits
any offence under in this Chapter shall be considered as a child in
conflict with law under this Act.
Clause 91.— This clause provides that the Committee or the
Board, before which a child is brought under any of the provisions
of this Act, may, whenever it so thinks fit, require any parent or
guardian having the actual charge of the child to be present at any
proceeding in respect of that child.

173
Clause 92.— This clause provides that if, at any stage during
the course of an inquiry, the Committee or the Board is satisfied
that the attendance of the child is not essential for the purpose of
inquiry, then the Committee or the Board, shall dispense with the
attendance of a child and limit the same for the purpose of
recording the statement. Subsequently, the inquiry shall continue
even in the absence of the child concerned, unless ordered
otherwise by the Committee or the Board.
Further, where the attendance of a child is required before the
Board or the Committee, such child shall be entitled to travel
reimbursement for self and one escort accompanying the child as
per actual expenditure incurred, by the Board, or the Committee or
the District Child Protection Unit.
Clause 93.— This clause provides that when a child, who has
been brought before the Committee or the Board, is found to be
suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical treatment or
physical or mental complaint that will respond to treatment, the
Committee or the Board, may send the child to any place recognised
as a fit facility as prescribed under the Rules for a period as it may
think necessary for the required treatment.
Clause 94.— This clause provides that where it appears to the
Committee or the Board that any child kept in a special home or an
observation home or a children’s home or a shelter home or in an
institution in pursuance of this Act, is a mentally ill person or
addicted to alcohol or other drugs which lead to behavioural
changes in a person, then the Committee or the Board, may order
removal of such child to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric
nursing home in accordance with the provisions of the Mental
Health Act, 1987 or the rules made thereunder.
The clause also provides that in case the child had been
removed to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home under
sub-clause (1), the Committee or the Board may, on the basis of the
advice given in the certificate of discharge of the psychiatric
hospital or psychiatric nursing home, order to remove the child to
an Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts or similar centres
maintained by the State Government for mentally ill persons
(including the persons addicted to any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance). Such removal of the child shall be only for the period
required for the inpatient treatment of the child.
Explanation under this clause states that:
(a) “Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts” shall
have the meaning assigned to it under the scheme called
“Central Sector Scheme of Assistance for Prevention of
Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse and for Social
Defence Services” framed by the Central Government in the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment or any other
corresponding scheme for the time being in force;

174
(b) “mentally ill person” shall have the meaning assigned
to it in clause (l) of section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987;
(c) “psychiatric hospital” or “psychiatric nursing home”
shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (q) of
section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987.
Clause 95.— This clause provides that where, it is obvious to
the Committee or the Board, based on the appearance of the person
brought before it under any of the provisions of this Act (other than
for the purpose of giving evidence) that the said person is a child,
then the Committee or the Board shall record its observation stating
the age of the child as nearly as may be and proceed with the
inquiry under clause 14 or cluase 36, without waiting for further
confirmation of the age.
Further, in case, the Committee or the Board has reasonable
grounds for doubt regarding whether the person brought before it is
a child or not, the Committee or the Board, shall undertake the
process of age determination, by seeking evidence by obtaining —
(i) the date of birth certificate from the school, or the
matriculation or equivalent certificate from an examination
Board, if available; and in the absence thereof;
(ii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a
municipal authority or a panchayat;
(iii) and only in the absence of (i) and (ii) above, age
shall be determined by an ossification test or any other latest
medical age determination test conducted on the orders of the
Committee or the Board.
It is further clarified that such age determination test
conducted on the order of the Committee or the Board shall be
completed within fifteen days of first production of the person.
Additionally, the age recorded by the Committee or the Board
to be the age of person so brought before it, shall for the purpose
of this Act, be deemed to be the true age of that person.
Clause 96.— This clause provides that if during the inquiry it
is found that a child hails from a place outside the jurisdiction of
the Board or Committee then the Board or Committee if satisfied
after due inquiry that it is in the best interest of the child and also
after due consultation with the Committee or the Board of the
child’s home district, order the transfer of the child, as soon as
possible, to the said Committee or the Board, along with relevant
documents and following such procedure as may be prescribed
under the Rules. It is also clarified that such transfer can be made
in case of a child in conflict with law, only after the inquiry has
been completed and final order passed by the Board. It is further
clarified that in case of inter-State transfer, the child shall be, if
convenient, handed over to the Committee or the Board, as the case
may be, of the home district of the child, or to the Committee or
the Board in the capital city of the home State.

175
Once the decision to transfer is finalised, the Committee or
Board, shall give an escort order to the Special Juvenile Police Unit
to escort the child, within fifteen days of receiving such order. It
is clarified that a girl child shall be accompanied by a woman
officer and further where a Special Juvenile Police Unit is not
available, the Committee or Board, shall direct the institution where
the child is temporarily staying or District Child Protection Unit, to
provide an escort to accompany the child during travel.
It also states in the clause that the State Government shall
make rules to provide for travelling allowance to the escorting staff
for the child, which shall be paid in advance and the Committee or
the Board, on receiving the transferred child will process for
restoration or rehabilitation or social reintegration, as laid down
under this Act.
Clause 97.— This clause provide that the State Government
may at any time, on the recommendation of a Committee or Board,
despite anything contained in this Act, and keeping the best interest
of the child in mind, shall order the child’s transfer from any
children’s home or special home or fit facility or fit person, to a
home or facility, within the State with prior intimation to the
concerned Committee or the Board. It is clarified that for transfer
of a child between similar home or facility or person within the
same district, the Committee or Board, of the said district shall be
competent to issue such an order.
If transfer is being ordered by a State Government to an
institution outside the State, this shall be done only in consultation
with the concerned State Government. Further, the total period of
stay of the child in a children’s home or a special home shall not
be increased by such transfer. Additionally, orders passed under sub-
clause (1) and (2) shall be deemed to be operative for the
Committee or the Board, as the case may be, of the area to which
the child is sent.
Clause 98.— This clause provides that when a child is kept in
a children’s home or special home and on a report of a probation
officer or social worker or of Government or a voluntary or non-
governmental organisation, the Committee or the Board may
consider, the release of such child, either absolutely or on such
conditions as it may think fit to impose, permitting the child to live
with parents or guardian or under the supervision of any authorised
person named in the order, willing to receive and take charge,
educate and train the child, for some useful trade or calling or to
look after the child for rehabilitation. It is also clarified that if a
child who has been released conditionally under this cluase, or the
person under whose supervision the child has been placed, fails to
fulfil such conditions, the Board or Committee may, if necessary,
cause the child to be taken charge of and to be placed back in the
concerned Home.

176
This clause also states that if the child has been released on
a temporary basis, the time during which the child is not in the
concerned home in pursuance of such permission granted under
sub-clause (1) shall be deemed to be part of the time for which the
child is liable to be kept in the children or special home. It is also
clarified that in case of a child in conflict with law fails to fulfil the
conditions set by the Board as mentioned in sub-clause (1), the time
for which he is still liable to be kept in the institution shall be
extended by the Board for a period equivalent to the time which
lapses due to such failure.
Clause 99.— This clause provides that the Committee or the
Board, may permit leave of absence to any child, to allow him, on
special occasions like examination, marriage of relatives, death of
kith or kin or accident or serious illness of parent or any emergency
of like nature, under supervision. The period shall generally not
exceed seven days in one instance, excluding the time taken in
journey.
The clause further provides that the time during which a child
is absent from an institution where he is placed, in pursuance of
such permission granted under this clause, shall be deemed to be
part of the time for which he is liable to be kept in the children’s
home or special home. If a child refuses, or has failed to return to
the children’s home or special home, as the case may be, on the
leave period being exhausted or permission being revoked or
forfeited, the Board or Committee may, if necessary, cause him to
be taken charge of and to be taken back to the concerned home.
It is clarified that when a child in conflict with law has failed to
return to the special home on the leave period being exhausted or
on permission being revoked or forfeited, the time for which he is
still liable to be kept in the institution shall be extended by the Board
for a period equivalent to the time which lapses due to such failure.
Clause 100.— This clause provides that all reports related to
the child and considered by the Committee or the Board shall be
treated as confidential. Additionally, the Committee or the Board,
may if it so thinks fit, communicate the substance thereof to
another Committee or Board or to the child or to the child’s parent
or guardian, and may give such Committee or the Board or the child
or parent or guardian, an opportunity of producing evidence as may
be relevant to the matter stated in the report. The clause also
provides that despite anything contained in this Act, the victim shall
not denied access to their case record, orders and relevant papers.
Clause101.— This clause provides that no suit, prosecution or
other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, or
the State Government or any person acting under the directions of
the Central Government or State Government, in respect of anything
which is done in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of
this Act or of any rules or guidelines made thereunder.

177
Clause 102.— This clause provides that subject to the
provisions of this Act, any person aggrieved by an order made by
the Committee or the Board under this Act may, within thirty days
from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the Court of
Session, except for decisions by the Committee related to Foster
Care and Sponsorship After Care for which the appeal shall lie with
the District Magistrate. It is clarified that the Court of Sessions, or
the District Magistrate, may entertain the appeal after the expiry of
the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time and such
appeal shall be decided within a period of thirty days.
No appeal shall lie from,—
(a) any order of acquittal made by the Board in respect
of a child alleged to have committed an offence; or
(b) any order made by a Committee in respect of
finding that a person is not a child in need of care and
protection.
Further, no second appeal shall lie from any order of the
Court of Session, passed in appeal under this clause and any person
aggrieved by an order of the Children’s Court may file an appeal
before the High Court in accordance with the procedure specified in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 103.— This clause provides that the High Court may, at
any time, either of its own motion or on an application received in
this behalf, call for the record of any proceeding in which any
Committee or Board or Children’s Court, or Court has passed an
order, for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or
propriety of any such order and may pass such order in relation
thereto as it thinks fit. It is clarified that the High Court shall not
pass an order under this section prejudicial to any person without
giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 104.— This clause provides that save as otherwise
expressly provided by this Act, a Committee or a Board while holding
any inquiry under any of the provisions of this Act, shall follow such
procedure as may be prescribed and subject thereto, shall follow, as
far as may be, the procedure laid down in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 for trials in summons cases. Further it also states
that save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, the
procedure to be followed in hearing appeals or revision proceedings
under this Act shall be, as far as practicable, in accordance with the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 105.— This clause provides that without prejudice to
the provisions for appeal and revision under this Act, the Committee
or the Board may, on an application received in this behalf, amend
any orders passed by itself, as to the institution to which a child is
to be sent or as to the person under whose care or supervision a
child is to be placed under this Act. It is clarified that during the

178
course of hearing for amending any such orders, there shall be at
least two members of the Board out which one shall be the Principal
Magistrate and at least three members of the Committee out of
which one shall be the Chairperson and all persons concerned, or
their authorized representatives, whose views shall be heard by the
Committee or the Board before the said orders are amended.
It is also added that clerical mistakes in orders passed by the
Committee or the Board or errors arising therein from any accidental
slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the Committee
or the Board, either on its own motion or on an application received
in this behalf.
Clause 106.— This clause provides that the State Government
may create a fund under such name as it thinks fit for the welfare
and rehabilitation of the children dealt with under this Act. There
shall be credited to the fund such voluntary donations, contributions
or subscriptions as may be made by any individual or organisation.
The clause also states that the fund created under sub-clause (1)
shall be administered by the Department of the State Government
implementing this Act in such manner and for such purposes as may
be prescribed.
Clause 107.— This clause provides that every State
Government shall constitute a Child Protection Society for the State
and Child Protection Units for every District, consisting of officers
and employees as may be appointed by that Government, to take up
matters relating to children with a view to ensure the implementation
of this Act. The State Government shall also provide for the
establishment and maintenance of institutions under this Act,
notification of competent authorities in relation to the children and
their rehabilitation and co-ordination with various official and non-
official agencies concerned and to discharge such other functions as
may be prescribed under the Rules.
Clause 108.— This clause provides that in every police station,
at least one officer, not below the rank of assistant sub-inspector,
with aptitude, appropriate training and orientation may be designated
as the ‘child welfare police officer’ to exclusively deal with children
either as victims or perpetrators, in co-ordination with the police,
voluntary and non-governmental organisations.
It further states that to co-ordinate all functions of police
related to children, the State Government shall constitute Special
Juvenile Police Units in each district and city, headed by a police
officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police or
above and consisting of all police officers designated under sub-
clause (1) and two social workers having experience of working in
the field of child welfare, of whom one shall be a woman. All police
officers of the Special Juvenile Police Units shall be provided special
training, especially at induction as child welfare police officer, to
enable them to perform their functions more effectively.

179
It is clarified that Special Juvenile Police Unit also includes
Railway police dealing with children.
Clause 109.— This clause provides that the State Government
shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out
the purposes of this Act. It is clarified that the Central Government
may, frame model rules in respect of all or any of the matters with
respect to which the State Government is required to make rules
and where any such model rules have been framed in respect of any
such matter, they shall apply to the State mutatis mutandis  until the
rules in respect of that matter are made by the State Government
and while making any such rules, they conform to such model
rules.
The clause further states that in particular, and without
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(i) manner of inquiry in case of a missing or run away
child or whose parents cannot be found under sub-clause (vii)
of clause (14) of section 2;
(ii) responsibilities of the Child Welfare Officer attached
to a Children’s Home under clause (18) of section 2;
(iii) qualifications of the members of the Board under
sub-section (2) of section 4;
(iv) induction training and sensitisation of all members
of the Board under sub-section (6) of section 4;
(v) term of office of the members of the Board and the
manner in which such member may resign under sub-
section (6) of section 4;
(vi) time of the meetings of the Board and the rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meeting under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(vii) qualifications, experience and payment of fees of
an interpreter or translator under clause (d) of sub-section (3)
of section 9;
(viii) any other function of the Board under clause (n)
of sub-section (3) of section 9;
(ix) persons through whom any child alleged to be in
conflict with law may be produced before the Board and the
manner in which such a child may be sent to an observation
home or place of safety under sub-section (2) of section 11;
(x) manner in which a person apprehended and not
released on bail by the officer-in-charge of the police station
may be kept in an observation home until such person is
brought before a Board under sub-section (2) of section 13;

180
(xi) format for information on pendency in the Board to
the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate and District magistrate on quarterly bases under
sub-section (3) of section 17;
(xii) monitoring procedures and list of monitoring
authorities under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(xiii) manner in which the relevant records of the child
may be destroyed by the Board, police or the court under
sub-section (2) of section 25;
(xiv) qualifications of the members of the Child Welfare
Committee under sub-section (5) of section 28;
(xv) rules and procedures with regard to transaction of
business at the meetings of the Child Welfare Committee
under sub-section (1) of section 29;
(xvi) process of restoration of abandoned or lost
children to their families under clause (x) of section 31;
(xvii) manner of submitting the report to the Committee
and the manner of sending and entrusting the child to
children’s home or shelter home or fit facility or fit person
under sub-section (2) of section 32;
(xviii) manner of holding an inquiry by the Child
Welfare Committee under sub-section (1) of section 37;
(xix) manner in which a child may be sent to a
Specialised Adoption Agency if the child is below six years of
age, children’s home or to a fit facility or person or foster
family, till suitable means of rehabilitation are found for the
child including manner in which situation of the child placed
in a children’s home or with a fit facility or person or foster
family, may be reviewed by the Committee under sub-
section (3) of section 37;
(xx) manner in which a quarterly report may be
submitted by the Committee to the District Magistrate for
review of pendency of cases under sub-section (4) of
section 37;
(xxi) any other order related to any other function of
the Committee under clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of
section 38;
(xxii) information to be given every month by the
Committee to State Agency and Authority regarding number of
children declared legally free for adoption and number of
cases pending under sub-section (5) of section 39;
(xxiii) manner in which all institutions under this Act
shall be registered under sub-section (1) of section 42;

181
(xxiv) procedure for cancelling or withholding
registration of an institution that fails to provide rehabilitation
and reintegration services under sub-section (7) of section 42;
(xxv) manner in which information shall be send every
month by the open shelter to the District Child Protection Unit
to the Committee under sub-section (3) of section 44;
(xxvi) procedure for placing children in foster care
including group foster care under sub-section (1) of
section 45;
(xxvii) procedure for inspection of children in foster
care under sub-section (4) of section 45;
(xxviii) manner in which foster family shall provide
education, health and nutrition to the child under sub-
section (6) of section 45;
(xxix) procedure and criteria in which foster care
services shall be provided to children under sub-section (7) of
section 45;
(xxx) format for inspection of foster families by the
Committee to check the well being of children under sub-
section (8) of section 45;
(xxxi) purpose of undertaking various programmes of
sponsorship of children, such as individual to individual
sponsorship, group sponsorship or community sponsorship
under sub-section (1) of section 46;
(xxxii) duration of sponsorship under sub-section (3) of
section 46;
(xxxiii) manner of providing one time financial support
to any child leaving institutional care on completing eighteen
years of age under section 47;
(xxxiv) management and monitoring of observation
homes, including the standards and various types of services
to be provided by them for rehabilitation and social integration
of a child alleged to be in conflict with law and the
circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the
registration of an observation home may be granted or
withdrawn under sub-section (3) of section 48;
(xxxv) management and monitoring of special homes
including the standards and various types of services to be
provided to them under sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of
section 49;
(xxxvi) monitoring and management of children’s homes
including the standards and the nature of services to be
provided by them, based on individual care plans for each
child under sub-section (3) of section 51;

182
(xxxvii) manner in which a Board or the Committee
shall recognise, a facility being run by a Governmental
Organisation or a voluntary or non-governmental organisation
registered under any law for the time being in force, fit to
temporarily take the responsibility of a child for a specific
purpose after due inquiry regarding the suitability of the
facility and the organisation to take care of the child under
sub-section (1) of section 52;
(xxxviii) procedure of verification of credentials, for
recognising any person fit to temporarily receive a child for
care, protection and treatment of such child for a specified
period by the Board or the Committee under sub-section (1)
of section 53;
(xxxix) manner in which services shall be provided by
an institution under this Act for rehabilitation and reintegration
of children and standards for basic requirements such as
food, shelter, clothing and medical attention under sub-
section (1) of section 54;
(xl) manner in which Management Committee shall be
set up by each institution for management of the institution
and monitoring of the progress of every child under sub-
section (2) of section 54;
(xli) activities that may be taken up by children’s
committees under sub-section (3) of section 54;
(xlii) appointment of inspection committees for all
institutions registered or recognised fit, for the state and
district under sub-section (1) of section 55;
(xliii) manner in which Central Government or State
Government may independently evaluate the functioning of the
Board, Committee, special juvenile police units, registered
institutions, or recognised fit facilities and persons, including
the period and through persons or institutions under sub-
section (1) of section 56;
(xliv) manner in which institutions shall furnish details
of children declared legally free for adoption to the Specialised
Adoption Agency under sub-section (2) of section 67;
(xlv) any other function of the Authority under
clause (e) of section 69;
(xlvi) criteria for the selection or nomination of the
Members of the Steering Committee of the Authority and their
tenure as well as the terms and conditions of their
appointment under sub-section (2) of section 70;
(xlvii) manner in which Steering Committee of the
Authority shall meet under sub-section (4) of section 70;

183
(xlviii) manner in which the Authority shall submit an
annual report to the Central Government under sub-section (1)
of section 72;
(xlix) functions of the Authority under sub-section (2)
of section 73;
(l) manner in which the Authority shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts under sub-section (1) of section 74;
(li) period that the Committee or Board may think
necessary for the treatment of children who are found to be
suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical
treatment or physical or mental complaint that will respond to
treatment to a fit facility under section 93;
(lii) procedure for transfer of child under sub-
section (1) section 96;
(liii) provision for travelling allowance to the escorting
staff for the child under sub-section (3) of section 96;
(liv) procedure to be followed by the Committee or a
Board while holding any inquiry, appeal or revision under sub-
section (1) of section 104;
(lv) manner in which juvenile justice fund shall be
administered under sub-section (3) of section 106;
(lvi) functioning of the Child Protection Society for the
State and Child Protection Units for every district under
section 107;
(lvii) any other matter which is required to be or may
be, prescribed.
This clause further states that every rule and regulation made
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation.
This clause also provides that every rule made by the State
Government made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before the State Legislature.

184
Clause 110.— This clause states that of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 is hereby repealed. It
also states that despite such repeal, anything done or any action
taken under the said Acts shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Clause 111.— This clause provides that if any difficulty arises
in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, remove the difficulty. It further clarifies that no such order
shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years from the
commencement of this Act. However, order made under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House
of Parliament.

185
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATIONS
Sub-clause (1) of clause 110 of the Bill provides that the State
Government shall make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
It also provides that the Central Government may frame model
rules, which shall apply to the State mutatis mutandis  until the rules
in that matter are made by the State Government.
2. Sub-clause (2) provides making rules for all or any of the
following matter, namely:—
(i) manner of inquiry in case of a missing or run away
child or whose parents cannot be found under sub-clause (vii)
of clause (14) of section 2;
(ii) responsibilities of the Child Welfare Officer attached
to a Children’s Home under clause (18) of section 2;
(iii) qualifications of the members of the Board under
sub-section (2) of section 4;
(iv) induction training and sensitisation of all members
of the Board under sub-section (6) of section 4;
(v) term of office of the members of the Board and the
manner in which such member may resign under sub-
section (6) of section 4;
(vi) time of the meetings of the Board and the rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meeting under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(vii) qualifications, experience and payment of fees of
an interpreter or translator under clause (d) of sub-section (3)
of section 9;
(viii) any other function of the Board under clause (n)
of sub-section (3) of section 9;
(ix) persons through whom any child alleged to be in
conflict with law may be produced before the Board and the
manner in which such a child may be sent to an observation
home or place of safety under sub-section (2) of section 11;
(x) manner in which a person apprehended and not
released on bail by the officer-in-charge of the police station
may be kept in an observation home until such person is
brought before a Board under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(xi) format for information on pendency in the Board to
the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate and District magistrate on quarterly bases under
sub-section (3) of section 17;
185

186
(xii) monitoring procedures and list of monitoring
authorities under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(xiii) manner in which the relevant records of the child
may be destroyed by the Board, police or the court under
sub-section (2) of section 25;
(xiv) qualifications of the members of the Child Welfare
Committee under sub-section (5) of section 28;
(xv) rules and procedures with regard to transaction of
business at the meetings of the Child Welfare Committee
under sub-section (1) of section 29;
(xvi) process of restoration of abandoned or lost
children to their families under clause (x) of section 31;
(xvii) manner of submitting the report to the Committee
and the manner of sending and entrusting the child to
children’s home or shelter home or fit facility or fit person
under sub-section (2) of section 32;
(xviii) manner of holding an inquiry by the Child
Welfare Committee under subsection (1) of section 37;
(xix) manner in which a child may be sent to a
Specialised Adoption Agency if the child is below six years of
age, children’s home or to a fit facility or person or foster
family, till suitable means of rehabilitation are found for the
child including manner in which situation of the child placed
in a children’s home or with a fit facility or person or foster
family, may be reviewed by the Committee under sub-
section (3) of section 37;
(xx) manner in which a quarterly report may be
submitted  by the Committee to the District Magistrate for
review of pendency of cases under sub-section (4) of
section 37;
(xxi) any other order related to any other function of
the Committee under clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of
section 38;
(xxii) information to be given every month by the
Committee to State Agency and Authority regarding number of
children declared legally free for adoption and number of
cases pending under sub-section (5) of section 39;
(xxiii) manner in which all institutions under this Act
shall be registered under sub-section (1) of section 42;
(xxiv) procedure for cancelling or withholding
registration of an institution that fails to provide rehabilitation
and reintegration services under sub-section (7) of section 42;

187
(xxv) manner in which information shall be send every
month by the open shelter to the District Child Protection Unit
to the Committee under sub-section (3) of section 44;
(xxvi) procedure for placing children in foster care
including group foster care under sub-section (1) of
section 45;
(xxvii) procedure for inspection of children in foster
care under sub-section (4) of section 45;
(xxviii) manner in which foster family shall provide
education, health and nutrition to the child under sub-
section (6) of section 45;
(xxix) procedure and criteria in which foster care
services shall be provided to children under sub-section (7) of
section 45;
(xxx) format for inspection of foster families by the
Committee to check the well being of children under sub-
section (8) of section 45;
(xxxi) purpose of undertaking various programmes of
sponsorship of children, such as individual to individual
sponsorship, group sponsorship or community sponsorship
under sub-section (1) of section 46;
(xxxii) duration of sponsorship under sub-section (3) of
section 46;
(xxxiii) manner of providing one time financial support
to any child leaving institutional care on completing eighteen
years of age under section 47;
(xxxiv) management and monitoring of observation
homes, including the standards and various types of services
to be provided by them for rehabilitation and social integration
of a child alleged to be in conflict with law and the
circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the
registration of an observation home may be granted or
withdrawn under sub-section (3) of section 48;
(xxxv) management and monitoring of special homes
including the standards and various types of services to be
provided to them under sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of
section 49;
(xxxvi) monitoring and management of children’s homes
including the standards and the nature of services to be
provided by them, based on individual care plans for each
child under sub-section (3) of section 51;
(xxxvii) manner in which a Board or the Committee
shall recognise, a facility being run by a Governmental
Organisation or a voluntary or non-governmental organisation

188
registered under any law for the time being in force, fit to
temporarily take the responsibility of a child for a specific
purpose after due inquiry regarding the suitability of the
facility and the organisation to take care of the child under
sub-section (1) of section 52;
(xxxviii) procedure of verification of credentials, for
recognising any person fit to temporarily receive a child for
care, protection and treatment of such child for a specified
period by the Board or the Committee under sub-section (1)
of section 53;
(xxxix) manner in which services shall be provided by
an institution under this Act for rehabilitation and reintegration
of children and standards for basic requirements such as
food, shelter, clothing and medical attention under sub-
section (1) of section 54;
(xl) manner in which Management Committee shall be
set up by each institution for management of the institution
and monitoring of the progress of every child under sub-
section (2) of section 54;
(xli) activities that may be taken up by children’s
committees under sub-section (3) of section 54;
(xlii) appointment of inspection committees for all
institutions registered or recognised fit, for the state and
district under sub-section (1) of section 55;
(xliii) manner in which Central Government or State
Government may independently evaluate the functioning of the
Board, Committee, special juvenile police units, registered
institutions, or recognised fit facilities and persons, including
the period and through persons or institutions under sub-
section (1) of section 56;
(xliv) manner in which institutions shall furnish details
of children declared legally free for adoption to the Specialised
Adoption Agency under sub-section (2) of section 67;
(xlv) any other function of the Authority under
clause (e) of section 69;
(xlvi) criteria for the selection or nomination of the
Members of the Steering Committee of the Authority and their
tenure as well as the terms and conditions of their
appointment under sub-section (2) of section 70;
(xlvii) manner in which Steering Committee of the
Authority shall meet under sub-section (4) of section 70;
(xlviii) manner in which the Authority shall submit an
annual report to the Central Government under sub-section (1)
of section 72;

189
(xlix) functions of the Authority under sub-section (2)
of section 73;
(l) manner in which the Authority shall maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts under sub-section (1) of section 74;
(li) period that the Committee or Board may think
 necessary for the treatment of children who are found to be
suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical
treatment or physical or mental complaint that will respond to
treatment to a fit facility under section 93;
(lii) procedure for transfer of child under sub-
section (1) section 96;
(liii) provision for travelling allowance to the escorting
staff for the child under sub-section (3) of section 96;
(liv) procedure to be followed by the Committee or a
Board while holding any inquiry, appeal or revision under sub-
section (1) of section 104;
(lv) manner in which juvenile justice fund shall be
administered under sub-section (3) of section 106;
(lvi) functioning of the Child Protection Society for the
State and Child Protection Units for every district under
section 107;
(lvii) any other matter which is required to be or may
be, prescribed.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 110 provides that every rule and
regulation made under this clause shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Sub-clause (4) of clause 110 provides that every rule made by
the State Government made under this clause shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before the State Legislative.
3. The matters in respect which the Central Government may
make rules are matter of procedure and administrative details and it
is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of Legislation power is, therefore, of a normal character.

190
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to children alleged and
found to be in conflict with law and children in need of care
and protection by catering to their basic needs through proper
care, protection, development, treatment, social re-integration,
by adopting a child-friendly approach in the adjudication and
disposal of matters in the best interest of children and for
their rehabilitation through processes provided, and institutions
and bodies established, hereinunder and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shrimati Maneka Sanjay Gandhi, Minister of Women and Child Development)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.