PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT ON
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2016-2017 (DEMAND NO. 97) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT

(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 15th December,2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi

December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)C O N T E N T S
PAGES
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …........................................................... (i)
2.        PREFACE.................................................................................................................. (ii)
3. ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... (iii) - (iv)
4. REPORT.........................................................................................…............................ 1-28
Chapter-I  -  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
 by the Government -
Chapter -II  - Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply-
Chapter-III - Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies-
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee...
Chapter-IV - Recommendation/Observation in respect of which reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
 
4. *OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE  
5. *MINUTES...........................................................................................................
6. *ANNEXURES..................................................................................................
  
______________________________
*Appended on printing stage

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2016)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya   ¾ Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
3. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
5. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
10. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
LOK SABHA
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13.  Shri Nihal Chand
14.      Shrimati Bhawana Gawali  Patil
15.    Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
16.    Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
17.      Prof. Chintamani Malviya
18.      Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
19.      Shri Chand Nath
20.      Shri Hari Om Pandey
21.      Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
22.      Shri N.K. Premachandran
23.      Shri K.N. Ramachandran
24.      Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
25.      Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
26.      Shri M.I. Shanavas
27.      Dr. Nepal Singh
28.      Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
29.      Shrimati Neelam Sonkar
30.      Shri P.R. Sundaram
31.      Shrimati P .K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director
(i)

P R E F A C E
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf,  do  hereby  present  this  Two  Hundred  Seventy-eighth  Report  on  Action  Taken  by
Government on the Recommendations/observations contained in the Two Hundred Seventy- eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 97) for the year 2016-17 of the Ministry of Women
and Child Development 
2. The  Two  Hundred  Seventy-  eighth  Report  of  the  Department-related  Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 27 th
April, 2016 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 27th April, 2016.  Replies of the Government
to the recommendations/observations contained in the Report, were considered by the Committee
at its meeting held on the 24th October, 2016.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
the 24th October, 2016.
NEW DELHI;
October 24, 2016
Kartika 2,1938 (Saka)
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, Rajya Sabha
                    
(ii)

A B B R E VI T I O N S
AGs : Adolescent Girls 
AKBY : Anganwadi Karyakartri Bima Yojana 
APL : Above Poverty Line 
ARSH : Adolescent, Reproductive and Sexual Health 
AWCs : Anganwadi Centres 
AWHs : Anganwadi Helpers 
AWWs : Anganwadi Workers 
BBBP : Beti Bachao Beti Padhao 
BE : Budget Estimates 
BPL : Below Poverty Line 
CARA : Central Adoption Resource Agency 
CARINGS : Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System 
CCI : Child Care Institute 
CCT : Conditional Cash Transfer 
CDPO : Child Development Project Officer 
CSS : Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
CWC : Child Welfare Committee 
ECCE : Early Childhood Care and Education 
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee 
FCI : Female Critical Illness 
ICDS : Integrated Child Development Services Scheme 
ICPS : Integrated Child Protection Scheme 
ICT : Information and Communication Technology 
IDA : International Development Association 
IEC : Nationwide Information, Education and Communication 
IGMSY : Indira Gandhi Matritva Shayog Yojana 
IMO : Intermediary Organization 
ISAP : Indian Society for Agri-business Professionals, New Delhi '
JJ Act : Juvenile Justice Act (iv) 
JJB : Juvenile Justice Board 
MIS : Management Information System 
(iii)

MoU : Memorandum of Understanding 
MSY : Matritva Sahyog Yojana 
MWCD : Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NCAER : National Council for Applied Economic Research 
NCW : National Commission for Women North Eastern Region 
NER : North Eastern Region 
NGO : Non Governmental Organization 
NIPCCD : National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development 
NMEW : National Mission for Empowerment of Women 
NNM : National Nutrition Mission 
NRCW : National Resource Centre for Women 
PAB : Project Approval Board 
P&L : Pregnant and Lactating 
PSE : Pre-School Education 
RE : Revised Estimates 
RGSEAG : Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls 
RMK : Rashtriya Mahila Kosh 
RTE : Right to Education 
SAA : Specialized Adoption Agency 
SARA : State Adoption Resource Agency 
SHG : Self Help Group 
SMC : School Management Group 
SRCW : State Resource Centre for Women 
STEP : Support to Training and Employment Programme 
UC : Utilization Certificate 
VCFS : Village Convergence and Facilitation Service 
WWH : Working Women Hostel
(iv)

REPORT
The  Report  of  the  Department-related  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on  Human
Resource Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in its Two hundred seventy-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 97) of
the Ministry of Women and Child Development for the year 2016-17.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the 278th Report have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government –
paras –2.8, 3.4, 3.6, 3.10, 3.21, 3.23, 3.25, 14.5 
(Chapter-I) Total – 8
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s reply – paras –3.27, 4.7, 4.9, 5.4, 11.2, 12.6, 15.3, 15.8,
17.4
(Chapter-II) Total – 9
(iii) Recommendations/Observations  in  respect  of  which  replies  of  the  Government
have not been accepted by the Committee – paras – 2.5, 2.6, 2.10, 2.12, 2.14, 3.3,
3.14, 3.18, 3.19, 6.8, 7.4, 8.4, 9.4, 10.4, 13.5, 16.3
(Chapter-III) Total – 16
(iv)   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are
still awaited - Nil

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/observations
2.8 The Committee observes that in almost all the major schemes, except for ICDS,
SABLA, ICPS and NCW, BE allocation has been drastically brought down at the RE stage.
Further, the Committee feels that the funds allocated have not been utilized to the fullest extent.  It
is  unfortunate  to  note  that  in  the  scheme  of  National  Nutrition  Mission,  there  has  been  no
utilization of funds at all.  The Committee would like to point out that in schemes like ICDS,
SABLA and ICPS, the funds allocated in BE 2016-17 have been reduced.  Also in the scheme of
RMK, there has been no allocation of funds at all for the last two years.  The Committee desires
that a status note on this be furnished for its consideration.
Action Taken
Under the Scheme of OSC a provision of Rs. 14 crore was kept at BE stage during 2015-16
for setting up One Centre in each State/UT. Out of which 20 Centres are envisaged to be set up in
constructed  building.  The  scheme  is  being  implemented  from  the  1st  April,  2015.  All  the
States/UTs were requested to send the proposal for setting up One Stop Centre and Ministry had
received proposals from 33 States/UTs only.    As the setting up One Stop Centre, involves a
number of activities ranging from identification of place, identification of land, hiring of personal
etc., the proposal of most of the States/UTs were received after second half of the financial year as
such the 2nd instalment of the recurring grant for each centre could not be released to States/UTs.
The proposal from 3 States/UTs namely West Bengal, NCT of Delhi and Lakshadweep were not
received even after repeated reminders. Hence, the provision of Rs 14 crore at BE stage was
reduced to 13 crore at RE stage and expenditure incurred was Rs.10.33 cr.  
            In respect of Women Helpline, the proposal of most of the States/UTs were received
after second half of the financial year as such the 2nd instalment of the recurring  grant could not
be  released  to  States/UTs.  Apart  from  the  above  the  proposal  from  3  States/UTs  namely,
Lakshadweep,  Puducherry and Dadra & Nagar  Haveli  were  not received even after  repeated
reminders. Hence, the provision of Rs 28 crore at BE stage was reduced to 17.5 crore at RE stage
and there was an expenditure of Rs. 15.12 Cr under the scheme of Women Helpline.  
             The proposal for setting up of National Nutrition Mission (NMM) was considered and
recommended by EFC. Thereafter, draft Cabinet Note was circulated to the line Ministries and
their comments were also obtained. The Proposal was sent to NITI Aayog for review and for
suggesting any further improvement. After the review by NITI Aayog, the proposal is under
consideration of the Government.  
The committee has observed that BE for the scheme Sabla has been reduced in 2016-17.  In
this context, it is stated that BE for the scheme Sabla in 2015-16 was Rs. 75.5 crore and at RE
stage it was Rs. 475.5 crore.  Hence, as compared to RE of 2015-16, the budget allocation for
Sabla has been slightly reduced to Rs. 460 crore at BE stage 2016-17.  Looking at the trend of
expenditure under the scheme, if required, proposal for supplementary grant will be moved for
additional allocation under the scheme. 

Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK) was set up by the Government of India as a Society in 1993
as a nationallevel organization under the Ministry of Women and Child Development, initially
with a corpus of Rs. 31 crore in 1993 to meet the credit needs of poor and asset less women in the
informal sector. The initial corpus of Rs.  31 crore has grown over to  Rs  243 crore (including
reserves and surplus etc.) due to additional budgetary allocation of  Rs  69 crore (Rs 10 crore in
2006-07; Rs. 12 crore in 2007-08; Rs. 31 crore in 2008-09 and Rs 16 crore in 2009-10) and credit,
investment and recovery management. 
 During the FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16, no loans were sanctioned to IMOs/NGOs for on-
lending  through  SHGs  to  women  beneficiaries  due  to  the  reason  that  huge  default  in  loans
disbursed by Rashtriya Mahila Kosh. It was observed that one of the reasons for loan default is
few shortcomings in loaning guidelines. Therefore Governing Board of RMK has directed to
revise the lending guidelines. 
 The lending guidelines of RMK has been revised and placed for approval of GB in its 55th
GB meeting held on 17th Nov, 2015. The same was approved and Secretary, WCD referred to IFD
of the Ministry which is under examination. 
 Rashtriya Mahila Kosh is not receiving any grants from Government of India, other than a
total grant Rs.100 Crore received upto 2009-10. The amount of Rs.1 Crore was earmarked to
‘Mahila-E-Haat, an online marketing platform launched from the funds of Rashtriya Mahila Kosh,
to enhance the marketing prospects of the products made / manufactured / sold by the women /
women entrepreneurs. They can even showcase their services reflecting creative potentials. This
unique  e-platform  is  expected  to  empower  and  strengthen  financial  inclusion  of  women
entrepreneurs in the economy by providing better avenues, continued sustenance and support to
their creativity.  
 The recommendation of the committee is noted for implementation of RMK loan schemes
and Mahila E-haat.
III. INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (ICDS)
Recommendations/observations
3.4 The  Committee  also  appreciates  the  efforts  of  the  Ministry for  fulfilling  its  financial
targets. However, a lot more remains to be done.  Given the immense importance of the nature of
the Scheme, the Committee feels that the funds should be utilized properly, so that maximum
number of women and children are benefitted by this Scheme.
Action Taken
Last three years BE/RE/Expenditure for ICDS is as under:-
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. Year Budget Allocation
(BE)
Budget Allocation
(RE)
Expenditure
1. 2013-14 17,700.00 16,312.00 16,267.49
2. 2014-15 18,195.00 16,561.60 16,581.82 (This includes
saving  from  other
schemes during the year)
3. 2015-16 8335.77 15483.77 15438.93
 

Recommendations/observations
3.6 The Committee feels that the constraints in making the sanctioned AWCs operational need
to  be  identified  and  taken  care  of.   In  States  like  Bihar  and  Uttar  Pradesh,  the  number  of
operational AWCs have not increased.  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry has yet to
do enough in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates that the hurdles that come in the
process should be identified and taken care of.
Action Taken
The Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Scheme was universalized in 2008-09
across the country with the approval of 7076 ICDS projects and 14 lakh Anganwadi Centres
(AWCs)/Mini-AWCs.  
All the 7076 ICDS Projects and 14 lakh approved AWCs /Mini-AWCs have already been
allocated to the State Government/UT Administrations.  Out of these, 7072 projects are operational
and about 13.5 lakh AWCs are functional as on 31st December, 2015.  
Directions have been issued to State Governments/UT Administrations (including States of
Bihar  and Uttar  Pradesh)  for taking  immediate  steps towards operationalization of remaining
Projects and Anganwadi Centres sanctioned to the concerned State/UT, within a period of two
months, vide this Ministry’s D.O. letter No.20012/1/2016-CD-I, dated 17th June, 2016.  
MWCD  is  continuously  monitoring  the  implementation  of  ICDS  including
operationalization of Projects and Anganwadi Centres (AWCs).  During the recent review meeting
with  States/UTs  held  on  22.02.2016  and  22.04.2016,  MWCD  has  advised  to  States/UTs  to
operationalize all projects and AWCs by 30.06.2016. 
Recommendations/observations
3.10 According to the data provided by the Ministry in its Replies to the Questionnaires, the
Committee observes that barring a few States, majority of the AWCs in various States do not have
drinking water and toilet facilities.  Absence of such facilities would be a discouraging factor for
the  targeted  beneficiaries.  The Committee would  like to emphasize  upon the importance  of
providing these facilities in all the AWCs.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
Ministry should find out all the hurdles that come in the way and solve them urgently without any
delay.  The Committee acknowledges the initiative of the Ministry with respect of convergence of
scheme run by other Departments/Ministries so as to provide the basic facilities to AWCs.  It is
now obligatory upon the MWCD to reach out to the Ministries of Rural Development, Panchayati
Raj and Drinking Water and Sanitation and also the respective States Governments to get their
maximum support in providing AWCs with pucca houses, drinking water and sanitation facilities,
the Committee observe.
Action Taken
In convergence with Ministry of Rural Development under Mahatma Gandhi National
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), guidelines for construction of Anganwadi
Centers  under  MGNREGS  have  been  issued  jointly  by the  Ministries  of  Women  and  Child
Development  and  Rural  Development,  on  13th  August,  2015  and  has  been  revised  on  17th

February, 2016, to construct 4 lakh AWC buildings by 2019 (one lakh annually).  Convergence
now applies to all blocks in the States/UTs.  
Drinking water and sanitation facilities will be provided in these AWCs from the funds
available with Panchayati Raj Institutions under 14th Finance Commission.   
Letters have been written to State Governments and UT Administrations regarding the
provision of child friendly toilets and drinking water facility to all AWCs where it is unavailable.
Also the feasibility of providing mobile toilets has been asked for consideration in AWCs where
toilet facility is not available.   
Recently, also a D.O. letter No. 11/2/2016-ME/CD.I, dated 28.04.2016 has been written
from Secretary, WCD to all Chief Secretaries to identify the AWCs where toilet and drinking water
facilities are required. 
Staff and Key Functionaries of ICDS
Recommendations/observations
3.21 The Committee is dismayed to note that barring a very few States, majority of the States
have  got  a long way to go in  filling  the  vacant posts of the ICDS functionaries.  With  the
expansion and strengthening of ICDS Scheme, more efforts need to be made in order to fill the
vacancies. The pace of filling up of vacancies is drastically very slow.  The ICDS functionaries
play a very important role in implementing the scheme efficiently.  The Committee reiterates that
the vacancy problem that continues for a long time needs to be addressed urgently without further
delay.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to fill the
vacant posts.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should pursue the matter with the
State Governments on a priority basis, if need be at the highest level so that vacant posts are filled
at the earliest.
Action Taken
As  on  31st  December,  2015,  under  ICDS  Scheme  3571  positions  of  CDPOs/ADPOs
(except Mizoram, A&N Islands, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Puducherry), 19178
positions of Supervisors; 117034 positions of AWWs, (except Assam, Mizoram, Chandigarh and
Lakshadweep), and 123735 positions of AWHs (except Assam, A&N Islands, Chandigarh and
Lakshadweep), are vacant.  A  D.O. letter No.20012/1/2016-CD-I dated 17th June, 2016 from
Secretary (WCD) to Chief Secretaries/Secretaries of all States/UTs has been sent for filling up the
vacant posts of the ICDS functionaries, within two months and also intimate the reasons for
shortfall, if any, in sanctioning of the approved positions by the States.  
ICDS including operationalization of Projects and Anganwadi Centres (AWCs).  During
the  recent  review  meeting  with  States/UTs  held  on  22.02.2016  and  22.04.2016,  MWCD  has
advised to States/UTs to operationalize all projects and AWCs by 30.06.2016.
Recommendations/observations
3.23 The Committee while taking note of the efforts of the Ministry in improving the working
conditions of AWWs/AWHs expresses its serious concern about its reaching to the ground level.
It is to be noted that AWWs/AWHs play a very important role in the proper implementation of the
ICDS Scheme.  Therefore, it is important that these benefits reach to the workers and they are
remunerated properly.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take up steps in
enhancing the honorarium paid to AWWs/AWHs.

Action Taken
A  D.O.  letter  No.20012/1/2016-CD-I  dated  17th  June,  2016  has  been  written  from
Secretary, WCD to Chief Secretaries of States/UTs for taking necessary steps towards proper
implementation of ICDS Scheme.  They are also advised to ensure that the benefits/remuneration
be paid timely to AWWs/AWHs.  Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Committee for
appropriate action.  A letter dated 17th June, 2016 has also been written to States for enhancement
in their honorarium from States funds. 
Recommendations/observations
3.25 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Ministry in finalising and conferring the
awards to the AWWs.  However, the Committee expresses its concern about unduly long process
for  selection  of  AWWs  for  awards.   Delay  in  awarding  the  worker  can  only  hamper  the
functioning of the ICDS Scheme.  The Committee recommends that the selection process should
be completed without any further delay and services of deserving functionaries duly recognised.
Action Taken
Guidelines for Anganwadi Workers (AWWs) Awards for the year 2014-15 and 2015-16
have been issued to the States/UTs.  As per these guidelines, a meeting of Screening Committee
under  Chairmanship  of Secretary,  MWCD  has been  held  on 24.52016 to screen nominations
received  from  34  States/UTs  (except  Bihar  &  Lakshadweep)  for  the  year  2014-15  for
recommending the Selection Committee.  National Level Awards to Anganwadi Workers are being
given after receiving the nominations out of Awardees from State Level on completion of every
financial year, 8 States/UTs of Goa, Haryana, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Tripura Uttar
Pradesh & Uttarakhand have sent the nominations for year 2015-16.  MWCD has sought the
nominations latest by 20th May, 2016 and subsequent reminder is being issued shortly.
 
XIV . CENTRAL ADOPTION RESOURCE AUTHORITY (CARA)
Recommendations/observations
14.5 The Committee finds that the number of in-country and inter-country adoptions have not
increased at all.  Further, data relating to the year 2015-16 has not been provided by the Ministry.
Despite formulating Guidelines Governing Adoption of Children, 2015, the adoption rate has not
picked up at all.  The Committee observes that the Ministry should put in place a system where
prospective parents may undergo a hassle free adoption process.  The Committee may also be
apprised why the number of inter-country adoption has dropped considerable.  The Committee
believes that the whole process of adoption, be it in-country or inter-country should be made
parent-friendly and child-friendly.  The facilitators of the adoption process should be sensitive to
the  sentiments  and  vulnerability of  orphaned  or  abandoned  children  and  also  of  prospective
parents.
Action Taken
(i)   The Guidelines Governing Adoption of Children, 2015, notified by Government of
India on 17th July, 2015 and effective from 1st August, 2015 has brought total transparency in the
adoption procedure. Prospective Adoptive Parents (PAPs) can register online through a web based

application known as Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System (CARINGS)
available on the CARA website.   
(ii)    The  Guidelines  shall  result  in  simplification  of  adoption  procedure,  addresses
ambiguities in the current adoption process thereby reducing procedural delays. It is pertinent to
mention  that  CARINGS  was  implemented  midway  during  the  year  2015-2016  and  capacity
building of the Specialised Adoption Agencies (SAAs) on the new system in all the States is still
being undertaken. It should be appreciated that it would take some time for the online system to
stabilise after which the pool of legally free children in the system for adoption shall increase in
due course of time. Further, in order to put in place a system where prospective parents undergo a
hassle free adoption process, National Helpline & Counselling Services have been initiated to
assist PAPs in the process of adoption. 
(iii)   The adoption figures of the last five years and current year are placed below:- 
S.No. Year In-country Inter-country
1. 2011-2012 4220 504
2. 2012-2013 4694 308
3. 2013-2014 3924 430
4. 2014-2015 3988 374
5. 2015-2016 3011 666
6. 2016-2017
(April-June, 2016)
800 102
(iv)   For increasing the number of adoptions, the linkages of Child Care Institutions (CCIs)
other than Specialised Adoption Agencies (SAAs) are being undertaken. Further, Government has
taken several steps to address delays and simplify adoption procedure. In this regard, Ministry has
conducted several Video Conferences and issued circulars to State Governments/UTs to take steps
to  address delays  at the level  of Child Welfare  Committees (CWCs) & the Courts and take
necessary steps to expedite rehabilitation of orphan and destitute children.   

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
World Bank assisted ICDS Systems Strengthening and Nutrition Project (ISSNIP)
Recommendations/observations
3.27 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has taken steps to implement the scheme.
However, Phase I of the project, due to restructuring, has been extended by two years.  The
Committee, recommends, that the Ministry should take up steps to ensure that the scheme is
implemented on time so that the targeted beneficiaries are not deprived of the benefits of this
scheme.
Action Taken
The  necessary  Administrative  Approval  and  Guidelines  for  implementation  of  the
restructured ISSNIP has been issued on 18.03.2016. The project is under implementation as per the
prescribed time schedule and achieving the targets of Disbursement Link Indicators (DLIs). It is
also mentioned that Common Application Software (CAS) of Information and Communication
Technology enabled Real Time Monitoring (ICT-RTM) has been launched by the Ministry on
25.05.2016. Community Based Event (CBE) and Incremental Learning Approach (ILA) are also
operational in respective ISSNIP States. 
IV . INTEGRATED CHILD PROTECTION SCHEME (ICPS)
Recommendations/observations
4.7 The Committee would like to express its satisfaction over the various steps to deal with the
issue of missing children. It is to be noted that everyday thousands of children are reported missing
and many of them are never found.  Therefore, it is imperative that the all out efforts are required
to be taken up in this regard.  Hence the Committee recommends that missing children should
become  a  priority  issue  with  State  and  Union  Governments  and  law  enforcement  agencies.
Separate Cell for missing children should be established at all police stations.  It was obvious that
the police agencies, despite best efforts, have not been able to rescue and retrieve thousands of
missing children due to various factors.  The resources and time to their command are limited and
above all, the issue of missing children has not received the required sensitive handling, except in
a few instances.  By and large, there is no involvement of other government agencies.  The efforts
to locate the missing children need to be synergised to build up an effective and functional system
where  the  various  partners  work  in  a  concerted,  coordinated  and  integrated  manner.   The
Committee feels strongly about utilisation of advanced technologies, skills and training for the
same.
Action Taken
Under  the  Trackchild  portal,  the  advanced  technologies  are  being  used  and  all  the
stakeholders are being trained with support from NIC The stakeholders under the Trackchild
program includes, police,  Child welfare Committee(CWC), Juvenile Justice Boards(JJBs), State

Governments through the State Child Protection Societies (SCPS), Child Care Institutions (CCIs)
run by the Government by itself  or through  NGO. 
Recommendations/observations
4.9 The Committee would like to point out that well meaning laws alone would not
make any change at the ground level.  What is required is their implementation in accordance with
their objective.  The Ministry, being the nodal authority for all child-welfare measures, has to be
pro-active in sensitizing the State Governments in carrying out the assigned tasks.  
Action Taken
The Ministry has taken a pro-active role in sensitizing the State Governments in carrying
out  these  tasks.  Moreover,  the  Ministry,  has  on  its  own,  has  taken  up  a  review  exercise  of
identifying unregistered CCIs in the States/UTs by involving the States/UTs through the District
administration.   The Standards of care being implemented in these is also checked. 
V . BETI BACHAO BETI PADHAO (BBBP)
Recommendations/observations
5.4 The Committee would like to point out that Child Sex Ratio (CSR), an indication of gender
discrimination towards girl child stands at 918 girls per 1000 boys in the age group of 0-6 years,
much lower than the figure of 927 in 2001 Census.  The unabated decline in CSR since 1961 is a
matter of grave concern as it reflects the low status of women in our society and indicates her
disempowerment.  Hence, it is important that the Ministry check this serious problem before it is
too late.  However, the Committee is disappointed to note the unsatisfactory utilisation trend of
this  scheme  despite  dealing  with  grave  matter.   Therefore,  the  Committee  observes  that  the
Ministry should make serious efforts to utilize the funds properly so as to benefit the targeted
beneficiaries.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take concerted efforts to
check this declining CSR in a mission mode and also to put more aggressiveness, energy and
resources to reverse this trend.
Action Taken
Beti Bachao Beti Padhao (BBBP) was launched by Prime Minister on 22nd January, 2015
at Panipat, Haryana. BBBP addresses the declining Child Sex Ratio (CSR) and related issues of
women empowerment over a life-cycle continuum. It is a tri-ministerial effort of Ministries of
Women and Child Development, Health & Family Welfare and Human Resource Development
The key elements of the scheme include Enforcement of PC&PNDT Act; Nationwide awareness
and advocacy campaign and multi-sectoral action in select 100 districts (low on CSR) in the first
phase.   
The  Ministry  is  making  rigorous  efforts  to  address  mindset  change  through  training,
sensitization,  awareness  raising  and  community  mobilization  on  ground.   The  Multi-sectoral
District  Action  Plans  have  been  operationalized  in  all  State/UTs  except  West  Bengal  and

Lakshadweep.  Capacity-building  programmes  and  Trainings  have  been  imparted  to  Master
Trainers to further strengthen capacities of district level officials and frontline workers.  As a part
of branding exercise, BBBP logo is a part of all Government of India newspaper advertisements
issued by different Ministries/Departments bringing greater visibility to the issue in the public
domain.  
Advocacy and Media Campaign is exhaustive with a 360  degree approach and includes
Radio and TV campaign, Cinema Halls, IVR based 139 (the universal railway enquiry number),
community engagement through Song and Drama Division, and online digital media. Radio, TV
and IVR based 139 (the universal railway enquiry number) campaigns are running.
XI. UJJAWALA SCHEME
Recommendations/observations
11.2 The  Committee  is  happy  to  note  the  Ujjawala  Scheme  is  being  implemented
properly by the Ministry.  It is to be noted that this scheme is a valuable step in the direction of
protecting two vulnerable sections of society i.e., women and children from exploitation. The
Committee  observes  that  funds allotted  for this  scheme  should  be  utilized  properly so  as  to
empower victims of trafficking and help them become financially independent.  The Committee is
of the view that the Ministry should put in place a monitoring mechanism to see that the concerned
NGOs are implementing the scheme effectively so that the objectives of the Scheme may be
realised. 
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations have been noted for compliance.
XII. NATIONAL MISSION FOR EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN (NMEW)
Recommendations/observations
12.6 The Committee observes that the objective of the NMEW Scheme is of vital importance as
it aims for social, economic and educational empowerment of women.  The Committee is of the
view that the Scheme has not been implemented properly as is evident from the under utilisation of
funds.  The Committee feels that the Ministry should put in more efforts so that the objectives of
the Mission are achieved by completing the process of putting all the necessary structures in place
and receipt of viable proposals from the States.  The Committee hopes that the allocation of
Rs.50.00 crore for the year 2016-17 is utilized fully for the implementation of the scheme.
Action Taken
The directions of the Committee are noted for compliance.   
Regular follow-up with the State Resource Centre for Women (SRCW) in the respective
State/UT Adm is being undertaken to enhance the utilization of funds under the Scheme.

XV . NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN (NCW)
Recommendations/observations
15.3 The Committee is happy to note the performance of NCW for the year 2014-15.  However,
the achievements for the year 2015-16 seem to be lagging far behind as compared to the previous
year.  The Committee would like to refer to the rising crimes against women in the recent times
which violate the right to life and right to various freedoms enjoyed by women citizens of the
country.  Women have been at the receiving end most of the time, be it gender based violence and
discrimination, sexual assault and rape, dowry deaths, crime and killings in the name of honour,
trafficking, patriarchal bias in matters of family and inheritance laws etc.  The Committee fails to
see any pro-active role of the Commission with respect to safeguarding rights of women.  The
Committee recommends that vigorous and concerted efforts need to be taken by the Commission,
especially with respect to crimes against women.
Action Taken
The Commission had undertaken several programmatic initiatives during the year 2015-16,
which includes identified issues / topics such as (a) Effects of disasters (war/ flood/ famine/
terrorism/  militancy  etc.)  on  women  such  as  trafficking  etc.  (b)  Analysing  gender  through
traditional cultural practices: A study on superstitions  (c) Impact of culture deviance on increasing
crimes against women (d) Impact of delay in Forensic reports in delivery of justice to women (e)
Study on rehabilitation of acid attack victims (f) Study on Compliance to provisions of Sexual
Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 with focus
on private sector etc.  
(1)   A  special  study  on  “Addressing  Concerns  of  Women  Admitted  in  Psychiatric
Institutions  in  India:  An  In-depth  Analysis”  has  been  undertaken  by  the  Commission  in
collaboration  with  NIMHANS,  Bangalore,  during  the  year  2015-16.  The  study covers  Govt.
Psychiatric Institutions in India and the study report is under finalisation.  
(2) The Commission sanctioned a study on “Mapping Gender Equity at the Workplace: A
Special Study of a few Departments of Government of India” to the Tata Institute of Social
Sciences (TISS), Mumbai during the year 201516. The objective of the study inter alia is to
ascertain the efficacy of the existing system with respect to provisions under various laws etc. in
the  area  of  promoting  gender  equality  at  workplace.  The  study will  be  carried  out  in  three
departments i.e. Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of
Home Affairs and the autonomous and statutory bodies associated with the Ministries/Departments
concerned.  
(3)  The  Commission  initiated  a  special  study  during  the  year  2015-16  on  “National
Research on Human Trafficking in India” in three states - Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal.   
(4) The Commission organised various consultations with special focus during the year
2015-16 especially on issues concerning women such as (a) Consultation on “Surrogacy Issues”
was organized  by National  Commission  for Women  primarily with  an objective  to inter  alia
examine the proposed Assisted Reproductive Technology Bill, 2013, Bill of Ministry of Health and
Family  Welfare  to  ascertain  whether  it  safeguards  the  rights  of  women  and  children  and  to
deliberate on socio – economic strategies to address the exploitation of surrogate mothers (b)
Consultative meeting on “Expanding Opportunities for differently-abled Women”, to highlight the

issues and challenges faced by differentlyabled women and to recommend strategies for their
mainstreaming  (c)  National  Dialogue  on  “An  Equal  Space:  Gender  Parity in  the  Media  and
Entertainment  Sector”  was  organized  in  collaboration  with  Ministry  of  Information  and
Broadcasting and ASSOCHAM etc. The reports of these consultations have been forwarded to the
concerned Ministries/Departments for necessary action.  
Programmatic Initiatives of 2015-16 : Some of the initiatives during the year are mentioned
as follows:  (1) The National Commission for Women (NCW), is implementing the pilot project
‘Violence Free Home – A Woman’s Right’ (Special Cell for Women) in collaboration with Delhi
Police as ‘Special Police Unit for Women & Children’ (SPUWAC), New Delhi and TISS, Mumbai
since  2008-09.  The  social  workers  were  initially  placed  at  the  SPUWAC  Headquarters  in
Nanakpura, New Delhi and from the year 2010-11 onwards.  The services of the social workers
were extended to two other Cells i.e., Pitampura and Saket for similar crisis intervention, in
addition to creating a women-friendly atmosphere in police stations / establishments. The scope of
this programme is rebuilding violated woman’s self esteem, self worth and dignity, offering the
violated  woman  immediate  services,  based  on  her  needs  etc.   During  the  year  2015-16,  the
Commission decided to expand this project ‘Violence Free Home – A Woman’s Right’ to all the 11
districts of Delhi. Consequently, services of trained social workers are now available in all the
districts of Delhi through the Crime Against Women (CAW) cells. The project has been replicated
in 7 states through 22 special cells in Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Meghalaya, Assam, Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh & Punjab.   
 (2) The Commission has developed training modules to build capacity of elected women
representatives to enable them to effectively perform their role in local self-governance.  The
modules  cover  knowledge  on  institutions  and  structures,  policies,  programmes  and  schemes
initiated by the Government and ICT in governance, Laws related to women, skills for monitoring
development work, conflict Resolution, Negotiation and Advocacy etc.  Two phases of on field
testing of the modules were held in Rajasthan for the capacity building of the elected women
panchayat representatives.   
Recommendations/observations
15.8 The Committee has been emphasizing upon the curtailment of crimes against women.
However, the data given above paints a gloomy picture.  The Committee is of the view that proper
structure should be put in place to hinder such crimes against women and also to deliver justice on
time.  Apart from this, the Committee believes that a vigorous awareness generation programme
through  various  mediums  should  be  undertaken  by  NCW  with  special  focus  on  officers,
colleges/universities, schools etc.  Women need to know their rights and the platform for redressal
of their grievances. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a pro-active role should be played
by NCW not gist for redressal of complaints but also their prevention.
Action Taken
In addition to the initiatives mentioned in reply to para No.15.3 the following initiatives
have been taken in 2015-16 for generation of awareness and capacity building:  
1.  Legal  Awareness  Programmes:  NCW  has  been  undertaking  Legal  awareness
programmes to impart practical knowledge about the basic legal rights and remedies provided
under various women related laws, thereby making them fit to face the challenges in real life
situations, to create awareness in women about the various machineries / organs of Justice delivery

system available for redressal of their problems / grievances, the role of District Legal Service
Authority, Free Legal Aid and Lok Adalats etc.  To organize these programmes, NCW has revised
guidelines  and  developed  a  new  comprehensive  ‘Standardized  Module  for  Legal  Awareness
Programme About Women Related Laws’.  The modules describe the syllabus / laws including
recent new legislations and amendments such as the Sexual Harassment at Work Place Act, 2013
and the Criminal Amendment Laws, 2013 etc.  NCW in collaboration with National Legal Service
Authority / reputed Universities / Law Departments / Colleges from all over the country conducted
139 legal awareness programmes wherein approx. 8000 participants participated. 
2. Capacity Building Training to Police Officers: With rise in increasing Crime Against
Women and amendment to the Criminal Amendment Act, 2013 specific offenses against women
shall be investigated by women police officers. NCW organized Capacity Building Programmes to
the Women Police Officers from the level of Asstt. Sub-Inspector to Dy. Superintendent of Police,
who  could  be  Investigating  Officers  particularly  in  the  matters  of  crime  against  women  in
collaboration with the Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D), Ministry of Home
Affairs.  Approx. 150 women police officers have been trained during 2015-16.  
3. Public Awareness Programme: NCW has undertaken wide public awareness programmes
on crime against women as well as their rights through Audio Visual spots on domestic violence,
empowerment of women, eve teasing & NRI marrigages through electronic media, print media,
outdoor publicity campaign etc.  Special focus is also being given to women from North East as
the Commission has a dedicated North East Cell catering to the needs of the region.   
4.  Special  initiative  for  the  North  East  Region:  NCW,  which  is  concerned  with
safeguarding the constitutional rights of women, their safety as well as social, economic and
political development of women, endeavours to touch the lives of women in every corner of the
country.  In an exercise spread over the last one and a half years, the Commission has been
studying, through a major primary survey covering all districts in all 8 states, at the grass-root
level, the status of women in each of the North East States which includes their social, economic,
political and legal status relating to inheritance.  Also, the Commission conducted legal awareness
programs, seminars, workshops for women related issues in North East Region.  
The targets for 2015-16 and achievements are given in the following table:  
Sl.No
.
Activity Target Achievement
1 No.  of  Conferences/Seminars/Public
Hearings/Awareness programmes etc. by NCW
48 52
2 No. of special studies sponsored by NCW 16 23
3 No. of legal awareness programmes sponsored 133 139
4 No. of complaints/cases received in Commission 24379
NCW has achieved / organized the programmes beyond its target successfully and initiated many
activities pro-actively as cited above for the prevention of crimes against women during the year
2015-16 and continues to do so. 
XVII.  GENDER BUDGETING
Recommendations/observations
17.4 The  Committee  finds  that  considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  the  area  of  fund
management across the Ministries both at the Central and State level from the perspective of

women specific concerns.  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Women and Child
Development,  being  the  nodal  agency  for  Gender  Budgeting,  should  focus  upon  the  proper
allocation to and full utilization of funds for the Gender Budgeting Scheme.  Gender Budgeting as
tool for translating the gender commitment is gaining wide importance in recent times.  Hence, the
Committee observes that the Ministry should make conscious efforts for proper utilisation of funds
for the scheme.  
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance.  

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/observations
2.5 The Committee is dismayed to note that there has been no substantial increase in the
allocation for the Ministry for the current year.  Though there has been a slight increase in the
allocation of women development schemes, the allocation for child development schemes have
been reduced.  The Committee, however, takes note of the reason given by the Ministry that the
impact of reduction in allocation is offset by the changed cost sharing ratio between the Centre and
the States.  
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations indicate the factual position. As such, no comments
are necessary.
Comments of the Committee
Majority of children in India have underprivileged childhoods starting from birth. It
is imperative that these children are given full opportunities for growth and development in
a safe and protective environment. In order to do so, proper implementation of the child
development schemes is very necessary. Proper implementations of these schemes require
funds. Hence, the Ministry should ensure that enough funds are provided for these schemes.
The Committee hopes that reduction in the allocation of funds for these schemes does not
hamper their functioning. Further, the Ministry should take up steps to spread the women
welfare schemes on a pan India basis. It is important that steps are taken up to empower the
most vulnerable sections of the society.
Recommendations/observations
2.6 The Committee is also sad to note that the universalization of women welfare schemes is
yet to take place as the universalization of these schemes has not yet been approved by the
competent authority.  The Committee feels that steps should be taken up to empower women and
ensure gender equality.  Gender equality is guaranteed under the Constitution of India which not
only prohibits discrimination on grounds of sex, but also permits positive discrimination in favour
of women.  Several constitutional provisions reiterate India's commitment towards the socio-
economic development of women and uphold their right of participation in political and decision
making process.  The Committee observes that the Ministry should make all efforts to ensure
universalization of women welfare schemes so that women from every nook and corner of the
country are empowered both socially and economically and to recognize women as the agents of
charge.

Action Taken
The Ministry is implementing Schemes of One Stop Centre to provide integrated support
and assistance to women affected by violence and Scheme for Universalisation of Women Helpline
intended to provide 24 hours immediate and emergency response to women affected by violence.
Women Helpline (WHL) will be integrated with One Stop Centre Scheme (OSC).  Initially under
the One Stop Centre scheme it was envisaged to set up one Centre in each States/UT. Now, the
scheme has been revised for setting up One Stop Centre in 150 additional locations in second
phase, in addition to 36 Centre in first phase.  
The ‘Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment of Adolescent Girls (RGSEAG)–‘Sabla’, a
Centrallysponsored scheme introduced in the year 2010-11 is being implemented in 205 districts
from all the States/UTs. Sabla aims at empowering the Adolescent Girls (AGs) (11 to 18 years)
through nutrition, health care and life skill education. The budgetary allocation for the Scheme
Sabla for 12th Five Year Plan period Rs. 3650 crore with this the scheme can be implemented in
existing 205 districts only. Approval of competent authority will be obtained to extend the scheme
to all the districts of the country.  
Comments of the Committee
The Committee desires that more funds should be allotted to the Ministry as whole
and specifically for women welfare schemes. These funds are required for implementing the
schemes to all parts of the country so that all the targeted women are benefitted through
these schemes. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should take up all possible
measures so that more funds are allocated for women welfare schemes and women are not
deprived of the benefits that can be availed from these schemes.  
Recommendations/observations
2.10 The  Committee  feels  that  inordinate  delays  due  to  one  procedural  reason  or  another
ultimately leads to delayed implementation of schemes.  Ideally, least possible time should be
taken  for  implementing  the  schemes  so  that  the  benefits  of  the  schemes  reach  the  targeted
beneficiaries.  The Committee firmly believes that concerted efforts need to be made by the
Ministry  with  active  co-operation  from  and  co-ordination  with  the  State  Governments  for
successfully  implementing  the  schemes,  leading  to  timely  and  proper  utilization  of  funds
earmarked for the schemes in a financial year.
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee desires to know as to what has been done by the Ministry to improve
the pace of utilization of funds on those schemes where there has been under-utilization of
funds. The Committee observes that the funds allocated for all the schemes should be utilized
on time and also in a proper manner so that the physical targets can be achieved. The very
objectives  of  implementing  these  schemes  are  rendered  meaningless  due  to  under-

achievement of their physical and financial targets. The Committee, accordingly, calls for the
details of steps taken by the Ministry for enhancing the pace of utilization of funds.
Recommendations/observations
2.12 The Committee finds that physical targets with respect to the above-mentioned schemes
remained under-achieved in 2014-15 and 2015-16.  The Committee believes that these schemes
meant for girl child, adolescent girls and women were of vital importance for the welfare of the
women and girl child.  Any problems faced in the achievement of targets need to be identified and
addressed for the efficacious implementation of the schemes.  The Committee feels that the matter
of under-achievement of targets should be taken up by the Ministry with the concerned State
Governments for resolving any constraints faced, so that the objectives of such schemes may be
realised.
Action Taken
“Rajiv Gandhi National Creche Scheme (RGNCS) was  launched w.e.f. 01.1.2006 as a
Central Sector Scheme and is being implemented presently through the Central Social Welfare
Board (CSWB) (an autonomous body under the Ministry) and Indian Council for Child Welfare
(ICCW) (an NGO).  As per the decision of Ministry of Finance in July, 2015 the number of
crèches to be run under RGNCS was limited to 23293 creches.  A review of the scheme was
undertaken  and  schematic  norms  have  been  revised.   The  revised  guidelines  have  been
implemented w.e.f. 01.01.2016”.  
The matter of under achievement of targets and Hon’ble Committee’s observation are noted
for compliance.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that the problem of under-achievement of targets is a matter
of grave concern. This needs to be dealt with serious efforts. The Committee desires to know
what steps have been taken by the Ministry for compliance of the recommendation of the
Committee to keep at bay the under achievement of said targets.
Recommendations/observations
2.14 The Committee observes that outstanding UCs have become a perennial problem for the
Ministry.  Despite the efforts put in by the Ministry, there is still a good number of UCs that are
still pending.  The Committee would appreciate if proactive efforts are initiated by the Ministry for
liquidating the very old Utilization Certificates.  Pendency pertaining to the recent years also needs
to be brought to the minimum level.  The Committee is of the view that urgent steps on a priority
basis need to be taken by the Ministry for liquidating the pending UCs, especially the old ones
along with a proper analysis of the situation with the co-operation of the State Governments and
implementing agencies.  Constraints faced in the procedural formalities and accounting system
need  to  be  identified  and  addressed  so  as  to  ensure  compliance  with  all  the  prescribed
requirements.

Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance. A concerted effort is
being initiated by the respective Bureaus & Divisions in the Ministry with the PAO of Ministry of
Women & Child Development to review and settle pending UCs.
Comments of the Committee
Failure to liquidate the pending UCs has led to nil allocation of funds to certain States
under certain Schemes. This has greatly affected the implementation of the schemes. Pending
UCs  continue  to  remain as  a  major problem. Hence,  the  Committee  reiterates  that the
Ministry should look into the matter and make all out efforts to deal with this problem.
Pendency pertaining to the recent years also needs to be brought to the minimum level.
III. INTEGRATED CHILD DEVELOPMENT SERVICES SCHEME (ICDS)
Recommendations/observations
3.3 The Committee notes that there has been a consistent increase in the allocations for
the first three years of the XII Plan.  However, for the year 2015-16, the allocation was reduced
substantially at BE on account of the recommendations of 14th Finance Commission.  The Ministry
pointed out that additional funds were provided for ICDS Scheme and hence RE of 2015-16 was
enhanced to Rs.15,480.77 crore.  For the current year, the BE was increased slightly in comparison
with BE 2015-16, however the increase is not that significant.  It is to be noted that ICDS Scheme
is the biggest and most unique programme.  It is of utmost importance that the benefits of the
scheme reach all the targeted beneficiaries.  In order to do as, enough funds for implementing are
required.  The Committee observes that the Ministry should put in efforts to make sure that the
shortage of funds does not become a hindrance in implementing the scheme and also in enhancing
the outreach of the scheme so as to include maximum number of beneficiaries.
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is of the view that on one hand there seems to be a perennial problem
of shortage of funds for implementing various schemes. The Ministry should ensure that
insufficiency of funds do not affect the functioning of the scheme.  It has been established
that ICDS scheme continues to be one of the biggest programme of the Ministry which caters
to more than half of the total population of this country. Failure to implement this scheme
due to shortage of funds will affect a large number of families especially those who belong to
lower income group. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take up steps on time to
ensure that inadequate funds do not pose as a major hurdle in implementing this scheme.

Recommendations/observations
3.14 The Committee is of the view that even the revised cost norms per beneficiary per day
appears to be on the lower side, keeping in view the inflationary trends in recent times leading to
rising prices of food-grains and of other items.  The Committee wonders whether in the prescribed
cost  norms,  the  beneficiary would  be  getting  the  prescribed  calories/protein.  The  Committee
believes that the idea of providing SNP to the women and children is to fulfil any deficiency in
their  daily  in-take  of  food.   To  keep  up  the  quality  and  quantity  of  SNP,  the  Committee
recommends for further increase in the cost norms set for providing SNP on a daily basis.
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that cost norms per beneficiary is meagre and these do not
serve  any  purpose  in  light  of  the  recent  increased  rate  of  inflation.  The  Committee  is
doubtful that the beneficiaries are getting the right amount of calories at these costs. It is
high time that these cost norms are revised at the earliest. The Committee would like to
know  the outcome of the proposal that was proposed to be sent to the NITI Aayog for
revising the cost norms per beneficiary, while adjusting the inflation.
Availability of Pre-School Education (PSE) Kits and Medicine Kits.
Recommendations/observations
3.18 On a specific query raised by the Committee regarding status of procurement of Pre-School
kits and Medicine Kits by the States/UTs during the last three years, the Committee notes that
proper information of procurement details and the number of States not making available PSE and
Medicine kits have not been furnished by the Ministry.  However, from this information the
Committee concludes that very few States witnessed increase in the expenditure incurred for PSE
and Medicine kits while a majority of States have not given any data at all.  
Action Taken
Statement showing Expenditure on Medicine kit under ICDS Scheme during last three
years is given below:
(Rs. in Lakh)
S. No. Year Expenditure
1 2013-14 4201.30
2 2014-15 5987.42
3 2015-16 517.66

Comments of the Committee
The expenditure made for the year 2015-16 is quite less as compared to that of the
previous years. The Committee would like to be apprised about the reasons for this massive
reduction in spending and what steps can be taken to avoid such situations in the future. The
Committee observes that the Ministry should ensure that kits are made available to the
targeted beneficiaries. The Committee also desires to know why many of the States have
failed to provide the necessary data on time.
Recommendations/observations
3.19 The Committee would like to emphasize upon the importance of the availability of PSE
and Medicine kits in AWCs which introduce young children to non-formal pre-school education
through a variety of activities and teaching and provide them medical aid whenever required
during their stay in an AWC.  The Committee feels that adequate attention and priority is not being
given to this component of the ICDS Scheme.  The Committee recommends to the Ministry to
make efforts so that the targeted beneficiaries receive the kits meant for them.
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance.
Comments of the Committee
From the reply given by the Ministry regarding expenditure made in this particular
scheme, the Committee has come to the conclusion that distribution of PSE and medicine
kits is not being done in a proper manner. Instead, the Ministry should have explained why
the distribution of PSE and kits was not upto the mark. There is neither any comparative
figures for many of the States nor is there any data for expenditure vis-a-vis procurement.
Hence, the Committee observes that the Ministry should furnish the explanation and also put
in place a strict monitoring mechanism to ensure that the concerned States/UTs distribute
the kits to the beneficiaries without any delay.
VI. RAJIV  GANDHI  SCHEME  FOR  THE  EMPOWERMENT  OF  ADOLESCENT
GIRLS - (SABLA)
Recommendations/observations

6.8 The Committee is happy to note that the scheme for empowerment of adolescent girls is
yielding good results, especially with respect to the nutrition component.  Proper nutrition for the
adolescent girls is of vital importance for their state of health, hygiene of the girl child, family and
child care.  The non-nutrition component, on the other hand, needs to be strengthened as envisaged
by the Ministry.  The Committee is of the view that the non-nutrition component of the scheme is
very important for the development and empowerment of adolescent girls.  The Committee hopes
that this component is strengthened so as to benefit maximum number of adolescent girls.
Action Taken
The observation of the committee that “the non-nutrition component of the scheme is very
important  for  the  development  and  empowerment  of  adolescent  girls  hence,  needs  to  be
strengthened so as to benefit maximum  number of adolescent girls”, has been noted.  In this
context, it is mentioned that non-nutrition component of the scheme involves convergence with
various line Ministries in addition to the limited financial resources provisional for the various
Non-nutrition services under the scheme.  The evaluation of the scheme Sabla has also brought out
the inadequacy of budgetary provisions for non nutrition and the need for effective convergence
upto the grass root level and flexibility in the scheme to address local needs of AGs.  Efforts are
being made to strengthen the convergence under the scheme.  Monitoring committees are set up at
all levels (National, State, District, Block and Village level) to take stock of the progress of the
scheme as also strengthen the coordination and convergence between concerned departments.  The
financial norms under the scheme have been proposed to be revised in addition to the provision for
flexibility in the scheme to address local needs of AGs.  
Comments of the Committee
Regarding strengthening of non-nutrition component of this scheme, the Ministry has
been  giving  the  same  reasons  for the  past  two  years.  Mere  verbal  compliance  will  not
improve the implementation of this scheme. The Ministry appears to be adopting a casual
approach in this regard. The Committee reiterates that the Ministry start producing some
concrete actions urgently so that the targeted adolescent girls start to enjoy the benefits as
promised under this scheme and if necessary provide more budgetary provisions therefor.
VII. INDIRA GANDHI MATRITV A SAHYOG YOJANA (IGMSY)
Recommendations/observations
7.4 The Committee observes that despite the Ministry's submission of improvement in the
achievements of the scheme both financially and physically, the figure shown above paints a
different picture.  Keeping aside a few States and UTs, almost all the States and UTs have not
utilised the funds completely.  Many States and UTs have also not reported any data for the year
2014-15 inspite of the time lapsed.  Data for the year 2015-16 is not complete.  In State of Manipur
and UT of Lakshadweep, no funds have been released for the last three years.  The Committee is
disappointed with the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry towards this scheme.  The Committee
recommends the Ministry to make serious efforts with co-operation of the State Governments in
putting in place the necessary structures for service delivery to maximum pregnant and nursing
women requiring cash incentives for their health, nutrition and also partial compensation for their
wage loss.

Action Taken
The Ministry has requested all States/UTs, including those States/UTs (i.e. Assam, Jammu
& Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep) who have not yet
submitted Utilisation Certificate (UC) in respect of the grant released during 2014-15 to submit
UC  for  2014-15  and  2015-16.  The  State  of  Jammu  &  Kashmir  and  UT  Administration  of
Lakshadweep have now furnished UC for the said period. However, there are some discrepancies
in it. The Ministry has informed the State/UT about the discrepancies and State/UT are rectifying
it.  
The funds to the State of Manipur could not be released due to non-receipt of UC from the
State whereas the funds to the UT of Lakshadweep could not be released due to discrepancies in
the UC furnished by the UT Administration. The Ministry has written to State of Manipur to
furnish the UC and UT of Lakshadweep has been requested to revise the UC.  
Comments of the Committee
Non-receipt or discrepancies in UCs has been a constant hurdle in the implementation
of the schemes. The main cause behind this problem needs to be identified. It appears that
the State Governments have difficulty complying to the norms laid out by the Ministry. The
Ministry  should  find  ways  to  reverse  this  trend.  Regarding  the  State  of  Manipur,  the
Ministry should take up steps to see that the UCs are submitted on time by the concerned
Government. The Committee observes that Ministry should take up proactive steps to ensure
that all States/UTs strictly adhere to the norms laid down for the proper implementation of
the scheme.
VIII. RASHTRIYA MAHILA KOSH (RMK)
Recommendations/observations
8.4 The Committee takes note of the fact that the data on loan sanctioned, disbursed
and number of beneficiaries as on 31.12.2014 and 31.12.2015 have not changed at all.  Further, the
Committee  observes  that  no  fund  has  been  allotted  for  this  scheme  since  2012-13  and  no
utilization of fund since 2011-12.  The Committee may be apprised of the reasons why there has
been no allocation and utilisation of funds.  For the year 2016-17, a meagre amount of Rs.1 crore
has been assigned for this scheme.  The Committee fails to understand why a meagre sum of Rs. 1
crore has been allotted for this scheme meant for the economic empowerment of poor women.
The  Committee  recommends that  the  Ministry should complete all  necessary procedures and
formalities without further delay and process of seeking approvals from the concerned authorities
should be expedited so that women beneficiaries benefit from this scheme.
Action Taken
Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK) was set up by the Government of India as a Society in 1993
as a national level organization under the Ministry of Women and Child Development, initially
with a corpus of Rs. 31 crore in 1993 to meet the credit needs of poor and asset less women in the
informal sector. The initial corpus of Rs.  31 crore has grown over to  Rs  243 crore (including
reserves and surplus etc.) due to additional budgetary allocation of  Rs  69 crore (Rs 10 crore in

2006-07; Rs. 12 crore in 2007-08; Rs. 31 crore in 2008-09 and Rs 16 crore in 2009-10) and credit,
investment and recovery management. 
 During the FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16, no loans were sanctioned to IMOs/NGOs for on-
lending  through  SHGs  to  women  beneficiaries  due  to  the  reason  that  huge  default  in  loans
disbursed by Rashtriya Mahila Kosh. It was observed that one of the reasons for loan default is
few shortcomings in loaning guidelines. Therefore Governing Board of RMK has directed to
revise the lending guidelines. 
 The lending guidelines of RMK has been revised and placed for approval of GB in its 55th
GB meeting held on 17th Nov, 2015. The same was approved and Secretary, WCD referred to IFD
of the Ministry which is under examination. 
 Rashtriya Mahila Kosh is not receiving any grants from Government of India, other than a
total grant Rs.100 Crore received upto 2009-10. The amount of Rs.1 Crore was earmarked to
‘Mahila-E-Haat, an online marketing platform launched from the funds of Rashtriya Mahila Kosh,
to enhance the marketing prospects of the products made / manufactured / sold by the women /
women entrepreneurs. They can even showcase their services reflecting creative potentials. This
unique  e-platform  is  expected  to  empower  and  strengthen  financial  inclusion  of  women
entrepreneurs in the economy by providing better avenues, continued sustenance and support to
their creativity. 
 The recommendation of the committee is noted for implementation of RMK loan schemes
and Mahila E-Haat.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not at all happy with the way this scheme has been implemented.
This scheme seems to be moving at a sluggish pace. Three years have passed, yet no concrete
action has been taken to improve the functioning of the scheme. Many months have lapsed
since approval of the new lending guidelines, however, the Ministry has failed to do anything
progressive with this scheme. The Committee strongly observes that the Ministry should take
up the matter urgently with the concerned authorities. A status note may be submitted to the
Committee for its consideration.
IX. HOSTELS FOR WORKING WOMEN
Recommendations/observations
9.4 The Committee is of the view that the revision of the Scheme has not helped in the
performance  of the scheme with respect  to the receipt of complete and viable  proposals for
construction of new hostels for working women.  In the year 2014-15, only 3 proposals were
sanctioned, while 5 proposals had been sanctioned in 2015-16.  The Committee observes that the
Ministry needs to take serious steps to improve the performance of the scheme with respect to
construction of more hostels for working women.  The Ministry should take up strict steps with the
State Governments/UT Administrations so that more complete and viable proposals are sent on a
regular basis.

Action Taken
The Working Women Hostel Scheme of Ministry Women and Child Development was
introduced in 1972-73. The Scheme has been modified from time to time to widen its scope and to
make changes consistent with the socio economic transition in the Society.  Based on evaluation,
the existing Scheme has been approved for continuation during the 12th Plan period in June, 2015
to promote availability of safe and conveniently located accommodation for Working Women who
are compelled to live away from their families due to professional commitment.    
 The main difficulty noticed in implementation of the Scheme is non-receipt of adequate
complete  and  viable  proposals  from  State  Government/UTs.   Ministry of  Women  and  Child
Development has been requesting time and again all the State Governments/UTs to encourage their
agencies, local bodies, Universities etc. for construction of more and more buildings for working
women and also encourage the State Commissions for Women to take part in this endeavour.
Necessary funds for this purpose is  made available by MWCD as per the schematic norms as and
when required.                    
 After continuous follow up with the State Governments the number of hostels sanctioned
by the Ministry in 2015-16 increased to 8 as compared to 3 sanctioned during 2014-15.  All the
State Governments have again been reminded by MWCD vide letter dated 06.06.2016 to send
viable and complete proposals as per the revised Scheme guidelines urgently to the Ministry.  The
matter will be taken up again in the National Conference of State Secretaries of Women and Child
Development being held at Vigyan Bhawan, New Delhi on 13.07.2016 to discuss the issues related
to Ministry of Women and Child Development. 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that the Ministry should take up steps to ensure that viable
proposals are sent by the States/UTs on time. The Ministry cannot sit on the excuse that the
States/UTs  are  not  sending  any  complete  and  viable  proposals  from  the  State
Governments/UTs. Proactive steps are required to ensure smooth functioning of the scheme.
The Committee is of the view that for effective implementation of the scheme the Ministry
should consider involving NGOs and other non-State agencies.
X. SWADHAR GREH 
Recommendations/observations
10.4 The Committee appreciates the efforts taken by the Ministry to implement the Swadhar
Greh Scheme.  However, a lot more can be done to improve on this.  The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should approach all the State Governments/UT administrations to send their
proposals on time.  The Scheme of such importance should be implemented with all sincerity so as
to benefit the victims in unfortunate circumstances.
Action Taken
Swadhar Greh Scheme came into effect from 01.01.2016 after the merger of two Schemes
i.e. Short Stay Home and Swadhar. Till date an amount of Rs. 1,23,48000/- and Rs. 1,56,73,250/-

has been released under the Swadhar Greh scheme to State Governments of West Bengal & Odisha
respectively for implementation the Swadhar Greh Scheme.  Proposal for disbursement of funds to
the state of Pudducherry is under consideration.  Ministry is making concerted efforts to reach out
to the States/UTs for obtaining their proposals.  In this regard, all the States/UTs have been asked
to send their proposals for release of funds vide this Ministry letters dated 8-10-2015 & 11-122015
followed by reminders have been sent on 17-5-2016 & 6-6-2016.  A Video Conference was also
held with the States/UTs on 07-4-2016 to take up the issues relating to implementation of the new
Scheme.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee desires that updated facts and figures about the funds disbursed to all
the States/UTs and the details of the proposals received from the States/UTs are provided.
The  Committee  would  also  like  to  know  as  to  how  the  Ministry  would  ensure  that  a
monitoring mechanism is in place concerning the utilization of disbursed amount on time. 
XIII. NIRBHAYA SCHEMES
Recommendations/observations
13.5 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry is taking some positive steps towards
implementation of Schemes under the Nirbhaya Fund.  However, the Committee is of the view that
the Ministry should put in more efforts to ensure that the funds allotted are utilised to the full
extent.  It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that for the past 3 to 4 years, almost all
the funds are lying idle.  It is a complete irony that on one hand, crimes, against women are on the
rise and on the other, funds allocated to tackle this issue has remained unutilized.  Hence, the
Committee recommends that concerted efforts are required to be taken up by the Ministry to
ensure protection and welfare of women.
Action Taken
Initially under the One Stop Centre scheme it was envisaged to set up one Centre in each
States/UT. Now the proposal for expansion of the scheme is under consideration for setting up
another 150 Centres in various locations across the country to ensure safety and protection of
women.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee finds that the pace of implementation of the schemes envisaged under
the Nirbhaya Fund is going at a very slow rate. Incidents of violence against women are
increasing with every passing minute and the funds meant to tackle this problem remain idle.
The Committee is constrained to note that no concrete steps have been taken up by the
concerned authorities to deal with this situation and most part of the scheme is still at the
planning stage. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take up this matter
with a great sense of urgency as the reality paints a very gloomy picture. The Committee
would like the updated data of the achievement made under this scheme, if any and the

reasons for delay  in implementing this scheme especially  in view  of the ever increasing
crimes against women seen on a daily basis across the country.
XVI. RESEARCH, PUBLICATION AND MONITORING, INFORMATION AND MASS
MEDIA
Recommendations/observations
16.3 The Committee is sad to note that there has been a consistent trend of under-utilization for
the past three years.  The Committee desires that the Ministry provide the reasons for such under-
utilization.   The  Committee  strongly  feels  that  a  comprehensive  advocacy  and  awareness
generation  policy and  plan  of  action  has  to  be  developed  and  implemented  that  will  ensure
awareness generation and public education of existing policies and programmes for women and
children at all levels.  National awareness campaign having involvement of all concerned has to be
launched.  Only then, public at large and other stakeholders can be sensitized in the real sense.
The Committee is of the view that the efforts made in bringing out such a large number of laws
and allied schemes/programmes can register their impact only if awareness about them is created
both in the designated authorities, implementing agencies and also targeted beneficiaries.
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance.  
Comments of the Committee
The  Research  and  Publication  scheme  is  very  important  in  spreading  awareness
among the public about the schemes handled by the Ministry. It is unfortunate to note that
most of the funds allocated for this scheme remained underutilised for the past three years.
The  Committee  finds  it  unacceptable  that even the allocated funds have not been fully
utilised given the fact that the only way to fight the society’s apathy toward women and
children  is  through  awareness.  The  Committee  desires  to  know  the  reasons  for  such
underutilisation. The Ministry should ensure that the information of each scheme should
reach every nook and corner of the country. Therefore, it is imperative that the Ministry
consults all the necessary authorities so that public awareness of all the schemes of the
Ministry can be created. 

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
NIL
*****