 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022 / Agrahayana, 1944, (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
Report No 
345 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three 
Hundred Thirty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2022-23 
of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in  

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Thirty 
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2022-23 of the Department of 
Higher Education, Ministry of Education 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/Agrahayana, 1944(Saka) 
 
 
  


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.................................................................................................. (iv)-(v) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1- 
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... .....   2-6 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  7-14 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee....   15-21 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..     22 
   
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE.. ...................     23-24 
6. MINUTES....................................................................................................      25-26 
7. ANNEXURES.................................................................................................   27-39   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13thSeptember, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Faiyaz Ahmad 
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. *Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
8. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. **Dr. T.R. Paarivendhar 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Sangam Lal Kadedin Gupta 
16. Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
17. Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
29.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
31. Shri S. Venkatesan 
*Nominated w.e.f. 11.10.2022 
**Nominated w.e.f. 16.11.2022 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
(i) 

 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to pre sent the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Forty Fifth Report of the Committee on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Three Hundred and Thirty 
Seventh Report of the Committee on " Demands f or Grants 2022 -23 of the Department of Higher 
Education", which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and la id on the T able of Lok Sabha on 16th 
March, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned Report 
were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education vide their 
communication dated 12th July, 2022.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on         
15th December, 2022. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15th December, 2022                                                                                                                
Agrahayana 24,1944 (Saka)
  
 
  
 
 
 
Shri Vivek Thakur  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
ADF Automatic Document Feeder 
B. ARCH Bachelor of Architecture  
BE Budget Estimates 
CGFSEL Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Educational Loans  
CNA Central Nodal Agency 
CSIS Central Scheme to Provide Interest Subsidy  
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CSSS Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship  
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DHE Department of Higher Education 
EAT Expenditure Advance Transfer  
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee  
EAT Environmental Acceptance Test 
FY Financial Year 
GFR General Financial Rules  
GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
HECI Higher Education Commission of India  
HEFA Higher Education Financing Agency 
HEIs Higher Educational Institutions 
ICHR Indian Council of Historical Research 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IIIT Indian Institute of Information Technology  
IMPRINT Impacting Research Innovation and Technology  
MOOC  Massive Open Online Courses 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NEP National Education Policy  
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
ODL Open and Distance Learning 
O.M. Office Memorandum  
PG Post Graduate 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PM-USP  Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Protsahan 
RUSA Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
RE Revised Estimates 
R&D Research and Development  
SNA Single Nodal Agency 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

 
 
     
  
    
      
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
SC  Scheduled Caste 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
SEDGs Socio-Economically Disadvantaged Groups 
SNA Single Nodal Agency 
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring 
Minds 
TSA Treasury Single Account  
UC Utilization Certificate 
UGC University Grants Commission  
UT Union Territory  

1 
 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in its 3 37th Report on “Demands for Grants 2022 -23 of the 
Department of Higher Education”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table 
of Lok Sabha on 16th March, 2022. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education vide their 
communication dated 12th July, 2022. These have been categorized as follows.  
Chapter I:  Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
Paras –2.14, 3.2.6, 3.2.7, 3.5.5, 3.6.1, 4.1.11 
Total - 6 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
Government's replies:- 
Paras –2.9, 2.11, 2.13, 3.3, 3.4.2, 3.6.3, 4.1.8, 4.1.13, 4.2.3, 4.3.4, 4.3.5, 4.4 
Total - 12 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras- 2.6, 2.12, 3.16, 3.17, 3.18, 3.6.2, 4.2.2, 4.2.5, 4.3.3 
Total - 9 
       Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still 
awaited:- 
Paras - Nil 
Total - Nil 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022 -23) OF THE  
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
Recommendation 
1. Observing that 4468 Utilization Certificates (UCs) of the stalled/ ongoing 
schemes/projects are pending amounting to Rs 13447.05 crores, which is more than one third of 
the RE 2021-22, the Committee recommends that the reasons for slow pace/delay in submission of 
UCs be identified, remedial action be taken and a better monitoring mechanism be placed to keep 
a regular check on the progress of stalled/ongoing projects so that a clearer picture emerges 
about fund utilization and making ground for reallocation of funds at RE stage. Schemes / projects 
performing well may be rewarded with more allocation.            (Para: 2.14) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that d ue to Covid -19 pandemic and owing to delay in 
finalization of accounts and delay in completion of other statutory work such as Audit of 
Accounts, institutions were unable  to submit the UCs in time. It was further mentioned that a s 
remedial action to check delay in submission of Utilization  Certificate, the Department is 
operating a computerized UC package through which the pendency of outstanding UCs is watched 
and submission of UCs is insisted upon as per rule 238 of GFR. Further, for better monitoring of 
fund utilization of the schemes, t he Department has implemented Expenditure Advance Transfer 
(EAT) module of PFMS. It was also informed that  Treasury Single Account (TSA) system for 
Central Sector Schemes having annual outlay of more than Rs 500 crores and Central Nodal 
Agency (CNA) system for scheme outlay of less than Rs 500 crores is being implemented to help 
monitor utilization of funds of schemes. The Department is also implementing Single Nodal 
Agency (SNA) system for Centrally Sponsored Schemes which help s in monitoring utilisation o f 
funds released at States/UTs level through PFMS. 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
STUDENT FINANCIAL AID SCHEMES 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee observes that the beneficiaries under the Student Financial Aid Schemes 
are primarily students with low income groups and the scholarship provided under the Schemes 
fail to recognize that the highest expenditure made by students is on course fees and that the 
scholarship amount is not sufficient to cover the maintenance cost of the student in higher 
education. It is also felt that there is a lack of analysis on the coverage of the scholarship schemes 
in terms of the students’ private expenditure and the enrolment of the disadvantaged sections in 
higher education. In view of this, the Committee recommends that there is a crucial need for the 
government to revise the amount and coverage of the schemes. Further, in order to gain insights 
on the basis of authentic data regarding the percentage share of various categories, especially 
deprived sections, a comprehensive study be conducted for the eva luation of such scholarship 
schemes , which give pertinent data points on the advantage of such schemes for the deprived 
sections. This will help in recognizing shortcomings and making improvements in the Schemes. 
               (Para: 3.2.6) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that t he scholarship  under the scheme – “Central Sector 
Scheme of Scholarship (CSSS) for College and University Students”,  is provided for pursuing 
higher studies to eligible meritorious students from low income families to meet a part of their 
day-to-day expenses. It was also informed that before the proposal for continuation of this scheme 
during the period from 2021 -22 to 2025-26 was initiated, evaluation of the scheme was done 
through the “Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi” in the year 2020. One of the recommendations 
of the Institute was to increase the scholarship amount from Rs.10,000/ - p.a.  to Rs. 40,000/ - p.a. 
for first three years and from Rs. 20,000/ - p.a. to Rs. 60,000/ - p.a. for 4 th & 5 th years. The 
recommendation was examined keeping in view the instructions contained in Department of 
Expenditure’s O.M. dated 08.12.2020 – ‘outlay cannot exceed 5.5 times the act ual expenditure of 
financial year 2019-20, cost escalation in higher education since 2008 and in line with para -12.10 
of the New Education Policy, 2020. In EFC proposal, it was proposed to double the scholarship 
amount i.e. Rs. 20,000/ - p.a. for the 1 st three years and Rs.40,000/ - for 4 th & 5th years. The EFC 
appraised the EFC proposal in its meeting held on 06.07.2021 and recommended for continuation 
of the scheme for the period from 2021 -22  to 2025-26 and recommended the scholarship amount 

4 
 
of Rs. 12,000/ - p.a. for 1 st three years and Rs. 20,000/ - for 4 th & 5 th years. The Cabinet has 
approved the scheme – Financial Aid to Students (PM -USP Yojana) in its meeting held on 
19.01.2022 for an amount of Rs.10,158 crore up to the period 31 st  March, 2026 or till f urther 
review, whichever is earlier, subject to adherence to Expenditure Finance Committee’s (EFC) 
recommendations and the financial ceilings, etc. However, the recommendation of the Committee 
is noted and all factors as recommended by the Committee, may b e considered at the time of mid-
time evaluation of the scheme [probably to be done during 2023 -24 through an independent 
agency].  
Recommendation 
3. The Committee also suggests that a comparative study of all Schemes being run by other 
Ministries/Departments to benefit/attract students belonging to SC/ST category and from certain 
states which are low on the performance index in the higher educational sector must be carried 
out, and a well-coordinated mechanism be developed in consultatio n with other Ministries in this 
regard.               (Para: 3.2.7) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that the recommendation of the Committee has been noted 
for compliance.   
SCHEMES UNDER RESEARCH AND INNOVATION 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee notes the Schemes and is of the view that such interventions are critical to 
build the strong ecosystem for nurturing the research and innovation initiative in the country. The 
Committee also notes that there are a number of challenges in furthering research and innovation, 
such as low investment, inadequate linkages amongst the academia, the researchers and the 
industry, weak innovation ecosystem for conversion of ideas into useful acceptable products and 
processes, poor coupling between tech nology and trade etc. The Committee is of the view that 
reforms are needed to strengthen our science, technology and innovation ecosystem and thus 
there is a pressing need to reorient R&D efforts for making the higher education system 
innovative, qualitative, outcome oriented and protective for solving national problems.  
    (Para: 3.5.5) 
Action Taken 

5 
 
The Department of Higher Education in their Action Taken Notes informed the Committee 
that t hrough establishment of Research Parks in technical institutions under Start -up India 
initiative in Higher Educational Institutions, an atmosphere conducive for  research work is being 
created in HEIs. It was further informed that s chemes like IMPRINT-II has been started with the 
learning of the IMPRINT -I scheme and envisioned to promote R&D efforts in the country with 
possible industry participation.  It has further been  stated that t he recommendation  of the 
Committee is noted for compliance.   
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO (GER) 
Recommendation  
5. The Committee observes that the Gross Enrolment Ratio has increased from 26.3 in 2018 -
19 to 27.1 in 2019 -20 among all categories. The Committee notes that Gross Enrolment Ratio of 
SC/ST students at 23.4 and 18.0 res pectively is still below the national average of 27.1. In view of 
this, the Committee recommends that the factors for this gap need to be identified and action 
across various Schemes be undertaken to reduce this gap.         (Para: 3.6.1) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that the NEP, 2020 envisions an appreciable improvement in 
the standards across Higher Educational Institutions , thereby ensuring equitable access to quality 
education, with special emphasis on the SEDGs/under -represented groups. The implementation of 
the policy is to be led by all HEIs across the country. The steps to be taken by HEIs are: 
a) Institutional Development Plans that contain specific plans for action on incr easing 
participation from SEDGs; 
b) Mitigate opportunity costs and fees for pursuing higher education; 
c) Make admissions processes more inclusive; 
d) Make curriculum more inclusive; 
e) Increase employability potential of higher education programmes; 
f) Develop more degree courses in Indian languages and bilingually; 
g) Ensure all buildings and facilities are wheelchair-accessible and disabled friendly; 

6 
 
h) Develop bridge courses for those students that may come from disadvantaged educational 
backgrounds; 
i) Provide socio-emotional and academic support for all such students through suitable counselling 
and mentoring programmes. 
It has further been stated that  the recommendation of the Committee is noted for 
compliance. 
ORGANIZATIONS/INSTITUTIONS/BODIES UNDE R DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER 
EDUCATION UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION (UGC) AND ALL INDIA 
COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE) 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee takes note of the various welfare Schemes of AICTE and observes that 
despite their intent, the outcome in terms of selected students and spread of benefits has been quite 
low. The Committee also feels that such Schemes require advocacy and publicity so that more and 
more eligible students become aware of the Schemes and are thus able to partake in them. Th e 
Committee recommends that AICTE should use various platforms ---conventional and digital to 
highlight the features of the Schemes and category of students who can benefit from them.  
    (Para: 4.1.11) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that u nder Pragati and Saksham Scholarship Scheme, 15 
webinars have been organized to make students aware  by AICTE. Also, periodic publicity for PG 
scholarship and AICTE Doctoral Fellowships (ADF) has been done through various mediums like 
advertisements, circulars and notices on the Institutes as well as on the website of AICTE.  AICTE 
is utilising social media and other platform s to create awareness about AICTE scholarship 
schemes and concerted efforts would be made in this direction as recommended by the 
Committee. 
***** 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022 -23) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
Recommendation 
1.  The Committee notes the enhanced allocations in the Schemes and autonomous bodies 
mentioned and recommends that it would be prudent to draw up detailed blueprint in respect of 
each of the Schemes and Bodies where substantial budgetary enhancement has been given so that 
the progress of these Schemes/ Bodies as a result of the enhanced allocation can be monitored, 
and the new initiatives sought to be taken can be kept track of.          (Para: 2.9) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that the allocation/release and enhancement of funds under 
various schemes/items is based on the proposals received from the implementing bodies. The 
Government is also monitoring regularly for effective implementation of the schemes/ bodies 
including the progress of the schemes/ bodies as a result of the enhanced allocation . It was also 
stated that funds are released to the institutes as per the requirement projected by them 
periodically and within budgetary provision. 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee takes note of the figures and facts furnished by the Department of Higher 
Education (in Table: 1)* in respect of the percentage variations between BE 2021-22, RE 2021-22 
and BE 2022 -23 and would like to state that there is an increase of 6.48% (in BE 2022 -23) over 
BE 2021 -22 and an increase of 13.31% (in BE 2022 -23 over RE 2021 -22) compared to the 
Financial figures of FY 2021 -22. The Committee recommends that the Department may make an 
analysis of the curtailed projected demands and identify the requirements which may get 
hampered due to this curtailment and if required, seek additional funds at the RE stage.  
* Annexure I 
    (Para: 2.11) 

8 
 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed by the Department of Higher Education that t he total 
projection for BE is made to the Ministry of Finance by the Department based on the requirements 
projected by respective impl ementing bodies. However, actual allocation (BE) of Department is 
decided by the Ministry of Finance and is distributed among the budget lines of the Department 
accordingly, keeping in view the requirements and pace of expenditure. It was further informed 
that at RE stage, all possible efforts are made by the Department to seek additional funds from the 
Ministry of Finance so that no requirements get hampered due to any curtailment of demands. 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee takes note of the fact/figures in Table: 3 # and highlights that only 74.21% 
expenditure of amount in RE 2021 -22 was incurred till 31st January, 2022. The Committee 
recommends that policies/ programmes be properly evaluated and strict implementation 
guidelines be laid to ensure effective  utilization of the funds allocated in the financial Year 2022 -
23.                 (Para: 2.13) 
Action Taken 
While replying to the recommendation of Committee, the Department in its Action Taken 
Notes informed the Committee that a s on 31 st March, 2022, the expenditure in respect of 
Department of Higher Education was 97.26% of RE. Funds are released to the institutes as per the 
requirement projected by them periodically and within budgetary provision. It was also mentioned 
that the Government also monitors regularly for effective utilization of the allocated budget. 
PRIME MINISTER RESEARCH FELLOWSHIP SCHEME 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee appreciates the objectives of the Prime Minister Research Fellowship 
Scheme and hopes that the Scheme will help to create a pool of research students in various fields 
to bring about a visible difference in the country’s Research & Development scenario.  (Para: 3.3) 
Action Taken 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
# Annexure II 

9 
 
SCHEMES UNDER DIGITAL INDIA- E-LEARNING 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee notes the steps being taken for strengthening digital education in India and 
observes that increasing digital education in the country will also help the government to improve 
accessibility in rural areas and impart quality education to students in small towns and villages. It 
is also observed that increased adoption of digital education in India is also attracting global key 
players to offer online courses to students and extend opportunities to learn new skil ls. The 
Committee recommends that through such digital courses or avenues of education, the 
Department should also focus on getting students industry-ready by evaluating their competencies 
and helping them get aligned with industry -based skills. Besides th is, the Committee also 
recommends to identify the means and evolve new collaborative mechanisms in various sectors to 
further support and strengthen digital education initiatives which will prove beneficial to India, 
such as leveraging space technology and  specifically satellite communication techniques for 
beaming educational content in the digital form, in coordination with concerned space application 
institutes. The Committee also recommends that institutes/Universities imparting education 
through online /distance learning programmes should also formulate a mechanism for revenue 
generation to move towards self-reliance.            (Para: 3.4.2) 
Action Taken 
The Department in its Action Taken Notes informed the Committee that i n order to 
popularise the online courses, for the benefit of students and learners, it has been proposed that the 
SWAYAM courses may be provided free of cost, as per the existing model. It was also informed 
that self-sufficiency/revenue model at this stage of maturing may lead to reduction in enrolment. It 
may be noted that for conducting the proctored exam , SWAYAM charges fee to the participants. 
Further, d ue to charging of fee, a less number of students are registering for examination 
compared to the total enrolment. It was also mentioned that in medium term all the initiatives of 
digital education will eventually transform into Virtual University, which would be in a position to 
fix the charges/fees and generate revenue. The action for the s etting up of Virtual University  has 
already been initiated. 
 
 

10 
 
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO (GER) 
Recommendation  
6. The Committee also recommends for providing financial assistance to the students from 
low income families to bear the initial cost of education, in the form of loan or minimum fi nancial 
assistance equivalent to entry cost. Additionally, such a provision should also be made for large 
number of scholarships for different categories of students at Graduation, Post Graduation and 
Research levels by generating resources through CSR ini tiatives, philanthropic grants, education 
cess and others. The Committee also suggests that schemes offering ‘earn while you learn’ option 
in colleges and universities may be explored, in which the outsourced work by the government can 
be undertaken by the  students on a part -time basis. It is felt that these and more such initiatives 
are needed to meet the targets for increase in Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER).     (Para: 3.6.3) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed by the Department in its Action Taken Notes that the 
Government has been trying  to ensure that no student is denied the opportunity to pursue higher 
education because she or he is poor. To achieve this objective, Department of Higher Education 
(DHE) is implementing schemes namely  (i) Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship (CSSS) for 
College and University Students; (ii) Special Scholarship Scheme for Jammu & Kashmir and 
Ladakh; and (iii) Central Sector Interest Subsidy Scheme (CSIS) and Credit Guarantee Fund 
Scheme for Education Loan (CGFSEL),  to provide financial assistance to students who are 
economically weak to pursue their higher education, in the form of scholarships, interest subsidy 
on education loan and credit guarantees for education loan. The scholarships include day to day 
maintenance allowance & purchase of books & equipments, etc. and payment of fee under these 
schemes. It is encouraging the students to continue education, particularly the students from 
economically weaker sections of the society and contributing to increase Gross E nrolment Ratio 
(GER) in higher education. All three schemes are implemented for welfare of all categories of 
students including students of rural areas, girl students, physically challenged/ transgender 
students. The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
ORGANIZATIONS/INSTITUTIONS/BODIES UNDER DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER 
EDUCATION, UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION (UGC) AND ALL INDIA 
COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION (AICTE) 

11 
 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee observes that the NEP, 2020 has recommended a  complete overhaul of the 
higher education regulatory structure and states that the distinct functions of regulation, 
accreditation, funding, and setting academic standards should be performed by separate, 
independent bodies to minimize the conflict of int erest and eliminate the concentration of power. 
Also, the legislation to set up the Higher Education Commission of India has been in the pipeline. 
The Committee also notes that the role of UGC has over the years changed according to the 
environment for which it was designed in terms of both quantity and quality of higher education in 
the country with the manifold increase in the number of institutions, UGC is now required to 
regulate different kinds of institutions, offering a diverse number of courses whic h did not exist 
even a few decades ago, making the UGC’s task much more complex. Thus, for the regulation of a 
complex system of higher education which has developed, the necessity of a strong institutional 
structure that is capable of handling the systemic challenges, and providing direction to the future 
growth of higher education in India is being felt. Therefore, the Committee recommends that 
necessary efforts are required, either through setting up the proposed Higher Education 
Commission of India or t hrough other mechanisms, to reform and strengthen the regulatory 
landscape for higher education in India. It is also felt that any policy response must consider 
radical institutional innovation, particularly keeping in mind the need for decentralized and 
competent institutional frameworks and must equip any regulatory institution with a range of 
tools focusing on facilitation of innovation by universities themselves.       (Para: 4.1.8) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was apprised of the fact that as per the NEP- 2020, the HECI Bill has been 
drafted according to the provisions of NEP, 2020. It was also informed that t he process of 
stakeholder consultation on the proposal is underway. 
Recommendation  
8. The Committee also observes that various reforms for online education are underway. The 
Committee welcomes the proposal for setting up a Digital University and is of the view that this 
university should emerge as a key enabler for the “ Digital University Ecosystem” through 
integration with other digital uni versities and technical and non -technical universities of repute, 
which already have a number of online courses across various areas. Besides, the proposed 
Digital University will be able to resolve the problem of shortage of seats in higher education. The 

12 
 
Committee recommends that UGC and AICTE should coordinate to expedite the work on setting 
up the Digital University and putting in place a regulatory framework for digital universities. The 
Committee also recommends that AICTE should lay down a clear blue print to fulfil the vision as 
outlined in Para 71 of the Budget announcement.         (Para: 4.1.13) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that an Expert Committee with representation from 
technology sector, education sector, private and Government sector, regulator and University 
administration has been constituted by UGC. Relevant Sub -Committee to examine & recommend 
on various aspe cts, has also been constituted.  It was also informed that AICTE would extend its 
fullest cooperation to UGC in establishing a “Digital University" in the country. 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AGENCY (HEFA) 
Recommendation 
9. The Committee observes that National Institute (NIT) Delhi was established in 2010 by an 
Act of Parliament and it is yet to have its own permanent campus. The Committee recommends 
that with the enhanced allocation, the status of implementation of the already chalked out 
activities, especially the construction of permanent campuses of NITs should be closely monitored 
to ensure its expeditious completion.            (Para: 4.2.3) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was apprised that NIT Delhi has started functioning from 2010 -11 
onwards in its temporary campus. The permanent campus of the Institute was finalized at Narela 
where construction of building works is under various stages of completion. The phase -1A 
construction work has already been completed and the Institute has also shifted in the permanent 
campus in January, 2021. 
COUNCILS 
Recommendation  
10. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry that schemes under ICHR should not 
face any resource crunch and more effective ways of implementing such schemes in close 

13 
 
coordination with UGC, AICTE and other stakeholders should be chalked out and the Co mmittee 
be apprised of the same.              (Para: 4.3.4) 
Action Taken 
The Department in its written reply informed the Committee that a  process has been 
initiated to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between D epartment of  Higher 
Education, M inistry of Education and the Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR), New 
Delhi for the F.Y. 2022 -23 which will include the Annual Calendar of activities to be undertaken 
by ICHR under its various schemes in F.Y. 2022 -23 and their corresponding budget ary 
requirement, with its implementation and Monitoring Mechanism. 
COUNCILS 
11. The Committee also recommends that a coordination mechanism for brainstorming 
between the Department and the various Councils be evolved so that regular interactions take 
place and the issues concerning the effective functioning of these Councils in pursuance of their 
mandated aims can be discussed and resolved.          (Para: 4.3.5) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that though, there are various coordination mechanisms for 
coordination between the Department and the Councils already in vogue viz. Executive Body/ 
Governing Body meetings, Annual meetings, special purpose meetings, various MoUs etc. , the 
Department of Higher Education has noted the views of the Parliament Standing Committee and is 
under consideration to constitute a coordination committee for brainstorming between the 
Department and the Councils  for regular interaction between the two for effective functioning of 
the councils. The Coordination Committee woul d be chaired by the Secretary (Higher Education) 
along with the Directors of all the Councils as Members and a Joint Secretary level Officer in the 
Department as its Member Secretary.The Term of Reference (ToR) of the Committee would 
include resolution of the issues concerning the effective functioning of the Councils in pursuance 
of their mandate.  
 
 
 

14 
 
NATIONAL EDUCATION POLICY (NEP), 2020 
Recommendation  
11. The Committee is of the view that the Department must prepare a comprehensive blueprint 
outlining time bound action plan in each of the areas where the vision of the National Education 
Policy (NEP), 2020 impacts the higher education ecosystem so that the concerned stakeholders 
can focus on the line of action to be taken to translate the vision of the NEP into reality.  
   (Para: 4.4) 
Action Taken 
It was submitted that NEP 2020 provides different timelines as well as principles and 
methodology for its implementation.  After announcement of NEP 2020, a number of 
consultations/ deliberations have been held with stakeholders for implementation of NEP 2020. 
Also, theme-wise activities of NEP 2020 along with timelines have been identified for the year 
2021-22 and 2022-23 have been prepared and circulated among stakeholders for implementation.   
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee observes that in the FY 2021 -22, the BE was Rs. 38350.65 Cr, which has 
been rationalized to Rs. 36031.57 Cr. in RE. BE for the next year 2022 -23 has been kept at 
Rs.40828.35 Cr., which is 4796.78 Cr. more than the current year RE. The Committee also notes 
that out of the total allocation of Department of Higher Education, 81.07 %  is towards 
Autonomous Bodies ( UGC, AICTE, Central Universi ties, IITs IIITs, Councils, etc) , 13.26 % 
towards various Central Sector Schemes and 5 % towards Centrally Sponsored Schemes like 
RUSA. The Committee recognizes that the standing of a country in terms of higher education 
parameters reflect on the global importance that is assigned to a country a t the world stage. The 
Committee recommends that while formulating Schemes and polices in the higher education 
sector due analysis be done so that the Schemes and policies match the global standards and are 
able to produce graduates with appropriate skills , specialized knowledge and requisite core 
competencies in their field. The Committee also notes that in order to achieve this, concerted 
efforts by all stakeholders are required. Therefore, the Committee recommends that an expert 
study focusing on reforms  that are required to give a major boost to higher education in the 
country, upgrading existing institutions, allocating more funds towards university-based research, 
and promoting collaborations among institutions be undertaken to identify the areas which  
require active intervention.            (Para: 2.6) 
Action Taken 
The Department of Higher Education in their Action Taken Notes informed the Committee 
that t hrough establishment of Research Parks in technical institutions under Start -up India 
initiative in Higher Educational Institutions, an atmosphere conducive for  research work is being 
created in HEIs. It was further informed that s chemes like IMPRINT-II has been started with the 
learning of the IMPRINT -I scheme and envisioned to promote R&D efforts in the country with 

16 
 
possible industry participation.  It has further been stated that t he recommendation  of the 
Committee is noted for compliance.   
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee takes note of the information provided and while appreciating that 
the recommendation of the Committee for undertaking an expert study has been noted, 
suggests that this expert study should be undertaken at the earliest as it will be able to 
provide requisite insights on the actionable reforms that are required for higher edu cation 
sector, which can suitably be incorporated in formulation of the policies on these aspects in 
the near future and will also help in identification of research areas requiring immediate 
intervention. Also, the Committee may be kept abreast of the action taken in this regard. 
Recommendation 
2. Taking note of the figures (in Table: 2 *) furnished by the Department under the head 
“Andhra Pradesh and Telangana Tribal Universities”, the Committee notes that despite hardly 
any utilization (RE 2021 -22 reduced to Rs. 4 crore from Rs. 53.80 crore allocated for BE 2021 -
22) allocation has again been enhanced substantially to Rs. 53.80 crore w hich is an enhancement 
of 1245% . Similarly, there is enhancement of 1157.29 % in BE 2022 -23 allocation of Central 
University, Andhra Pradesh from RE 2021 -22. The Committee recommends that this year the 
utilization of the allocated funds in both these institutions be closely monitored and a detailed note 
of ongoing status of implementation of this project be prepared for information of the Committee.  
                 (Para: 2.12) 
Action Taken 
The Department has informed that the recommendation of the Committee has been noted 
for compliance.   
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee desires that a status note detailing the utilization of enhanced funds 
allocated for the year 2022 -23 under the mentioned Head be prepared and submitted for 
perusal of the Committee. 
* Annexure III 

17 
 
SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee noting the status of the RUSA observes that it would be prudent that RUSA 
targets reach out to the remote and rural areas which have not been served so far. The Committee 
recommends that the Scheme with enhanced allocation should focus on areas with difficult 
geographies, aspirational districts and areas with low Gross Enrolment Ratio(GER) , to benefit 
the most disadvantaged areas and SEDGs (Socio -Economically Disadvantaged Groups). The 
Committee also recommends that the objectives and aims of the National Education Policy be also 
factored in the Scheme to deliver quality higher education, with equity and inclusion.    
                (Para: 3.16) 
4. The Committee also recommends for enhanced support to the States for the creation of 
new Model Degree Colleges and for multi-disciplinary education and research.             
                (Para: 3.17) 
5.  The Committee also feels that a review of the Scheme by experts is necessary so that 
required academic reforms and equity -based growth and improvements in teaching-learning can 
be included in the action plans of RUSA.                
                 (Para: 3.18) 
Action Taken 
The Department in its reply informed the Committee that i n order to increase the  equity, 
access and excellence, the Higher Education al Institutions are funded strategically through the 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA). 
i. During the 1 st phase of the RUSA Scheme, 60 Model Degree Colleges were approved 
under the Educationally Backward Districts.  
ii. During the 2 nd phase of RUSA Scheme, 70 Model Degree Colleges were approved in the 
Aspirational Districts to cater the needs of un-served and underserved areas. 
 Through various components, the scheme supported: 
i. Improvement in  opportunities of higher education to SC/STs,  
ii. Socially and educationally backward classes;  

18 
 
iii. Promoting inclusion of women, minorities, and differently-abled persons. 
 It was also informed that t he new structure and guidelines of RUSA Scheme are being 
finalised. The Department in its reply further informed the Committee that the second phase of 
RUSA was evaluated by the NITI Aayog through KPMG for its continuation. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee would like to be apprised of what steps have been initiated to focus 
on areas with  difficult geographies, aspirational districts and areas with low Gross 
Enrolment Ratio(GER) and also to benefit the most disadvantaged areas and SEDGs (Socio -
Economically Disadvantaged Groups). Further, a detailed note updating the same State-wise 
should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest. Also, the Committee taking note of the 
position that the new structure and guidelines of RUSA are being finalised, reiterates that 
the recommendations made be duly taken note of and factored in the revised str ucture/ 
guidelines.  
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO (GER) 
Recommendation  
6. The Committee notes that the NEP 2020 aims at increasing the Gross Enrolment Ratio 
(GER) to 50% by 2035 and observes that this is achievable only through a strong execution plan 
and active  participation of all the stakeholders. Besides, to achieve this aim, there would be a 
huge requirement of teachers and thus the teacher -student ratio needs to increase substantially. 
The Committee recommends that sustained efforts be made towards building  the huge pool of 
qualified and skilled teachers. Therefore, earnest efforts be made to fill up the existing vacancies 
in all institutions.              
               (Para: 3.6.2) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed as follows: 
 In the NEP 2020, multiple entry and exit provides the much-needed flexibility to learners along 
with varied certification options such as certificate after the completion of 1 st Year, diploma 
with the completion of 2 nd year, degree with the Completion of 3rd year and degree with 

19 
 
Research/Hons. at the end of 4 th year.  It will help reduce drop -out rate and increase Gross 
Enrolment Ratio (GER) in higher education. It will also ensure equal opportunities. 
 To enable more onl ine learning for improving Gross Enrolment Ratio  (GER), UGC has 
notified ODL and Online Programmes Regulations, 2020 on 04.09.2020 – 53 HEIs are offering 
307 full-fledged Online programmes, 41 HEIs are offering ODL programmes. 
 UGC (Credit Framework for onl ine Course through Study Webs of Active –Learning for 
Young Aspiring Minds  (SWAYAM) Regulation 2021 issued on 25.03.2021 - Increased the 
percentage of courses permitted to credit from 20 % to 40% by using MOOC SWAYAM. 
More than 154 Universities have adopted  SWAYAM Course.  Courses offered under 
SWAYAM now increased to about 800 in a semester from about 100 earlier.   
 AICTE has framed the Guidelines on Open and Distance Learning Education and Online 
Education, 2021.  
Moreover, the recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee would like to be informed of the efforts being made towards building 
a pool of qualified and skilled teachers and towards filling up of the existing vacancies, 
institution wise. 
 
HIGHER EDUCATION FINANCING AGENCY (HEFA) 
Recommendation  
7. The Committee notes that loans disbursal has been low across various Institutions. The 
Committee recommends that the reasons for low disbursement rate of loans be identified and 
suitable action be taken to arrest this trend of low disbursement.          
               (Para: 4.2.2) 
Action Taken 
The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
 

20 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee desires that it should be apprised of the reasons which have been 
identified by the Department towards low disbursal of loans across various institutions and 
what appropriate action has been initiated to arrest this trend. 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction on this account and notes that more than 35% 
of the sanctioned posts are lying vacant to fill up the vacancies in Central Universities and other 
higher educational institutions. The Committee recommends that the D epartment should follow a 
pro active approach in monitoring the progress/ action being taken towards filing up of vacant 
posts, so that the situation shows visible improvement. The Committee also recommends that in 
respect of Institutions which are seen to  be going slow towards filling up the vacancies, the 
reasons for the same be identified and efforts be made to resolve the bottlenecks. Also, if required 
special recruitment drives be conducted.            
                 (Para: 4.2.5) 
Action Taken 
The Department in its Action Taken Notes informed the Committee that o ccurring of 
vacancies and filling them up is a continuous process. For filling up of vacancy positions, Ministry 
of Education has requested all the central Higher Educational Institutions to  do the same  in a 
mission mode within a period of one year starting from 5th September, 2021. 
Comments of the Committee 
Taking note of the position, t he Committee is of the view that the Department must 
closely monitor the progress being made towards filling up of vacant posts ---Institution-
wise and update the same for perusal of the Committee.  
COUNCILS 
Recommendation  
9. The Committee takes note of the submissions and recommends that  the Department/ 
Council must coordinate to find solution to this alarming trend of declining admissions in the field 

21 
 
of architecture. The Committee also recommends that necessary action by way of any amendment 
in the existing legislation/ regulations be examined so as to address the concerns expressed.  
     (Para: 4.3.3) 
Action Taken 
The Committee was informed that t he admission in any particular course keeps on 
fluctuating from year to year due to choice & liking of students, fee charged by the institutions for 
the B. Arch cou rse, future employment avenues,  etc. The criteria of 50% marks and 50% in 
Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics, for admission to 1 st year of B. Arch course, was relaxed for 
the year 2020-21 and 2021-22. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee recalls that it has taken note of the various factors like the  long 
duration of the course ( 5 years) , Court Judgments in respect of profession of Architects, 
practicing of foreign Architects without any regulations/reciprocal arran gements besides 
shortage of qualified senior faculty that have contributed to declining admiss ion in the 
Architecture courses. The recommendation of the Committee was towards findin g solution 
through coordination / intervention and taking appropriate action  so as to arrest the 
situation. Besides this , the Committee had also recommended that necessary action by way 
of any amendment in the existing legislation/ regulations be examined so as to address the 
concerns expressed.  Since no submissions have been mad e by the Department in respect of 
these recommendations, the Committee reiterates its concerns expressed earlier and directs 
that the Committee be apprised of the initiatives taken, at the earliest.   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
-Nil- 
**** 
 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE (CHAPTER-III) 
 The Committee takes note of the information provided and while appreciating 
that the recommendation of the Committee for undertaking an expert study has be en noted, 
suggests that this expert study should be undertaken at the earliest as it will be able to 
provide requisite insights on the actionable reforms that are required for higher education 
sector, which can suitably be incorporated in formulation of th e policies on these aspects in 
the near future and will also help in identification of research areas requiring immediate 
intervention. Also, the Committee may be kept abreast of the action taken in this regard. 
                  (Para: 2.6) 
            The Committee desires that a status note detailing the utilization of enhanced funds 
allocated for the year 2022 -23 under the mentioned Head be prepared and submitted for 
perusal of the Committee.                                       (Para: 2.12) 
The Committee would like to be apprised of what steps have been initiated to focus 
on areas with difficult geographies, aspirational districts and areas with low Gross 
Enrolment Ratio(GER) and also to benefit the most disadvantaged areas and SEDGs (Socio -
Economically Disadvantaged Groups). Further, a detailed note updating the same State-wise 
should be furnished to the Committee at the earliest. Also, the Committee taking note of the 
position that the new structure and guidelines of RUSA are being finalised , reiterates that 
the recommendations made be duly taken note of and factored in the revised structure/ 
guidelines.                  (Para: 3.16) 
The Committee would like to be informed of the efforts being made towards building 
a pool of qualified and ski lled teachers and towards filling up of the existing vacancies, 
institution wise.             (Para: 3.6.2) 
The Committee desires that it should be apprised of the reasons which have been 
identified by the Department towards low disbursal of loans across various institutions and 
what appropriate action has been initiated to arrest this trend.      (Para: 4.2.2) 

24 
 
Taking note of the position, t he Committee is of the view that the Department must 
closely monitor the progress being made towards filling up of vacant posts ---Institution-
wise and update the same for perusal of the Committee.        (Para: 4.2.5) 
 
The Committee recalls that it has taken note of the various factors like the  long 
duration of the course ( 5 years) , Court Judgments in respect of profession of Architects, 
practicing of foreign Architects without any regulations/reciprocal arrangements besides 
shortage of qualified senior faculty that have contributed to declining admiss ion in the 
Architecture courses. The recommendation of the Committee was towards findin g solution 
through coordination / intervention and taking appropriate action so as to arrest the 
situation. Besides this , the Committee had also recommend ed that necessary action by way 
of any amendment in the existing legislation/ regulations be examined so as to address the 
concerns expressed.  Since no submissions have been made by the Department in respect of 
these recommendations, the Committee reiterates its concerns expressed earlier and directs 
that the Committee be apprised of the initiatives taken, at the earliest.   
              (Para: 4.3.3) 
 
*** 
 
 

25 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(EWCY&S)  
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports (EWCY&S) met at 10:30 A.M. 
on Thursday, 15th December, 2022 in Committee Room No.4, A-Block, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Vivek Thakur  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
4. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
5. Shrimati Sangeeta Yadav 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
6.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
8.  Shri Sri Krishna Devarayalu Lavu 
9.  Shri Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
10. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Balak Nath 
14. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
15. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
16. Shri Dharambir Singh 
17. Shrimati Pratibha Singh 
18. Shri S. Venkatesan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Nirmala Bhatt, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Pritam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Vijay Kumar Rai, Under Secretary  
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
7. Shri Rohit Kumar Mishra, Committee Officer 

26 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed that the agenda for the meeting was to deliberate upon and adoption of the following 
six draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: 
a) * * * 
b) * * * 
c) * * * 
d) 345th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Thirty Seventh Report 
on Demands for Grants 2022-23 of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of 
Education;  
e) * * * 
f) * * * 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid six draft Action Taken Reports one by 
one and after a brief discussion, adopted the same with minor changes in * and *  Reports. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament during the 
upcoming Session of the Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri Vivek 
Thakur, Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari, M.P. to 
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajendra Agrawal, M.P. and in his absence, Shri 
Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi, M.P. were authorized to lay the above mentioned Reports on the 
Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. * * * 
   6.   The meeting adjourned at 11:01 A.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
15th December, 2022                                                                                               Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Pertains to other matter 

27 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
 
The detailed break-up of the allocation under Scheme and Non-Scheme in Revenue and 
Capital Heads in BE & RE (2021-22) and BE (2022-23) and percentage change/variation in 
allocations and utilization is as under:  
TABLE: 1 
                                     (₹ in crores) 
  
Actuals 
2020-21 
BE 2021-22 RE 2021-22 BE 2022-23 Variations 
(Percentage) 
  Scheme  Non-
Scheme Scheme Non-
Scheme Scheme Non-
Scheme 
BE 2021-22 
& BE 2022-
23 
RE 
2021-
22 & 
BE 
2022-
23 
Revenue 31975.36 9078.43 29246.72 5210.99 30805.87 7454.96 33355.38 6.48% 13.31% 
Capital 205.74 1.00 24.50 0.01 14.70 0.01 18.00 -29.37% 22.43% 
Total 32181.10 9079.43 29271.22 5211.00 30820.57 7454.97 33373.38 6.46% 13.31% 
Grand 
Total 32181.10 38350.65 36031.57 40828.35 6.46%  13.31% 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
 
  ANNEXURE- II 
                       The details of expenditure incurred as on 31st January, 2022 are as follows: 
TABLE: 3 
                                     (₹ in crores) 
Year BE 2021-22 RE 2021-22 Expenditure as on 
31.01.2022 
      2021-22 38350.65 36031.57               26738.88 
(74.21% of RE) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE- III 
                The details of projections of funds made and allocated in BE (2022-23) for   schemes/projects 
under the Department and percentage change/variations over BE/RE (2021-22) are as under: 
 
TABLE: 2 
Scheme-wise projections, Allocation, Utilization and variations under the administrative control of the  
Department of Higher Education (Demand No. 26) 
 
 (₹ in crores) 
S.No. Name of the Unit 
(s)/Scheme (s) 
Actual 
2020-21 
 BE       
 2021-22 
RE  
2021-22 
Projections 
to MoF for 
2022-23 
 BE  
2022-23 
Variations (in percentage) 
BE 22-23 over 
RE 21-22 
BE 22-23 
over 
projections 
22-23 
 Centre's Expenditure  
  
   
  Establishment 
Expenditure of the 
centre 
  
        
  
  
1 Secretariat- Social 
Services 96.34 140.00 133.98 154.96 154.17  15.07% -0.51% 
2 Directorate of Hindi 18.32 30.00 30.00 40.00 36.00 20.00% -10.00% 
3 Commission for 
Scientific and Technical 
Terminology 
13.06 12.00 10.00 15.19 12.00  20.00% -21.00% 
4 Central Institute of 
Indian Languages, 
Mysore and Regional 
Language Centers 
29.43 57.88 46.60 63.12 60.00  28.76% -4.94% 

30 
 
5 Educational Institutions 
Abroad* 4.04 7.56 10.00 11.21 11.21  12.10%   
  Total- Establishment 
Expenditure of the 
centre 
161.19 247.44 230.58 284.48 273.38 18.56% -3.90% 
  Transfers to States/UTs               
  Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes               
1 National Education 
Mission: Rashtriya 
Uchhatar Shiksha 
Abhiyan (RUSA) 
165.20 3000.00 793.26 2452.39 2042.95  157.54% -16.70% 
  Other 
Grants/Loans/Transfers               
2 Improvement in Salary 
Scale of University & 
College Teachers 
622.01 10.00 6.30 1000.00 0.01  -99.84% -100.00% 
  Central Sector 
Schemes/ Projects               
  Higher Education               
1 National Initiative on 
Sports and Wellness   1.00    1.00     -100.00% 
2 National Initiative to 
Foster Social 
Responsibility 
  1.00    1.00     -100.00% 
3 National Research 
Professors 0.29 1.30 0.38 0.27 0.27  -28.95%   
4 Establishment of Multi- 
Disciplinary Research 
Universities including 
Central University of 
Himalayan Studies 
(CUHS), creation of 
  0.10    0.10 0.01    -90.00% 

31 
 
Centres of Excellence & 
National Centre for 
Excellence in Humanities 
5 Higher Education 
Financing Agency 
(HEFA) 
200.00 1.00 0.01 1.00 0.01    -99.00% 
6 World Class Institutions 1016.30 1710.00 1200.00 2049.22 1700.00 41.67% -17.04% 
7 Prime Minister's Girls' 
Hostel   20.00  20.00 20.00 20.00      
8 Indian Knowledge 
Systems   10.00  10.00 10.00 10.00      
  Glue Grant for Higher 
Education  Institutions     10.00 10.00 10.00      
  Total-Higher Education 1216.59 1744.40 1240.39 2092.59 1740.29 40.30% -16.84% 
  Student Financial Aid               
9 Interest Subsidy and 
Contribution for 
Guarantee Fund 
1476.79 1900.00 1500.00 1400.00 1400.00  -6.67%   
10 Scholarship for College 
and University Students 166.10 206.32 206.32 251.85 251.85  22.07%   
11 Indian Scholars Going 
abroad against 
Scholarships offered by 
foreign Govt. 
0.09 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00      
12 Special Scholarship 
Scheme for Jammu and 
Kashmir  
128.00 225.00 225.00 225.00 225.00      
13 PM Research Fellowship 63.28 150.00 156.93 250.00 200.00 27.45% -20.00% 
  Total-Student Financial 
Aid 1834.26 2482.32 2089.25 2127.85 2077.85 -0.55% -2.35% 

32 
 
  Digital India- e-
Learning               
14 National Mission in 
Education through ICT 36.66 150.00 83.71 478.00 400.00  377.84% -16.32% 
15 Setting of Virtual 
Classrooms and Massive 
Open Online Courses 
(MOOCs) 
68.00 200.00 80.00     -100.00%    
16 e-ShodhSindhu 154.61 154.61 150.00     -100.00%   
17 Higher Education 
Statistics And Public 
Information System 
(HESPIS) 
12.34 20.00 10.00 10.86 10.00    -7.92% 
18 National Digital Library 7.90 20.00 15.00     -100.00%   
19 National Academic 
Depository   1.00      0.10      
20 PM e-Vidya   50.00 0.01 50.00 0.01   -99.98% 
21 Academic Bank of Credit   50.00 28.79 12.76 10.90 -62.14% -14.58% 
  Total-Digital India- e-
Learning 279.51 645.61 367.51 551.62 421.01 14.56% -23.68% 
  Research & Innovation               
  Training & Research in 
Frontier Areas 4.51             
23 National Initiative for 
Design Innovation 8.73 35.00 10.00 17.80 17.80  78.00%   
24 Startup India Initiative in 
Higher Educational 
Institutions 
167.50 100.00 30.00 70.00 60.00  100.00% -14.29% 
25(i) Unnat Bharat Abhiyan 5.00 5.00 5.00 10.20 10.20 104.00%   
25(ii) Swachhata Action Plan 
(SAP) 1.13 2.40 2.40 2.40 2.40      
  Unnat Bharat 6.13 7.40 7.40 12.60 12.60 70.27%   

33 
 
Abhiyaan- Total 
26 Implementation of the 
IMPRINT Research 
Initiative (IMPacting  
Research INnovation& 
Technology) 
  25.00  5.00 25.00 10.00  100.00% -60.00% 
27 Impactful Policy 
Research in Social 
Science (IMPRESS) 
12.00 25.00 23.00 17.26 17.26  -24.96%   
28 Scheme for Promotion of 
Academic and Research 
Collaboration(SPARC) 
  10.00  45.01 74.00 74.00  64.41%   
29 Scheme for 
Transformational and 
Advanced Research in 
Sciences (STARS) 
15.00 25.00 22.00 25.00 25.00  13.64%   
30 Multidisciplinary 
Education and Research 
Improvement in 
Technical Education-
EAP (MERITE) 
  10.00  2.00 100.00 2.00      
  Total-Research & 
Innovation 213.87 237.40 144.41 341.66 218.66 51.42% -36.00% 
31 Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya National 
Mission on Teachers and 
Teaching 
(PMMMNMTT) 
22.90 90.00 90.00 110.00 95.00  5.56% -13.64% 
32 National Institutional 
Ranking Framework 3.00 3.00 3.00 5.00 4.00  33.33% -20.00% 
33 Global Initiative for 
Academic 
Network(GIAN) 
  10.00  5.00 13.00 10.00  100.00% -23.08% 

34 
 
34 Technical Education- 
Quality Improvement 
Programme of 
Government of India 
(EAP)  
596.40 20.00 34.68     -100.00%    
35 Programme for 
Apprenticeship Training- 
Scholarships & Stipends 
175.00 500.00 150.00 550.00 500.00  233.33% -9.09% 
36 Study in India 19.59 25.00 25.00 25.00 25.00     
37 Planning, 
Administration & Global 
Engagement 
              
37.01 Initiatives for Global 
Engagement  26.80 100.00 58.00 72.00 65.00  12.07% -9.72% 
37.02 National Monitoring 
Committee for Minority 
Education 
0.10 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.35      
37.03 Expenditure on 
Seminars, Committees 
Meetings etc. /TA/DA to 
Non-Official Members  
0.19 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.60      
37.04 Shastri Indo- Canadian 
Institute  1.62 7.16 4.16 7.16 7.16  72.12%   
37.05 Refund of Income Tax 
and Customs Duty to 
United States Education 
Foundation in India  
1.03 1.64 1.64 1.64 1.64      
37.06 Contribution to 
UNESCO 17.34 18.20 21.70 21.70 21.70      
37.07 Deputation and 
Delegation  to UNESCO 
Conferences etc. 
0.12 0.80 0.80 0.80 0.80      
37.08 Visit of Foreign   0.15 0.15 0.15 0.15     

35 
 
Delegation to India 
37.09 Holding of meetings of 
Committees/ Conference 
and organizations of 
exhibition in furtherance 
of UNESCO’s aims and 
objectives 
  0.30  0.30 0.30 0.30      
37.1 Asian Institute of 
Technology, Bangkok  0.49 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50      
37.11 Commonwealth of 
Learning 12.00 12.00 12.00 12.00 12.00      
37 Planning, 
Administration & 
Global Engagement 
59.69 141.70 100.20 117.20 110.20 9.98% -5.97% 
  
 
              
  Champion Services 
Sector Scheme               
39 Champion Services 
Sector Scheme-
Education Services-
Internationalization of 
Higher Education 
87.21 160.00 160.00 250.00 200.00  25.00% -20.00% 
40 ASEAN Fellowship 0.92 10.00 2.00 10.00 10.00 400.00%   
  Total- Central Sector 
Schemes/ Projects 4508.94 6069.43 4411.44 6193.92 5412.01 22.68% -12.62% 
  Total Schemes 5296.15 9079.43 5211.00 9646.31 7454.97 43.06% -22.72% 
  Other Central Sector 
Expenditure               
  Statutory and 
Regulatory Bodies               
48 Support to University 
Grants Commission 
(UGC) 
4435.57 4693.20 4444.70 5001.86 4693.20  5.59% -6.17% 

36 
 
49 All India Council for 
Technical Education 
(AICTE) 
436.00 416.00 415.00 747.60 416.00  0.24% -44.36% 
  Total-Statutory and 
Regulatory Bodies 4871.57 5109.20 4859.70 5749.46 5109.20 5.13% -11.14% 
  Autonomus Bodies               
50 Grants to Central 
Universities (CUs) 7853.84 7477.26 8468.32 11054.83 7477.26 -11.70% -32.36% 
  Grants to IMS BHU 135.00 166.00 166.00 244.72 166.00   -32.17% 
51 Central University, 
Andhra Pradesh   60.35  4.80 59.30 60.35  1157.29% 1.77% 
52 Andhra Pradesh and 
Telangana  Tribal 
Universities  
0.63 53.80 4.00 47.20 53.80  1245.00% 13.98% 
  Total- Central 
Universities  7989.47 7757.41 8643.12 11406.05 7757.41 -10.25% -31.99% 
53 Deemed Universities 
Promoted by Central 
Government 
418.02 351.00 442.82 527.00 351.00  -20.74% -33.40% 
  Indian Institutes of 
Technology               
54 Support to Indian 
Institutes of Technology 6365.91 7182.00 6615.35 9742.08 7536.02  13.92% -22.64% 
55 IIT, Hyderabad (EAP) 230.00 150.00 225.30 519.36 150.00 -33.42% -71.12% 
  Total-Indian Institutes 
of Technology 6595.91 7332.00 6840.65 10261.44 7686.02 12.36% -25.10% 
56 Support to Indian 
Institutes of Management 481.29 476.00 465.29 726.65 476.00  2.30% -34.49% 
57 Support to National 
Institutes of Technology 
(NITs) and IIEST 
3486.60 3885.00 3265.12 4321.10 3935.00  20.52% -8.94% 
58 Support to Indian 
Institutes of Science for 791.22 896.00 993.05 1840.28 946.00  -4.74% -48.59% 

37 
 
Education & Research 
(IISERs) 
59  
(i) 
Support to Indian 
Institute of Science (IISc) 569.57 570.25 590.60 805.00 600.25  1.63% -25.43% 
59(ii) Centre for Nano- Science 
and Engineering 
(CeNSE) 
26.91 21.40 14.00 20.00 21.40  52.86% 7.00% 
  Total-Support to Indian 
Institute of Science 
(IISc) 
596.48 591.65 604.60 825.00 621.65 2.82% -24.65% 
60 Support to Indian 
Institutes of Information 
Technology (Allahabad, 
Gwalior, Jabalpur 
&Kanchipuram) 
167.31 226.35 195.40 284.40 226.35  15.84% -20.41% 
61 Setting up Indian 
Institutes of Information 
Technology in PPP mode 
161.02 167.00 144.02 183.70 167.00  15.96% -9.09% 
  Total-Indian Institutes 
of Information 
Technology (IIITs) 
328.33 393.35 339.42 468.10 393.35 15.89% -15.97% 
62 Grants to 
Councils/Institutes for 
Excellence in Humanities 
and  Social Sciences 
194.76 254.80 194.95 329.85 256.30  31.47% -22.30% 
63 Grants to Institutes for 
Promotion of Indian 
Languages 
434.64 433.00 370.73 485.41 433.00  16.80% -10.80% 
64 BharatiyaBhasha 
University & Institute of 
Translation 
      200.00 50.00    -75.00% 
65 National Institute of 
Industrial Engineering, 73.31 53.90 60.57 195.55 53.90  -11.01% -72.44% 

38 
 
Mumbai 
66 Schools of Planning & 
Architecture 101.30 275.00 98.75 139.71 175.00  77.22% 25.26% 
67 National Institutes of 
Technical Teachers 
Training & Research 
175.43 154.90 168.40 439.65 173.00  2.73% -60.65% 
68 Board of Apprenticeship 
Training, Bombay, 
Calcutta , Madras and 
Kanpur 
20.40 21.25 21.36 28.25 24.25  13.53% -14.16% 
69 Indira Gandhi National 
Open University 
(IGNOU) 
110.00 140.00 110.50 155.00 103.00  -6.79% -33.55% 
70 Assistance to Other 
Institutions               
70.01 Association of Indian 
Universities 2.50 2.50 2.50 2.50 1.00  -60.00% -60.00% 
70.02 National Book Trust 42.36 49.98 36.83 57.48 49.98 35.70% -13.05% 
70.03 Grants for Book 
Promotion Activities and 
Voluntary Agencies 
0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02  25.00%   
70.04 National Institute of 
Educational Planning and 
Administration (NIEPA) 
45.59 39.70 38.68 49.70 45.00  16.34% -9.46% 
70.05 Auroville Management  14.85 18.20 4.58 18.20 18.20 297.38%   
70.06 National Commission for 
Minority Educational 
Institutions 
6.96 7.15 7.02 7.15 7.15  1.85%   
70.07 Assistance to Other 
Institutes including 
SLIET, NERIST, NIFFT 
& CIT Kokrajhar 
357.08 359.35 344.48 667.05 358.35  4.03% -46.28% 

39 
 
70 Assistance to Other 
Institutions 469.36 476.90 434.11 802.10 479.70 10.50% -40.19% 
  Total- Other Central 
Sector Expenditure 27138.09 28601.36 27913.14 38900.60 29023.78 3.98% -25.39% 
  Grand Total  32602.85 37928.23 33354.72 48831.39 36752.13 10.19% -24.74% 
 
 
 
 
 