 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021 /Sravana, 1943, (Saka)  
Report No 
329 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH  REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken by the  Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred and Twenty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2021-22 of 
the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on .6th August,  2021) 
(Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY NINTH   REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken by the  Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred and Twenty Fourth 
Report on Demands for Grants 2021-22 of the of the Department of 
Higher  Education, Ministry of Education 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on . 6th August 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on.. 6th August 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat New Delhi 
August, 2021 /Sravana, 1943, (Saka) 
  


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
 
  
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. PREFACE (iii) 
3. ABBREVIATIONS  
4. REPORT  
 Chapter-I Observations/recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government                                   
1-2     
 Chapter -II Observations/recommendations which the Committee does 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies                                                                      
3-6 
 Chapter-III Observations/recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee                                                               
7-9 
 Chapter-IV Observation/recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government is still awaited                                                                                  
10   
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE          11-12 
 
6 
6. 
ANNEXURES 
 
13 
 
7. MINUTES 14-16 

 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2020) 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6. ** Vacant 
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
10. Shri G.K. Vasan 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. * Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21 Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
____________________________ 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  30.12.2020. 
** Vacant  w.e.f. 7.7.2021 
 
 
 
 

                                                             (i) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri K. Sudhakaran, Director 
Ms. Chitra G., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Shri K.Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director 
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer (in-situ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee o n 
Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports, having been authorised by the Committee 
to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Twenty Ninth 
Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Three Hu ndred and Twenty Fourth Report 
on Demands for Grants 2021 -22 of the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of 
Education.  The Action Taken Notes were received from the Department of Higher 
Education  on 19th  July, 2021. 
2. Three Hundred and Twenty Fourth Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee o n Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports was presented to 
Rajya Sabha on 9th March, 2021  and Replies of the Government to the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report were considered by the Committee 
at its meeting held on the 5th August 2021. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting 
held on the 5th August 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                    
5th August 2021 
August / 1943 (Saka)                                                               
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on   Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee o n 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports  deals with the Action T aken by the 
Department of School Education and Literacy on the Recommendations contained in its 
324th  Report on Demands for Grants 2021 -22 of the Department of School Education and 
Literacy, Ministry of Education ” which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9 th March, 
2021 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th March, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Replies in respect of Recommendations contained in the 324th  
Report  were received from the Department of Higher Education  on  19th  July, 2021.  These 
have been categorized as follows:- 
 
Chapter I :  Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
  Paras - 2.11,  3.8,  3.15,  
  TOTAL-  
Chapter II : Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of Government's replies: 
  Paras – 3.6,  3.30, 3.43, 3.37, 3.45, 3.46, 3.12. 3.47, 3.32 
  TOTAL-  
Chapter III : Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee. 
  Paras- 3.24, 3.25, 3.48, 3.49, 3.4,  
  TOTAL-  
Chapter IV : Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited. 
  Paras-  NIL 
  TOTAL-  
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendations  
The Department should prepare a well thought out plan of action to be implemented in a 
time bound manner with Key Result Areas for every phase in order to increase Gross 
Enrolment Ratio (GER) to 50% as envisaged in NEP, 2020; (para 2.11) 
Action Taken  
The SWAYAM (Study Webs of Active –Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) initiative of 
Government of India launched in July 2017 aims to provide equal access to quality 
education and increase GER in higher education. 
 UGC (University Grants Commission) has increased the Credit cap from the existing 
20% to 40%. In this regard, the Regulations has been notified on 25 th March, 2021, the 
University Grants Commission (Credit Framework for Online Learning Courses through 
Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) Regulations, 2021, which 
now facilitates an institution to allow upto 40% (forty percent) of the total course being 
offered in a particular programme in a semes ter through the online learning courses 
offered through SWAYAM Platform. 
 UGC has undertaken the mapping of developed SWAYAM MOOCs (Study Webs of 
Active–Learning for Young Aspiring Minds - Massive Open Online Courses) by 
National Programme on Technology Enha nced Learning (NPTEL) and Consortium for 
Educational Communication (CEC) with UGC Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) in 
17 subject i.e History, Public Administration, Sociology, Political Science, 
Anthropology, Commerce, Geography, Psychology, Economics, En glish, Hindi, 
Sanskrit, Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics, Physics, and Environmental 
Science, Gap area has been identified under these subjects and as a result of Gap Areas 
under the above mentioned subject, Expression of Interest under 520 courses  has been 
invited  on the UGC website at http://swayam.inflibnet.ac.in/ 
Total 122 courses i.e. 40 PG and 82 UG Non -Engineering courses will be offered in July -
2021 Semester. 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations  
The funding from National Research Foundation(NRF) and fellowships/scholarships should 
focus on themes having national importance as identified after due consultations with 
different Ministries/organizations.    (Para 3.8) 
Action Taken  
Office of Principal  Scientific Adviser to the Govt. Of India is taking forward the 
establishment of NRF. 
Recommendations  
The possibility of enhancing the amount of JRF and SRF upto ₹ 50,000 p.m be explored to 
attract bright students for research and innovation  with a view to cultivating a proper eco -
system for rigorous research and creating a pool of highly qualified faculty (Para 3.15) 
 
Action Taken 2 
The UGC has revised the rates of JRF from ₹.25,000/- PM to ₹.31,000/- PM and SRF from 
₹.28,000/- PM to ₹.35,000/- PM w.e.f. 01.01.2019 
 
 
  

3 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendations  
The benefits of scholarships, reservations and hostel facilities may be provided to increase 
the enrollment of SC, ST and Women in Higher Educational Institutions including Institutes 
of National Importance, Deemed Universities funded by Central Government   (Para 3.6) 
Action Taken  
University Grants Commission (UGC) has issued  a letter to all Commis sioners of  Social 
Welfare Department  of All States and U Ts vide D.O. No.F.1 -27/2009(SCT) dated 
25.09.2020 Annexure -I. with the request to disburse the scholarships  in time so as to 
enable the deserving SC/ST/OBC and PwD students to complete their acade mic 
programmes. 
 
The percentage of reservation applicable is 15% for SC and 7.5 % for ST. Additional 
percentage of seats may be  provided  for the girls students  of these communities . No rent 
shall be charged  from the students of these communities as per the guidelines -2006 point 
No.11. 
 
UGC has been contributing towards social equ ity and social economic mobility of the under 
privileged section of the society through a special coaching scheme in Universities 
/Colleges. Remedial Coaching for SC/ST/OBC (non -creamy layer) & Minorities 
Community     Students 
 
Recommendations  
With a view to enhancing employability of graduates, UGC should explore the possibility of 
introducing a two-semester component of internship in B.A, B.Com and B.Sc. courses in 
collaboration with industries/start -ups to provide  experience based learning (EBL) and  on 
the job training(OJT)  (para 3.30) 
 
Action Taken  
 To enable and encourage the institutions to provide Apprenticeship embedded degree 
programme, UGC in consultation with various stakeholders in HEIs, industry and Sector 
Skill Councils framed the Guidelines for Higher Education Institutions to offer 
Apprenticeship/Internship embedded Degree Programme. 

4 
 
 The UGC Guidelines were released by Hon’ble Education Minister on 7th August 2020. 
 
 
As per these Guidelines, any UG degree programme in all disciplines as specified by the 
UGC under section 22 (3) of the UGC Act, 1956 is eligible for embedded 
apprenticeship/internship into the degree programme. UGC has already written to all the 
Universities to introduce apprenticeship embedded degree programmes. 
 
Recommendations  
In order to ensure educational  standards of international level, periodic review  of status of 
Institutes of Eminence should be undertaken by National Accreditation and Assessment 
Council (NAAC) or National Accreditation Board (NAB)  (Para 3.43) 
 
Action Taken  
As per Clause 13.1 of the IoE Regulations, 2017, the Institutions of Eminence Deemed to be 
Universities shall be reviewed once in three years after their notification as such by the 
Education Ministry and by the Empowered Expert Committee for adherence to their 
implementation plans, keeping in view their fifteen year strategic plans. The monitoring and 
review shall continue till the Institution of Eminence Deemed to be University gets into top 
one hundred in a world ranking of repute for two consecutive yea rs or till fifteen years, 
whichever is earlier. 
 
Recommendations  
More teachers training programmes like Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission 
on Teachers and Teaching (PMMMNTT) be  introduced to  ensure enhanced quality of 
teachers (Para 3.37) 
Action Taken  
The appreciation of the Scheme is noted. The Scheme PMMMNMTT was approved till 
March, 2021. It is proposed to be appraised by SFC for further continuation. The scheme in 
next phase is proposed for strengthening and aligning with objectives of NEP 2020.  (3.37) 
 
Recommendations  
UGC should explore the possibility of evolving new courses on emerging branches of 
knowledge like Glacial  studies/geodynamics, remote sensing, and  other related disciplines.  
(Para 3.45) 
 
Action Taken  
HEIs are autonomous institutions and decide their academic components in line with the 
emerging societal needs, regional and national relevance, and keeping in view the national 
and global requirements. However, UGC shall write to HEIs to explore the possi bility of 
introducing these programs.   
 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations  
Appropriate government bodies should undertake designing of  courses in Light  and Sound/ 
Laser Show and Heritage  Walks with a  view to promoting the  cultural heritage and 
historical monuments of the Country and for generating  employment opportunities for 
students interested in culture and history of India. (Para 3.46) 
Action Taken  
Advisory ha s already been issued to the universities. All the advisories in this matter are 
available on the UGC website www.ugc.ac.in 
 
Recommendations  
The Department should also strengthen the 'Study in India' scheme and advertise it in other 
countries especially in South East Asian, African, Central  Asian and Latin American 
countries for a faculty exchange program and awarding double diploma/degree to  the 
students availing  this Scheme.  It is advised that the recommendatio ns of the Destination 
India Conference held in  Pune in January 2020 on the subject of Making India a Hub of 
Higher Education be taken into consideration seriously.  (Para 3.12) 
 
Action Taken  
Study in India (SII) is a programme that aims to increase the number of inbound 
international students to India. Even though the students from all over the world can apply 
under SII, a few countries, presently 45, have been identified as focused countries for 
systematic branding and promotional activities. Most of th ese countries are from South East 
Asia, Africa, Central Asia, West Asia and SAARC Countries. 
Recommendations of Destination India Conference on internationalization have been made 
part of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and appropriate action is b eing taken by 
the respective agencies. 
 
Recommendations  
With a view to giving impetus to boosting Research and Innovation in the country the  
department should try to simplify the procedure and reduce the cost for granting patents for 
researchers from both government and non- government organizations. (Para 3.47) 
 
Action Taken  
Hon’ble Finance Minister Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman spoke about ‘Innovation and R&D’ as 
one of the six important pillars of Budget 2021 and unveiled several measures to strengthen 
the public research and innovation ecosystem of India. 

6 
 
In order to give imp etus to boosting Research & Innovation in the country and to simplify 
the procedure, ₹ 50,000 crore has been allocated to the National Research Foundation 
(NRF) to be spent over a period of 5 years. The NRF has been envisaged as an umbrella  
 
 
body that is expected to fund research across a range of disciplines, from science and 
technology to humanities. It has also been tasked with seeding and building research 
capacity at universities and colleges. 
This NRF is over & above several other research schemes running under this ministry. 
 Scheme for Translational and Advanced Research in Science (STARS) 
 Impactful Policy Research in Social Sciences (IMPRESS) 
 Impacting Research Innovation Technology – IMPRINT 
 Ucchatar AvishkarYojana (UAY) 
 Prime Minister’s Research Fellowship (PMRF) 
 Start-up India Initiative in Higher Education Institutions - (SIIHEI) 
 Scheme for Promotion of Academic and Research Collaboration (SPARC) 
 
Recommendations  
The Ministry should undertake a comprehensive evaluation of Chairs set up in  foreign 
universities by the Indian organizations through a study group in the FY  2021-22.  (Para 
3.32) 
 
Action Taken  
Establishment of chairs in foreign countries is done largely by I ndian Council for Cultural 
Relations (ICCR), therefore Study Group, to undertake comprehensive evaluation of these 
chairs is proposed to be set up under the aegis of ICCR. Accordingly, ICCR will be 
requested to take necessary action in this regard. 
 
 
 
  

7 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendations  
The trend of appointing Adhoc faculty in Higher Education Institutions has a  potential of 
creating wrong perceptions about our collective commitment to social justice and hence the 
Department should undertake  special recruitment drive to  fill these posts within  the FY 
2021-22 (Para 3.24) 
 
Action Taken  
UGC vide its D.O. letter No.F.1 -14/2019 (CPP-II) dated 4th June, 2019 has prepared the 
Guidelines for Recruitment of Faculty in Universities, Colleges and Institutions Deemed to 
be Universities outlining the selection procedure and the time frame for recru itment which 
has been circulated to all Universities to adhere the guidelines. The Universities have  also 
been requested to take steps to ensure that the vacancies in the University as well as in the 
Colleges affiliated to University are filled up at the earliest. 
 
Further, UGC vide its letter No.F.1 -14/2019 (CPP -II) dated 31st July, 2019, 7th August, 
2019, 5th September, 2019 and 22nd October, 2019 again requested to ensure that vacant 
positions in University as well as colleges affiliated to University are filled at the earliest 
and the status of the recruitment process is uploaded on the University Activity Monitoring 
Portal of UGC.  
 
Further  recommendations  
 
The Department of Higher Education have only enumerated the steps taken prior to 
the recommen dations made by the Committee and not provided details of the steps 
taken on the recommendation of the Committee regarding conducting special 
recruitment drives for filling up the vacancies. The Committee accordingly 
recommends that  Department should prov ide precise steps taken on the 
recommendations of the Committee as contained in the 324 th Report and submit a 
status report on the same at the earliest .  
 
Recommendations  

8 
 
The Dept should explore the possibility of introducing a Common Exam for  appointment of 
faculty and non - faculty for all Centrally Funded Educational  Institutions through National 
Testing Agency (NTA)/UPSC; and thereby creating an independent cadre. (Para  3.25) 
 
 
 
Action Taken  
Single Act Committee constituted by Ministry of Education in April, 2013 to prepare a draft 
Bill for administration of all the Central Universities.  The Terms of Reference of the 
Committee was to prepare a Draft Bill for administration of all the Central Universities 
keeping in view the recommendations of Madhav Menon Committee on autonomy of 
Central Education Institutions including Central Universities and such other relevant 
Committees.  
A very important issue of shortage of faculty in the Central Univer sities has been brought to 
the notice of the Committee.   The Committee, was of the view that present mechanism for 
filling up the post of teachers has not been effective and it has generated backlog of unfilled 
vacancies in thousand s.  Therefore, a new me chanism needs to be devised for promptly 
filling up the vacancies of the teachers. The Committee deliberated on various models for 
expeditious filling up of the vacancies of the teachers in Central Universities.  The 
Committee therefore proposed in the Draft Bill that there shall be a central body to be called 
the Central Universities (Teachers, Registrar and Finance Officer) Recruitment Board to be 
constituted by the Central Government.  However, the report of the Committee not accepted 
so far. 
 
Further  recommendations (3.24 and 3.25) 
 
The  Committee is  not  convinced by the reply of the  Department .The Committee  
would  like  to point out that the Department of  Higher Education being the  nodal  
Department for the  higher  education sector in India , should take  steps to tackle the 
issue of  faculty  shortage in higher educational institutions. The  Committee highlights 
the fact  that  an inordinate delay in the  setting up of the Central  Universities 
Recruitment  Board will only magnify the  proble m of  faculty  shortage in educational 
institutions. The  Committee recommends that  the Department  should bring  the 
proposed Bill in this  regard as  soon as possible in the Parliament for creation of a 
Central body to address all administrative issues of Central University.  
Recommendations  
The Department should prepare a plan for enhancing investment in all new technologies like 
Artificial Intelligence, Nanotechnology, Blockchain, Quantum Computing, Mixed Reality, 
Data Analytics etc. with special focus on agriculture, healthcare and education a s these 
sectors   have the potential for creating large scale employment which needs to be tapped. 
Accordingly, the Department should set up a study group to devise a plan to train the human 
resources for the jobs to be created in all these emerging technologies     (Paras 3.48 & 3.49) 

9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Action Taken  
Most of the IITs offer various Artificial Intelligence (AI) related courses such as Deep 
Learning Foundations & Applications, Foundation of AI and Machine Learning, 
Reinforcement Learning, Probabilistic Reasoning in AI , Predictive & Prescriptive Data 
Analytics, Deep Learning, System Identification, Cyber Physical Security, Digital Image 
Processing, etc. Besides, IITs also organize short term programmes inter -alia on Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) for the working professional and interested students. 
 
Further  recommendations  
  
The  Committee  acknowledges that  many of the IITs  are offering  courses in 
emerging  areas like Artificial Intelligence (AI) related courses such as Deep Learning 
Foundations & Applications, Foundation of AI and Machine Learning  etc. The    
Committee,  however, recommends  that Department  should  also  encourage  
National Institutes of  Technology (NITs)  and  other  Centrally  Funded Institutions  
like IIITs  and  Central Univer sities  to start  such  courses and train  students in 
emerging  technologies  and  provide   a large  skilled  force . 
 
Recommendations 
The Department should conduct a third party evaluation about the patents and  products 
created by the incubation centres  in IITs and assess the job creation  potential as well as 
other features of the products and services created by the incubated entities (Para 3.4) 
 
Action Taken  
Inputs annexed (Annexure -I). 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department. The Committee 
recommends that the Department should evolve a time bound mechanism to evaluate 

10 
 
the various innovations/patents being developed in the incubation centres in the II Ts. 
The Commit tee also emphasised  that the patents/innovations/products made in the 
incubation centres should be commercialised and establishment of new start -ups 
should be encouraged. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED. 
 
-NIL- 
  

11 
 
 
 
                         RECOMMENDATION(S)/OBSERVATION(S)-AT A GLANCE 
 
 
1. The Department have only enumerated the steps taken prior to the 
recommendations made by the Committee and not provided details of the steps 
taken on the recommendations of the Committee regarding conducting special 
recruitment drives for filling up the vacancies. The Committee accordingly 
recommends that Department should provide precise steps taken on the 
recommendations of the Committee as contained in the 324th Report and submit 
a status report on the same at the earliest.  
2. The  Committee is  not  convinced by the reply of the  Department .The 
Committee  would  like  to point out that the Department of  Higher Education 
being the  nodal  Department for the  higher  education sector in India should 
take  steps to tackle the issue of  faculty  shortage in higher educational 
institutions. The  Committee highlights the fact  that  an inordinate delay in the  
setting up of the Central  Universities Recruitment  Board will only magnify the  
problem of  faculty  shortage in educational institutions. The  Committee 
recommends that the Department  should bring  the proposed  Bill in this  
regard as  soon as possible in the Parliament to fill the  vacant posts.  
3. The  Committee  acknowledges that  many of the IITs  are offering  courses in 
emerging  areas like Artificial Intelligence (AI) related courses such as Deep 
Learning Foundations & Applications, Foundation of AI and Machine 
Learning etc. The    Committee,  however, recommends  that Department  
should  also  encourage  National Institutes of  Technology (NITs)  and  other  
Centrally  Funded Institutions  like IIITs and  Central Universities  to start  
such  courses and train  stu dents in emerging  technologies  and  provide   a 
large  skilled  force. 
4. The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should evolve a time bound 
mechanism to evaluate the various innovations/ patents being developed in the 
incubation centres in the IITs. The Committee also emphasis ed that the 

12 
 
patents/innovations/products made in the incubation centres should be 
commercialised and establishment of new start-ups should be encouraged. 
 
 
 
Annexure-I 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Institute 
Comments of the Institute 
1 IIT Bombay IIT Bombay has stated that they do not create products / patents, nor are 
they owners of any product/ patents or file patent any product on behalf 
of companies.   
2 IIT Delhi IIT Delhi has informed that their incubator set -up, the startups in the 
year 2019-to date have filed 25+ patents and the product launches in the 
same period and this does not include patents / products of our Institute. 
In total > 200 direct jobs have been cr eated by the startups incubated 
within the reporting period. 
3 IIT Roorkee IIT Roorkee has a well structured mechanism to evaluate the 
commercial viability of patents/ disclosures. However, if a third party is 
appointed to evaluate the patents of IIT Roor kee, Institute will   do the 
needful. Further, it is also to bring to your notice that all patents of IIT 
Roorkee are validated by Third party under ARIIA system.  
4 IIT BHU  IIT BHU has informed that  as per information received from 
Technology Business Incubation Centre they do not have any IPR so 
far. However, some patents are in process, but not filed.  
5 IIT Ropar IIT Ropar has informed that third party evaluations of patents  held by 
incubated companies may be performed on a voluntary basis. If found  
suitable from the point of view of job creation or high value commercial 
potential these companies may be supported financially and other 
means to commercialize these patents  either through manufacturing or 
technology transfers. 
6 IIT Patna  IIT Patna has informed that a committee of experts is being constituted 
for Third Party Audit. It will be completed positively within a period of 
12 weeks from now. 
7 IIT Hyderabad IIT Hyderabad has informed that the institute  expresses its commitment 
to undertake an evaluation of the products and patents created from the 
Incubator together with external experts within six months. 
8 IIT Jodhpur IIT Jodhpur has informed that so far there is no patent and/or product 
that have been created by our incubation center, i.e., IIT Jodhpur 
Technology Innovation and Start-up Center (TISC). 
9 IIT Palakkad The institute has stated that they are yet to develop any product and has 
not applied for any patent through its Innovation/Incubation Centre and 
hence our report may please be treated as 'Nil'. 
10 IIT Dharwad IIT Dharwad is planning to establish an incubation centre after shifting 
to the permanent campus site.  Hence, so far no patnents and products 
have been created under the umbrella of incubation centres at IIT Delhi.  
However, Institute Innovation Council (IIC) of IIT Dharwad is 
established to conduct various innovation and entrepreneurship related 
activities, and to systematically foster the culture of innovation of IIT 
*** 

13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  
  

14 
 
 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports  met at 10.00 
A.M. on Thursday, the 5 th August, 2021 in Committee Room No. '63', First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7. Shri Dhal Singh Bisen 
8. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
9. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
10. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
14. Shri Balak Nath 
15. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
16. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
17. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
18. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
19. Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr.   Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri   K. Sudhakaran, Director 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer (in-situ) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised 
them of the agenda of the day, i.e, consideration and adoption of the following Reports:-  
(i) 327th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred and Seventeenth Report on 
the Subject “Preparation for Olympic Games, 2021” of the Department of 
Sports, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports; 
(ii) 328th Report on the Subject “Plans for Bridging the Learning Gap caused due  
to School Lockdown as well as Review of Online and Offline Instructions 
and Examinations and Plans for re-opening of Schools”; 
(iii) 329th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Three  
Hundred and Twenty Fourth Report on the Demands for Grants, 2021 -22 of 
the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education; and 
(iv) 330th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its  Three 
Hundred and Twenty Third Report on the Demands for Grants, 2021 -22 of 
the Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education. 
3. The Chairman informed the Members that in regard to Action Taken Reports, the 
Secretary of concerned Min istries were impressed upon the need to give due consideration 
to all recommendations and to indicate concrete steps being taken for implementation of the 
same in the Action Taken Report instead of stating that the matter is under consideration or 
being looked into etc. Members, appreciating the Action Taken Reports, also emphasized 
the need for analyzing all Action Taken Reports and comparing the funds/Budget allocated 
previously to each item and in the new Budget. 
4. The Chairman thereafter gave a detaile d observation on the Report on Learning 
Loss. Members also observed that most rural and remote areas of the country lack digital 
facilities that have led to huge digital divide. Digital emphasis should be given to primary 
schools. 
5. The Members of the Committee, referring to the 327 th Report on Preparation of 
Olympic Games, 2021, invited the attention of the Chairman of the Committee towards the 
contribution of Shri Naveen Patnaik, Chief Minister of Odisha in shaping the Indian hockey 
teams, both men an d women. It was informed that this is first time a State has taken the 
responsibility of supporting a national team, which should be replicated by other States. The 
Members then requested that the contribution of Shri Naveen Patnaik may be taken into 

16 
 
cognizance by the Committee and appropriately mentioned in its 327 th Report. Chairman 
assured the Committee that he will look into the matter and incorporate the same suitably.  
The Chairman then instructed to mention the name of Chief Minister of Odisha in the  
Report. 
6. The Committee thereafter considered all the Draft Reports and adopted them with 
some minor modifications. 
7. The Committee further decided to present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 6 th August, 2021. It authorized the Chairman a nd in his absence, Shri 
Bhubaneswar Kalita to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
and in his absence, Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen to lay the Reports on the Table of the  Lok Sabha.  
8. The Committee, after some discussion, decided to undertake a study visit to Chennai, 
Mumbai and Gwalior from 23 rd to 27th August, 2021. During the study visit, the Committee 
would be taking up the issues “Reforms for the promotion of Fine Arts, Performing Arts and 
Culture Education”, education loan with b anks, etc. and  would also be interacting with 
various stakeholders, including State/Central Universities, State Sports Federations and 
Anganwadi Workers and Anganwadi Helpers, etc. The Committee authorized the Chairman 
of the Committee to approach the Hon ’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to seek permission for 
the said visit. 
9. The meeting adjourned at 10.45 A.M.   
 
 