 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA     227 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE COPYRIGHT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 23 RD  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932  (SAKA)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in  
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE COPYRIGHT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 23 RD  NOVEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI  
NOVEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932  (SAKA) 

CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE ....................................................................................................................... (iii)-(iv) 
3. R EPORT ........................................................................................................................ 1-48 
4. O BSERVATIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   ––    AT A GLANCE ............................ 49-61 
5. M INUTES .................................................................................................................... 63-98 
6. A NNEXURE I .................................................................................................................. 101-122 
7. A NNEXURE II  ................................................................................................................. 123-124 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE  COMMITTEE ON HRD  
(2010-11)  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   ––   Chairman  
 2. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai  
 3. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 6. Shri Pramod Kureel 
 7. Shri N.K. Singh  
 8. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 9. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
 10. Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Shri Kirti Azad 
 12. Shri P. K. Biju 
 13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela  
 14. Shri Angadi Suresh Chanabasappa  
 15. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 16. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
 17. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 18. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 19. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhao  
 20. Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
 21. Shri P. Kumar 
 22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 23. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 24. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 25. Shri Tapas Paul 
 26. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 27. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 29. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’  
 30. Shri P. Viswanathan 
 31. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
PREFACE  
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliam entary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorized by the Committe e, present this Two Hundred and Twenty-seventh 
Report of the Committee on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010.* 
2.  The Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introd uced in the Rajya Sabha on 19 April, 2010. In 
pursuance of Rule 270 relating to Department-relate d Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee o n 23 April, 2010 for examination and report within two 
months. 
3.   A Press Communique was issued by the Committee  inviting memoranda/representation from the public. 
A total of 68 memoranda were received from the stak eholders which were forwarded to the Department of 
Higher Education for clause-wise comments. 
4.  The Committee considered the Bill in fifteen si ttings held on 26 May, 4, 15, 22, 29 and 30 June, 1 5, 16 
and 22 July, 18 and 26 August, 1 and 13 October and 9 and 18 November, 2010. 
5.  On 26 May, 2010, the Committee heard the Secret ary, Department of Higher Education on various 
provisions of the Bill. The Committee interacted wi th a number of organizations/associations from the film, 
music and publishing industry, organizations/associ ations representing the disabled, News Broadcasting  
Associations, Association for Radio Operators for I ndia, Authors’ organizations, lyricists/music compo sers, 
Artists organizations, Internet service providers, Copyright Board and other organizations. The Commit tee 
heard the Secretary again on 22 July, 2010 on some core issues relating to the Bill. . 
6.  The Committee, while drafting the Report, relie d on the following:---- 
(i) Background Note on the Bill and Note on the cla uses of the Bill received from the Department of 
Higher Education; 
(ii) Presentation made and clarifications given by the Secretary, Department of Higher Education; 
(iii) Memoranda received from the stakeholders incl uding their oral deposition before the Committee 
and feedback; and 
(iv)  Feedback received from the Department on the questionnaires and the memoranda of the 
stakeholders. 
7.  The Committee considered the Draft Report on th e Bill and adopted the same in its meeting held on 13 
October, 2010. However, subsequently the Committee received suggestions from some members relating to 
clauses 6 and 7 of the Bill. The Committee heard th e Secretary again on these two clauses. Based on th e oral 
evidence and the written submission of the Departme nt, required modification was made in the Report wh ich 
was duly approved by the Committee in its meeting held on 18 November, 2010. 
 

8.  For facility of reference, observations and rec ommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold 
letters at the end of the Report. 
 
 
 
OSCAR FERNANDES 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
October 13, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary  
Asvina  21, 1932 ( Saka ) Standing Committee on 
  Human Resource Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT  
I.  INTRODUCTION  
1.1   The Copyright Act, 1957 was enacted to amend and consolidate the law relating to copyrights in I ndia. 
The Act has been amended five times, since then, on ce each in the years 1983, 1984, 1992, 1994 and 199 9 to 
meet with the national and international requiremen ts. Though the amendments in the year 1994 were qui te 
comprehensive, only minor changes were introduced through the amendment made in the year 1999 to comply 
with the obligations under the Trade Related Aspect s of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The Copy right 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 was introduced in Rajya Sabh a on 19 April, 2010 and referred to the Department- -
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human R esource Development on 23 April, 2010 for 
examination and report thereon within two months. 
1.2  The Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks to amend the Copyright Act, 1957 with certain changes 
for clarity, to remove operational difficulties and also to address certain newer issues that have eme rged in the 
context of digital technologies and the Internet. T he Bill also seeks to bring the provisions of the C opyright 
Act, 1957 in conformity with the two World Intellec tual Property Organization (WIPO) Internet Treaties , 
namely, WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT), 1996 and WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT), 
1996 to the extent considered necessary and desirab le. The WCT and the WPPT were negotiated in 1996 to  
address the challenges posed to the protection of c opyrights and related rights by digital technology,  
particularly with regard to the dissemination of pr otected material over digital networks such as Inte rnet. The 
WCT deals with the protection for the authors of li terary and artistic works such as writings, compute r 
programmes, original data-bases, musical works, aud io-visual works, works of the fine art and photogra phs. 
The WPPT protects certain “related rights” which ar e the rights of the performers and producers of 
phonograms. In order to extend protection of copyright material in India over digital networks such as Internet 
and other computer networks in respect of literary,  dramatic, musical and artistic works, cinematograp h films 
and sound recordings works of performers, the Copyr ight (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks to harmonise the 
Copyright Act, 1957 with the two WIPO Internet Treaties. 
1.3  As enumerated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill, besides amendments in  
various provisions, a number of new provisions are proposed to be included in the Act. The most signif icant 
amendments seek to:---- 
(i) make the provisions of the Act in conformity wi th World Intellectual Property Organization’s 
WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT);  
(ii) provide for definition of new terms, namely “c ommercial rental”, “Rights Management 
Information” and “visual recording” and to amend th e existing definitions of the terms “author”, 
“cinematograph films”, “communication to the public”, “infringing copy”, “performer” and “work 
 of joint authorship”; 
(iii)  make provision for storing of copyrights mat erial by electronic means in the context of digital  
technology and to provide for the liability of internet service providers; 
(iv) give independent rights to authors of literary  and musical works in cinematograph films; 
(v) clarify that the authors would have rights to r eceive royalties and the benefits enjoyed through t he 
copyright societies; 

(vi) ensure that the authors of the works, in parti cular, author of the songs included in the 
cinematograph films or sound recordings, receive ro yalty for the commercial exploitation of such 
works; 
(vii)  allow the physically challenged persons to access to copyright material in specialized formats; 
(viii)  introduce statutory licensing for version r ecordings of all sound recordings to ensure that wh ile 
 making a sound recording of any literary, dramatic  or musical work the interest of the 
copyright  holder is duly protected; 
(ix)  introduce a system of statutory licensing to broadcasting organizations to access to literary an d 
 musical works and sound recordings without subject ing the owners of copyright works to 
any  disadvantages; 
(x) make provision for formulation and administrati on of copyright societies by the authors instead 
 of the owners;  
(xi)  make provision for formulation of a tariff sc heme by the copyright societies subject to scrutiny  
 by the Copyright Board; 
(xii)  provide for continuous payment of royalties by aggrieved party pending the appeal before the 
Copyright Board and the Copyright Board may fix int erim tariff pending appeal on the tariff 
scheme; and 
(xiii)  strengthen enforcement of rights by making provision of control of importing infringjng copies  
 by the Customs Department, disposal of infringing copies and presumption of authorship 
under  civil remedies. 
1.4   Keeping in view, the very comprehensive amend ments proposed by the Department in the Copyright 
Act, 1957, extensively affecting the rights of a large number of entities, the Committee decided to seek opinion 
of all concerned. Accordingly, a Press Release invi ting memoranda/suggestions on various provisions of  the 
Bill from all the stakeholders involved in copyrigh t work was issued on 21 May, 2010. The Press Releas e 
elicited tremendous response from the stakeholders.  Out of the 68 memoranda received, prominent were f rom 
the Film Industry, (Film and Television Producers G uild of India, Mumbai, Indian Motion Picture Produc ers’ 
Association, Mumbai, South Indian Film Chamber of C ommerce, Chennai, Motion Picture Association and 
Film Federation of India); Music Industry (RPG Ente rprises-Saregama, Kolkata, Indian Music Industry, 
Mumbai, South India Music Companies Association, Ch ennai and Phonographic Performance Ltd., Mumbai); 
Publishing Industry (Association of Publishers in I ndia, New Delhi, Federation of Indian Publishers, N ew 
Delhi and Indian Reprographic Rights Organisation, New Delhi); Organizations/Associations representing  
visually impaired (Inclusive Planet, Kochi and Xavi er’s Resource Centre for the Visually Challenged, 
Mumbai); News Broadcasting Associations (News Broad casters Association, New Delhi and Indian 
Broadcasting Foundation, New Delhi); Association of  Radio Operators in India, Author’s organizations 
(Authors’ Guild of India and CISAC); lyricists/musi c composers (Sh. Javed Akhtar, Smt. Shubha Mudgal a nd 
others); Artists organizations (Indian Performing R ight Society Limited, Mumbai); Internet service pro viders 
(Yahoo India, Google India, Ebay India) and other o rganizations such as Internet and Mobile Associatio n of 
India, Business Software Alliance. 
1.5  The Committee started its deliberations with a  preliminary discussion with the Secretary, Department of 
Higher Education on 26 May, 2010. The Committee was  informed that India has been a member of the World  

Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) since 197 5. The two WIPO Internet Treaties, namely, the WIPO  
Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) which were negotiated 
in 1996, address the challenges posed to the protec tion of copyrights and related rights by digital te chnology, 
particularly with regard to the dissemination of pr otected material over digital network such as the I nternet. 
The member countries of the WIPO agreed on the util ity of having the Internet Treaties in the changed global 
technical scenario and adopted them by consensus. I n order to sign these treaties, a country has to am end its 
domestic legislation and fulfill the treaty obligat ions before signing these treaties. It was clarifie d that 
conformity with the WCT and WPPT provisions did not warrant any major overhauling of the national laws of 
the countries which were signatory to the Berne Con vention, 1971 and TRIPS, India being one such count ry. 
The Secretary apprised the Committee that the propo sed amendments, besides bringing the Act in conform ity 
with the WCT and WPPT could be categorized as those  addressing the concerns of music and film industry ; 
specific amendments protecting the physically chall enged; and those protecting the interests of author s and 
amendments relating to operational difficulties and  enforcement of rights. The Secretary, further appr ised the 
Committee about the main features of the Bill. 
1.6  Subsequent to preliminary interaction with the  Secretary, Department of Higher Education, the 
Committee held a series of meetings with a number o f organizations/associations/NGOs/legal experts as well 
as some renowned artists concerned with different a spects of copyright law having a direct impact on t heir 
domain of work. Besides holding extensive deliberat ions with all these stakeholders, the Committee als o 
received detailed memoranda from them. Keeping in v iew the wide-ranging impact of proposed amendments 
touching upon very complex issues, all these memora nda were forwarded to the Department for ascertaini ng 
its views. Not only this, based on its interactions  with different stakeholders, detailed questionnair e was also 
sent to the Department on four occasions along with  few pertinent issues raised by some Members. The 
Committee also held a final meeting with the offici als of the Department on some core issues relating to the 
Bill. Feedback received from the Department has pro ved to be of immense help to the Committee in 
formulating its views on various provisions of the Bill. 
II.  CONSULTATION  PROCESS  
2.1  In the introductory meeting held on 26 May, 20 10, the Secretary had dwelt at length on the wide-ranging 
consultations carried out by the Department with al l the stakeholders. The Committee was informed that  a 
thirty member Core Group was constituted in 2000 un der the Chairmanship of the then Education Secretar y 
with representatives of various Ministries/Departme nts like Information and Broadcasting, Science and 
Technology, Communications and Information Technolo gy, Industrial Policy and Promotion, Culture, 
Customs, Defence Research and Development, Legal Af fairs, organizations such as the Indian Performing 
Right Society Limited (IPRS), Phonographic Performa nce Limited (PPL), Film Federation of India (FFI), 
Federation of Indian Publishers (FIP), Federation o f Publishers’ and Booksellers’ Association in India  
(FPBAI), Authors Guild of India, National Associati on of Software Service Companies (NASSCOM), Indian 
Newspaper Society, audiovisual performers such as, Smt. Asha Bhosle, singer and Smt. Shubha Mudgal, 
classical singer, National Institutions like, Sahit ya Academy, Sangeet Natak Academy, National School of 
Drama and Film and Television Institute of India (F TII), Academic institutions such as Indian Institut e of 
Technology (IIT), Delhi and National Law School of India University (NLSUI), Bangalore, representatives of 
persons with disability, subject experts such as Pr of.(Dr.) N.S.Gopalkrishnan, Prof. HRD Chair on IPR and 
Director, Inter-University Centre for IPR Studies, Cochin, University of Science and Technology, Cochi n and 
Shri Jagdish Sagar, Advocate and Professional IPR l awyers, Shri Pravin Anand and Shri Hardeep Singh 
Anand. 

2.2   Thereafter, the first draft of the Bill prepa red by the Drafting Committee was circulated in May , 2005. 
Draft Bill was also put on the public domain throug h advertisements, Copyright Office Web-site, along with 
comments sought from Vice-Chancellors, Heads of Ins titutions, Bar Council of India and State Bar Counc ils. 
Based on the wide-ranging consultations held with various stakeholders, the Bill was revised after inclusion of 
provisions relating to fresh issues. 
2.3  The Committee observes that the major distinct ive features of the present Bill when compared with  the 
previous draft relate to the following:– 
– changes made in the definition of terms ‘Author’ and ‘work of joint authorship’; 
– term of Cinematograph work and joint authorship o f films;  
– independent rights to authors and composers in ci nematograph films;  
– statutory licensing for broadcasting; 
– compulsory licence for published orphaned works; and 
– registration of Copyright Societies. 
  The Committee also takes note of the fact that th ree important issues raised by the stakeholders rel ating 
to physically challenged, joint authorship for prod ucer and principal director and extension of term f or 
cinematograph films and independents rights to authors and composers in films have remained unresolved. 
2.4   During the course of its extensive deliberations wi th various stakeholders, one issue which was 
raised again and again was their non-involvement in  the consultation process and their concerns not 
being addressed fully. From the very detailed feedb ack received from the Department as well as its 
interactions with all concerned, the Committee is c onstrained to observe that perhaps the present Bill  
was not shared with the stakeholders at the same le vel as the 2005 draft Bill. However, the Committee 
feels that by undertaking a very intensive consulta tion drive by issuing a Press Release followed by 
giving an opportunity to all the stakeholders to pr esent their views in person as well as in writing h as 
now left no scope for any stakeholder being denied the opportunity to have his say. Not only this, the  
Committee has also obtained the response of the Dep artment on all the issues raised/ apprehensions 
voiced by a large number of witnesses.  
2.5  The Committee has also observed that, by and large,  many witnesses working in different areas 
touching upon different copyright related domains w ere primarily concerned with the safeguarding of 
their professional interests. Overall impact of cop yright law did not seem to be an issue pertinent 
enough. The Committee can only say that it is the p rimary duty of the Government, as the law maker, 
responsible for both domestic interests and interna tional commitments to do a balancing act. Similarly , 
the Committee is mandated to make an objective asse ssment of all the proposed legislations referred to  
it. It is against this backdrop, the Committee is m aking its observations/recommendations in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
 
 

III.  CLAUSE 2: SECTION 2(D) (V) AND (Z), CLAUSE 5:  SECTION 17 AND CLAUSE 12:SECTION 
26 JOINT AUTHORSHIP FOR PRODUCER AND PRINCIPAL DIRE CTOR IN 
CINEMATOGRAPH  FILMS  
3.1   With the objective to recognize the intellect ual contribution of principal director in cinematograph films, 
concept of joint authorship of producer and princip al director has been proposed. Accordingly, while c lause 
2(d) (v) provides that both the producer and the principal director will be authors of a cinematograph film, sub-
clause (vi) lays down that in relation to a sound r ecording, the producer shall be the author. Secondl y, clause 
2(z) defining the term ‘work of joint authorship’ i s proposed to be modified by insertion of an Explan ation 
clarifying that cinematograph film is to be treated  as a work of joint authorship except in cases wher e the 
producer and the principal director would be the sa me person. Further, clause 5 seeks to amend section  17 
relating to the first owner of copyright, whereunde r producer and principal director shall be treated jointly as 
the first owner of copyright after the commencement  of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2010. In the cas e of 
a cinematograph film produced before the commenceme nt of the Act, the principal director shall enjoy t he 
copyright for a period of ten years after the expir y of the duration of copyright in the cinematograph  film. A 
proviso providing that in the case of a principal d irector, the copyright shall subsist until 70 years  is proposed 
to be added to section 26 relating to term of copyright in cinematograph films. 
3.2   The Committee was given to understand that at  present, principal director is only paid fee for h is work 
and the producer does not share rights with him. Pr incipal director’s creativity has not yet been reco gnised 
inspite of his intellectual contribution in the creation of the film. While admitting that such a prov ision did not 
exist in most of other jurisdictions like USA, it w as pointed out that the US industry was addressing this issue 
through ‘union contracts’. Under this system, royal ties were shared with all the stakeholders in the f ilm-
making. Not only this, the European Directives impl emented by 27 European States introduced ‘work of j oint 
authorship’ in cinematograph films by making princi pal director, script writer, dialogue writer and mu sic 
composer as joint owners unlike the producer who on ly initiated the process of film making. It was als o 
clarified that the proposed amendments were absolut ely in strict conformity with the international tre aties and 
conventions like the Berne Convention, the Rome Con vention and the TRIPS Agreement. Another reason 
emphatically advanced was that a well-designed contractual agreement between the producer and the principal 
director, clearly stipulating the nature and conten t of the enjoyment of rights jointly owned before t he start of 
the film production would solve many problems on the exploitation of films in future. 
3.3  The proposal to include principal director as an author in case of a cinematograph film was oppos ed in 
very strong terms by all the stakeholders appearing  before the Committee. The representatives of Film and 
Television Producers Guild of India  held that the proposed co-ownership to principal director was absolutely 
unfair and unjustified as it was the producer who f aced the potential risk of loss as compared to a pr incipal 
director charging upfront fee for his services. It was the producer who was entrusted with the task of making a 
film, organizing finance, employing artists, techni cians, story writer, music director, lyric writer, distributor, 
exhibitor etc. and taking all their liabilities/res ponsibilities. In such a scenario, making the direc tor a co-
owner/partner was totally unjustified. Another appr ehension voiced by the Guild was that such a practi cally 
unworkable proposition would result in producers not entering into contracts with directors and denyin g break 
to new talent. Committee’s attention was also drawn  to the fact that it may so happen that the directo r instead 
of assigning the rights to the producer may assign/ sell his rights to third party which may not agree with the 
producer’s commercial plans. Existence of a level p laying field in the film industry for these two ent ities was 
also cited as a factor not necessitating such a pro posal. It was emphasized that a contract negotiated  freely 
between the producer and the director which may inc lude percentage of profit also took full care of th e rights 
of director. 

3.4   Endorsing the views of the Film and Televisio n Producers’ Guild, the Indian Motion Picture 
Producers Association submitted that it was the producer alone who suffer ed all the losses in case a film 
failed, with the director being paid his remunerati on/fee beforehand. In contrast, the investment risk  of 
producing a movie solely rested with the producer. If a film proved to be a hit, it benefited everybod y 
including the director. Representatives of the South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce  also pointed out 
that inclusion of principal director as author of a cinematograph film was totally unwarranted as the process of 
film making involved a number of crafts handled by different agencies/individuals. Identifying only pr incipal 
director could not be considered justifiable. 
3.5  Voicing their strong reservations, office-bear ers of the Indian Reprographic Rights Organisation  
termed the proposed amendment as conceptually unten able, discriminatory, challengeable and ultra-vires  of 
Article 14 of the Constitution. Committee’s attenti on was drawn towards an anomalous situation where t he 
principal director may choose to assign his copyright to another party, resulting in the other party e njoying the 
copyright for a longer term than the producer himself by virtue of proposed amendment in section 26. 
3.6   Opposing the amendment, the representatives o f the Indian Broadcasting Foundation  opined that the 
proposal would affect the broadcasting organization s in terms of both buying the movies and producing 
television content. For buying movies, broadcaster would now need to negotiate assignment/licensing contracts 
with both producer and principal director of such movie, thereby making such procurement cumbersome and a 
costly affair. For producing television content, de spite being a producer and owner of television cont ent, it 
would be difficult for a broadcasting organization to have absolute and unrestricted commercial rights , due to 
sharing of its revenue with the principal director of the concerned television content. 
3.7  The Committee shares the apprehensions of the stake holders about the proposed inclusion of 
principal director as author in clause 2 (d) (v) of the Act. Department’s admission that “such a provision 
is not prescribed in most of the jurisdictions like  USA” and the matter is taken care of through other  
means corroborates such apprehensions. It is again intriguing that none of the international treaties 
namely WCT and WPPT or even Rome Convention stipula te such a concept. It is well established that 
the producer is the kingpin who invests substantive  money, raises finance through institution, utilize s 
persons/expertise and brings out a product i.e. fil m. He takes such initiative and responsibility for 
making the work and chooses the director on certain  offer. It is also an undisputed fact that a direct or 
plays a major role in the making of a film but in co-ordination with the producer only. The Committee is 
also surprised to note that nowhere in the proposed  Bill, the term “principal director” has been defin ed 
whereas the definition of the term “producer” has b een provided under section 2 (uu) of the Copyright 
Act, 1957. The Committee feels that this definition  of producer ought to have been modified in the 
context of the proposed amendment. It was also poin ted out that the term ‘principal director’ was not 
defined under the Berne Convention also. The Commit tee is not convinced by the contention of the 
Department that such a definition is not required due to the clear understanding in the film world about 
the identity of principal director as there are dif ferent directors responsible for different aspects of film 
making like music director, art director, action di rector etc. More so there is no word” as ‘principal  
director’ in the parlance of the cine industry at a ll as ‘director’ is the term used for any person wh o co 
ordinates ‘in general way’ while others are on specific work as music, art, dance etc.  
3.8  The Committee observes that opportunity to have par tnership in a cinematograph film is being 
given to an undefined person i.e. principal directo r without any liability/responsibility being assigned to 
him. In fact, in the film industry today, directors are getting huge money as fee under a mutual contract 

drawn with the producer without any pressure whatso ever, leaving no cause for marginalization. The 
Committee has been given to understand that even in  Hollywood, fee is allowed and certain profit is 
shared under a system/agreement where under no equa l partnership between the director and the 
producer is there. Such a system can exist in India n cinema also. The Committee endorses the 
apprehensions that the proposed amendment will create a lot of uncalled for and unnecessary problems 
in the Indian cinema. The Committee is in agreement  with the contention of some stakeholders that this  
may lead to a situation when the producer may not e ngage directors and may become director, script 
writer etc. himself. Further directors may not work  in the same capacity and they may be pushed down 
as assistant directors, which will stop the upcoming directors to reach the top in industry.  
3.9   The Committee was informed that the Film Prod ucers and Film Federation of India had sought for 
extension of copyright term for cinematograph films  by amending section 26, specially to exploit old f ilms in 
new medium and also help the Producers of such film s economically. Accordingly, a sub-committee was 
constituted by the Department on 6 November, 2006 w hich held two meetings on 29 December, 2006 and 4 
January, 2008 to discuss the issue. A detailed stud y report was also submitted by Ministry of HRD IPR Chair, 
Cochin on term extension. One of the options consid ered was to include director as ‘author’ along with  
producer by amending section 2 (d) (v) in order to extend the term of cinematograph film. Creative 
contribution of principal director in the films was also recognised by the representatives of film industry during 
these discussions. Thus, introduction of the term, principal director was primarily meant to extend th e 
copyright term of cinematograph film by ten years. Any direct increase would have led to increase in t he 
copyright term of other works also. 
3.10  Nobody can deny the fact that interest of producers of old films needs to be fully protected. But the 
Committee fails to comprehend the rationale behind the proposed introduction of a new stakeholder, 
i.e., principal director that too for films produce d 50 years ago. The main objective of this exercise  was 
to protect the producers of old films economically. It seems remedy proposed is worse than the problem.  
3.11  In view of the above, the Committee is of the view that the proposed amendment to include 
principal director as author of a cinematograph film along with producer may create confusion and lead 
to uncalled for situations instead of serving the p urpose intended for. Committee’s opinion rests on t he 
premise that there is a system existing presently w here under producers and directors are free to 
negotiate on their own terms and conditions. Under these negotiations/contracts, directors are not onl y 
paid their negotiated salary/fee but also certain rights in perpetuity relating to the script. Further, as per 
the existing system, the principal director is not taking any equity risk in the production/performance of 
a film and it is the producer alone who runs the ri sk of his investment not being recovered. The 
Committee strongly feels that the proposal of joint  ownership is unfair. It, therefore, recommends tha t 
the proposal to include principal director as autho r of the film along with producer may be dropped 
altogether.  
IV.  CLAUSE 2 : DEFINITION  OF  THE  TERM  ‘CINEMAT OGRAPH  FILM’  
4.1  Clause (t) of section 2 of the Act defines the  term, “cinematograph film” as follows: 
“any work of visual recording on any medium produce d through a process from which a moving image 
may be produced by any means and includes a sound recording accompanying such visual recording and 
“cinematograph” shall be construed as including any  work produced by any process analogous to 
cinematography including video film.” 

  The Bill seeks to omit the words “on any medium p roduced through a process from which a moving 
image may be produced by any means” from clause (f). 
4.2   The Department has clarified that the definit ion of the term “cinematograph film” is being revis ed to 
tackle the exploitation of works in digital medium.  The Committee, however, feels that the amendment 
cannot be accepted as future systems of electronic format/formation will be left out. 
V.  CLAUSE 2 : DEFINITION  OF  THE  TERM  ‘COMMERCI AL  RENTAL’  
5.1  The Bill seeks to insert a definition of the t erm ‘commercial rental’ after Section 2(f) of the A ct as 
indicated below: 
‘(fa) “commercial rental” does not include the rent al, lease or lending of a lawfully acquired copy of  a 
computer programme, sound recording, visual recordi ng or cinematograph film for nonprofit purposes 
by a non-profit library or non-profit educational institution.’ 
5.2  Obligation under Article 11 of the TRIPS Agree ment, Article 7 of WCT and Article 9 of WPPT to 
provide for “commercial rental” rights for computer  programmes and cinematograph film was cited as the  
basis for bringing the definition of the term ‘comm ercial rental’. Committee’s attention was also draw n to the 
fact that this right was introduced in 1994 in sect ion 14 relating to ‘Meaning of Copyright’ using the  words 
‘hire’. However, keeping in view the possibility of  interpreting this term to include non-commercial h ire and 
lending by libraries and educational institutions, the term ‘hire’ in section 14 (b) for computer programme was 
replaced with the term ‘commercial rental’ in the 1 999 Amendment. The term ‘hire’ in section 14 (d) an d (c) 
with regard to a cinematograph film and sound recor ding respectively is now proposed to be replaced wi th the 
term ‘commercial rental’. Committee was informed th at specific definition of the term ‘commercial rent al’ is 
proposed to be inserted with the objective of expre ssly clarifying that this right was not applicable to non-
commercial activities of libraries and educational institutions. 
5.3  Representatives of organizations, namely India n Music Industry, Indian Reprographic Right 
Organisation, South India Music Companies Associati on and Indian Motion Picture Association of America , 
Saregama- RPG Enterprises and Indian Operations Bus iness Software Alliance appearing before the 
Committee voiced their serious reservations on the proposed definition of the term ‘commercial rental’  and 
other allied amendment in section 14 (d) and (e) on the following grounds: 
– Definition is too wide and provides an indetermin ate meaning. The range of possible misuses in 
the name of non-commercial rental is vast, in view of numerous large users of copyrighted works 
being technically ‘non-commercial’. 
– Illegal internet web-sites/services streaming son gs unauthorizedly free of cost would misinterpret 
the law to mean that in the absence of any fees/ren tal charged by them, they cannot be termed as 
infringes. 
– It would be possible for anyone to effectively in fringe copyright by the simple device of 
registering a society (non-commercial body) and dis tributing infringing copies on a nominal one-
time payment of non-commercial rent. 
– It would prove to be extremely harmful to the mus ic industry as it would dilute the market for 
legally sold digital copies. 

– It would add to the burden of enforcement authori ties charged with combating the widespread 
availability of pirated products. 
– Courts understand the term ‘non-commercial’ and t hus there is no apparent need for the open-
ended definition which can only create difficulties in interpretation. 
5.4   The Committee also takes note of the clarific ations given by the Department on the above apprehensions 
of the stake holders. It has been pointed out that by virtue of this definition, normal activities of public libraries 
and educational institutions will not be affected b y granting rental rights to the authors. As the cop ies used by 
the libraries/educational institutions would be leg al copies, interests of copyright owners would rema in fully 
protected. Finally, this benefit would be available  only if the purpose is non-profit for non-profit m aking 
institutions. 
5.5   The Committee finds merit in the apprehensions voic ed by different stakeholders. It is apparent 
that the definition of the term ‘commercial rental’  is too wide and open ended. Mere assurance of 
interests of copyright owners remaining fully prote cted would serve no purpose. The Committee would 
also like to point out that the absence of any clarity on the non-profit character of a public library or an 
educational institution is likely to result in diff erent interpretations and resultant legal complicat ions. 
The Committee, therefore, is of the view that in th e light of very convincing facts put forth by the 
stakeholders based on their experience as copyright  holders and service-providers, the proposed 
amendment needs to be reexamined from all conceivab le aspects. One option can be to clearly spell out 
the criteria for designating a library/educational institution as non-profit based. The other option c ould 
be to restrict the application of this clause to on ly Government recognised libraries/educational 
institutions. Either way, such specification needs to be there in appropriate place either in the Act itself 
or in the relevant rules. 
VI.  CLAUSE 2 : DEFINITION  OF  THE  TERM  'COMMUNI CATION  TO  THE  PUBLIC'  
6.1  Section:2 (f) of the Act defines the term “com munication to the public” as follows: 
“making any work available for being seen or heard or otherwise enjoyed by the public directly or by 
any means of display or diffusion other than by iss uing copies of such work regardless of whether any 
member of the public actually sees, hears or otherwise enjoys the work so made available.” 
  The Bill seeks to amend the definition by adding the words ‘or performance’ after the word ‘work’ an d 
extending the communication to the public simultaneously or at places and times chosen individually. 
6.2   According to the Department, the definition h as been revised to tackle the exploitation of works  in 
digital medium, thereby bringing the same in conformity with WCT and WPPT. The Committee notes that the 
proposed amendment in the definition of the term ‘c ommunication to the public’ has not found favour wi th 
music companies represented by the South India Musi c Companies Association, the RPG Enterprises 
Saregama, Indian Music Industry and also the Associ ation of Radio Operators for India. Attention was d rawn 
to the following factors having an adverse impact on the music industry and radio operators: 
– subscription to caller tunes and authorized websi tes permitting streaming/downloading of copies 
etc. will be considered “communication to the public” inspite of it being a sale of the copy; 

– no rationale in exclusion of only physical copies  from the purview of “communication to the 
public” in an age where commercialization and sale of music is taking place extensively through 
the medium of internet and transfer of files through computers/blue tooth; 
– creation of a transient electronic copy in the co urse of or for the purpose of “communication to 
public” under current law is treated as an infringe ment. While such act by a legitimate TV/Radio 
station would be lawful, the section will be misuse d by unauthorized websites treating it as an 
activity during the course of “communication to the public”. . 
– free radio broadcast which is a service to the pu blic and is also in the interest of artists as it 
promotes their compositions will be brought under t he definition. Therefore, the word 
‘performance’ should be excluded from the provision. 
– proposed amendment will be misinterpreted by cert ain quarters when even issuing “digital” copies 
would amount to ‘communication to public’. It would  be wrong to consider digital sales such as 
iTunes as “communication to the public” In reality, it is only a sale, but on a different medium. 
6.3  The Committee feels that the reservations of the st akeholders are unfounded. Issuing physical 
copies or legitimate digital downloading music or v ideo recording by payment cannot be considered a 
communication to the public. The Department has justified the proposed amendment for exploitation of 
digital mediums. As the amendment is in tune with t he technological advancement, the Committee 
accepts the amendment. The Committee is also of the  view that the copyright societies can play a pro-
active role in resolving problems, if any, arising due to the proposed changes in the definition. 
VII.  CLAUSE 2 : DEFINITION  OF  THE  TERM  ‘INFRINGING  COPY’  
7.1   Clause 2 (m) of the Act defines the expressio n ‘infringing copy’ as a reproduction of a literary, dramatic, 
musical or artistic work or a copy of a cinematogra ph film made on any medium by any means or any othe r 
recording embodying the same sound recording, made by any means or the sound recording or a 
cinematographic film or broadcasting of a programme  or performance if reproduction of sound recording is 
made or imported in contravention of the provisions  of the Act. The Bill seeks to insert the following  proviso 
to this clause:– 
“provided that a copy of a work published in any country outside India with the permission of the author 
of the work and imported from that country into India shall not be deemed to be an infringing copy”. 
7.2  The Committee received memoranda on the propos ed insertion of a proviso to the definition of the term 
‘infringing copy’ from a large number of organizati ons/associations. The Committee also had the opport unity 
to interact with the representatives of these bodie s. Very strong objections were raised on the propos ed 
amendment. 
7.3  The South India Music Companies Association  pointed out that such a move would act as a huge 
disincentive for sound recording labels to obtain l icense from foreign producers. The Indian Motion Picture 
Producers’ Association  were of the view that it would result in copies of a work published outside India to be 
imported without consent of the owner thereby dives ting the rights of owner of copyright in such works  and 
diluting the commercial potential of exploitation of a work. The viewpoint of the Motion Picture Association  
was that repealing India’s long-existing national e xhaustion rule for copyright would not be a good po licy 
choice as all the important copyright producing nat ions in the WTO have the rule of national exhaustio n for 
copyright national. The national exhaustion is bene ficial to the economy as it allows exclusive distri bution 

arrangements to be formed and respected and at the same tune, keeps the prices low in the country and helps 
build a strong domestic copyright industry. It was suggested that the concerns over impact of the exis ting rule 
on persons bringing in small quantities of parallel imported copy-righted material for personal use can be taken 
care of by an amendment creating an exception which could be narrowly crafted. 
7.4  Creation of a parallel market of foreign conte nts/works in India was the main objection raised by  the 
Indian Broadcasting Foundation.  It was apprehended that it would be possible for a ny person to buy a copy 
of a foreign work including a movie and other media  content in any country and import and resell it in  India 
before the work in question could be formally relea sed in India. Any content specifically produced or edited 
for a foreign audience could be freely imported by anyone in India without license/permission from the  
broadcaster. 
7.5  Similar serious concerns were raised by the Pu blishers. The Association of Publishers in India  pointed 
out that the books published in one country could b e freely made available and sold in India without 
amounting to infringement of copyright. Publishers/agents/authors would hesitate from designating India as an 
exclusive territory in which (cheaper) Indian Editi ons could be produced as India would not be a “secu re” 
market. It would not be possible for Indian publish ers to sell Indian Editions into protected markets abroad 
since other countries recognize territoriality. According to them, it was a retrograde step diluting t he ability of 
various stakeholders in the publishing industry to uphold and enforce the territorial division of righ ts, the very 
basis upon which the publishing industry operated. 
7.6  Clarification given by the Federation of Indian Publishers was that the rights were commonly split up 
and assigned territorially. Indian publishers often  enjoyed the right to publish and sell a book in In dia, while 
some other publishers did so in some other country (ies). Author was given the right to allow parallel  imports 
regardless of whether or not he was the current own er of copyright. It was mentioned that as the amend ment 
would be benefitting authors at the disadvantage of  the publishers and it would also give rise to liti gation 
between authors and publishers. The Indian Reprographic Rights Organization  contended that the provision 
was likely to upset the whole pattern of commercial  exploitation of most kinds of copyright works, by 
legitimizing the circumvention of territorial rights acquired by assignees at some cost. 
7.7  Equally strong objections were raised by anoth er stakeholder i.e., the Business Software Alliance.  
According to them, such a move would cause serious imbalance of trade, counterfeiting activities acros s 
borders and total disruption of authorized distribution channels. It would be impossible for customs and border 
police to apprehend illegal copies. Further, this w ould make working and enforcement of Licence Agreem ents 
for computer programmes more complex and burdensome for users, software publishers and the courts. 
7.8  The Authors Guild of India  was the only body which welcomed the provision. Ac cording to them, 
copy of a work published in a foreign country with the permission of the author and on being imported to 
India, not being considered as infringing copy, was  a step taken in the right direction. It was pointe d out by 
them that in the age of globalization where the bor ders were becoming highly irrelevant, this was the need of 
the hour. 
7.9  During the course of the oral evidence before the Committee, the Federation of Indian Publishers  and 
the Association of Publishers in India  further elaborated upon their opposition to the insertion of a proviso in 
section 2 (m). According to them, in the publishing  industry, the internationally accepted business mo del was 
the territorial division of rights wherein the publ isher had the right to publish territory (country),  specific 
editions. It was also contended that other stakehol ders including the authors and consumers benefitted  from 
territorial division of rights. The existing provis ion had an added advantage in cases of books meant for 

academic purposes. With the proposed amendment, the  student community would be hit the hardest. It was  
pointed out that in higher education, especially in  medical and engineering, a lot of foreign books we re being 
made available in India at low prices in spite of t heir being priced at much higher rate in the countr y of their 
origin. With this amendment, the low priced editions meant for Indian sub-continent could be exported back to 
the country of their origin where they were priced at much higher rates. Consequently, the publishers would 
lose the incentive to sell books in India or in the  Indian sub-continent at subsidized prices. Reason being that 
foreign publishers would not like to grant the repr int rights to Indian publishers fearing low priced Indian 
editions flooding and diluting their own markets. 
7.10   All the reservations/objections raised by th e various stakeholders were taken up by the Committ ee 
with the Department with the intent of having full understanding of the background necessitating the proposed 
amendment and its exact impact on the various stakeholders. As clarified by the Department, the main purpose 
of this amendment was to allow for imports of copyr ight materials (e.g. books) from other countries. I t was in 
accordance with Article 6 of the TRIPS Agreement re lating to exhaustion of rights whereunder developin g 
countries could facilitate access to copyright works at affordable cost. Exhaustion of rights (popularly called as 
parallel import) was a legal mechanism used to regulate prices of IPR protected materials. This was viable only 
if the price of the same works in the Indian market  was very high when compared to the price in other 
countries from where it was imported to India. 
7.11  Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact t hat majority of educational books used in India wer e 
imported from other countries particularly from US and EU. There was an increasing tendency by publishers to 
give territorial licence to publish the books at ve ry high rates. The low price editions were invariab ly the old 
editions than the latest ones. This provision would  compel the Indian publishers to price the works re asonably 
so that it would not be viable for a distributor to  import same works to India from other countries. T his would 
also save India foreign exchange on the payment of royalties (licence fee) by the Indian publishers to  
foreigners. 
7.12  Committee was also given to understand by the  representatives of the publishing industry that Scheme of 
the Copyright Law was entirely different from the T rade Marks Act, 1999 and the Patent Act, 1970. The 
application of the standards and principles of these two laws through the proposed amendment of section 2(m) 
would completely dismantle the business model currently employed, rendering several industries unviable. On 
a specific query in this regard the Department info rmed that the concept of international exhaustion p rovided 
in section 107 A of the Patent Act, 1971 and in sec tion 30 (3) of the Trademarks Act, 1999 and in sect ion 2 
(m) of the copyright law were similar. This provisi on was in tune with the national policy on exhausti on of 
rights. 
7.13   After analysing the viewpoints of all the stakehold ers along with the clarifications given 
thereupon by the Department, the Committee is of the view that proposed inclusion of the proviso in the 
definition of the term ‘infringing copy’ seems to b e a step in the right direction, specially in the 
prevailing situation at the ground level. The prese nt practice of publishers publishing books under a 
territorial license, resulting in sale of books at very high rates cannot be considered a healthy prac tice. 
The Committee also notes that availability of low p riced books under the present regime is invariably 
confined to old editions. It has been clearly speci fied that only those works published outside India with 
the permission of the author and imported into Indi a will not be considered an infringed copy. Nobody 
can deny the fact that the interests of students will be best protected if they have access to latest editions 
of the books. Thus, apprehensions about the floodin g of the primary market with low priced editions, 
may be mis-founded as such a situation would be tac kled by that country’s law. The Committee would, 

however, like to put a note of caution to Governmen t to ensure that the purpose for which the 
amendment is proposed i.e. to protect the interest of the students is not lost sight of.  
VIII. CLAUSE  2 : DEFINITION  OF  TERM  ‘RIGHTS  MANAGEMENT  INFORMATION’  
8.1   The Clause seeks to insert a new clause (xa) in section 2 in order to define the term “Rights Management 
Information” as follows:– 
  “(xa) ‘Rights Management Information means- 
(a) the title or other information identifying the work or performance; 
(b) the name of the author or performer; 
(c) the name and address of the owner of rights; 
(d) terms and conditions regarding the use of the r ights; and 
(e) any matter or code that represents the informat ion referred to in Sub-clauses (a) to (d), but 
does not include any device or procedure intended to identify the user. 
8.2  The Committee was informed that the inclusion of definition of the term ‘Rights Management 
Information’ which has been brought in conformity t o Article 12 of the WCT and Article 19 of the WPPT,  
would help the film, music and publishing industry to fight piracy. It was clarified that the modern t echnology 
facilitated management of rights digitally. However , attempts were sometimes made to remove these 
contractual terms from the digital copies of the wo rk to prevent detecting the violations of contract terms by 
the copyright owner. The proposed provision would h elp in preventing the removal of information regard ing 
management of rights in the digital copies of the work. 
8.3   The Committee takes note of the following app rehensions raised about the efficacy of the definit ion of 
the term 'Rights Management Information' by stakeho lders like India Operations Business Software Allia nce, 
Indian Reprographic Rights Organisation and Indian Broadcasting Federation. 
– one key element of Subscriber Management System ( SMS) deployed by Broadcasters is the 
identification of the end-subscriber of the channel s. Any removal or alteration of SMS would 
deprive a broadcaster of his legitimate revenue and  would also enable MSOs/LCOs in infringing 
copyright and not being caught. 
– non-inclusion of device/procedure intended to ide ntify the user in the definition is not a 
requirement of WCT. It would not only create proble m for users of devices in which the RMI has 
been tampered with, but could also potentially affect treaty compliance. 
8.4  On drawing the attention of the Department to these issues, the Committee was informed that the 
proposed definition of the term ‘Rights Management Information’ includes all kinds of information incl uding 
Subscriber Management System. It was based on the W CT and WPPT mandate whereunder Rights 
Management Information does include device or procedure intended to identify the user. The Committee is of 
the view that in the light of clarification given b y the Department, the proposed definition of the te rm 
'Rights Management Information' is in order.  
IX.   CLAUSE  6 : SECTION 18 : ASSIGNMENT  OF  COPY RIGHT  

9.1  Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 18  relating to assignment of copyright. Sub section ( 1) of 
section 18 of the Act provides that the owner of th e copyright in an existing work or the prospective owner of 
the copyright in a future work may assign to any pe rson the copyright, either wholly or partially gene rally or 
subject to limitations and for the whole of the cop yright or any part thereof. However, in the case of  the 
assignment of copyright in any future work, the ass ignment shall take effect only when the work comes into 
existence. Following two provisos to sub-section (1) are proposed to be inserted:- 
“Provided further that no such assignment shall be applied to any medium or mode of exploitation of the 
work which did not exist or was not in commercial u se at the time when the assignment was made, 
unless the assignment specifically referred to such medium or mode of exploitation of the work.” 
“Provided also that the author of the literary or m usical work included in a cinematograph film or sou nd 
recording shall not assign the right to receive roy alties from the utilization of such work in any for m 
other than as part of the cinematograph film or sound recording except to the legal heirs or to a copyright 
society for collection and distribution and any agreement to the contrary shall be void”. 
9.2   Very serious objections were raised by a larg e number of stakeholders on the proposed amendments  in 
section 18 relating to assignment of copyrights. No t only detailed memoranda was received from all of them, 
the Committee also held extensive deliberations wit h representatives of different associations/organiz ations. 
The Committee also received memoranda from world-re nowned artists, lyricists, authors, music composers  
and artists working both inside and outside the Ind ian Film Industry in the context of protection of t heir 
copyrights. The Committee also had the opportunity to interact with a renowned composer and an artist 
representing the entire community. As a result, the  Committee could get an idea about the status of ar tists, 
specially those working in the film industry. To ha ve an objective assessment about the very complex i ssues 
involved against the background of existing copyrig ht law and resultant impact of proposed amendments,  the 
Committee also sought the views of the Department. As a result of this exercise, the Committee could i dentify 
some contentious issues and analyse their viability and exact impact on the different stakeholders. 
9.3  The South India Music Companies Association  opined that the first proviso would take away the 
entire scope for private negotiation in respect of assignment of rights of exploitation in future medi a/mode 
which was highly unfair and violative of the freedo m of business under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constit ution. 
The Committee was given to understand that in this age of fast evolving technology, a particular mediu m of 
use/mode of exploitation may last only for a period  of six months at the most or one year and after th e expiry 
of such period, some new technology could come. It would, therefore, be extremely unfair to confine th e 
assignment of rights in a work to only the medium/m ode in existence or commercial use. The second prov iso 
would also affect the right of the producer/sound r ecording label to enter into private agreements wit h the 
music composer/lyricist/script writer for the purpo se of collecting royalties on their behalf. This wo uld render 
the licensing of a film/music extremely unworkable since the licensee would have to make separate paym ents 
to different entities, to producer, music composer,  lyricist, script writer etc. It would make much mo re 
commercial sense to permit the producer to enter in to agreements with each of these stakeholders where  the 
producer could collect the royalties on their behalf as well. 
9.4   The RPG Enterprises-Saregama  were of the view that the proposed-amendment would  have an un-
intended effect of nullifying all existing contract s, in respect of pre-amendment copyrights taking an  adverse 
toll on the very survival and viability of the musi c industry. It would debar assignment of rights int o any 
medium or mode of exploitation of the work which di d not exist or was not in commercial use at the tim e 
when the assignment was made. Every time a new medi um or technology or mode was to be introduced, the 

owners would have to trace hundreds and thousands o f authors and enter into fresh agreements. Voicing 
similar concerns, the Indian Performing Right Society Limited  pointed out that the proposal had far-
reaching consequences. In the era of rapidly changing technology, it was difficult for a film producer or music 
company or publisher having copyright in a work tod ay to know the mode of exploitation in future or ev en in 
the next 5-10 years. The amendment was also silent as to whether the future exploitation of existing r epertoire 
would be subject to the amendment or not. If made e ffective retrospectively, it would lead to tremendo us 
litigation, taking away existing valuations/propert ies ownerships. Further, the amendment would seriou sly 
affect the liability of authors and film producers/music companies/publishers to do business and monetize their 
rights. 
9.5  The Film & Television Producers Guild of India was of the view that restricting mode and medium of 
exploitation in a world where technology was rapidl y changing was unfair to licensee/assignee to have such 
limited technology rights. The proposed second prov iso would also be detrimental to the lyricists and 
composers as whether the person to whom the author opting to assign his copyright would actually be author’s 
legal heir or not was a contingent event. Hence, th e proposed clause would prove to be unworkable. Voi cing 
similar concerns, the Indian Motion Picture Producers’ Association  opined that the amendment would 
prevent authors from monetizing their rights as res trictions on assignment will adversely affect the a uthor’s 
commercial bargaining power with the producers. 
9.6  Pointing out similar impact on authors, the South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce contented that 
this amendment will prevent the authors from moneti zing their rights. Producers had the network, 
infrastructure and resources to monetize the works incorporated in cinematograph films. However, the 
restriction on assignment would adversely affect th e authors of musical and literary works or credits being 
accorded to such authors in relation to their works . Endorsing similar views, the Motion Picture Association 
opined  that assignments would no longer apply to a medium  or mode of exploitation not in existence or “not 
in commercial use” at the time of the assignment unless that medium or mode was “specifically” mentioned in 
the assignment. This change would preclude even “al l rights” assignments, which in a fast-moving new 
technology environment, would severely complicate the ability of the producer/copyright owner of the f ilm to 
exploit the work in new areas, particularly in the digital environment. Therefore, restrictions on ass ignments 
should be deleted from the Bill. 
9.7  The Indian Broadcasting Foundation  was of the view that currently, broadcasters and m edia 
organizations paid lump sum amount to the producers /rights holders to obtain assignments/licences to e xploit 
films/TV programmes on any medium or mode, whether in existence or subsequently developed. Most of these 
rights were bought upon payment of exorbitant amoun ts. With the inclusion of this proviso, it would be come 
difficult to freely exploit the rights obtained in film/TV programmes on newer exploitation modes even when a 
complete assignment of rights has been made. The Co pyright Act grants economic and moral rights to the  
authors of literary and musical works to exploit th eir economic rights in a manner most desirable to t hem. The 
proposal would restrict the authors of literary and  musical works from freely assigning the right to r eceive 
royalty for an appropriate consideration agreed between them and the assignees. 
9.8  According to the Federation of Indian Publishers,  modes of exploitation existing at the, time of 
original assignment might go completely out of use within the term of copyright, thus creating lottery situation 
whereby the rights of the assignor (author) and ass ignee (publisher) would become subject to unpredict able 
technological change ego before the term of copyrig ht in many recently published works would expire, e -
books might become the main commercial format. The second proviso may not affect the rights of the 
producers in the script /screenplay which is a dram atic work, not a literary work. It makes the copyri ght 

situation change completely in regard to a novel, once the novel was used for a film. Voicing similar concerns, 
the Association of Publishers in India  submitted that the assignment of rights could only  be with respect to 
known forms of exploitation and in contemplation at  the time of entering into the assignment agreement . The 
proposal would severely limit the scope of an assignment of copyright. 
9.9  The Indian Reprographic Rights Organization  informed the Committee that the amendment was 
likely to result into completely unintended consequences. The technology is changing rapidly and as the modes 
of exploitation existing at the time of original as signments may go completely out of use within the t erm of 
copyright, it would create a lottery situation subj ecting the rights of the assignor (author) and assi gnee 
(publisher) to unpredictable technological change. According to them, author’s right of assignment was limited 
to two persons, his legal heirs and a copyright society. The proposed second proviso would not be workable as 
the persons to whom the author opted to assign his copyright would be the author’s legal heir or not would not 
be known before the author’s death. Further, it wou ld make the author completely dependent on a copyri ght 
society which was not in his control. The proposal could create anomalies if a lyricist assigned his r ight to 
anyone before the lyrics had been included in a film/sound recording. 
9.10   The Business Software Alliance  were of the view that the amendment would severely  limit the 
scope of possible assignment of copyright in any wo rk including software considering the manner in whi ch 
technology was leaping forward in recent times. Mor eover, it was not possible to specify all modes and  media 
of exploitation. The proposal should, therefore, be  reconsidered as it would subject the rights of the  assignor 
(author) and assignee (publishers) to unpredictable technological changes. 
9.11   Renowned artist, Shri Javed Akhtar  was of the opinion that the inclusion of “sound re cordings” 
in the proposed amendment to Sections 18 and 19 wou ld mean that when music and lyrics were exploited a s 
part of sound recordings, the ‘right to royalty’ wo uld not arise. Since sound recordings were the main  medium 
through which lyrics and music were exploited on va rious platforms, authors would be denied royalty in  
respect of such exploitation. He further mentioned that the effect of the language “other than as part  of the 
cinematograph film” in sections 18 and 19 would lea d to a situation where television/cable broadcast o f films 
and even the distribution and exhibition of films on mobile platforms through 3G technology would result in a 
denial of royalties to authors. 
9.12   The Committee observes that the main contention bet ween authors/composers of film lyrics 
and music compositions and Film/Producers Music Companies is about the rights relating to film music. 
Film music rights are bundle of copyrights which in clude synchronization right, performing rights, 
mechanical reproduction right and sound recording right. Synchronisation right is that when a music or 
song is synchronised to a film, video, television o r commercial etc. Performing rights are right to 
perform music in public specially in broadcasting ( TV /Radio), restaurants, airlines, auditoriums or 
public functions etc. Mechanical reproduction rights are a royalty paid to a song writer whenever a copy 
of one of their songs is made. Sound recording rights are owned by producer or a recording company.  
9.13  When a song or music is incorporated in a film, it is relating to synchronization right of author 
and music composer which is assigned to the producer of the film as per section 17 (b) or in the absen ce 
of agreement, film producer is the first owner. However, film producer is also getting other independent 
rights of author and music composer of their works envisaged in section 13 of the Act. As per section 17 
(b), he further assigns these rights to the music c ompanies for upfront lump-sum amount. When the 
films songs are performed separately and independen tly through TV /Radio, restaurants, airlines, 
auditoriums or public functions etc. film, producer  becomes the first owner and authors/music 

composers lose economic benefits of exploitation of  their works to music companies who become 
ultimate owners of these works.  
9.14  The Committee also takes note of the fact that inde pendent rights of authors of literary and 
musical works in cinematograph films are being wron gfully exploited by the producers and music 
companies by virtue of Supreme Court judgment in In dian Performing Rights Society vs.  Eastern India 
Motion Pictures Association (AIR 1977 SC 1443) whic h held that film producer is the first owner of the  
copyright and authors and music composers do not ha ve separate right. The Committee, however, 
observes that in the footnote of this very judgement, Justice Krishna Aiyar also advised as follows: 
“the authors and music composers who are left in th e cold in the penumbral area of policy should 
be given justice by recognizing their rights when t heir works are used commercially separately 
from cinematograph film and the legislature should do something to help them”.  
9.15  It was also clarified through this judgement that t he right of producer in a film as entitled under 
section 14(1) (c) cannot trench on the composer’s copyright given under section 14(1) (a) when the music 
is separately played in a restaurant/aeroplane/radi o station/cinema theatre. If producer enjoys 
synchronisation right, authors/composers should enjoy performing right. The footnote of the judgement 
also states that the twin rights can co-exist, each fulfilling itself in its delectable distinctiveness.  
9.16  The Committee can only conclude in the light of the  long standing infirmity in the copyright law 
outlined above that proposed amendments in section 17 and 18 were overdue. It has taken more than 
thirty years for the legislature to act upon a Supreme Court directive which indeed is a very sad state of 
affairs. The Committee emphatically recommends that this long standing infirmity in the copyright law 
needs to be removed without any further delay.  
9.17   The Committee observes that some of the apprehensio ns of film producers are not well-
placed. The Committee finds that authors/composers are paid fee for creation of their works and not 
upfront guaranteed royalties as mentioned by film industry. The Committee would also like to point out 
that promoting of new talent is the hallmark of the  film industry which gives incentives to producers as 
well. In case of non-film music, specially in the case of upcoming artists, if music companies launch them 
by flooding their records in the market, it would b e a good exposure for them, finally leading to the 
growth of music industry.  
9.18   Committee’s attention has also been drawn to sectio n 13 (3) (a) of the Act which provides 
that copyright shall not subsist in any cinematogra ph film if a substantial part of the film is an 
infringement of the copyright in any other work. Se ction 13(4) .further provides that copyright in a 
cinematograph film or sound recording shall not aff ect the separate copyright in any work in respect o f 
which or a substantial part of which, the film or sound recording is made. The proposed amendments in 
section 17, 18 and 19 are the reiteration of what is already provided in section 13 of the Act. In short, the 
proposed amendments in section 18 will protect inte rests of authors in the event of exploitation of th eir 
work by restricting assignments in unforeseen new m ediums and henceforth author of works in films 
will have right to receive royalties from the utilization of such work in any other form except to the legal 
heirs or to a copyright society and any other contract to the contrary shall be void.  
9.19  The Committee also observes that many countries per mit the assignment of rights in a musical or 
literary work in past, present and future works. As  this assignment pertains to the public performance , 
communication to public, broadcast and cable transm ission rights, it is immaterial whether any new 

mode/medium of use which was not there at the time of assignment provided that these rights in the 
literary/musical works have been assigned to the legal heirs and also to a copyright society. As a rule, the 
copyright society will simply proceed to license ne w uses, collect royalties and distribute them back to 
copyright owners. This institutionalized system wil l greatly benefit the authors/lyricists and the 
composers as individually they may not be in a position to collect their royalties.  
9.20  The Committee would like to add a note of caution h ere that the system of institutionalized 
societies needs to be strengthened as everybody may  not be in a position to negotiate contracts with 
equity and there is a vast difference between contr act of service and contract for service. Establishe d 
names may negotiate and demand equity but beginners  may remain at the receiving end and their 
contribution may go unnoticed and unrecognized. The  Committee feels that the film industry needs to 
address this issue urgently and also evolve a viabl e profit sharing system for other categories of 
craftsmen/technical experts engaged in the making of a film.  
X.  CLAUSE  7 : SECTION 19 : ‘MODE  OF  ASSIGNMENT’  
10.1  Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 1 9 of the Act, relating to mode of assignment. This section 
provides that no assignment of copyright in any wor k is valid unless it is in writing signed by the as signor or 
his duly authorized agent. The assignment of copyri ght in the work shall also specify the rights assig ned and 
the duration and territorial extent of such assignment and it shall also specify the royalty, if any, payable to the 
author or his legal heirs during the currency of th e assignment and the assignment shall be subject to  revision, 
extension or termination on terms mutually agreed u pon by the parties. If the assignee fails to exerci se rights 
assigned to him within a period of one year from the date of assignment, the same shall expire unless otherwise 
specified in the assignment. If the period or the t erritorial extent of assignment is not specified it  shall be 
deemed to be five years from the date of assignment  and the territorial extent shall be within India, as the case 
may be. 
10.2  The Bill proposes to amend sub-section (3) to  provide that the assignment shall specify the othe r 
considerations besides the royalty, if any, payable . The Bill further proposes to insert a new sub-sec tion (8) to 
provide that any assignment of copyright in any wor k contrary to that of the terms and conditions of\h e rights 
already assigned to a copyright society in which th e author of the work is a member, shall be deemed t o be 
void. It is also proposed to insert a new sub-secti on (9) providing that no assignment of copyright in  any work 
to make a cinematograph film or sound recording sha ll affect the right of the author of the work to cl aim 
royalties in case of utilization of the work in any  form other than as part of cinematograph film or s ound 
recording. 
10.3  The Department has justified the proposed ame ndments in the backdrop of royalty in assignments. Any 
assignment of copyright in any work to other than a  copyright society will be deemed to be void and no n-film 
songs will also get the right to receive royalty wh en included in cinematograph film or sound recordin gs in 
case of concerned exploitation. It was pointed out that when the authors created work for film/sound recording, 
producers insisted for the transfer of all rights t o them. This deprived the authors from the benefits  they 
enjoyed from the rights assigned to copyright socie ties. It also led to the taking over of the adminis tration of 
copyright societies by the producers. The proposed amendment would enable the authors to retain their rights 
assigned to societies and also retain their control on societies. 
10.4  Attention of the Committee was drawn to a num ber of concerns on the proposed amendments by various 
stakeholders appearing before the Committee. Advoca ting deletion of proposed addition of sub-sections (8) 
and (9), the South India Music Companies Association  was of the view that sub-section (8) would impose 

highly unreasonable restrictions on the producer’s freedom of contract. Even if the music composer was  
willing to assign the right of exploitation of the work to the producer, the producer could only take such 
assignment on terms similar to those on which the a ssignment had been made to the copyright society 
administring the rights of the music composer. This would affect the music industry in manifold ways. Firstly, 
sub-section (8) had retrospective operation on exis ting arrangements where money had already been paid  
based on the existing assessment of the market. Secondly, composers could not assign their rights to producers 
for exploitation for a new medium/mode without assi gning such rights to their own copyright society wh ich 
could give rise to a form of militant unionism. Thirdly, the rights already assigned to producers/label could not 
be exploited by them in future on the initial terms. 
10.5  The Motion Picture Association  opined that section 19(8) would undermine the abil ity of producers to 
use works in films. It should not be made applicable to all rights in musical works/literary works. Section 19(9) 
allowed contributors of works to films to retain their right to assign (and under Section 30 A to license) all uses 
other than the use in the film. This would further limit the ability of the producer to benefit economically from 
the use of these works. 
10.6   The Indian Broadcasting Foundation  informed that broadcasting and media organizations  paid 
lump sum amounts to producers/rights holders to obt ain an assignment/licence to exploit a cinematograp h 
film/sound recording/TV programmes and all the work  contained therein in any format. With the inclusio n of 
sub-section (9) it would become difficult to freely  exploit the rights obtained in a film/sound record ing/TV 
programmes in any format other than in conjunction with the relevant cinematograph or sound recording.  
Therefore, sub-section (9), should be deleted. According to the Federation of Indian Publishers  the proposed 
amendment was violative of Article 9(2) of Berne three step test. 
10.7  The Indian Reprographic Rights Organisation  held that the amendment seemed to create possible 
anomalies, besides limiting the author’s ownership rights. Author’s right of assignment was to be limi ted to 
two persons, namely pis legal heirs and a copyright  society. But the question remains as to whether th e person 
to whom the author opted to assign his copyright would actually be the author’s legal heir or not. The proposal 
would thus make the author completely dependent on the existence of an effective copyright society, wh ich 
was not in his control. 
10.8  The Confederation of International Society for Authors and Composers (CISAC)  was of the view 
that amendment would serve to reinforce the existin g legal principle that any assignment which was con trary 
to a prior agreement was null and void. The Authors Guild of India  supporting the amendment opined that 
the proposed amendment protected the interests of t he author in case of any ambiguity or confusion. Su b-
section (9) was also satisfying to the authors acco rding to which the royalty claims of the author rem ained 
intact in case the work was used in film or sound recording. 
10.9   Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that inclusion of the words ‘sound recording’ 
along with cinematograph film in sections 18 and 19  would mean that the ‘right to royalty’ would not a rise 
when music and lyrics were exploited as part of sou nd recording. This would prove to be detrimental to  the 
interests of authors. On a specific query in this r egard, the Department informed that the inclusion o f ‘sound 
recording’ was to cover non-film music also within the scope of the section. The definition of ‘cinema tograph 
film’ given in section 2(f) included sound recordin g accompanying the visual recording. Accordingly, a  clear 
term in the contract at the time of transferring the synchronizing right regarding the terms and conditions of the 
separate making of the sound records of the music included in the film could protect the interests of the author 
of the works. 

10.10   Another objection raised by authors pertain ed to the inclusion of words ‘other than as part of  the 
cinematograph film’ in sections 18 and 19. Impact of such an amendment would be such that authors would be 
denied royalties arising out of television/cable br oadcast of films and even the distribution/exhibiti on of films 
on mobile platforms through 3 G technology. They wo uld also be denied their share of the normal licenc e 
royalty arising out of music used in advertisement films. However, it was categorically pointed out by  the 
Department that rights of authors/music composers i n respect of a song being played independently woul d 
remain fully secure. 
10.11  Reservations were also expressed to use of words or any other consideration along with ‘royalty’. It was 
pointed out that non-assignable right to royalty wo uld be rendered useless as producers would be free to 
choose the mode of payment to authors. 
10.12   At the concluding stage of its deliberation s, the Committee received specific suggestions with  
regard to sections 18 and 19 from some members of t he Committee. It was pointed out that the proposed 
amendments to these two sections leave great scope for ambiguity which could defeat the very purpose f or 
which these provisions were made. The term ‘sound r ecording’ which has been used twice in the proposed  
second proviso to section 18, should only be used o nce by deleting the second use of the term. It was a well-
known fact that main vehicle of utilisation of musi cal and lyrical works was through sound recording. The 
amendment should, accordingly, provide to the autho rs the ability to assert their copyrights and right s as 
granted by the amendment in respect of the use of the lyrics and musical works as part of sound recording. 
10.13 Second suggestion made was that the words “ot her than as part of cinematograph film or sound 
recording” should also be amended to allow the auth or to exert the “right to claim royalty” when the l iterary 
work and musical work is used as part of a cinemato graph film and should only exclude a situation when  the 
literary and musical work is communicated to the pu blic as part of a cinematograph film in a cinema ha ll. It 
was also emphasized that the provision should clari fy that the royalty claimed by the author is “to be  shared 
equally with the assignee of copyright”. This would lead to removing the ambiguity with regard to the right of 
royalty as claimed by an author and an assignment o f copyright (granted by an author) as well as addre ssing 
concerns of all the stakeholders by securing an equ al share in royalties to them. Similar changes were  
suggested in proposed section 19(9). 
10.14 Committee’s attention was also drawn to the f act that the language of the proposed section 19(9)  
inadvertently provides an option between royalty and consideration. Such a provision was likely to weaken the 
“right to royalty” granted by the second proviso to  section 18. Accordingly, the word “or” used betwee n the 
words “royalties” and “consideration” should be rep laced by the word “and”, thus confirming the compul sory 
nature and sanctity of the authors’ right to royalty. 
10.15  All these suggestions were deliberated upon by the Committee at length. The Committee also had the 
opportunity to seek clarifications in this regard from the representatives of the Department of Higher Education 
and Legislative Department at its meeting held on 9 November, 2010. 
10.16  It was clarified by the Ministry that the te rm “sound recording” was introduced in order to ext end the 
right of authors and music composers to claim royal ties who create non-film musical works apart from f ilm 
music. However, keeping in view the possible misinterpretation of the words “sound recording”, the same may 
be removed not only from the second part but also f rom the first part. It was also pointed out that it  would be 
imperative to introduce a new provision to protect the right of authors and music composers to claim t heir 
royalties in non-film works. 

10.17  With regard to the suggestion for modification of the words “other than as part of cinematograph film or 
sound recording” in the second proviso to section 18, the following clarification was given by the Ministry: 
“Synchronisation right” is that when a musical work  or song is synchronized to a film, video, televisi on 
or commercial. Synchronisation right and sound reco rding rights are owned by producer or a recording 
company who takes initiative to make a record. But,  when a song is played/performed independently in 
broadcasting (TV/Radio), restaurants, airlines, auditoriums or public functions or through ring tones etc., 
author, music composers are entitled for royalties. The proposed amendment is to discourage the current 
practice of compelling the ‘authors and music compo sers to assign all rights to the producers of film or 
sound records when they are engaged because of the weak bargaining power. The proposed provision 
ensures that the authors and music composers receiv e economic returns when their work is exploited 
through different modes other than as part of film or sound recording”. 
10.18 The Committee was also apprised by the Minist ry that sharing of performing rights royalties by a uthors 
and music composers equally with music publishers ( Producers) is an international non-legislative prac tice 
which is supported by the International Confederation of Societies of Authors and Composers (CISAC), Paris. 
10.19  With regard to implication of the word ‘or’ as used between the words ‘royalties’ and ‘consideration’ in 
the proposed section 19(9), the Committee was given to understand that the word ‘or’ used between the words 
“royalties and consideration” in section 19(9) give s the literal meaning of another possibility and it  does not 
exclude ‘royalty’ for ‘consideration’ and vice-vers a. Therefore, the word ‘or’ means both royalty and 
consideration. However, in order to avoid confusion , the word “and” could also be used in place of the  word 
‘or’. 
10.20 The Committee observes that one of the plain object ives of the proposed legislation is to ensure 
that the authors of the works, in particular author s of songs included in cinematograph films or sound  
recordings, receive royalty for the commercial expl oitation of such works. With a view to remove any 
element of ambiguity which may give rise to complic ations or different interpretations in future, and 
also to protect the right of authors and music comp osers to claim their royalties in non-film works, t he 
Committee recommends following amendments in clauses 6 and 7 of the Bill: 
Proposed Second Proviso to section 18 may be revised as follows: 
 “Provided also that the author of the literary or musical work included in a cinematograph 
film shall not assign or waive the right to receive  royalties to be shared on an equal basis with the 
assignee of copyright for the utilisation of such w ork in any form other than for the 
communication to the public of the work along with the cinematograph film in a cinema hall, 
except to the author’s legal heirs or to a copyrigh t society for collection and distribution and any 
agreement to contrary shall be void”. 
Third proviso as indicated below may be added to section 18: 
 “Provided also that the author of the literary or musical work included in the sound 
recording but not forming part of any cinematograph  film shall not assign the right to receive 
royalties to be shared on an equal basis with the a ssignee of copyright for any utilisation of such 
work except to the author’s legal heirs or to a col lecting society for collection and distribution and 
any assignment to the contrary shall be void” . 
Proposed sub-section (9) of section 19 should read as follows: 

(9)  “No assignment of copyright in any work to mak e a cinematograph film shall affect the right 
of the author of the work to claim an equal share o f royalties and consideration payable in case of 
utilisation of the work in any form other than for the communication to the public of the work, 
along with the cinematograph film in a cinema hall”. 
sub-section (10) as indicated below may be added to section 19: 
(10)  “No assignment of the copyright in any work to make a sound recording which does not form 
part of any cinematograph film shall affect the rig ht of the author of the work to claim an equal 
share of royalties and consideration payable for any utilization of such work in any form” . 
XI.  CLAUSE 8: SECTION 19 A: DISPUTES WITH RESPECT TO ASSIGNMENT OF 
COPYRIGHT  
11.1   Clause 8 seeks to amend section 19 A relatin g to disputes with respect to assignment of copyright. 
This section provides that, on receipt of a complai nt from the aggrieved party, the Copyright Board ma y hold 
inquiry and pass orders as it may deem fit, includi ng an order for the recovery of any royalty payable . Second 
proviso is proposed to provide that pending disposa l of an application for revocation of assignment, t he 
Copyright Board may pass any order as it deems’ fit  regarding implementation of the terms and conditio ns of 
assignment, including any consideration to be paid for the enjoyment of the rights assigned. 
11.2  The Committee observes that amendment in sect ion 19A is meant for providing protection to the au thor 
of any work regarding the payment of consideration for any work by empowering the Copyright Board to 
decide on the amount of consideration to be paid fo r the enjoyment of the work during the pendency of any 
dispute. 
11.3   The Committee takes note of certain reservat ions expressed about the implications of the proposed 
amendment. It was pointed out by the South India Music Companies Association  that such a move may lead 
to situations when music composers/lyricists may file frivolous applications for revocation and still continue to 
get royalty on the basis of an interim order of the  Copyright Board. The Committee feels that these 
apprehensions are somewhat misplaced as Copyright B oard, a statutory authority is fully competent to 
assess the merit of a case filed with it. The Commi ttee is, however, of the view that with a prescribe d 
time-limit for adjudication of an application by th e Copyright Board, there is little likelihood of an y 
undue delay or any deliberate attempt on the part o f a complainant. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that necessary provision in this regard may be added at the appropriate place.  
11.4  Committee’s attention was also drawn to anoth er pertinent problem regarding the functioning of t he 
Copyright Board. As pointed out by the Phonographhi c Performance Ltd., Mumbai, the Copyright Board was  
responsible for handling of legal, economic, financ ial, costing and valuation issues. With added 
responsibilities, the Copyright Board presently functioning as a part time Board needed to be strengthened and 
institutionalized so as to function full time, meet ing at regular intervals. The Committee would be ma king 
specific suggestions in this regard in the later part of the Report. 
XII.  CLAUSE 15 : SECTION 31: COMPULSORY  LICENCE  IN  WORKS  WITHHELD  FROM 
PUBLIC  
12.1  This clause seeks to amend section 31 of the Act dealing with compulsory licensing in works with held 
from public. This section provides that if the owner of copyright in any Indian work has refused to republish or 
allow the republication or has refused the performance in public of the work and the work is withheld from the 

public or has refused to allow communication to the  public by broadcast of the work recorded in sound 
recording, the Copyright Board may on basis of the complaint and after giving to the owner of the copyright in 
the work a reasonable opportunity of being heard an d after holding such inquiry as it may deem necessa ry, 
direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant to the complainant, a licence. Applicability of this Secti on is 
proposed to be amplified from ‘Indian work’ to ‘any  work’. ‘Explanation’ relating to the definition of  ‘Indian 
work’ is also proposed to be omitted. It is also pr oposed to substitute the word ‘complainant’ with th e words 
‘such person or persons who, in the opinion of the Copyright Board, is or are qualified to do so’. Sub -section 
(2) is also proposed to be omitted so as to enable the Copyright Board to grant compulsory licence to more 
than one person. 
12.2  The Committee notes that this amendment is in tended to help the Indian industries to negotiate voluntary 
licences for publication of foreign works in India on better terms. Indian industries will also be in a position to 
seek compulsory licence in case of failure to negot iate voluntary licence. Some implications of ‘propo sed 
amendment of compulsory licensing in all works---- both Indian and foreign being withheld from public were 
pointed out by a number of stakeholders like Motion  Picture Association of India, Indian Music Industr y, 
South Indian Music Companies Association, Indian Pe rforming Right Society Ltd, Federation of Indian 
Publishers and Indian Reprographic Rights Organisat ion. It was alleged that such a move would make 
Copyright Board non compliant with the Berne Conven tion and consequently TRIPS Agreement, exposing 
India to the possibility of sanctions in WTO. 
12.3   On taking up this issue with the Department,  the Committee was informed that the concept of 
compulsory licence in the Indian Copyright Law has been introduced as per the facility of ‘Special pro visions 
regarding Developing Countries’ provided in the App endix of the Berne Convention, 1886 (revised Paris Act, 
1971). India is one of the few member countries whi ch utilised this facility. It was further clarified  that 
although the existing provision is confined to Indi an works only, there is an increasing need for acce ss to 
foreign works. There is tendency to price the works  very high and not publish it in the Indian market forcing 
distributor to import it from foreign markets. The proposed amendment will help the Indian industries to 
negotiate voluntary licences for publication of foreign works in India on better terms. 
12.4   While welcoming the spirit behind the proposed amen dments, the Committee strongly feels 
that all grey areas in respect of compliance of TRI PS Agreement and WTO commitments need to be 
made very clear. Reason being is that queries raise d by the stakeholders have not been responded fully  
and any ambuiguity in such an area may lead to unnecessary complications.  
12.5  The Committee also takes note of the other objections raised by the stakeholders indicated below: 
– replacing the word ‘complainant’ by ‘such person or persons who in the opinion of the Copyright 
Board is or are qualified to do so’ is arbitrary as  there is no qualification parameters mentioned in 
the Bill. 
– it gives sweeping powers to the Copyright Board 
– to grant compulsory licences to persons other tha n the complainant. It is potentially dangerous for 
the interests of the copyright owners. 
12.6  The Committee has been given to understand th at the Supreme Court and various High Courts 
interpreted this provision to facilitate issue of m ultiple compulsory licences. The Committee, however , finds 
merits in the above objections specially in view of  the present set-up of the Copyright Board. The Committee 
is of the view that criteria qualifying a person to file a complaint before the Copyright Board needs to be 

specifically provided for, if not in the Act then i n the Rules. A time-frame for disposal of such 
complaints also needs to be laid down in the Rules, if not already done.  
12.7  The Committee also takes note of the proposed amendments in section 31 A relating to compulsory 
licence in unpublished Indian works. The provision of compulsory licence for orphaned works available 
under this section is proposed to be extended to pu blished works as well. Like in the case of section 31, 
extension of applicability to all foreign works (in cluding film, DVDs, etc.) could be violative of Ber ne 
Convention and TRIPS Agreement and seem to fall sho rt of the minimum obligations imposed by such 
instruments. The Committee is of the view that futu re implication of proposed amendment in Section 
31A vis-a-vis  India’s commitment to international agreement need s to be free from any ambiguity so as 
to prevent any negative fallout.  
XIII. CLAUSES 17 AND 31: SECTION 31B: COMPULSORY LI CENCE FOR BENEFIT OF 
DISABLED SECTION 52(ZB): CERTAIN ACTS NOT BE INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT.  
13.1  The proposed new section 31 B seeks to provid e compulsory licence for the disabled. It provides that an 
organization, registered under Section 12A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and working primarily for the benefit 
of persons with disability and recognized under Cha pter X of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal 
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Partic ipation) Act, 1951 may apply to the Copyright Board  for 
compulsory license to publish any work in which copyright subsists for the benefit of such persons, in a case to 
which clause (zb) sub-section (1) of section 52 doe s not apply. The Copyright Board shall, after inqui ry to 
establish credentials of the applicant and after gi ving to the owners of rights in the work a reasonab le 
opportunity of being heard dispose of such applicat ion within two months from the receipt of the appli cation 
and direct the Registrar of Copyrights to grant to the applicant such a licence to publish the work th at a 
compulsory licence needs to be issued to make the w ork available to the disabled. Every compulsory lic ence 
issued under this section shall specify the means a nd format of publication, the period during which t he 
compulsory licence may be exercised and the number of copies that may be issued. The Board may on a 
further application and after giving reasonable opp ortunity to the owners of rights, extend the period  of such 
compulsory licence and allow the issue of more copi es as it may deem fit. The Copyright Board may spec ify 
the number of copies that may be published without payment of royalty and may fix the rate of royalty for the 
remaining copies. Clause 52(zb) seeks to provide th at the adaptation, reproduction, issue of copies or  
communication to the public of any work in a format  including sign language, specially designed only f or the 
use of persons suffering from a visual, aural or ot her disability that prevents their enjoyment of suc h works in 
their normal format shall not constitute an infringement of copyright. The Department clarified that the section 
has been introduced to facilitate access to works f or disabled persons other than in special format as  covered 
under section 52 (i) (zb). The provision will facil itate the issue of compulsory licence for the conve rsion of 
work in any format for the use of the disabled persons. 
13.2  The Committee received written memoranda from  organizations working for the welfare of disabled like 
Inclusive Planet, Kochi and Xavier’s Resource Centr e for the Visually challenged, Mumbai as well as ot her 
stakeholders on the proposed provisions. The Commit tee also held extensive interactions with all the 
stakeholders on this issue. While the organizations  representing the cause of the disabled apprised th e 
Committee about the inherent shortcomings in the pr oposed provisions going against the targetted 
beneficiaries, its attention was also drawn towards  their potential misuse by the other stakeholders. 
Views/apprehensions of all the stakeholders were shared by the Committee with the Department. This exercise 
enabled the Committee to examine the complexities i nvolved in the proposed provisions not only from th e 

point of view of disabled, but also those working f or their cause as well as the other concerned stake holders 
working in their separate professional domains. 
13.3  The Committee takes note of the following sho rtcomings as pointed by the representatives of two 
organizations working for the disabled: 
– licensing system as envisaged in section 31 B wou ld prevent educational institutions, Self Help 
Groups, other NGOs and reading disabled individuals  from undertaking conversion and 
distribution. 
– time-consuming and cumbersome procedure for obtai ning permissions from Copyright Board. 
time involved in subsequent conversions will result  in further delays causing hardships for 
students. 
– it would discriminate between blind persons knowi ng Braille and those not knowing. 
– exception as envisaged in Section 52(1) (zb) in f avour of only ‘specially designed’ format does not 
benefit persons affected by cerebral palsy, dyslexia and low vision. 
13.4  On taking up these problem-areas with the Dep artment, the Committee was informed that section 31 B 
has been introduced to facilitate access to works f or disabled persons other than in special format co vered 
under section 52 (1) (zb). Many restrictions have been included in section 31B so as to prevent possible misuse 
of such facility. These restrictions would also fac ilitate to identify the institute which was making conversion 
of works in normal electronic format for the use of  print-disabled. It was further clarified that any individual 
disabled person with the help of his next friend co uld convert any work for the purposes of private an d 
personal use, including research and study as provi ded under the proposed amendment to Section 52(1) ( a) (i) 
of the Bill. With regard to expected delay in dispo sal of applications by the Copyright Board, it was informed 
that applications for compulsory licence were to be disposed of within two months of receipt. 
13.5   It was emphasized by other stakeholders like  Federation of Indian Publishers, Business 
Software Alliance, Indian Reprographic Rights Organ ization  that potential misuse of the proposed 
provision for disabled also needed to be tackled. I t was suggested that restriction on the extent of c opies to be 
issued or work may be adapted/reproduced or communi cated to the public needed to be imposed. Non-
commercial use needed to be ensured so that the imp act on the revenue stream of the copyright owner wa s 
mitigated. Response of the Department to these conc erns was that restrictions included in section 31B were 
meant to check possible misuse. 
13.6  After analysing the proposed amendments as envisage d in section 31B and 52 (1) (zb) in the 
backdrop of interactions held with various stakehol ders and the Department, the Committee strongly 
feels that concerns raised by the organizations wor king for the disabled are indeed very genuine. The 
Committee would like to point out that the real obj ective behind these two provisions is to facilitate  the 
cause of the disabled. Every attempt needs to be ma de to remove all the drawbacks highlighted in the 
proposed amendments.  
13.7  The Committee is of the firm opinion that all physi cally challenged need to be benefitted by the 
proposed amendments. It would be very discriminatin g if envisaged benefit remains restricted to only 
visually impaired, leaving out persons affected by cerebral palsy, dyslexia and low vision. The 
Committee takes note of fact that even regular Brai lle users complement Braille with other accessible 
formats like audio, reading material with large fon ts and electronic texts. The Committee also observe s 

that the modern day Braille production is dependent  on the material being first converted into 
mainstream electronic formats such as MS Word because Braille translation software requires inputs in 
such formats. The Committee hopes that the request of orgnisations for extending access of works to al l 
accessible formats instead of special formats presently under consideration of the Department will result 
in a positive outcome. The other request for wideni ng the scope of compulsory licence to allow other 
entities working for disabled in case it is not possible to withdraw section 31 B also merits a sympathetic 
consideration by the Department.  
13.8   Committee’s attention was drawn to another n egative aspect arising out of fees (royalty) likely  to 
be charged for copies going beyond the number of fr ee copies to be specified by the Copyright Board. 
Committee is well aware of the fact that as only ‘n ot for profit’ organizations are involved in this a rea, the 
issue of potential fess may prove to be a very disc ouraging factor. Department’s response to this apprehension 
that an organization registered under section 12A o f the Income-Tax Act, 1961 and working primarily fo r 
disabled and recognised under the Persons with Disa bilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights  and 
Full Participation) Act, 1958 need not pay fee and may get compulsory licence free of charge does not seem to 
be very convincing. Such a provision needs to be specifically provided in the Act itself. 
13.9  The Committee would finally reiterate that the Depa rtment needs to bring out the required 
modifications in section 31B and 52 (1) (zb) based on very pertinent concerns raised by the organizations 
working for the cause of the disabled. 
XIV.  CLAUSE 17: SECTION 31C: STATUTORY LICENCE FOR COVER VERSIONS  
14.1  This section seeks to provide statutory licen ce to any person desiring to make a cover version of a sound 
recording in respect of any literary, dramatic or m usical work, where sound recordings of that work have been 
made by or with the licence or consent of the owner  of the right in the work in the same medium as the  last 
recording, unless the medium of the last recording is no longer in current commercial use. 
14.2  Committee’s attention was drawn to the follow ing drawbacks of the proposed amendment by 
organizations representing Music companies i.e., South India Music Companies Association, Indian Mus ic 
Industry and Indian Motion Picture Producers Association:- 
– the proposed provision sets at naught the bargain ing power of the producer as it permits a person 
to make a version recording without first approachi ng the producer/sound recording label and 
entering into private agreement with the latter for obtaining rights to a version recording. 
– it does not explicitly state that it is meant onl y for physical format. In physical format, packagin g 
in the form of an album containing 5-6 songs establ ishes the genuineness of the product to the 
consumer. In digital format, consumer can be easily confused by a ‘cover version’ song as original 
song. 
– it reduces the commercial potential of exploitati on of sound recordings and thereby repair the 
producers’ rights to recover his investment in rela tion to the cinematograph film and sound 
recording. 
14.3  When these issues were taken up with the Department, the Committee was informed that there have been 
complaints from music Industry about infringement o f their rights by other record companies by bringin g 
cover versions by misusing Section 52(1) (j) and ‘v ersion recordings’ were being made without paying p roper 
royalties and without maintenance of proper account s. The problems being faced by Music Industry relat ed to 

this provision have been highlighted in case relating to Gramophone Company of India Ltd. vs. Super Cassette 
Industries (1945 PTR 64). It was further clarified that Section 31 C was not a new provision for statu tory 
licence for cover version, but replacement of section 52(1) (j) for better clarity. 
14.4  The Committee is inclined to agree with the D epartment’s view that continuation of fair use clau se with 
statutory license under 52 (1) (j) needs to be remo ved from the list of fair dealing under section 52 and be 
placed under Chapter VI i.e., licences. The Committee has been given to understand that the  proposed 
provision will lead to protection of interest of mu sic industry engaged in the creation of original mu sic 
and certain additional safeguards through a statutory licencing provision have been provided to suit the 
needs of the music industry in digital environment and to ensure that while making sound recording of 
any literary, dramatic or musical work, the interes t of the copyright holder is duly protected. The 
Committee fails to understand the reservations of m usic companies specially in view of proposed 
provision being incorporated in place of existing p rovision that too in the background of judicial 
pronouncements. 
XV.  CLAUSE 17: SECTION 31D: STATUTORY LICENCE FOR RADIO BROADCASTING OF 
LITERARY AND MUSICAL WORKS AND SOUND RECORDING  
15.1  The proposed new Section seeks to deal with s tatutory licence for broadcasting of literary and m usical 
works and sound recordings. It provides as follows: 
– any broadcasting organization desiring to communi cate to the public by way of a broadcast or by 
way of performance of a literary or musical work, i ncluding sound recording which has already 
been published may do so. 
– the broadcasting organization shall give prior no tice, by stating the duration and territorial 
coverage of the broadcast and shall pay an advance to the owner of rights in each work royalties in 
the manner and at the rate fixed by the Copyright Board. 
– the names of the authors and the principal perfor mers of the work shall be announced with the 
broadcast. 
– no fresh alteration to any literary or musical wo rk, which is not technically necessary for the 
purpose of broadcasting, other than shortening the work for convenience of broadcast, shall be 
made without the consent of the owners of the rights. 
– the broadcasting organization shall maintain reco rds and books of account and allow the owners of 
rights or his duly authorized agent/representative to inspect all records and books of account 
relating to such broadcast. 
– the provision shall not affect the operation of a ny licence issued or any agreement entered into 
before the commencement of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2010. 
15.2  The Committee finds that the introduction of system of statutory licensing has been proposed so as to 
ensure that public has access to musical works over  the FM radio networks and at the same time, the ow ner of 
copyright works is also not subject to any disadvantages. The Committee has been given to understand that this 
system would work in favour of users of copyright works who would then not be subject to lengthy, expensive 
and monopolistic negotiations by the owners of the work. 
15.3   Divergent views were expressed by different stakeholders on the viability of this amendment. 
Welcoming it as a positive move, the Indian Broadcasting Foundation  pointed out that with pre-worked 

terms and conditions, a broadcasting organization w ould have far greater certainty in terms of its ope ration 
cost. Also number of disputes arising due to arbitr ary and unreasonable demands of copyright owners wo uld 
likely to be quite low. However, very strong reserv ations were expressed by organizations like South I ndia 
Music Companies Association, Indian Music Industry,  Phonographic Performance Ltd., Indian Performing 
Right Society Ltd. and RPG Enterprises- Saregama on the following grounds: 
– the new regime of ‘statutory licensing’ of music to broadcasters appears to be discriminating as the 
copyright owner/author has been denied any say in the fixing of royalty. 
– like music industry, the broadcasting (except AIR ) industry is in the private sector. 
– radio industry is risk-free and solely profit-ori ented and already offered concessions by the 
Government. Reasons for music industry which takes risks in bringing out music being singled out 
are not known. 
– television industry is a long established industr y, not needing any support. However, with such a 
provision for broadcasting industry, Television ind ustry may also seek concessional licensing for 
their programmes as well. 
– it will drastically reduce the number of works, s ocieties can administer by excluding all those 
works where the author has already assigned his rights. 
15.4  When asked to clarify their stand on the afor esaid reservations, the Department apprised the Com mittee 
that at present, the access to copyright works by b roadcasters in the light of the new system of aucti on of 
licences for FM operators was dependant on voluntar y licensing. As a result, unreasonable terms and 
conditions were being set by the copyright societie s and owners. This has also led to divergent views by the 
courts in interpreting the existing compulsory lice nsing provisions under section 31. There were litig ations 
pending before various High Courts as well as the Copyright Board regarding the nature of licence and the rate 
of royalties to be paid when works particularly son gs were used for broadcasting. Automatic licence or  non-
voluntary licence such as proposed statutory ensuri ng adequate return to the owner of works was the be st 
solution to make access easy for broadcasting. The Committee is inclined to agree with the contention of the 
Department. Fast-growing industry like broadcasting  industry needs to have hassle-free access to works . The 
Committee also notes that this provision is similar to that of statutory licensing for cover version. 
15.5   While agreeing with the justification given by the Department for bringing in Section 31 D, the  
Committee would like to point out that there should  be no ambiguity in its applicability. The Committee also 
takes note of the that following procedural shortcomings specially taking into account ground realities– 
– viability of payment of royalty in advance. 
– practicability of compulsory mentioning of artist s’ names. 
– requirement of maintenance of agreement between t he radio broadcaster and the copyright 
society may form part of relevant rules. 
  The Committee would be happy if a viable solution  of the aforesaid shortcomings is arrived at.  
 
 
 

XVI.  CLAUSES 18: SECTION 33: REGISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT SOCIETY. 
  CLAUSE 20: SECTION 34: ADMINISTRATION OF RIGHTS O F OWNER BY COPYRIGHT 
  SOCIETY.  
  CLAUSE 22: SECTION 35: CONTROL OVER. THE COPYRIGHT SOCIETY BY THE 
OWNER 
  OF RIGHTS.  
16.1   Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to amend section  33 of the Act relating to registration of copyrigh t 
society by providing that registration of copyright  society shall only be done by authors and they wou ld re-
register in accordance with the provisions of this section within a period of one year from the date o f 
commencement of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2010 . Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend section 34 o f 
the Act which deals with administration of rights o f owner by copyright society. It provides that any owner of 
rights may authorize exclusively a copyright society to administer any right in any work by issue of licenses or 
collection of licence fees or both and he shall hav e the right to withdraw such authorization without prejudice 
to the rights of the copyright society under any co ntract. Clause (iii) of sub-section (3) of section 34 provides 
that a copyright society may distribute the fees am ong owner of rights after making deductions for its  own 
expenses. It is proposed to amend section 34 by providing that administration of a copyright society shall be by 
the author of works and not by the owner of rights.  Similarly, clause 22 of the Bill seeks to amend se ction 35 
of the Act relating to control over the copyright s ociety by owner of rights by making administration of 
copyright society only by author of works. 
16.2   The Committee notes that one of the objectiv es of the Bill is to make provision for formulation and 
administration of copyright societies by the author s instead of the owners. Accordingly, amendments ar e 
proposed in sections 33, 34 and 35. International S cenario and the prevailing situation in the country  in the 
context of copyright societies have been cited as t he two main factors necessitating these amendments.  The 
Committee was informed that internationally, perfor ming rights belonged to authors and composers. The 
International Confederation of Societies of Authors  and Composers (CISAC), Paris de-recognise performi ng 
rights societies set up without authors and compose rs. The copyright societies are intended to help au thors to 
issue licence and collect royalties and distribute the same for various commercial use of their works. 
16.3  The Committee was informed that a joint repre sentation from some of the world-famous and renowne d 
authors and composers of film lyrics and music comp ositions was received by the Department in 2008 and  
2009. Serious concerns had been voiced by them abou t exploitation /non-protection of rights and intere sts of 
authors and composers by Film Producers and Music C ompanies. The Department was aware of the problems 
in the functioning of the copyright societies. It w as further informed that in the background of the a mendment 
was the functioning of the Indian Performing Rights  Society, a copyright society founded by authors an d 
music composers including music publishers. As per the existing provisions, owners of rights were to 
administer the society. In 1993, there was an agree ment between IPRS authors, composers members and 
recording companies to share performing right royalties collected by IPRS on 50:50 basis between the o wners 
of rights i.e. recording companies and authors and composers. There was some internal trouble between these 
parties due to some court cases in 2007. In 2008, t he owner members under sections 33 to 38 of the Act  and 
rules made thereunder decided to change the nature of membership of IPRS. They made only owner of righ ts 
as members and authors and composers as ordinary me mbers thereby debarring authors and composers from 
attending the Governing Council and thus dominating IPRS by virtue of their numbers. They also amended the 
Memorandum of Association and Articles of Associati on of IPRS by introducing these changes in the 
memberships of IPRS. This led to a few recording co mpanies owning music rights dominating IPRS, a 
copyright society meant for authors and composers. The owner members further created trouble in distributing 

the royalties collected by them by making a conditi on that authors and composers had to give an undert aking 
stating that they did not own any rights in the son gs for which they were receiving royalties. Against  this 
backdrop, the amendment has been proposed to make clear that the societies can only be formed by the authors 
and not by the owners. The idea is to streamline the functioning of the copyright societies by ensuring adequate 
transparency in fixing and distributing the royalties as uptill now there was arbitrariness in fixing the rates and 
their distribution. The amendment will ensure colle ctive administration of works by authors on reasona ble 
terms. 
16.4  The stakeholders strongly opposed the propose d amendments through their written memoranda as wel l 
as while deposing before the Committee. The South India Music Companies Association pointed out that 
disentitling owners of copyrights from forming a copyright society was a flagrant violation of their right under 
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution to freely asso ciate and, therefore, owners of works should be per mitted to 
set up copyright societies. The Indian Music Industry  was of the view that the amendment ignored the bas ic 
fact that there were many non-author owners who wer e members of these copyright societies. Besides mak ing 
the rights of the producers in relation to sound re cording and underlying works therein effectively nu gatory, 
such a move was liable to boost piracy. Stand taken  by the Phonographic Performance Ltd.  was that 
replacement of owner by author would defeat the very purpose of having copyright societies. 
16.5   The Indian Broadcasting Federation  pointed out that the copyright societies have been created to 
administer the rights granted by the Copyright Act and the only un-assignable right with regard to the  relevant 
work granted to the author was the right given unde r section 57. It was, accordingly, suggested that t he 
existing scheme, pertaining to administration of rights of the owners, be retained. 
16.6   Shri Javed Akhtar  representing the lyricists contended that by manda ting “authors’ societies” in 
sections 33, 34 and 35 rights owners, such as film producers, were excluded from the membership of the  
society. This would create an anomalous situation w here users of music would be forced to approach mul tiple 
owners for license for works created prior to the c ommencement of the instant amendments. He further 
contended that by not specially allowing copyright societies to institute legal proceedings for recove ry of 
unpaid royalties, the authors’ right to royalty wou ld be rendered ‘toothless’. It was suggested that t he present 
sections 33, 34 and 35 may be retained in the Act a nd a proviso be added mandating that the registrati on of 
copyright societies would be subject always to auth ors retaining equal share of collective control ove r the 
society with other categories of members. 
16.7  The Motion Pictures Association  informed that no country limited collecting societ ies to only authors 
of works. The amendment would make no sense as auth ors’ rights were often initially owned by, assigned  or 
licensed to other than authors who then exercised s uch rights. Allowing only authors of works to form or be 
members of collecting societies was, therefore, com pletely unnecessary and unprecedented. The Indian 
Performing Right Society Limited  expressed the view that the proposed amendment doe s not protect the 
rights of the owners which had been granted under the present Act and would be prejudicial to the rights of the 
owners, who were also members of the existing copyr ight societies. The provision would also increase t he 
multiplicity of licenses for the users to be obtain ed from different right owners/authors. According t o the 
Indian Motion Picture Producers’ Association,  the authors of works are entitled to constitute and administer 
copyright societies irrespective of whether they ar e owners of such work or not. The amendment propose s to 
divest rights of owner of copyright and confer unwarranted and unjustifiable powers in the authors of works to 
unilaterally administer the copyright societies. 

16.8   Opposing the proposed amendment strongly, th e Association of Publishers in India  stated that 
under the current law, copyright owners may also be come members. The amendment would result in authors  
(who may not own any copyright) becoming members of and managing copyright societies for which they had 
no rights to manage. Expressing similar views, the Federation of Indian Publishers  opined that under the 
existing law even publishers could become member of  copyright society but the purposed amendment would  
deprive these stakeholders from the membership of t he copyright societies. The amendment would be taki ng 
away all the rights of the publishers who under the  contract with authors become owners of rights thus  
rendering the contract between the publishers and a uthors meaningless. The Indian Reprographic Rights 
Organisation  was of the view that the proposals appeared to cre ate anti-author provisions. At present, section 
33 provides that “no person or association of persons” may carry on the business of copyright licensing, except 
through a copyright society. Now, the proposed amen dment would limit this restriction to authors, and others 
would be free to set up shop as commercial licensors of third-party works. This would also mean that assignees 
(and heirs) would have no access to copyright societies, effectively depriving an existing copyright society, the 
Indian Reprographic Rights Organisation, of its rights. 
16.9  The Onmobile Global Limited  opined that the amendment would result in a situat ion where any 
association of persons other than authors was total ly removed from the purview of the Copyright Act. T he 
Google India  opined that administration of rights should remain with owners of rights rather than only authors 
of right as they were already covered within the ex pression ‘owners of rights’. Exclusion of all prosp ective 
owners of rights in a work would limit the scope of  collecting societies to administer such works. It would 
prevent copyright owners from simplifying the licensing process to the detriment of licensees and consumers. 
16.10  The Authors Guild of India  while welcoming the proposed replacement of phrase owner of rights with 
author of works in the section underlined that the copyright is vested with the authors. Therefore it was 
advisable that they should control the copyright so ciety. This would also result in the removal of man y 
malpractices which were invariably adopted by the p ublishers. The copyright society would also be able  to 
regulate the royalties and ensure that the authors were given their dues. 
16.11  The Committees notes that there are inherent proble ms in the administration and functioning of 
copyright societies which have been continuing sinc e long. Situation has deteriorated to such an exten t 
that the owners of works/music companies are domina ting these societies denying equity shares to the 
performers/authors. The basic reason for such a dis mal scenario is obviously entirely different 
considerations and interests of the owners and auth ors. The Committee further notes that due to the 
subjective functioning of the copyright societies a uthors are being invariably put to disadvantages. T he 
Committee, after hearing the views of all the stake holders representing both owners and authors is 
aware about the specific but very different concern s of both these parties. The Committee also takes 
note of the justification given by the Department t hat in view of owner members taking control of the 
copyright societies, formation and administration of copyright societies was required to be placed under 
the control and supervision of the authors.  
16.12  The Committee, after analyzing the pros and cons of the proposed amendments feels that obliging 
only authors to form and register a copyright society may not prove to be a right decision as it may l ead 
to serious practical consequences. Firstly, it will  keep the owners of rights viz  recording companies, 
music publishers, book publishers etc. out of the a mbit of these societies leading to a vacuum. It wou ld 
not be wrong to say that it would be a remedy worse than a malaise. Secondly, the complete handover of 
the copyright society to the authors alone would no t be fair and balanced. Legally and practically the  

owners of rights have been the owners of copyright and there would be no harm if they also remain 
members of the copyright societies. The Committee t akes note of the fact that this was a suggestion 
made by some of the stakeholders. Composition of th e copyright society should be such that both 
authors and owners get their rightful share. The Co mmittee further feels that there is no denying the 
fact that authors need protection of their rights. However, the way to achieve this protection is not by 
excluding the other stakeholder i.e.  owners of rights. A mechanism has to be evolved wh ereunder both 
authors and owners are allowed to form and administ er the copyright societies with all the members 
having equal rights and powers.  
16.13  The Committee is well aware of the fact that the au thor of work is the original person who 
authors. Equally true is the fact that the subsequent owner could be any other person. If the word owner 
of copyright is removed from the existing provision s, it would simply mean that subsequent owner 
would have no right and would not be entitled to an y benefits. Therefore, the blanket removal of the 
word “owners of right” cannot be considered an appr eciable move. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the proposed amendments in Sections  33, 34 and 35 may not be carried out. At the 
same time, the Committee would like to emphasise th at composition of the copyright societies should be  
balanced, with equal rights for all categories of m embers. The Committee would also like to draw the 
attention of the Department to section 33(4) whereu nder the Central Government can cancel the 
registration of a copyright society if it is satisfied that it is being managed in a manner detrimental to the 
interests of the concerned ownets of rights. The Co mmittee strongly feels that with such a specific 
provision already . existing, situation with respec t to functioning of IPRS could have been easily 
handled. 
XVII.  CLAUSE 19: SECTION 33A: TARIFF SCHEME BY COPYRIGHT SOCIETIES  
17.1   Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 33A in the Act providing for Tariff Scheme by 
copyright societies. The proposed section mandates that every copyright society shall publish its tari ff scheme 
in such manner as may be laid down by rules. Any ag grieved person may appeal against the tariff scheme  to 
the Copyright Board which may, after holding enquir y, make orders to remove any unreasonable element, 
anomaly or inconsistency therein. The aggrieved per son shall continue to pay such fee that had fallen due 
before making the appeal until the appeal is decide d and the Board shall not stay the collection of su ch fee 
pending disposal of the appeal. However, the Board may, after hearing the parties, fix interim tariff to be paid 
by the aggrieved party. 
17.2  The Committee was informed that presently, th ere was no provision to govern or regulate fixation , 
collection and distribution of royalties under sect ion 33 of the Act. As a result, the tariff scheme o f the 
copyright societies was often a matter of controver sy between owner of rights and users. In the absenc e of a 
transparent tariff scheme, copyright societies were  often found indulging in arm-twisting negotiations , 
resulting into different agreements with different companies. Therefore, a system for formulation of t ariff 
scheme by the Collective Administrative Societies o f Copyrights has been proposed. Under the proposed 
amendment, the aggrieved person shall pay to the copyright society any such prescribed fee that has fallen due 
before making an appeal to the Board and shall cont inue to pay such fee until the appeal is decided an d the 
Board shall not stay the collection of such fee pen ding disposal of appeal. The Committee was given to  
understand that the objective of this provision was  to introduce a system of transparent formulation o f a tariff 
scheme by the collective administrative copyright s ocieties, which would be subject to scrutiny by the  

Copyright Board on receipt of appeal from the aggri eved party. This would not only remove tariff rate related 
disputes but would also avoid harassment of users of works by the copyright societies. 
17.3  Divergent views were expressed by the various  stakeholders on the proposed amendment. Its negati ve 
impact was highlighted by organisations representin g music industry like South India Music Companies 
Association, Indian Music Industry  and copyright societies like Phonographic Performance Ltd.  and 
Indian Performing Right Society Ltd.  in the following manner: 
– this provision can result in unreasonable hinderi ng of the rights of producers / sound recording 
labels to enter into private agreements with licensees wishing to exploit the work. 
– conditions imposed on the copyright societies wou ld be extremely burdensome. As the tariff would 
be perennially open to challenge by any person anyw here in the country, the owner of the 
copyright will be burdened with litigations. 
– it will encourage owners / authors not to join th e society and license their rights directly as thei r 
license fees will not fall under the jurisdiction of the Copyright Board. 
– insertion of Section 33A appears to be contrary t o the Amendment Act of 1994, whereunder 
copyright societies were given a free hand to deal with and value the work of owner of copyright. 
17.4  The Indian Broadcasting Foundation, On Mobile Global Lt d.  and the Association of Radio 
Operators for India,  while welcoming the proposed amendment as a positi ve step, made a number of 
suggestions primarily relating to procedural matters as indicated below:- 
– process of fixation of tariff needs to be transpa rent and periodicity of changes therein infrequent.  
– amendment in relevant rules required whereunder T ariff Scheme including Volume Discounts are 
published and made applicable uniformly to all parties. 
– clarity on interim relief to be granted by the Co pyright Board is required. 
– time-line and procedure for disposal of tariff-re lated matters by the Copyright Board need to be 
laid down. 
17.5  The Committee notes that various stakeholders inclu ding the existing copyright societies had 
certain reservations against the proposal. Committe e’s attention has been particularly drawn by the 
apprehension about copyright societies coming up wi th high tariff schemes drawn up solely at their 
discretion. The Committee was also given to underst and that at present there was no check on the 
formulation of tariff scheme but merely a requireme nt of publication by the society. With the proposed  
amendment coming into effect, the aggrieved person would have no alternative but to pay the fee as per  
the tariff scheme and may face unnecessary hardship s before the appeal was decided and the relief, if 
any, at the end of the appeal may not prove be sufficient for the loss caused.  
17.6  The Committee would like to point out that ev en during its deliberations with the copyright soci eties 
especially the Phonographic Performance Ltd. (PPL) and the Indian Performing Rights Society Limited 
(IPRS), it was felt that they were not very forthcoming about their tariff schemes in spite of specific queries in 
this regard. The only information which was shared with the Committee was that tariff scheme was negotiated 
with the users and the same was available not only on their respective websites but published in the O fficial 

Gazette also. However, on being asked, other stakeh olders categorically pointed out that no tariff sch eme of 
these societies was put in the public domain either on their website or in the Official Gazette. 
17.7  The Committee, taking into account the viewpoint of  both the stakeholders i.e.  the copyright 
societies and the users, observes that there is no denying the fact that the process of fixing tariff by the 
copyright societies is not transparent. As per the existing system, the copyright societies are free t o fix 
tariffs without any visible basis / criteria. There  is no system of broad-based consultations by these  
societies as is done in other sectors such as telec om, insurance, broadcasting and electricity. The 
Committee observes that in these sectors, stakehold ers are consulted before tariff is fixed and notifi ed. 
However, such a system is completely lacking in cas e of copyright societies. As a result, there are 
instances of arbitrariness, arm twisting and negotiations by these societies.  
17.8  The Committee is of the firm view that the proposed  amendment will result in the introduction of 
a system of a transparent formulation of tariff sch eme by the collective administrative copyright 
societies, which will be subject to scrutiny by the Copyright Board on receipt of appeal by the aggrieved 
party. At the same time, the Committee would like t he Department to take note of the concerns of the 
various stakeholders and provide for a transparent process of tariff fixation by the copyright societi es 
with necessary changes in the relevant rules. The Committee would also take the opportunity to observe 
that for putting in place a well-defined and balanc ed tariff scheme, functioning of Copyright Board as  
well as copyright societies also needs to be regulated, strengthened and made foolproof so as ensure that 
all the stakeholders are benefited. The Committee would be giving its recommendations in this regard in 
the later part of the Report.  
XVIII. CLAUSE 25:SECTION 38 : PERFORMER’S RIGHT 
  CLAUSE 26 :SECTION 38A : EXCLUSIVE RIGHT OF PERFO RMERS  
  SECTION 38B :  MORAL RIGHTS OF THE PERFORMER.  
18.1   Clause 25 seeks to omit sub-sections (3) and  (4) of Section 38 relating to performer’s right as  a 
consequential to the insertion of new Section 38A. Clause 26 seeks to insert Section 38A which provide s that 
the performer’s right as the exclusive right to do or authorize the doing of any of the acts in respec t of the 
performance, without prejudice to the rights conferred on authors, namely: 
– to make a sound recording or a visual recording o f the performance or to certain acts in respect of 
such recording; 
– to reproduce it in any material form including th e storing of it in any medium by electronic or any 
other means; 
– to issue copies of it to the public not being cop ies already in circulation; 
– to communicate it to the public; 
– to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for  sale or for commercial rental any copy of the 
recording and; 
– to broadcast or communicate the performance to th e public except where the performance is 
already a broadcast performance. 

18.2   The proposed new section 38 B seeks to deal with moral rights of performers. The performer will  
have the right to claim to be identified as the per former of his performance. He will also have the ri ght to 
restrain or claim damages in respect of any distort ion, mutilation or other modifications of his perfo rmance 
prejudicial to his reputation. 
18.3  The Committee takes note of the factors neces sitating the insertion of provisions relating to ex clusive 
and moral rights of performers. The term ‘performer’ as per Section 2 (qq) of the Act includes an actor, singer, 
musician, dancer, acrobat, juggler, conjurer, snake charmer, a person delivering a lecture or any person making 
a performance. The term ‘performance’ as defined in  Section 2(q) of the Act means any visual or acoust ic 
presentation made live by one or more performers. T hese two definitions read together protect both aud io 
visual and musical performers under the Act. Sections 37 and 38 relating to Broadcast Reproduction Right and 
Performer’s Right are in harmony with Article 14 of TRIPS Agreement. The Committee was informed that the 
new provision under Section 38A substitutes existin g Performers’ Rights under Section 38 which provide s 
only right to prohibit. The proposed section providing exclusive rights to performers has been inserted so as to 
make it compatible with Articles 6 to 10 of the WPP T. Similarly, Section 38B introducing moral rights of 
performers is in conformity with Article 5 of the WPPT. 
18.4   Feedback on these two additions to the Copyr ight Law received by the Committee from a number 
of stakeholders representing Film Producers, Broadcasting Industry and Music Companies depicted an entirely 
different scenario. Their apprehensions were based on the following factors: 
– amendment dilutes ownership and rights of owner o f the sound recording / visual recording. 
– performer would be entitled to receive royalties in addition to lumpsum consideration. 
– it would undermine and disregard the rights and e fforts of producers by vesting undue rights in 
favour of a performer. 
– in addition to fixed fees / charges paid to perfo rmer for providing his services to the producer / 
broadcaster / media organisation, performer shall b e entitled to claim royalty for commercial 
exploitation of his performance. 
– a performer, having taken permission of the autho rs, but not that of producer may perform a song 
already published by the producer and make a recording of it for sale. 
– duplicate recordings will flood the market as per former himself may authorize multiple recording 
labels to make different sound recordings of his performance. 
  In the light of the above, it was emphasized by t he stakeholders that existing provisions under sect ion 
38(3) and (4) needed to be retained as they were se rving the interests of performers well. Addition of  sections 
38A and 38B would only result in increasing number of legal disputes. 
18.5   When these concerns raised by the stakeholde rs were taken up with the Department, it was 
clarified that proposed rights of performers were s ubject to the rights of authors of the work, thus c learly 
implying that the performers have to take permissio n from the author before performing the work. Right s of 
both producers and performers will run parallel as both are entitled for economic benefits from the commercial 
use of the performance. It has also been expressly provided that the performer cannot object to the en joyment 
of the rights by the producer once there is a written agreement. Besides that, section 38(4) has been retained as 
section 38 A(2). 

18.6  The Committee is inclined to agree with the justifi cation given by the Department for inclusion of 
new provisions, sections 38A and 38B. The Committee  feels that apprehensions of film producers and 
music companies are not well-placed, being guided b y their commercial interest. By deleting section 38  
(3) and (4) and bringing in very specific provision s for exclusive and moral rights of performers, the  
Department has only made an attempt to protect the interests of stakeholders in line with the 
international commitments.  
18.7  The Committee would, however, like to draw the atte ntion of the Department to one ground 
reality highlighted by the Association of the Radio  Operators of India. It was emphatically mentioned 
that defining ‘performance’ as including communicat ion by any means to public of any sound 
recordings virtually over-rules the current judicia l deliberations on whether free broadcast through 
radio constitutes performance. Playing of recorded songs cannot be construed as performance and this 
matter is currently under review of courts. The Com mittee is of the opinion that contention of the 
Association needs to be looked into and provision modified in the light of court rulings.  
XIX.  CLAUSE 31: SECTION 52: CERTAIN ACTS NOT TO BE INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT  
19.1  Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to amend section 52 of the Act relating to certain acts not to be in fringement 
of copyright. The Bill seeks to substitute certain clauses of section 52 as follows:- 
– clause (a) seeks to provide that a fair dealing w ith any work, not being a computer programme for 
the purpose of private or personal use, including r esearch; criticism or review, whether of that 
work or of any other work and the reporting of curr ent events, including the reporting of a lecture 
delivered in public shall not constitute on infring ement of copyright. An Explanation is also 
proposed to be inserted so as to clarify that stori ng of any work in any electronic medium for 
aforesaid the purposes including the incidental sto rage of any computer programme which is not 
itself an infringing copy for the said purposes, shall not constitute infringement of copyright. 
– clause (b) seeks to provide that the transient an d incidental storage of a work or performance 
purely in the technical process of electronic trans mission or communication to the public shall not 
constitute an infringement of copyright. 
– clause (c) seeks to provide that transient and in cidental storage of a work or performance for the 
purpose of providing electronic links, access or integration, where such links, access or integration 
has not been expressly prohibited by the right holder, unless the person responsible is aware or has 
reasonable grounds for believing that such storage is of an infringing copy also shall not constitute 
an infringement of copyright 
19.2  According to the Department, section 52 deals  with fair dealing and certain acts which are not 
infringement and it does not deal with infringement  per se . Any transient and incidental storage of any work 
through the process of ‘caching’ has been provided exceptions as per the international practice. Any deliberate 
storing of such works and unauthorized reproduction  and distribution of such works is infringement und er 
section 51 of the Act attracting civil and criminal  liability. Exceptions under this section have been  extended 
for education and research purposes as works are av ailable in digital formats and internet. The scope of these 
proposed provisions ensure that any introduction of  new technology will also be covered under this pro posed 
section. The proposed amendment in clause (c) intro duces liability of internet service providers. The practice 
of making available the works on internet and websi tes in unauthorized manner without licence from the  
author or right owner is infringement. This leads t o suspension of the service provider’s activity. Ho wever, in 

order to provide a safe harbour as per internationa l norms to the service provider to take down such 
unauthorized works upon receipt of notice from the authors and right owners and any abuse of suspension, it is 
provided that an order within 14 days from the competent count to be produced for the continued prevention of 
such storage. 
19.3   The proposed amendments to section 52 have b een vehemently opposed by the stakeholders 
particularly the ones dealing with fair dealing. Ac cording to Saregama RPG Enterprises,  the amendments in 
section 52 (1) (a), (b) and (c) will prove to be a God-sent opportunity to pirates to falsely plead that music files 
illegally stored by them on their computers, mobile  phones etc. are for their private or personal use or for 
criticism or review. This will bring to halt the an ti-piracy activities being carried out by organizat ions. 
Expressing similar views, the South India Music Companies Association  mentioned that sections 52(1) (a), 
(b) and (c) make it very easy for any online pirate /person making infringing digital copies such as in  chips, 
mobile phone etc. and will get away with such conduct by pleading that the storage was incidental while in the 
process of transmission or the copyright holder did not expressly prohibit such work and that infringer was not 
aware of the infringing nature of his conduct. Ther efore, section 52 (1) (b) and (c) should be deleted  and 
section 52(1) (a) be modified by adding a second explanation whereby copies of the work, whether physical or 
electronic found in the premises/electronic network of any organization, shop etc. run for commercial purpose 
will not be covered and presumption would be that such a copy is an infringing copy. 
19.4  An ISP namely eBay.India  expressed that sections 52(1) (b) and (c) are enti rely inadequate to address 
the issues faced by intermediaries in the course of  their routine activities. They suggested that the words 
‘transient and incidental’ in both the provisions s hould be changed to ‘transient or incidental’. Anot her ISP, 
Yahoo India  submitted that the proposed amendments have been l oosely worded and may not specifically 
cover certain areas such as search, hosting, inform ation retrieval and caching. In the absence of such  clearly 
defined exceptions, the proposed amendments would d efeat the purpose it has sought to achieve. The 
Copyright Act should clearly specify that an ISP wi ll be liable only if it has knowledge of the infrin ging 
activity and has failed to remove the infringing material on receiving notice from the concerned content owner 
or if it induces, causes or material contributes to  the infringing conduct of another. The Act should clearly 
define the extent and parameters of ISP liability o therwise every ISP is subject to unlimited liabilit y for third 
party actions. It is submitted that ISP should not be held responsible for words, pictures and videos they did 
not create and before an ISP is held liable an effe ctive Notice and Takedown (NTD) mechanism should be  
followed. NTD is a kind of self regulatory measure where parties hosting content agree to remove conte nt in 
case of a legitimate notice by content owner. Furth er, criminal liability in case of infringement of c opyright 
should apply to direct infringers and not to ISPs w hich merely provide the platform or means of 
communication for the end users. The Google India  was of the opinion that fair dealing provision sho uld be 
updated to keep in pace with Indian Court decisions  and international developments for flexibility in 
interpreting fair dealing principles. 
19.5  The Indian Broadcasting Federation  pointed out that in section 52(1 )( c), period of 14 days should be 
replaced with 90 days and a proviso to section 52 ( 1) (b) be provided to require that safe harbour wil l not be 
available if it is known that such storage is of an  infringing copy and electronic transmission of inf ringing 
work to public be immediately stopped upon being no tified unless an order is obtained within 90 days f rom 
court for continued prevention of such storage/transmission. 
19.6   The Authors Guild of India  was of the view that suitable changes should be ma de in section 52 
(b) and (c) to give retrospective effect to the sai d sections. Proviso to section 52(c) prescribing th e procedure 

for preventing storage of a work should be made simpler rather than asking the author to obtain order from the 
competent court. 
19.7  The Indian Motion Picture Producers Association  suggested that the amendment under 52( 1) (c) 
imposes an additional burden on owner of copyright to procure court order within 14 days to continue 
prevention of unauthorized storage should not be gi ven effect. The Motion Picture Association  opined that 
films are extraordinarily vulnerable to Internet pi racy and it must be made clear in the Bill that any  “private 
and/or personal” use of a copyrighted word is subje ct to “fair dealing” as limited by the three-step t est. 
Nowadays, “home uses, including downloading or stre aming to computers and mobile devices is increasing . 
Moreover, it should never be considered “fair deali ng” to make a copy of a work when accessed from 
unauthorized sources, or when doing so would violat e the terms on which access to the film was obtaine d (for 
example, it should not be permitted to make a copy of a film that one has rented for a limited period). It further 
said that India’s Internet penetration is growing a nd the government has recently just approved 3G lic ensing 
plans for mobile devices. Investing in these new me thods of distribution while also combating piracy i n this 
new environment is particularly challenging. The cu rrent proposal, which envisages allowing ISPs up to  
fourteen (14) days to act upon a notification of in fringement, is excessively long, particularly since in the case 
of India the majority of a film’s revenues are real ized within three days of its theatrical release. I SPs would be 
required to act expeditiously upon such notificatio ns. Similar views were expressed by the Indian Music 
Industry.  
19.8  The Business Software Alliance  opined that Proviso to section 52 (1) (c) is burde nsome to ISP owners 
since it imposes on the copyright owner the near impossible onus of getting a judicial order in favour within 14 
days. Such ex parte  injunctions/orders are highly discretionary in nat ure which cannot be claimed as a matter 
of right. The provision is inconsistent with section 55(2) which is a presumption in favour of copyright owner. 
It further said that the proposed amendment is against Berne Convention/TRIPS Agreement. 
19.9  The Committee noted that the stakeholders par ticularly the internet service providers (ISPs) had  certain 
reservations against the proposed provisions in sec tion 52 (1) (a), 52 (1) (b) and 52 (1) (c). Section  52 (1) (a) 
which relates to fair dealing and other exceptions was opposed on the ground that the electronic stora ge for 
private use would only help pirates as they would s afely plead that the electronic contents illegally stored by 
them on their computers, mobiles etc. were for their private or personal use and such other false excuses. They 
alleged that the words personal or private use were  very vague, wide and undefined and that it was not  
reasonable to extend the fair dealing provisions fo r private use. Further, the words ‘any work” used i n the 
section also came in for criticism. It was pointed out that under the existing provisions of the Act the exception 
applies ony to literary, dramatic, musical and arti stic works. Now with the words ‘any work’ the propo sed 
exemption has become too wide and broad and therefo re subject to misuse in the context of exempting co pies 
stored on computers in electronic form. The Committee noted that another area of concern for the stakeholders 
was websites escaping responsibilities inspite of f acilitating infringement on their websites by claim ing 
exception under section 52 (1) (b) because of the w ords “or communication to the pubic”. The stakehold ers 
further expressed their unhappiness on the requirem ent of a court order on the part of the copyright o wner 
within 14 days to continue prevention of unauthoriz ed storage. According to them it was not possible f or the 
copyright owner to get a court order within 14 days . The Committee noted that the Department has state d on 
the issue that this provision introduces liability of internet service providers. The practice of maki ng available 
of works on internet and websites in unauthorized m anner without license from author or right owner is  
infringement. This leads to suspension of the servi ce provider’s activity. However, in order to provid e a ‘safe 
harbour’ as per international norms to the service provider to take down such unauthorized works upon receipt 

of notice from authors and right owners and any abuse of suspension is it provided that an order within 14 days 
from the competent court to be produced for the continued prevention of such storage. In view of the above the 
Committee feels that apprehensions of the stakeholders on this particular aspect are mis-founded. 
19.10 In the light of the divergent views expressed by th e stakeholders particularly with regard to the 
stipulation of 14 days period under Section 52 (1) (c) the Committee is of the view that the viability , of 
the duration of 14 days may again be reviewed by way of balancing the views of the stakeholders as well 
as the lagal requirement in the matter. As for the words the “transient and incidental” occurring in 
section 52 (1) (b) and 52 (1) (c) the Committee rec ommends that the word ‘and’ may be replaced with 
the word or in both the clauses so as to read “transient or incidental”. The Committee feels that this will 
take care of the concern of ISPs for unlimited liability for third party actions. 
XX.  CLAUSE 36: SECTION 65 A: PROTECTION OF TECHNOLOGICAL MEASURES  
  SECTION 65 B: PROTECTION OF RIGHTS MANAGEMENT INF ORMATION  
20.1  Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to insert new sec tions 65 A and 65 B in the Act relating to protecti on of 
technological measures and protection of rights management information. Section 65 A reads as follows: 
(1)  Any person who circumvents an effective techno logical measure applied for the purpose of 
protecting any of the rights conferred by this Act, with the intention of infringing such rights, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent any pe rson from,- 
(a)  doing anything referred to therein for a purpo se not expressly prohibited by this Act; 
 Provided that any person facilitating circumventio n by another person of a technological 
measure for such a purpose shall maintain a complet e record of such other person including 
his name, address and all relevant particulars nece ssary to identify him and the purpose for 
which he has been facilitated; or 
(b) doing anything necessary to conduct encryption research using a lawfully obtained 
encrypted copy: or 
(c) conducting any lawful investigation; or 
(d) doing anything necessary for the purpose of tes ting the security of a computer system or a 
computer network with the authorization of its owner; or 
(e) operator; or 
(f) doing anything necessary to circumvent technolo gical measures intended for identification 
or surveillance of a user; or 
(g) taking measures necessary in the interest of na tional security. 
20.2  The Department clarified that section 65 A ha s been inserted to provide for prevention of circum vention 
keeping in mind the public interest in access to works. 
20.3   Divergent views were expressed by the variou s stakeholders on the viability of proposed provision. 
According to the Indian Broadcasting Federation,  the provision would have a positive impact as the person 
tampering with encryption of content would be punis hed. However it required some modifications for mak ing 

it more effective. Increase in the imprisonment ter m from 2 years to 3 years for first offence, 5 year s for 
second offence and all offences to be treated as co gnizable and non-bailable was the first suggestion made. It 
was also mentioned that anyone circumventing the te chnology should be deemed to have circumvented the 
same with the intent to infringe copyright so as to shift the burden of proof to infringer. Also, copyright owner 
should be entitled to seek damages from the offender. The Business Software Alliance  underlined the need to 
make this provision fully compliant with the WPO Tr eaties; and both civil and criminal liability neede d to be 
imposed. However, the Google India  wanted the act of unlawful circumvention to be mad e a civil wrong 
punishable by damages and not a criminal offence. I t was also pointed out that record requirements in proviso 
to section 65 A (2) on persons facilitating circumvention by other be reduced or removed. The Motion Picture 
Association  expressed the view that section 65A would appear t o allow unlimited acts of circumvention of 
TPMs for the viewing of movies on all digital devic es by individual viewers, since, among other things , 
“access controls” are not covered and the viewing o f a work streamed to digital devices may never invo lve an 
infringement by the person viewing that film. 
20.4  Advocating the deletion of section 65 A, Yahoo India  mentioned that this section introduces the concept 
of ‘Technological Protection Measures’ which are me asures used to enforce restrictions on the use of 
copyrighted material. It is believed that digital r ights management technology considerably interferes  with a 
consumer’s right to ‘fair use’. The resultant effec t of DRM technology is that it gives copyright owne rs the 
right to create their own copyright protection mech anisms through technological means. For instance, D RM 
could impose restrictions on the right of consumers  to freely play a particular type of legally purcha sed media 
which could be, inter alia , in the form of restrictions on the number of comp uters on which download music 
can be played. In such instances such restrictions result in exceeding the scope of protection granted under the 
Act by technologically blocking even legitimate activities which users are otherwise permitted to do u nder the 
copyright Act. It further said that imposition of c riminal and monetary liability for circumvention of  DRM 
technology could adversely affect entities or indiv iduals who adapt, reproduce or issue copies of any 
copyrighted material into a format specially designed for the use of persons suffering from any disability could 
adversely affect consumers and entities engaged in creating copies of any copyright material into a fo rmat 
specially designed for persons suffering from any disability should be deleted. 
20.5   The RPG Enterprises-Saregama  opined that the provision was vague as it would be  difficult to 
establish such intentions. It should therefore be for punishing only those acts of circumvention of technological 
measures of protection carried out with intention t o infringe. The Indian Music Industry was of the opinion 
that the proposed TPM provisions did not comply wit h WPPT standards and were inappropriate and 
ineffective TPM protection. It was necessary to cre ate either civil or criminal liability or both for such 
circumvention in order to accede to WCT. The provis ion needed to be redrafted so as to make the very a ct of 
interfering with technological measures itself an o ffense; and also provide for both civil and crimina l 
liabilities. The Indian Performing Right Society Limited  opined that this provision sought to create criminal 
liability for circumvention of technological measur es. As drafted this provision did not actually crea te a new 
criminal act, since an attempt to infringe copyrigh t was criminally punishable anyway. It was necessar y to 
redraft the provision in such a way so as to make t he very act of interfering with technological measures itself 
an offence. 
20.6   Majority of the stakeholders were of the vie w that the provisions as contained in section 65 A were 
inadequate. To them, the very act of interference w ith technological measures of protection should hav e been 

made punishable. This was a lacunae that the law pr oposed only criminal action for such circumvention 
whereas both civil and criminal liability should have been provided to make legal option effective. 
20.7  When these concerns were taken up with the De partment it was clarified that one of the drawbacks  of 
digital technology was the possibility of high rate  of infringement (digital piracy) and the technolog ical 
solutions were used to prevent this. Digital locks (technological protection measures -popularly known  as 
TPM) were invented to prevent infringement of works . At the same time, duplicate keys (circumvention 
technology) were also developed to unlock the digit al locks used by owners of copyright to prevent 
infringement. The use of TPM had a significant impa ct on users since the freedom to use the work (fair  use of 
works) permitted by law was considerably regulated through these measures. In the absence of the owner  of 
the works providing key to enjoy fair use, the only  option was to circumvent the technology to enjoy f air use 
of works. There was considerable demand to protect the TPM from circumvention by banning manufacture 
and sale of devices used for circumvention. On the other hand, the users argued that this would preven t the 
development of dual use technology and also prevent  the enjoyment of fair use permitted by law. The ma jor 
problem of use of law in preventing circumvention w as the impact on public interest on access to work 
facilitated by the copyright laws. Attention was dr awn to the WIPO treaties which provided a very flex ible 
provision to protect TPM. This provision allowed member countries to develop laws to prevent circumvention 
of technological measures, keeping in mind the publ ic interest of access to works. Developed countries  like 
US, EU, Australia, Japan etc. have enacted laws to prevent circumvention resulting in abuse and affect ing 
public interest. The unintended consequences of the se laws resulted in blocking research and developme nt of 
new technologies. It was pointed out that India was  yet to face major problems of circumvention due to  low 
level of penetration of digital technology. Taking note of experience of developed countries in  developing 
laws for prevention of circumvention of technologic al measures, the Committee agrees with the 
approach as enshrined in section 65 A to give limit ed legislative guidelines and allow the judiciary t o 
evolve the law based on practical situations, keepi ng in mind the larger public interest of facilitati ng 
access to work by the public. The Committee takes n ote of the fact that many terms have been 
consciously left undefined, given the complexities faced in defining these terms in the laws of develo ped 
countries. The Committee would, however, like to em phasize that a constant watch would have to be 
kept on the impact of this provision and corrective measures taken as and when required.  
20.8  Section 65B provides for Protection of Rights Management Information as under:- 
‘Any person, who knowingly- 
(i) removes or alters any rights management informa tion without authority, or 
(ii) distributes, imports for distribution, broadca sts or communicates to the public, without authorit y, 
copies of any work, or performance knowing that ele ctronic rights management information has 
been removed or altered without authority. 
  Shall be punishable with imprisonment which may e xtend to two years and shall also be liable to fine: 
  Provided that if the rights management informatio n has been tampered with in any work, the owner of 
copyright in such work may also avail of civil reme dies provided under Chapter XII against the persons  
indulging in such acts.’ 
20.9  According to the Department, the modem techno logy facilitates management of rights digitally. On  line 
contracts governing the terms and conditions of use  of copyright are becoming prominent. There are att empts 

to remove these contractual terms from the digital copies of the work to prevent detecting the violati ons of the 
terms of the contract by the owner of copyright. Th erefore, the present provision prevents the removal  of the 
information regarding the management of rights incl uded in the digital copies of the work. It was poin ted out 
that the proposed section would provide protection to the right holder against any attempts to remove Rights 
Management Information (RMI) without authority or b y distributing the work fixed performance or 
phonogram and provides for the punishment. Conformi ng to Article 12 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty and 
Article 19 of the WIPO Performers and Phonograms Tr eaty the provision would help film, music and 
publishing industry in fighting piracy. It was poin ted out that the parties responsible for distributi on or 
broadcasting or communication to public through aut horized licence from the author or rights holder an d who 
did not remove any rights management information de liberately for making unauthorized copies did not n eed 
to worry about this provision as long as their act was as per the framework of this provision. 
20.10  Taking strong exception to the insertion of section 65B Yahoo India emphasized that the same should be 
deleted in entirety as the imposition of criminal a nd monetary liability could adversely affect consum ers and 
entities engaged in creating copies of any copyrigh t material into a format specially designed for per sons 
suffering from disability. The Indian Reprographic Rights Organization  were of the view that section 65 B 
was basically a good provision necessary for WCT/WP PT compliance. However, the whole provision would 
be rendered meaningless if the copyright owner coul d not trace out the persons tampering with the Righ ts 
Management Information. It was crucial to trace out the users of copies in which RMI has been tampered with. 
20.11 The Committee is of the view that the parties respo nsible for distribution or broadcasting or 
communication to the public through authorized lice nce from the author or rights holder and who do 
not remove any rights management information delibe rately for making unauthorized copies need not 
worry about this provision as long as their act is as per the framework of this provision.  
XXI. GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS 
  Functioning of copyright societies:----  
21.1  A number of stakeholders who deposed before t he Committee were not satisfied with the functionin g of 
the copyright societies. Issues relating to the Soc ieties membership, administration, control, royalty  
distribution licensing and tariff schemes came unde r a lot of criticism during the deliberations of th e 
Committee. It was emphasized again and again that t he copyright societies were not functioning in a 
transparent manner and that there were no regulations to control their functioning. 
21.2  To have a proper understanding about the func tioning Copyright Societies, the Committee sought details 
in this regard from the Department. The Committee w as informed that at present there were four Copyrig ht 
Societies registered under section 33 of the Act, as follows:- 
– Society of Copyright Regulation of India Producer s for Films and Television (SCRIPFT) for 
managing rights of Producers or Cinematograph Films and Television Works; 
– Indian Performing Right Society Limited (IPRS), f or managing rights of musical works created by 
authors (lyricists), music composers and music publ ishers (Film Publishers). Other rights owners 
such as music companies owning rights are also members; 
– Phonographic Performance Ltd. (PPL)for managing r ights of Sound Recording. Music or 
recording companies are members; and 

– Indian Reprographic Rights Organisation (IPRO) fo r managing rights of Photocopy/reprographic 
rights. Authors and publishers are its members. 
21.3   On a specific query about the guidelines/nor ms or rules/regulations governing the functioning o f 
Copyright Societies, the Committee was informed tha t a copyright society is a .collective administrati on 
Society formed by copyright owners registered under  section 33 of the Act. The minimum membership 
required for registration of a society is seven. As provided in section 34 of the Act, a copyright soc iety has the 
power to issue license in respect of rights adminis tered by it, collect fees in pursuance of such lice nses, and 
distribute such fees among owners of copyright afte r making deductions for the administrative expenses . The 
Committee was also informed that every copyright so ciety has to submit to the Registrar of copyrights under 
section 36 such returns as may be prescribed. The a dministration of Copyright Societies is regulated b y Rules 
12 to 14 P of the Copyright Rules, 1958. Rule 14 P clearly lays down that every copyright society has to file an 
annual return with the Registrar of Copyrights giving details of the annual meeting of owners held immediately 
preceding the filing of return, the up-to-date list  of owners of rights, audited accounts. Tariff sche me and the 
Distribution scheme etc. 
21.4  The Committee’s attention was drawn to the fu nctioning of IPRS in the recent years, going agains t the 
interests of some stakeholders, particularly authors and composers. A few recording companies owning m usic 
rights taking control of IPRS was cited as the main  factor responsible for this disturbing situation. Tracing the 
background of this dispute, the Department informed  the Committee that in 1993, there was an agreement  
between IPRS authors and composers members and reco rding companies to share performing right royalties  
collected by IPRS on 50:50 basis. However, later on , in 2007, due to some internal trouble between the se 
parties, court cases cropped up. Situation deterior ated further in 2008, when owner members called a 
Governing Council meeting and decided to change the  nature of membership of IPRS. While owners of righ ts 
became members, authors and composers have given th e status of ordinary members. As a result, a few 
recording companies owning music rights starting dominating IPRS. Not only this while distributing royalties, 
a condition was imposed that authors and composers have to give an undertaking stating that they did n ot own 
any rights in the songs for which they were receiving royalties. The Committee was given to understand that it 
was against this backdrop, amendments in the membership or copyright societies have been proposed. 
21.5  The Committee observes that inspite of there being provisions in the Act and rules framed 
thereunder regulating the copyright societies, over  the years a disturbing trend in their functioning has 
been developing which has led to disputes between t he major stakeholders and resultant court cases. 
The Department has also admitted that the administration of copyright societies has been taken over by 
the owners whose interest is different from that of  the authors and in many cases authors are being 
deprived of their benefits. Another area of concern  noticed by the Committee is the Tariff Scheme for 
the Copyright Societies. Although as per Rule 14J of the Copyright Rules, 1958, a Copyright Society has 
to frame a Tariff Scheme setting out the nature and  quantum of fees or royalties, no provision is ther e 
for governing or regulating the system of fixation, collection and distribution of royalty under section 33 
of the Act. A system of formulation of a Tariff Sch eme by the Collective Administrative Societies has 
accordingly been brought as section 33A under the proposed legislation. The Committee feels that this is 
a step taken in the right direction and will put on  end to the arms-twisting negotiations of copyright  
Societies.  
21.6  The Committee would like to draw the attention of t he Department to Section 33 of the Act which 
empowers the Central Government to regulate the fun ctioning of Copyright Societies. As per this 

provision the registration of a Copyright Society c an be suspended for not more than one year or 
cancelled by the Central Government after conducting an inquiry, in the event of it being managed in a  
manner detrimental to the interests of owners of ri ghts. Not only this, Section 36 clearly provides th at 
every Copyright Society has to submit to the Regist rar of Copyright Society annual returns. under this  
very section, any officer duly authorized by the Ce ntral Government can call for any report or records  
of any Copyright Society so as to injure that the f ees collected by it in respect of rights administer ed by 
it are being utilized or distributed in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the purpose for 
highlighting all these provisions is that had the C entral Government played a more pro-active role, 
perhaps things . would not have reached such an ala rming level. The Committee can only conclude that 
with the proposed provision relating to Tariff Sche me and use of powers already there in the Act/rules  
by the Central Government through its authorized of ficers, copyright societies will be functioning as 
envisaged under the Copyright Law. 
Copyright Board  
21.7  The Copyright Board constituted under Section  11 of the Copyright Act, 1957 has been given sever al 
important powers such as deciding compulsory licens ing disputes and also matters relating to assignmen t of 
Copyright. It has the power to regulate its own pro cedure, including the fixing of place and time of its sittings. 
The Act further provides that the Copyright Board m ay exercise and discharge its powers and functions 
through benches constituted by the Chairman of the Copyright Board from amongst its member. 
21.8  During the course of its interactions with va rious Stakeholders, storing reservation were expressed about 
the functioning of the Copyright Board and other allied issues. The Committee also had the opportunity to hold 
discussion with the Chairman of the Board about its  functioning. The Committee also sought clarificati on on 
various related issues from the Department. This ex ercise enabled the Committee to have a fair idea of  the 
present set up of the Copyright Board and existing problem areas in its functioning faced by the stake holders 
as well as the Copyright Board. 
21.9   Following drawbacks in the composition and f unctioning of the Copyright Board were pointed out 
by various stakeholders:---- 
– The Act specifies the criteria for appointing onl y the Chairperson of the Copyright Board and the 
Central Government has the unbridled discretion in determining the membership of the Board. 
– The Copyright is deemed to be a Civil Court under  section 12 of the Act serving officers cannot be 
members of any tribunal or court as independence of  the judiciary cannot be compromised by 
appointing members of the Executive to tribunal or courts. 
21.10  Response of the Department to the above conc erns was that the present Copyright Board a quasi-
judicial body, under the Chairmanship of Dr. Raghbi r Singh has 14 members having legal 
knowledge/knowledge in Copyright law which includes  two Joint Secretaries of Central Government, Seven  
Law Secretaries and five Director/Vice Chancellors of National Law Institutes. 
21.11  Another area of concern highlighted by the s takeholders related to changes required in the comp osition 
of the members of the Board. It was pointed out tha t in view of manifold responsibilities assigned to the 
Copyright Board, members of the Board needed to be full time members, instead of ex-officio  members. 
Another suggestion made was that experts and specia lists having the understanding of publishing and 
entertainment industry and also competition law pol icy have to be there on the Board. When this issue was 

taken up with the Department, the Committee was inf ormed that appointment of full-time members in the 
Copyright Board was under its active consideration.  Further a five member committee has already been 
appointed to draft the rules of procedure relating to the functioning of the Board. 
21.12  While interacting with the Chairman of the Copyright Board, a number of suggestions for strengthening 
the Copyright Board were put forth before the Commi ttee. Commettee’s attention were was drawn to secti on 
12 whereunder the Board was authorized to hear the proceedings zone-wise as specified under the States  
Reorganisation Act, 1956. It was mentioned that consequent upon creation of new States and Union territories, 
the Act has been amended several times leading to p ractical difficulties being faced even by the train ed 
lawyers. It was, accordingly, suggested that the Ex planation to section 12 may be substituted so as to  provide 
different zones along with the States falling there under on the same pattern as done for the Patent Of fices and 
Trade Marks Offices under the Patent Act, 1970 and the Trade Marks Act, 1999. 
21.13  When the attention of the Department was drawn to the practical problems being faced by the Copyright 
Board in the present set up of zones it was clarifi ed that to far no serious complaint has been receiv ed. 
However, it was assured that inclusion of North-Eas tern States, not included in the zonal system envis aged in 
section 15 of the States Re-organisation Act, 1956 would be examined. 
21.14  Another anomaly highlighted by the Chairman of the Board related to the status of the Registrar  of the 
Board. Registrar of Copyrights is also the Secretar y of the Copyright Board. It was contended that a p erson 
manning the quasi-judicial organ at the lower pedes tal as against whose decisions appeals are to be he ard by 
the organ at the higher pedestal cannot concurrentl y by superintending the registry of the appellate f orum. 
Similarly, in matters relating to the rectification  of the register, the Registrar of Copyright is a n ecessary 
respondent, being the keeper and custodian of the R egister. It was, accordingly, suggested that amendm ent of 
section 11(4) of the Copyright Act on the pattern o f Section 90 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 relating to the 
Intellectual Property Appellate Board providing for  separate group of officers for the Board could be 
considered. 
21.15 The Committee was informed that the Registrar of Copyright, head of the Copyright Office and a quasi--
judicial authority himself has continued in this ca pacity since 1958 when the Copyright Board came int o 
existence. It was contended that so far no objectio n had been raised in this regard. However, it was a lso 
admitted that keeping in view likely increase in th e workload of the Copyright Board relating to licen sing, the 
proposal for making the Board to function on full-time basis was under consideration. Accordingly, the present 
dual role of the Registrar in administration of Cop yright Office and providing Secretarial support to the Board 
needed re-examination. 
21.16  The Committee observes that the responsibilities of  the Copyright Board, a very important 
statutory body assigned very crucial powers and fun ctions, have increased manifold over the years. Not  
only this, in the light of changing global scenario with emerging areas coming under the Copyright Law, 
the need for strengthening the Copyright Board is b eing increasingly felt. It has to be a full time Bo ard 
with inclusion of experts in specified areas relate d to Copyright law. The Committee is happy to note 
that exercise in this direction has already been in itiated by the Department. The Committee will 
appreciate if all the corrective measures are taken  at the earliest by the Department. Besides that, t he 
Committee is also of the firm view that all the pro visions in the Act as well as in the rules relating  to the 
Copyright Board may be reviewed and amendments carr ied out in the light of suggestions put forth 
before it.  

21.17  The heart and soul of copyrights depends on three mechanisms such as (i) Copyright Societies (ii) 
Registrar of Copyright and (iii) Copyright Board. I f all the three are independent and dynamic then 
only the copyright justice will be perfect and reli able. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the  
Government should act emergently to revitalize thes e three institutions by formulating clear rules and  
appointing fulltime experts and professional with accountability clubbed with sufficient powers. More so 
all the three organizations are to be fully moderni zed with all e-management system and manned by 
professionals and technical experts. 
Internet Piracy  
22.   A number of stakeholders who appeared before the Co mmittee, were of the opinion that the 
amendment Bill hardly addresses the issue of intern et piracy. It was pointed out that the spread of 
internet in India was of utmost importance and effe ctive protection to copyright works in digital form  
needed to be given. Music Industry is particularly plagued by large scale piracy as several websites h ost 
pirate music. The law enforcement on this particular issue has been quite lax. It was pointed out that the 
existing and proposed amendments will not be able t o curb piracy unless the copyright legislation is 
brought in tune with the Information Technology Act , 2000 which provides for power to intercept, 
monitor or decrypt information through any computer  source on certain grounds mentioned therein. 
The Committee therefore urges the Department to bring the copyright law in tune with the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 so far as internet piracy is c oncerned. A designated authority for managing 
copyrights issues and piracy is to be created with sufficient policing powers.  
23.  The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the bill without any amendments. 
24.  The enacting formula and the title are adopted  with consequential changes. 
25.  The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed after incorporating the amendments/additions  
suggested by it. The Committee would also appreciate if the revised provisions as recommended by it are made 
available to it before the Bill is again brought before the Parliament. 
26.  The Committee would like the Department to sub mit a note with reasons on the 
recommendations/suggestions which could not be incorporated in the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ---- AT A GLANCE  
II.  CONSULTATION  PROCESS 
  During the course of its extensive deliberations with various stakeholders, one issue which was 
raised again and again was their non-involvement in  the consultation process and their concerns not 
being addressed fully. From the very detailed feedb ack received from the Department as well as its 
interactions with all concerned, the Committee is c onstrained to observe that perhaps the present Bill  
was not shared with the stakeholders at the same le vel as the 2005 draft Bill. However, the Committee 
feels that by undertaking a very intensive consulta tion drive by issuing a Press Release followed by 
giving an opportunity to all the stakeholders to pr esent their views in person as well as in writing h as 
now left no scope for any stakeholder being denied the opportunity to have his say. Not only this, the  
Committee has also obtained the response of the Dep artment on all the issues raised/apprehensions 
voiced by a large number of witnesses. (Para 2.4)  
  The Committee has also observed that, by and larg e, many witnesses working in different areas 
touching upon different copyright related domains w ere primarily concerned with the safeguarding of 
their professional interests. Overall impact of cop yright law did not seem to be an issue pertinent 
enough. The Committee can only say that it is the p rimary duty of the Government, as the law maker, 
responsible for both domestic interests. and international commitments to do a balancing act. Similarly, 
the Committee is mandated to make an objective asse ssment of all the proposed legislations referred to  
it. It is against this backdrop, the Committee is m aking its observations/recommendations in the 
succeeding paragraphs.   (Para 2.5)  
III.  CLAUSE 2: SECTION 2(D) (V) AND (Z), CLAUSE 5:  SECTION 17 AND CLAUSE 12 : 
SECTION 26 JOINT AUTHORSHIP FOR PRODUCER AND PRINCI PAL DIRECTOR IN 
CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS 
  The Committee shares the apprehensions of the sta keholders about the proposed inclusion of 
principal director as author in clause 2 (d) (v) of the Act. Department’s admission that “such a provision 
is not prescribed in most of the jurisdictions like  USA” and the matter is taken care of through other  
means corroborates such apprehensions. It is again intriguing that none of the international treaties 
namely WCT and WPPT or even Rome Convention stipula te such a concept. It is well established that 
the producer is the kingpin who invests substantive  money, raises finance through institution, utilize s 
persons/expertise and brings out a product i.e.  film. He takes such initiative and responsibility for 
making the work and chooses the director on certain  offer. It is also an undisputed fact that a direct or 
plays a major role in the making of a film but in co-ordination with the producer only. The Committee is 
also surprised to note that nowhere in the proposed  Bill, the term “principal director” has been defin ed 
whereas the definition of the term “producer” has b een provided under section 2 (uu) of the Copyright 
Act, 1957. The Committee feels that this definition  of producer ought to have been modified in the 
context of the proposed amendment. It was also poin ted out that the term ‘principal director’ was not 
defined under the Berne Convention also. The Commit tee is not convinced by the contention of the 
Department that such a definition is not required due to the clear understanding in the film world about 
the identity of principal director as there are dif ferent directors responsible for different aspects of film 
making like music director, art director, action di rector etc. More so there is no word as ‘principal 
director’ in the parlance of the cine industry at a ll as ‘director’ is the term used for any person wh o co-
ordinates ‘in general way’ while others are on specific work as music, art, dance etc. (Para 3.7)  

  The Committee observes that opportunity to have p artnership in a cinematograph film is being 
given to an undefined person i.e.  principal director without any liability/responsibility being assigned to 
him. In fact, in the film industry today, directors are getting huge money as fee under a mutual contract 
drawn with the producer without any pressure whatso ever, leaving no cause for marginalization. The 
Committee has been given to understand that even in  Hollywood, fee is allowed and certain profit is 
shared under a system/agreement whereunder no equal  partnership between the director and the 
producer is there. Such a system can exist in India n cinema also. The Committee endorses the 
apprehensions that the proposed amendment will create a lot of uncalled for and unnecessary problems 
in the Indian cinema. The Committee is in agreement  with the contention of some stakeholders that this  
may lead to a situation when the producer may not e ngage directors and may become director, script 
writer etc. himself. Further directors may not work  in the same capacity and they may be pushed down 
as assistant directors, which will stop the upcoming directors to reach the top in industry. (Para 3.8)  
  Nobody can deny the fact that interest of produce rs of old films needs to be fully protected. But the 
Committee fails to comprehend the rationale behind the proposed introduction of a new stakeholder, 
i.e. , principal director that too for films produced 50  years ago. The main objective of this exercise was  
to protect the producers of old films economically. It seems remedy proposed is worse than the problem. 
        (Para 3.10)  
  In view of the above, the Committee is of the vie w that the proposed amendment to include 
principal director as author of a cinematograph film along with producer may create confusion and lead 
to uncalled for situations instead of serving the p urpose intended for. Committee’s opinion rests on t he 
premise that there is a system existing presently w hereunder producers and directors are free to 
negotiate on their own terms and conditions. Under these negotiations/contracts, directors are not onl y 
paid their negotiated salary/fee but also certain rights in perpetuity relating to the script. Further, as per 
the existing system, the principal director is not taking any equity risk in the production/performance of 
a film and it is the producer alone who runs the ri sk of his investment not being recovered. The 
Committee strongly feels that the proposal of joint  ownership is unfair. It, therefore, recommends tha t 
the proposal to include principal director as autho r of the film along with producer may be dropped 
altogether.      (Para 3.11)  
IV.  CLAUSE  2 : DEFINITION  OF  THE  TERM  ‘CINEMA TOGRAPH  FILM’ 
  The Department has clarified that the definition of the term "cinematograph film" is being revised 
to tackle the exploitation of works in digital medi um. The Committee, however, feels that the 
amendment cannot be accepted as future systems of electronic format/formation will be left out.  
        (Para 4.2)  
V.  CLAUSE  2 : DEFINITION  OF  THE  TERM  ‘COMMERC IAL  RENTAL’ 
  The Committee finds merit in the apprehensions vo iced by different stakeholders. It is apparent 
that the definition of the term 'commercial rental'  is too wide and open ended. Mere assurance of 
interests of copyright owners remaining fully prote cted would serve no purpose. The Committee would 
also like to point out that the absence of any clarity on the non-profit character of a public library or an 
educational institution is likely to result in diff erent interpretations and resultant legal complicat ions. 
The Committee, therefore, is of the view that in th e light of very convincing facts put forth by the 
stakeholders based on their experience as copyright  holders and service-providers, the proposed 

amendment needs to be reexamined from all conceivab le aspects. One option can be to clearly spell out 
the criteria for designating a library/educational institution as non-profit based. The other option c ould 
be to restrict the application of this clause to on ly Government recognised libraries/educational 
institutions. Either way, such specification needs to be there in appropriate place either in the Act itself 
or in the relevant rules.   (Para 5.5)  
VI.  CLAUSE  2 : DEFINITION  OF  THE  TERM  ‘COMMUN ICATION  TO  THE  PUBLIC' 
  The Committee feels that the reservations of the stakeholders are unfounded. Issuing physical 
copies or legitimate digital downloading music or v ideo recording by payment cannot be considered a 
communication to the public. The Department has justified the proposed amendment for exploita-tion of 
digital mediums. As the amendment is in tune with t he technological advancement, the Committee 
accepts the amendment. The Committee is also of the  view that the copyright societies can play a pro-
active role in resolving problems, if any, arising due to the proposed changes in the definition.  
        (Para 6.3)  
VII.  CLAUSE  2 : DEFINITION  OF  THE  TERM  ‘INFRINGING  COPY’ 
  After analysing the viewpoints of all the stakeho lders along with the clarifications given thereupon 
by the Department, the Committee is of the view tha t proposed inclusion of the proviso in the definiti on 
of the term ‘infringing copy’ seems to be a step in the right direction, specially in the prevailing situation 
at the ground level. The present practice of publis hers publishing books under a territorial license, 
resulting in sale of books at very high rates cannot be considered a healthy practice. The Committee also 
notes that availability of low priced books under t he present regime is invariably confined to old 
editions. It has been clearly specified that only t hose works published outside India with the permiss ion 
of the author and imported into India will not be c onsidered an infringed copy. Nobody can deny the 
fact that the interests of students will be best protected if they have access to latest editions of the books. 
Thus, apprehensions about the flooding of the prima ry market with low priced editions, may be mis-
founded as such a situation would be tackled by that country’s law. The Committee would, however, like 
to put a note of caution to Government to ensure that the purpose for which the amendment is proposed 
i.e.  to protect the interest of the students is not lost sight of. (Para 7.13)  
VIII.  CLAUSE 2: DEFINITION OF TERM ‘RIGHTS MANAGEMENT INFORMATION’ 
  On drawing the attention of the Department to the se issues, the Committee was informed that the 
proposed definition of the term ‘Rights Management Information’ includes all kinds of information 
including 'Subscriber Management System'. It was based on the WCT and WPPT mandate whereunder 
Rights Management Information does include device o r procedure intended to identify the user. The 
Committee is of the view that in the light of clari fication given by the Department, the proposed 
definition of the term 'Rights Management Information' is in order. (Para 8.4)  
IX.  CLAUSE 6: SECTION 18: ASSIGNMENT OF COPYRIGHT 
  The Committee observes that the main contention b etween authors/composers of film lyrics and 
music compositions and Film/Producers Music Compani es is about the rights relating to film music. 
Film music rights are bundle of copyrights which in clude synchronization right, performing rights, 
mechanical reproduction right and sound recording right. Synchronisation right is that when a music or 
song is synchronised to a film, video, television o r commercial etc. Performing rights are right to 

perform music in public specially in broadcasting ( TV/Radio), restaurants, airlines, auditoriums or 
public functions etc. Mechanical reproduction rights are a royalty paid to a song writer whenever a copy 
of one of their songs is made. Sound recording rights are owned by producer or a recording company. 
        (Para 9.12)  
  When a song or music is incorporated in a film, i t is relating to synchronization right of author 
and music composer which is assigned to the producer of the film as per section 17 (b) or in the absen ce 
of agreement, film producer is the first owner. However, film producer is also getting other independent 
rights of author and music composer of their works envisaged in section 13 of the Act. As per section 17 
(b), he further assigns these rights to the music c ompanies for upfront lump-sum amount. When the 
films songs are performed separately and independen tly through TV/Radio, restaurants, airlines, 
auditoriums or public functions etc. film producer becomes the first owner and authors/music 
composers lose economic benefits of exploitation of  their works to music companies who become 
ultimate owners of these works.   (Para 9.13)  
  The Committee also takes note of the fact that in dependent rights of authors of literary and 
musical works in cinematograph films are being wron gfully exploited by the producers and music 
companies by virtue of Supreme Court judgment in In dian Performing Rights Society vs . Eastern India 
Motion Pictures Association (AIR 1977 SC 1443) whic h held that film producer is the first owner of the  
copyright and authors and music composers do not ha ve separate right. The Committee, however, 
observes that in the footnote of this very judgement, Justice Krishna Aiyar also advised as follows: 
“the authors and music composers who are left in th e cold in the penumbral area of policy should 
be given justice by recognizing their rights when t heir works are used commercially separately 
from cinematograph film and the legislature should do something to help them” . (Para 9.14)  
  It was also clarified through this judgement that  the right of producer in a film as entitled under 
section 14(1) (c) cannot trench on the composer’s copyright given under section 14(1) (a) when the music 
is separately played in a restaurant/aeroplane/radi o station/cinema theatre. If producer enjoys 
synchronisation right, authors/composers should enjoy performing right. The footnote of the judgement 
also states that the twin rights can co-exist, each fulfilling itself in its delectable distinctiveness. 
        (Para 9.15)  
  The Committee can only conclude in the light of t he long standing infirmity in the copyright law 
outlined above that proposed amendments in section 17 and 18 were overdue. It has taken more than 
thirty years for the legislature to act upon a Supreme Court directive which indeed is a very sad state of 
affairs. The Committee emphatically recommends that this long standing infirmity in the copyright law 
needs to be removed without any further delay. (Para 9.16)  
  The Committee observes that some of the apprehens ions of film producers are not well-placed. 
The Committee finds that authors/composers are paid  fee for creation of their works and not upfront 
guaranteed royalties as mentioned by film industry.  The Committee would also like to point out that 
promoting of new talent is the hallmark of the film  industry which gives incentives to producers as well. 
In case of non-film music, specially in the case of  upcoming artists, if music companies launch them b y 
flooding their records in the market, it would be a good exposure for them, finally leading to the growth 
of music industry.    (Para 9.17)  

  Committee’s attention has also been drawn to sect ion 13 (3) (a) of the Act which provides that 
copyright shall not subsist in any cinematograph fi lm if a substantial part of the film is an infringe ment 
of the copyright in any other work. Section 13(4) f urther provides that copyright in a cinematograph 
film or sound recording shall not affect the separa te copyright in any work in respect of which or a 
substantial part of which, the film or sound recording is made. The proposed amendments in section 17, 
18 and 19 are the reiteration of what is already pr ovided in section 13 of the Act. In short, the prop osed 
amendments in section 18 will protect interests of authors in the event of exploitation of their work by 
restricting assignments in unforeseen new mediums a nd henceforth author of works in films will have 
right to receive royalties from the utilization of such work in any other form except to the legal hei rs or 
to a copyright society and any other contract to the contrary shall be void. (Para 9.18)  
  The Committee also observes that many countries p ermit the assignment of rights in a musical or 
literary work in past, present and future works. As  this assignment pertains to the public performance , 
communication to public, broadcast and cable transm ission rights, it is immaterial whether any new 
mode/medium of use which was not there at the time of assignment provided that these rights in the 
literary/musical works have been assigned to the legal heirs and also to a copyright society. As a rule, the 
copyright society will simply proceed to license ne w uses, collect royalties and distribute them back to 
copyright owners. This institutionalized system wil l greatly benefit the authors/lyricists and the 
composers as individually they may not be in a position to collect their royalties. (Para 9.19)  
  The Committee would like to add a note of caution  here that the system of institutionalized 
societies needs to be strengthened as everybody may  not be in a position to negotiate contracts with 
equity and there is a vast difference between contr act of service and contract for service. Establishe d 
names may negotiate and demand equity but beginners  may remain at the receiving end and their 
contribution may go unnoticed and unrecognized. The  Committee feels that the film industry needs to 
address this issue urgently and also evolve a viabl e profit sharing system for other categories of 
craftsmen/technical experts engaged in the making of a film. (Para 9.20)  
X.  CLAUSE  7 : SECTION 19 : ‘MODE  OF  ASSIGNMENT’  
  The Committee observes that one of the main objec tives of the proposed legislation is to ensure 
that the authors of the works, in particular author s of songs included in cinematograph films or sound  
recordings, receive royalty for the commercial expl oitation of such works. With a view to remove any 
element of ambiguity which may give rise to complic ations or different interpretations in future, and 
also to protect the right of authors and music comp osers to claim their royalties in non-film works, t he 
Committee recommends following amendments in clauses 6 and 7 of the Bill: 
Proposed Second Proviso to section 18 may be revised as follows: 
 “Provided also that the author of the literary or musical work included in a cinematograph 
film shall not assign or waive the right to receive  royalties to be shared on an equal basis with the 
assignee of copyright for the utilisation of such w ork in any form other than for the 
communication to the public of the work along with the cinematograph film in a cinema hall, 
except to the author’s legal heirs or to a copyrigh t society for collection and distribution and any 
agreement to contrary shall be void”. 
Third proviso as indicated below may be added to section 18: 

 “Provided also. that the author of the literary or  musical work included in the sound 
recording but not forming part of any cinematograph  film shall not assign the right to receive 
royalties to be shared on an equal basis with the a ssignee of copyright for any utilisation of such 
work except to the author’s legal heirs or to a col lecting society for collection and distribution and 
any assignment to the contrary shall be void” . 
Proposed sub-section (9) of section 19 should read as follows: 
(9) “No assignment of copyright in any work to make  a cinematograph film shall affect the 
right of the author of the work to claim an equal share of royalties and consideration payable 
in case of utilisation of the work in any form othe r than for the communication to the public 
of the work, along with the cinematograph film in a cinema hall”. 
Sub-section (10) as indicated below may be added to section 19: 
(10) “No assignment of the copyright in any work to  make a sound recording which does 
not form part of any cinematograph film shall affec t the right of the author of the work to 
claim an equal share of royalties and consideration  payable for any utilization of such work 
in any form”.  (Para 10.20)  
XI.  CLAUSE 8: SECTION 19 A: DISPUTES WITH RESPECT TO ASSIGNMENT OF 
COPYRIGHT 
  The Committee takes note of certain reservations expressed about the implications of the proposed 
amendment. It was pointed out by the South India Mu sic Companies Association that such a move may 
lead to situations when music composers/lyricists m ay file frivolous applications for revocation and s till 
continue to get royalty on the basis of an interim order of the Copyright Board. The Committee feels 
that these apprehensions are somewhat misplaced as Copyright Board, it statutory authority is fully 
competent to assess the merit of a case filed with it. The Committee is, however, of the view that wit h a 
prescribed time-limit for adjudication of an application by the Copyright Board, there is little likelihood 
of any undue delay or any deliberate attempt on the part of a complainant. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that necessary provision in this regard may be added at the appropriate place.  (Para 11.3)  
XII.  CLAUSE 15 : SECTION 31 : COMPULSORY  LICENCE  IN  WORKS  WITHHELD  FROM 
PUBLIC 
  While welcoming the spirit behind the proposed am endments, the Committee strongly feels that all 
grey areas in respect of compliance of TRIPS Agreement and WTO commitments need to be made very 
clear. Reason being is that queries raised by the s takeholders have not been responded fully and any 
ambuiguity in such an area may lead to unnecessary complications. (Para 12.4)  
  The Committee has been given to understand that t he Supreme Court and various High Courts 
interpreted this provision to facilitate issue of m ultiple compulsory licences. The Committee, however , 
finds merits in the above objections specially in v iew of the present set-up of the Copyright Board. T he 
Committee is of the view that criteria qualifying a person to file a complaint before the Copyright Board 
needs to be specifically provided for, if not in th e Act then in the Rules. A time-frame for disposal of 
such complaints also needs to be laid down in the Rules, if not already done. (Para 12.6)  
  The Committee also takes note of the proposed ame ndments in section 31 A relating to compulsory 
licence in unpublished Indian works. The provision of compulsory licence for orphaned works available 

under this section is proposed to be extended to pu blished works as well. Like in the case of section 31, 
extension of applicability to all foreign works (in cluding film, DVDs, etc.) could be violative of Ber ne 
Convention and TRIPS Agreement and seem to fall sho rt of the minimum obligations imposed by such 
instruments. The Committee is of the view that futu re implication of proposed amendment in Section 
31A vis-a-vis  India’s commitment to international agreement need s to be free from any ambiguity so as 
to prevent any negative fallout.  (Para 12.7)  
XIII. CLAUSES 17 AND 31: SECTION 31B: COMPULSORY  L ICENCE  FOR  BENEFIT  OF  
DISABLED 
 SECTION 52(ZB) : CERTAIN  ACTS  NOT  BE  INFRINGEM ENT  OF  COPYRIGHT. 
  After analysing the proposed amendments as envisa ged in section 31B and 52 (1) (zb) in the 
backdrop of interactions held with various stakehol ders and the Department, the Committee strongly 
feels that concerns raised by the organizations wor king for the disabled are indeed very genuine. The 
Committee would like to point out that the real obj ective behind these two provisions is to facilitate  the 
cause of the disabled. Every attempt needs to be ma de to remove all the drawbacks highlighted in the 
proposed amendments.   (Para 13.6)  
  The Committee is of the firm opinion that all phy sically challenged need to be benefitted by the 
proposed amendments. It would be very discriminatin g if envisaged benefit remains restricted to only 
visually impaired, leaving out persons affected by cerebral palsy, dyslexia and low vision. The 
Committee takes note of fact that even regular Brai lle users complement Braille with other accessible 
formats like audio, reading material with large fon ts and electronic texts. The Committee also observe s 
that the modern day Braille production is dependent  on the material being first converted into 
mainstream electronic formats such as MS Word because Braille translation software requires inputs in 
such formats. The, Committee hopes that the request of orgnisations for extending access of works to all 
accessible formats instead of special formats presently under consideration of the Department will result 
in a positive outcome. The other request for wideni ng the scope of compulsory licence to allow other 
entities working for disabled in case it is not possible to withdraw section 31 B also merits a sympathetic 
consideration by the Department.  (Para 13.7)  
  The Committee would finally reiterate that the De partment needs to bring out the required 
modifications in section 31B and 52 (1) (zb) based on very pertinent concerns raised by the organizations 
working for the cause of the disabled. (Para 13.9)  
XIV.  CLAUSE 17 : SECTION 31C : STATUTORY  LICENCE  FOR  COVER  VERSIONS 
  The Committee is inclined to agree with the Depar tment’s view that continuation of fair use clause 
with statutory license under 52 (1) (j) needs to be  removed from the list of fair dealing under sectio n 52 
and be placed under Chapter VI i.e. , licences. The Committee has been given to underst and that the 
proposed provision will lead to protection of inter est of music industry engaged in the creation of 
original music and certain additional safeguards th rough a statutory licencing provision have been 
provided to suit the needs of the music industry in  digital environment and to ensure that while makin g 
sound recording of any literary, dramatic or musica l work, the interest of the copyright holder is dul y 
protected. The Committee fails to understand the re servations of music companies specially in view of 
proposed provision being incorporated in place of e xisting provision that too in the background of 
judicial pronouncements.   (Para 14.4)  

XV.  CLAUSE 17: SECTION 31D: STATUTORY LICENCE FOR RADIO BROADCASTING OF 
LITERARY AND MUSICAL WORKS AND SOUND RECORDING 
15.5   While agreeing with the justification given by the Department for bringing in Section 31 D, the 
Committee would like to point out that there should be no ambiguity in its applicability. The Committee 
also takes note of the fact that following procedur al shortcomings specially taking into account groun d 
realities- 
– viability of payment of royalty in advance. 
– Practicability of compulsory mentioning of artist s’ names  
– Requirement of maintenance of agreement between t he radio broadcaster and the copyright 
society may form part of relevant rules. 
The Committee would be happy if a viable solution of the aforesaid shortcomings is arrived at. 
        (Para 15.5)  
XVI. CLAUSES 18: SECTION 33: REGISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT SOCIETY 
  CLAUSE 20: SECTION 34: ADMINISTRATION OF RIGHTS O F OWNER BY COPYRIGHT 
  SOCIETY.  
  CLAUSE 22: SECTION 35: CONTROL OVER THE COPYRIGHT  SOCIETY BY THE OWNER 
  OF RIGHTS. 
  The Committee notes that there are inherent probl ems in the administration and functioning of 
copyright societies which have been continuing sinc e long. Situation has deteriorated to such an exten t 
that the owners of works/music companies are domina ting these societies denying equity shares to the 
performers/authors. The basic reason for such a dis mal scenario is obviously entirely different 
considerations and interests of the owners and auth ors. The Committee further notes that due to the 
subjective functioning of the copyright societies a uthors are being invariably put to disadvantages. T he 
Committee, after hearing the views of all the stake holders representing both owners and authors is 
aware about the specific but very different concern s of both these parties. The Committee also takes 
note of the justification given by the Department t hat in view of owner members taking control of the 
copyright societies, formation and administration of copyright societies was required to be placed under 
the control and supervision of the authors. (Para 16.11)  
  The Committee, after analyzing the pros and cons of the proposed amendments feels that obliging 
only authors to form and register a copyright society may not prove to be a right decision as it may l ead 
to serious practical consequences. Firstly, it will  keep the owners of rights viz  recording companies, 
music publishers, book publishers etc. out of the a mbit of these societies leading to a vacuum. It wou ld 
not be wrong to say that it would be a remedy worse than a malaise. Secondly, the complete handover of 
the copyright society to the authors alone would no t be fair and balanced. Legally and practically the  
owners of rights have been the owners of copyright and there would be no harm if they also remain 
members of the copyright societies. The Committee t akes note of the fact that this was a suggestion 
made by some of the stakeholders. Composition of th e copyright society should be such that both 
authors and owners get their rightful share. The Co mmittee further feels that there is no denying the 
fact that authors need protection of their rights. However, the way to achieve this protection is not by 
excluding the other stakeholder i.e owners of right s. A mechanism has to be evolved whereunder both 
authors and owners are allowed to form and administ er the copyright societies with all the members 
having equal rights and powers.  (Para 16.12)  

  The Committee is well aware of the fact that the author of work is the original person who 
authors. Equally true is the fact that the subsequent owner could be any other person. If the word owner 
of copyright is removed from the existing provision s, it would simply mean that subsequent owner 
would have no right and would not be entitled to an y benefits. Therefore, the blanket removal of the 
word “owners of right” cannot be considered an appr eciable move. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the proposed amendments in Sections  33, 34 and 35 may not be carried out. At the 
same time, the Committee would like to emphasise th at composition of the copyright societies should be  
balanced, with equal rights for all categories of m embers. The Committee would also like to draw the 
attention of the Department to section 33(4) whereu nder the Central Government can cancel the 
registration of a copyright society if it is satisfied that it is being managed in a manner detrimental to the 
interests of the concerned owners of rights. The Co mmittee strongly feels that with such a specific 
provision already existing, situation with respect to functioning of IPRS could have been easily handled. 
        (Para 16.13)  
XVII.  CLAUSE 19: SECTION 33A: TARIFF SCHEME BY COPYRIGHT SOCIETIES 
  The Committee notes that various stakeholders inc luding the existing copyright societies had 
certain reservations against the proposal. Committe e’s attention has been particularly drawn by the 
apprehension about copyright societies coming up wi th high tariff schemes drawn up solely at their 
discretion. The Committee was also given to underst and that at present there was no check on the 
formulation of tariff scheme but merely a requireme nt of publication by the society. With the proposed  
amendment coming into effect, the aggrieved person would have no alternative but to pay the fee as per  
the tariff scheme and may face unnecessary hardship s before the appeal was decided and the relief, if 
any, at the end of the appeal may not prove be sufficient for the loss caused. (Para 17.5)  
  The Committee, taking into account the viewpoint of both the stakeholders i.e the copyright 
societies and the users, observes that there is no denying the fact that the process of fixing tariff by the 
copyright societies is not transparent. As per the existing system, the copyright societies are free t o fix 
tariffs without any visible basis / criteria. There  is no system of broad-based consultations by these  
societies as is done in other sectors such as telec om, insurance, broadcasting and electricity. The 
Committee observes that in these sectors, stakehold ers are consulted before tariff is fixed and notifi ed. 
However, such a system is completely lacking in cas e of copyright societies. As a result, there are 
instances of arbitrariness, arm twisting and negotiations by these societies. (Para 17.7)  
  The Committee is of the firm view that the propos ed amendment will result in the introduction of 
a system of a transparent formulation of tariff sch eme by the collective administrative copyright 
societies, which will be subject to scrutiny by the Copyright Board on receipt of appeal by the aggrieved 
party. At the same time, the Committee would like t he Department to take note of the concerns of the 
various stakeholders and provide for a transparent process of tariff fixation by the copyright societi es 
with necessary changes in the relevant rules. The Committee would also take the opportunity to observe 
that for putting in place a well-defined and balanc ed tariff scheme, functioning of Copyright Board as  
well as copyright societies also needs to be regulated, strengthened and made foolproof so as ensure that 
all the stakeholders are benefited. The Committee would be giving its recommendations in this regard in 
the later part of the Report.   (Para 17.8)  
 

XVIII. CLAUSE 25 :SECTION 38 : PERFORMER’S RIGHT 
  CLAUSE 26 :SECTION 38A :  EXCLUSIVE RIGHT OF PERF ORMERS  
  SECTION 38B :  MORAL RIGHTS OF THE PERFORMER. 
  The Committee is inclined to agree with the justi fication given by the Department for inclusion of 
new provisions, sections 38A and 38B. The Committee  feels that apprehensions of film producers and 
music companies are not well-placed, being guided b y their commercial interest. By deleting section 38  
(3) and (4) and bringing in very specific provision s for exclusive and moral rights of performers, the  
Department has only made an attempt to protect the interests of stakeholders in line with the 
international commitments.   (Para 18.6)  
  The Committee would, however, like to draw the at tention of the Department to one ground 
reality highlighted by the Association of the Radio  Operators of India. It was emphatically mentioned 
that defining ‘performance’ as including communicat ion by any means to public of any sound 
recordings virtually over-rules the current judicia l deliberations on whether free broadcast through 
radio constitutes performance. Playing of recorded songs cannot be construed as performance and this 
matter is currently under review of courts. The Com mittee is of the opinion that contention of the 
Association needs to be looked into and provision modified in the light of court rulings. (Para 18.7)  
XIX.  CLAUSE 31: SECTION 52: CERTAIN ACTS NOT TO BE INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT 
  In the light of the divergent views expressed by the stakeholders particularly with regard to the 
stipulation of 14 days period under 52 (1) (c) the Committee is of the view that the viability of the 
duration of 14 days may again be reviewed by way of  balancing the views of the stakeholders as well as  
the lagal requirement in the matter. As for the words the “transient and incidental” occurring in section 
51 (1) (b) and 52 (1) (c) the Committee recommends that the word ‘and’ may be replaced with the word 
or in both the clauses so as to read “transient or incidental”. The Committee feels that this will take care 
of the concern of ISPs for unlimited liability for third party actions. (Para 19.10)  
XX.  CLAUSE 36: SECTION 65 A: PROTECTION OF TECHNOLOGICAL MEASURES  
  SECTION 65 B: PROTECTION OF RIGHTS MANAGEMENT INF ORMATION 
  When these concerns were taken up with the Depart ment it was clarified that one of the 
drawbacks of digital technology was the possibility  of high rate of infringement (digital piracy) and the 
technological solutions were used to prevent this. Digital locks (technological protection measures -
popularly known as TPM) were invented to prevent in fringement of works. At the same time, duplicate 
keys (circumvention technology) were also developed  to unlock the digital locks used by owners of 
copyright to prevent infringement. The use of TPM h ad a significant impact on users since the freedom 
to use the work (fair use of works) permitted by la w was considerably regulated through these 
measures. In the absence of the owner of the works providing key to enjoy fair use, the only option wa s 
to circumvent the technology to enjoy fair use of w orks. There was considerable demand to protect the 
TPM from circumvention by banning manufacture and s ale of devices used for circumvention. On the 
other hand, the users argued that this would preven t the development of dual use technology and also 
prevent the enjoyment of fair use permitted by law.  The major problem of use of law in preventing 
circumvention was the impact on public interest on access to work facilitated by the copyright laws. 
Attention was drawn to the WIPO treaties which prov ided a very flexible provision to protect TPM. 
This provision allowed member countries to develop laws to prevent circumvention of technological 

measures, keeping in mind the public interest of ac cess to works. Developed countries like US, EU, 
Australia, Japan etc. have enacted laws to prevent circumvention resulting in abuse and affecting public 
interest. The unintended consequences of these laws  resulted in blocking research and development of 
new technologies. It was pointed out that India was  yet to face major problems of circumvention due to  
low level of penetration of digital technology. Tak ing note of experience of developed countries in 
developing laws for prevention of circumvention of technological measures, the Committee agrees with 
the approach as enshrined in section 65 A to give limited legislative guidelines and allow the judiciary to 
evolve the law based on practical situations, keepi ng in mind the larger public interest of facilitati ng 
access to work by the public. The Committee takes n ote of the fact that many terms have been 
consciously left undefined, given the complexities faced in defining these terms in the laws of develo ped 
countries. The Committee would, however, like to em phasize that a constant watch would have to be 
kept on the impact of this provision and corrective measures taken as and when required.    (Para 20.7)  
  The Committee is of the view that the parties res ponsible for distribution or broadcasting or 
communication to the public through authorized lice nce from the author or rights holder and who do 
not remove any rights management information delibe rately for making unauthorized copies need not 
worry about this provision as long as their act is as per the framework of this provision.      (Para 20.11)  
XXI.  GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS 
  Functioning of copyright societies:--- 
  The Committee observes that inspite of there bein g provisions in the Act and rules framed 
thereunder regulating the copyright societies, over  the years a disturbing trend in their functioning has 
been developing which has led to disputes between t he major stakeholders and resultant court cases. 
The Department has also admitted that the administration of copyright societies has been taken over by 
the owners whose interest is different from that of  the authors and in many cases authors are being 
deprived of their benefits. Another area of concern  noticed by the Committee is the Tariff Scheme for 
the Copyright Societies. Although as per Rule 14J of the Copyright Rules, 1958, a Copyright Society has 
to frame a Tariff Scheme setting out the nature and  quantum of fees or royalties, no provision is ther e 
for governing or regulating the system of fixation, collection and distribution of royalty under section 33 
of the Act. A system of formulation of a Tariff Sch eme by the Collective Administrative Societies has 
accordingly been brought as section 33A under the proposed legislation. The Committee feels that this is 
a step taken in the right direction and will put on  end to the arms-twisting negotiations of Copyright  
Societies.      (Para 21.11)  
  The Committee would like to draw the attention of  the Department to Section 33 of the Act which 
empowers the Central Government to regulate the fun ctioning of Copyright Societies. As per this 
provision the registration of a Copyright Society c an be suspended for not more than one year or 
cancelled by the Central Government after conducting an inquiry, in the event of it being managed in a  
manner detrimental to the interests of owners of ri ghts. Not only this, Section 36 clearly provides th at 
every Copyright Society has to submit to the Regist rar of Copyright Society annual returns. Under this  
very section, any officer duly authorized by the Ce ntral Government can call for any report or records  
of any Copyright Society so as to injure that the f ees collected by it in respect of rights administer ed by 
it are being utilized or distributed in accordance with the provisions the Act the purpose for highlighting 
all these provisions is that had the Central Govern ment played a more pro-active role, perhaps things 
would not have reached such an alarming level. The Committee can only conclude that with the 

proposed provision relating to Tariff Scheme and us e of powers already there in the Act/rules by the 
Central Government through its authorized officers, copyright societies will be functioning as envisaged 
under the Copyright Law.   (Para 21.12)  
Copyright Board 
    The Committee observes that the responsibilitie s of the Copyright Board, a very important  
statutory body assigned very crucial powers and fun ctions, have increased manifold over the years. Not  
only this, in the light of changing global scenario with emerging areas coming under the Copyright Law, 
the need for strengthening the Copyright Board is b eing increasingly felt. It has to be a full time Bo ard 
with inclusion of experts in specified areas relate d to Copyright law. The Committee is happy to note 
that exercise in this direction has already been in itiated by the Department. The Committee will 
appreciate if all the corrective measures are taken  at the earliest by the Department. Besides that, t he 
Committee is also of the firm view that all the pro visions in the Act as well as in the rules relating  to the 
Copyright Board may be reviewed and amendments carr ied out in the light of suggestions put forth 
before it.      (Para 21.17)  
  The heart and soul of copyrights depends on three  mechanisms such as (i) Copyright Societies (ii) 
Registrar of Copyright and (iii) Copyright Board. I f all the three are independent and dynamic then 
only the copyright justice will be perfect and reli able. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the  
Government should act emergently to revitalize thes e three institutions by formulating clear rules and  
appointing fulltime experts and professional with accountability clubbed with sufficient powers. More so 
all the three organizations are to be fully moderni zed with all e-management system and manned by 
professionals and technical experts. (Para 21.18)  
Internet Piracy 
  A number of stakeholders who appeared before the Committee were of the opinion that the 
amendment Bill hardly addresses the issue of intern et piracy. It was pointed out that the spread of 
internet in India was of utmost importance and effe ctive protection to copyright works in digital form  
needed to be given. Music Industry is particularly plagued by large scale piracy as several websites h ost 
pirate music. The law enforcement on this particular issue has been quite lax. It was pointed out that the 
existing and proposed amendments will not be able t o curb piracy unless the copyright legislation is 
brought in tune with the Information Technology Act , 2000 which provides for power to intercept, 
monitor or decrypt information through any computer  source on certain grounds mentioned therein. 
The Committee therefore urges the Department to bring the copyright law in tune with the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 so far as internet piracy is c oncerned. A designated authority for managing 
copyrights issues and piracy is to be created with sufficient policing powers.  (Para 22) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVIII  
EIGHTEENTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 26th May, 2010 
in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  
 3. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani  
 4. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 5. Shri N.K. Singh 
 6. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 7. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
 8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
  LOK  SABHA  
 9. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 10. Shri P.K. Biju 
 11. Shri Jitendra Singh Bundela  
 12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 13. Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 14. Shri P. Kumar 
 15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 16. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
  SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
 I.  Representatives of Department of Higher Education,  Ministry of HRD and Legislative  
  Department, Ministry of Law and Justice.  
(i) Smt. Vibha Puri Das, Secretary   
(ii) Shri Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary 
(iii) Shri Amit Khare, Joint Secretary 
(iv) Shri Narayan Raju, Joint Secretary (Legislativ e Department)  

(v) Shri G.R. Raghavendra, Deputy Secretary  
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6.  The Committee, then heard the views of Secretar y, Department of Higher Education on the Copyright 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. She briefed the Committee about the various aspects that necessitated amendments to 
the different sections of the Bill. She also made a  power point presentation during the briefing. The Members 
put forward their queries which were replied to by the Secretary. The Chairman wanted to know whether the 
Department has identified any specific problem area s in the operation of the Bill and sought a status note on 
the court cases regarding the Bill. The Committee d ecided to send a questionnaire for written replies of the 
Department. 
7. * * * 
8.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
9.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 4th June, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XIX  
NINETEENTH  MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 4th June, 2010 in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  
 3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 4. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 5. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
 6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 8. Shri Kirti Azad 
 9. Shri P.K. Biju 
 10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 11. Shri Jitendra Singh Bundela  
 12. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 13. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav  
 14. Shri P. Kumar 
 15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 16. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 17. Shri Tapas Paul 
 18. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 19. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 20. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 21. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
  SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
  (i) Shri Javed Akhtar, MP, Rajya Sabha 
  (ii)  Shri Ameet Datta, Advocate 
  (iii)  Shri Krishna Raj Gopal, Advocate 

2. * * * 
3.  The Committee first heard the views of Shri Jav ed Akhtar, Member, Rajya Sabha, Shri Ameet Datta, 
Advocate and Sai Krishna Raj Gopal, Advocate on the  Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The witnesses 
shared with the Committee their views on copyright issues pertaining to authors and lyricists. The Com mittee 
directed them to furnish additional points if any i ncluding the copies of contracts between writers an d 
producers as mentioned by them during their deposition. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 15th June, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XX  
TWENTIETH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 15th June, 2010 in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  
 3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 5. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
 6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7. Shri Suresh Angadi 
 8. Shri Kirti Azad 
 9. Shri P.K. Biju 
 10. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 11. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 12. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
 13. Shri P. Kumar . 
 14. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 16. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 17. Shri P. Viswanathan 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
Association Name 
      1    2 
The Film & Television Producers Guild of India Shri  Manmohan Shetty 
Ltd., Mumbai Shri Yash Chopra 
 Shri Ramesh Sippy 
 Shri Mahesh Bhatt 
 Shri Mukesh Bhatt 

 Shri Bhushan Kumar 
 Shri Siddharth Roy Kapur 
 Shri Ameet Naik 
Indian Motion Picture Producers’ Association, Shri T.P. Aggarwal 
Mumbai Ms Sushama Shiromanee 
Federation of Indian Publishers, New Delhi Shri Ana nd Bhushan 
 Shri Shakti Malik 
 Shri Asoke K. Ghosh 
 Shri B.K. Sharma 
Association of Publishers in India, New Delhi Shri Sanjeev Goswami 
 Shri Manas Saikia 
 Shri Vivek Govil 
 Mr. Mike Brayan 
 Shri Saikrishna Rajagopal 
Inclusive Planet, Kochi Shri Rahul Cherian 
 Shri Shamnad Basheer 
Xavier’s Resource Centre for the Visually Dr. Sam T araporevala 
Challenged, Mumbai Ms. Neha Trivedi 
 Shri Ketan Kothari 
 Ms. Kanchan Pamanai 
 Shri Dipendra Manocha 
   
2. * * * 
3.  The Committee first heard the views of represen tatives from the Film and Television Producers Guild of 
India Ltd., Mumbai and Indian Motion Picture Producers’ Association, Mumbai. The witnesses shared with the 
Committee certain apprehensions they were having wi th regard to proposed relevant amendments in the 
Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chairman and the members sought certain clarifications on the issues 
raised by them which were answered by the experts. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire, based on 
the deliberations of the day and the issues remained unanswered, to witnesses for replies within a fortnight.  
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
  The Committee then adjourned for lunch at 1.00 
P.M. 
4. * * * 
5.  Resuming its series of interactions on the Copy right (Amendment) Bill, 2010, the Committee then heard 
the views of representatives from Inclusive Planet,  Kochi, Xavier’s Resource Centre for the Visually 
Challenged, Mumbai, Federation of Indian Publishers, New Delhi and Association of Publishers in India, New 
Delhi in two separate sessions. After some discussion the Committee decided to forward a questionnaire on the 
Bill to each of the representatives with the direction to respond within 15 days. 

  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd June, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXI  
TWENTY-FIRST MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd June, 2010 in 
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan   
 3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai    
 4. Shri M. Rama Jois    
 5. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari    
 6. Shri Prakash Javadekar    
  LOK  SABHA    
 7. Shri Suresh Angadi    
 8. Shri Kirti Azad    
 9. Shri P.K. Biju    
 10. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar    
 11. Shri P. Kumar    
 12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad   
 13. Shri Tapas Paul    
 14. Shri Joseph Toppo    
 15. Shri P. Viswanathan    
 16. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi    
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
 I. Motion Picture Association, Mumbai  
  Shri Rajiv Dalal, Managing Director  
 II. Confederation of Societies of Authors and Comp osers (CISAC)  
  (i) Mr. Ang Kwee Tiang, Regional Director  
  (ii) Mr. Achille Forler 
 III. Authors Guild of India, New Delhi  

  (i) Shri Upendra Kumar, Vice-President 
  (ii) Shri S.S. Awasthi, Secretary-General 
  (iii) Smt. Sarojini Pritam, Writer 
  (iv) Dr. H.L. Bachhotia, Author and Educationist  
  (v) Shri R.P. Gupta, Advocate 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Praka sh Javadekar, M.P., Rajya Sabha who was recently 
nominated as member of the Committee. He then appri sed the Members about the day’s agenda on the 
Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
3.  The Committee first heard the views of Mr. Raji v Dalal from the Motion Pictures, Mumbai. The 
Members sought certain clarifications which the wit ness replied to. The Committee decided to send a 
questionnaire based on the deliberations of the day  and the issues which remained unanswered to the wi tness 
for replies within a fortnight.  
  (The witness then withdrew) 
4.  Thereafter, the experts from International Conf ederation of Societies of Authors and Composers 
(CISAC) shared their views and apprehensions on the  Bill with the Committee. The Chairman and members 
raised certain queries which were replied to by the  experts. The Committee decided to send a questionn aire 
based on the deliberations of the day and other iss ues which remained unanswered, to witnesses for rep lies 
within a fortnight. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
5.  The Committee then heard the views of the repre sentatives of the Authors Guild of India. They replied to 
certain queries raised by the members. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M., on Tuesday, the 29th June, 
2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXII  
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 29th June, 2010 in 
Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan  
 3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
 4. Shri N. K. Singh  
 5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 6. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari  
 7. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
  LOK  SABHA  
 8. Shri Suresh Angadi  
 9. Shri Kirti Azad 
 10. Shri P .K. Biju 
 11. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 12. Shri P. Kumar 
 13. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 14. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 15. Shri Tapas Paul 
 16. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 17. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 18. Shri P. Viswanathan 
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
 I. The News Broadcasting Association (NBA)  
  (i) Shri Shazi Zaman, Editor, Star News 
(ii) Shri Satish K. Singh, Editor, Zee News 
(iii) Shri Ajay Kumar, Executive Producer, Aajtak  
(iv) Shri Pradeep Ganapathy, NDTV 
(v) Shri Anup J. Bhambhani, NBA Counsel  
(vi) Smt. Annie Joseph, Secretary General, NBA  
(vii) Shri Chanderlok Nainta, Manager, NBA 
 II. The Indian Broadcasting Foundation, New Delhi  
(i) Shri Jawahar Goel, President, IBF 
(ii)  Shri Rajat Sharma, India TV 
(iii)  Smt. Pratibha Singh 

(iv)  Shri Sudeep Chatterjee 
(v)  Shri A. Mohan, Zee TV 
(vi)  Shri Venkatraman, Zee TV 
(vii)  Shri Mani Kumar, EENADU 
(viii)  Ms. Sheenaz Dastur, Star India 
(ix)  Shri Ashish Chandra, Star India 
(x)  Shri Rohit Gupta, MSM 
(xi)  Ms. Dipti Kotak, MSM 
(xii)  Shri Amod Gupte, Zoom/Times Now  
(xiii)  Shri N.P. Nawani, Secretary General, IBF  
(xiv)  Mr. K. Aravaudhan 
(xv)  Shri Ajay Kumar 
 III. RPG Enterprises-Saregama, Kolkata  
(i) Shri G.B. Aayeer  
(ii) Shri Neil Mason  
(iii) Shri Harshad Barde 
 IV. The Indian Music Industry  
(i) Shri Kumar Taurani, Chairman  
(ii) Shri V.J. Lazarus, President  
(iii) Shri Suresh Srinivasan, COO  
(iv) Shri Neil Mason, Legal Retainer 
 V. South India Music Companies Association, Chenna i  
(i) Shri S. Kalyanasundram, Vice President 
(ii) Shri J. Swaminathan, Secretary 
(iii) Shri S. Rajesh Dhupad, Joint Secretary 
(iv) Shri Jagdeep Grover, Joint Treasurer 
(v) Shri B. Premchandran, Executive Member (Kerala)  
(vi) Shri Ananth Padmanabhan, Legal Officer 
 VI. Business Software Alliance, New Delhi  
(i) Ms. Lizum Mishra 
(ii) Shri Keshav Dhakad  
(iii) Shri Saikrishna Rajgopal 
 VII. Yahoo India Private Ltd., Bangalore  
(i) Shri Amitabh Lal Das, General Counsel  
(ii) Shri Nandan Pandey 
VIII.  e-Bay India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai  
   Shri Rajendra Pundey 

 IX. Google India Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon  
   Shri Ramanjit Singh Chima, General Counsel 
 X. Internet and Mobile Association of India, New D elhi  
(i) Shri Sailesh Rao, Chairman 
(ii) Dr. Subho Rajy, President 
(iii) Smt. Chitrita Chatterjee, Associate Vice- Pre sident  
(iv) Smt. Vasanthika Srinath 
(v) Shri Siddharth Sharma 
(vi) Shri Vakul Sharma 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of th e representatives of News Broadcasting Association and 
Indian Broadcasting Foundation on the Copyright (Am endment) Bill, 2010. The members sought certain 
clarifications which the witnesses replied to. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire based on the 
deliberations of the day to the witnesses for replies within a fortnight.  
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
4.  The Committee then interacted with the represen tatives of the RPG Enterprises-Saregama, Kolkata, t he 
Indian Music Industry and the South India Music Com panies Association, Chennai on the Bill. The member s 
raised certain queries which were replied to by the  witnesses. The Committee decided to send a questio nnaire 
regarding the unanswered queries and issues to the witnesses for replies within a fortnight. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew and the Committee ad journed for lunch) 
5.  The Committee re-assembled after lunch at 2.30 
P.M. to hear the views of the representatives of the 
Business Software Alliance, New Delhi on the Bill. Clarifications were sought by members which were replied 
to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire based on the deliberation of the day to the 
witnesses for replies within a fortnight. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
6.  The Committee then held discussion with the rep resentatives of Internet and Mobile Association of 
India, Yahoo India Private Limited and e-Bay India Private Limited on the Bill. Certain queries which were 
raised by the members were replied to by the expert s. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire to  these 
associations also for replies within a fortnight ba sed on the unanswered queries and issues raised dur ing the 
deliberation of the day. 

7.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
8.  The Committee adjourned at 4.30 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M., on Wednesday, the 30th June, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

RECORD  OF  DISCUSSION  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 30th June, 2010 
in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman 
 2. Shri N.K. Singh 
 3. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
  LOK  SABHA  
 4. Shri Kirti Azad 
 5. Shri P. K. Biju 
 6. Shri P. C. Gaddigoudar 
 7. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 8. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 9. Shri Sis Ram Ola 
 10. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
  WITNESSES  
 I. Copyright Board  
 1. Dr. Raghbir Singh, Chairman 
 II. The Phonographic Performance Ltd.  
 2. Sh. Vijay Lazarus, President, 
 3. Sh. Vipul Pradhan, Chief Executive Officer  
 4. Sh. Suresh Srinivasan, COO 
 5. Sh. J. Ribeiro 
 6. Sh. Neil Mason, Legal Retainer 
 7. Sh. Ram Prakash Gupta, Vice-Chairman  
 8. Sh. G. B. Aayeer 
 III. Indian Reprographic Rights Organization (IRRO )  
 9. Sh. Anand Bhushan, Secretary General  
 10. Sh. Shakti Malik, Treasurer 
 11. Sh. Arun Singh, Legal Adviser 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  

Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting which was in continuation of the 
series of interactions held with the stakeholders o n the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. He informed  the 
members that the memoranda received from all the wi tnesses who appeared before the Committee have been  
referred to the Ministry of Human Resource Development to furnish clause-by-clause comments on the Bill so 
as to facilitate the deliberations on the subject. 
3.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of th e Chairman of Copyright Board on the role of the Board, 
the strength and weaknesses of the Copyright Manage ment System and the conflict of issues amongst vari ous 
stakeholders on the Copyright matters. The Chairman  and the members raised some queries which were 
replied to by the witness. The Committee decided to send a questionnaire for replies within a fortnight. 
  (The witness then withdrew) 
4.  The Committee then interacted with the represen tatives of the Phonographic Performance Ltd. and th e 
Indian Reprographic Rights Organization. The Chairm an and the members raised certain queries which wer e 
replied to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to send questionnaire to the witnesses for replies within a 
fortnight. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
5.  Thereafter, Shri Kirti Azad on behalf of the me mbers of the Committee and also on his own behalf 
thanked the Chairman for his noteworthy contribution as Chairman of the Committee to its working. Shri Azad 
also placed on record appreciation of the Committee for the Chairman giving opportunity to all the members to 
air their views and encouraging them to actively en gage in examining the important Bills which have be en 
referred to the Committee. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 1.02 
P.M. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXIII 
TWENTY-THIRD MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 15th July, 2010 in 
Committee Room’ A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes  ––     Chairman  
 2. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare    
 3. Shri Prakash Javadekar    
  LOK  SABHA    
 4. Shri Suresh Angadi    
 5. Shri Kirti Azad    
 6. Shri P.K. Biju    
 7. Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela    
 8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson    
 9. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar    
 10. Shri P. Kumar    
 11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar   
 12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad   
 13. Shri Sis Ram Ola    
 14. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh   
 15. Shri Joseph Toppo    
 16. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi    
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
 I. The Indian Performing Right Society Limited  
  1. Shri Hasan Kamaa1, Chairman 
  2. Shri Omi Sonik 
  3. Shri G.B. Aiyeer (M/s Saregama India Ltd.)  
  4. Shri Rakesh Nigam, CEO 
  5. Shri Nee1 Mason, Lawyer 
 II. Association of Radio Operators for India (AROI ) 
1. Ms. Anuradha Prasad, President AROI & Chairperso n Radio Dhamaal  
2. Mr. Rahu1 Gupta, Director, Radio Mantra 
3. Mr. Prashant Pandey 
4. Mr. Harish Bhatia, CEO, My FM 
5. Ms. Nisha Narayanan, Sr. VP Kal Radio (Sun Group ) 
6. Mr. Rohit Lal, Commercial Head, Red FM 
7. Ms. Reshma Khalid, CEO, Radio City 

8. Mr. Ashok Naraayan, VP, Small Operators, AROI 
9. Mr. Uday Chawla, Secretary General, AROI 
10. Mr. G. Krishnan, CEO, Aajtak/Radio Today 
11. Mr. Puneet Jain, Coy. Secretary, Aajtak/Radio T oday 
12. Mr. Soumen Choudhury, Business Head, Big FM 
13. Mr. Ashwin Padmanabhan, Delhi Station Head, Big  FM 
 III. South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce  
1. Dr. Dasari Narayana Rao, M.P., Leading Director and Former President 
2. Mr. C. Kalyan, President 
3. Mr. L. Suresh, Hon. Secretary, Film Federation o f India 
4. Mr. Ravi Kottarakara, Hon. Secretary, Vice-Presi dent, Film Federation of India 
5. Mr. D. Suresh Babu, Director, Rama Naidu Studios  
6. Mr. S.S.T. Subramaniam, General Secretary, Keral a Film Chamber of Commerce 
7. Mr. A.R. Raju, Executive Committee Member, Karna taka Film Chamber of Commerce  
8. Mr. K.V. Gupta, Executive Committee Member, Karn ataka Film Chamber of Commerce  
9. Sri K.S. Srinivasan, Treasurer 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting which was scheduled to hear the 
representatives/experts on the Copyright (Amendment ) Bill, 2010. The Chairman mentioned that as per th e 
direction of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, the Com mittee has to present the report on the Copyright 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 by 15th August, 2010 and sou ght the cooperation of members of the Committee in 
finalizing deliberations on the Bill. 
3.  The Committee, then heard the views of the repr esentatives of the Indian Performing Right Society Ltd. 
Mumbai on the proposed amendments in the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chairman and members 
sought certain clarifications on the issues which were replied by the witnesses. The Committee decided to send 
a questionnaire to the witnesses for replies within a week. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 
4.  Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of th e representatives of Association of Radio Operators  for 
India, New Delhi. The members raised certain queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Commi ttee 
decided to send a questionnaire to the witnesses for replies within a week. 
  (The witnesses then withdrew) 

5.  The Committee then heard the views of the repre sentatives of the South India Film Chambers of 
Commerce on the Bill. The Chairman and members soug ht certain clarifications which were replied to by the 
witnesses. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The Committee adjourned at 5.50 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M., on Friday, the 16th July, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXIV  
TWENTY-FOURTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 16th July, 2010 in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  ––     in the Chair  
 2. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
  LOK  SABHA  
 3. Shri Suresh Angadi  
 4. Shri Kirti Azad  
 5. Shri P.K. Biju  
 6. Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela  
 7. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 8. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar  
 9. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav  
 10. Shri P. Kumar  
 11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 13. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 14. Shri Joseph Toppo  
 15. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi  
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
 I. EXPERTS ON COPYRIGHT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010  
1. Shrimati Shubha Mudgal, Classical Singer  
2. Shri Sanjay Tandon 
 II. EXPERTS ON THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLO GY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2010  
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION  
1. Smt. Vibha Puri Das, Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Thakur, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Sunil Kumar, Additional Secretary (HE) 
4. Shri S.K. Ray Additional Secretary & Financial A dvisor  
5. Shri N.K. Sinha, Joint Secretary 
6. Prof. P.N. Singh, Chairman, BOG, NIT - Agartala  
7. Shri H.R. Joshi, Director 
8. Prof. Sandeep Sancheti, Director, NITK - Surathk al  
9. Prof. S.S. Gokhale, Director, VNIT - Nagpur 

10. Prof. N. Sathyamurthy, Director, IISER - Mohali  
11. Dr. V.P. Goel, DDG 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4.   Thereafter, the Committee interacted with Shri mati Subha Mudgal, classical singer and Shri Sanjay  
Tandon on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. Mem bers sought certain clarifications which were repli ed 
to by the witnesses. 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6.  The Committee adjourned at 1.10 
P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M., on Thursday, the 22nd July, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXV  
TWENTY - FIFTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 22nd July, 2010 in 
Committee Room’ A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes       ––       Chairman  
 2. Shri N.K. Singh 
 3. Shri M. Rama Jois  
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 5. Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 6. Shri P .K. Biju 
 7. Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela  
 8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 9. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 10. Shri P. Kumar 
 11. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 13. Shri Sis Ram Ola 
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
 I. DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION   
  MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
(i)  Smt. Vibha Puri Das, Secretary 
(ii) Shri Amit Khare, Joint Secretary, (Book Promot ion and Copyright) 
(iii) Prof. N.S. Gopalkrishnan, MHRD, IPR Chairpers on 
(iv) Prof. Ramakrishna, MHRD, IPR Professor, NLSUI,  Bangalore 
(v) Prof. V.C. Vivekananda, MHRD, IPR Chair Profess or, NALSAR, University of Hyderabad 
 II. MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE (LEGISLATIVE DEPAR TMENT)  
(i) Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary  
(ii) Shri R.K. Pattanayak, DLC 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 

Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee to continue the 
examination of the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010 . Recapitulating the progress made so far on the 
mandate before the Committee, the Chairman complime nted the members for their useful contribution in t he 
series of interactions with various stakeholders. H e reminded the members about the deadline fixed for  
submission of report on the Bill and sought their c ooperation and wisdom on finalization of Committee’ s 
deliberation. Some of the members wanted adequate t ime for going through voluminous documents and the 
feedback received during interactions for judicious  scrutiny and to arrive at conclusions/observations  on the 
Bill. It was felt that though the Committee would attempt to finalise its report by the 15th August, 2010 but for 
any eventuality, extension of time may be considered depending on assimilation of further feedback that might 
be required from the Department. 
3.   The Committee, then, heard the views of the Se cretary, Department of Higher Education and other 
officials of the Legislative Department on differen t provisions including the core issues of the Copyr ight 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chairman and members ra ised certain queries which were replied to by the 
witnesses. The Committee decided to send a question naire to the Department of Higher Education for rep lies 
within a week. 
4.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
5.  The Committee adjourned at 5.10 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXVIII 
TWENTY - EIGHTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 18th August 
2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes      ––      Chairman  
 2. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 3. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 5. Shri N. Balaganga 
 6. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7. Shri P.K. Biju 
 8. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 9. Shri Prasanta Kumar Mazumdar  
 10. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
 11. Shri Tapas Paul 
 12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 13. Shri Joseph Toppo 
 14. Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for considera tion a statement prepared by the Secretariat on var ious 
provisions of the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010.  Members gave their suggestions on some provisions of 
the Bill. In view of comprehensive changes/amendmen ts, the Committee decided to continue its deliberat ions 
on the Bill in its next sitting. 
5.  The Committee adjourned at 6.00 
P.M. to meet again on Thursday, the 26th August, 2010. 
 

XXIX 
TWENTY - NINTH MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 26th August 2010 
in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes      ––      Chairman  
 2. Shri M. Rama Jois 
 3. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 4. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 5. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
  LOK  SABHA  
 6. Shri P.K. Biju 
 7. Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 8. Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 9. Shri Prasanta Kumar Mazumdar  
 10. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 'Vinnu' 
 11. Shri Joseph Toppo 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting which was convened to continue 
clause by clause discussion on the Copyright (Amend ment) Bill, 2010. He sought their views on various 
provisions of the Bill so that the line of reportin g on the Bill would be finalized. The Committee, th en, 
resumed consideration of the unfinished portion of a statement prepared by the Secretariat on the vari ous 
provisions of the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010.  The Chairman suggested that the members of the 
Committee may sit again on 30th August to finalize the deliberations. 
3.  Thereafter, the Committee considered the status  of six Bills referred to it for examination in the  context 
of large mandate, the time constraints for its comp letion and the impending re-constitution of the Com mittee. 
The Committee decided to seek extension of time for  five Bills excluding the National Institutes of 
Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2010. It was decided t hat extension of time up to 15th October, 2010 may be 
sought in respect of Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 20 10. As for the remaining four Bills i.e. the Foreig n 
Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010, the Prohibition of Unfair Practices in 
Technical Educational Institutions, Medical Educati onal Institutions and Universities Bill, 2010, the National 

Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Bill, 2010 and the Central Educ ational 
Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment B ill, 2010, extension of time be sought till 31st 
December, 2010. 
4. * * * 
5.  The Committee adjourned at 5.30 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

III 
THIRD - MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Friday, the 1st October, 2010 in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes      ––      Chairman  
 2.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 3.  Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 4.  Shri Pramod Kureel 
 5.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
 6.  Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7.  Shri P.K.Biju 
 8.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
 9.  Shri Rahul Gandhi  
 10.  Shri P. Kumar 
 11.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 12.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad  
 13.  Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 14.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 15.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 16.  Shri Joseph Toppo 
 17.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’  
 18.  Shri P. Viswanathan 
  LIST OF WITNESSES  
 I.  DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION  
  MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
(i) Smt. Vibha Puri Das, Secretary 
(ii) Shri S.K. Ray, Addl. Secretary & F.A. 
(iii) Ms. Pratima Dixit, Director 
(iv) Prof. K.P. Singh, Director, Institute of Techn ology(BHU)  
(v) Prof. A.K. Tripathi, Professor, Institute of Te chnology (BHU)  
(vi) Prof. P.K. Mukherjee, Professor, Institute of Technology (BHU) 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  

Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2. * * * 
3. * * * 
4.  The Committee felt that consideration of the Re port on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010 would 
require at least two meetings in view of very compr ehensive nature of the Bill. The Committee, accordi ngly, 
decided to seek extension of time till the 31st Oct ober, 2010 for presentation of the Report to Hon’bl e 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha. 
5. * * * 
6. * * * 
7. * * * 
8. * * * 
9.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.    
10.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 
P.M. to meet again on Wednesday, the 13th October, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IV 
FOURTH - MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 13th October, 
2010 in Committee Room’ A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes      ––      Chairman  
 2.  Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai  
 3.  Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 4.  Shri M. Rama Jois 
 5.  Shri N.K. Singh 
 6.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare  
 7.  Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 8.  Shri Kirti Azad 
 9.  Shri P.K. Biju  
 10.  Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela 
 11.  Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi  
 12.  Shrimati J.Helen Davidson 
 13.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
 14.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 15.  Shri Prataorao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
 16.  Shri P. Kumar 
 17.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 18.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
 19.  Shri Sheesh Ram Ola 
 20.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh  
 21.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
 22.  Shri Joseph Toppo  
 23.  Shri P. Viswanathan 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s to the meeting to consider and adopt draft 227 
th  
Report on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The  Chairman informed the members that the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha had acceded to the request of  the Committee for extension of time till 31st Octo ber, 
2010 for the presentation of the Report on the Copy right (Amendment) Bill, 2010. He also mentioned tha t as 

oral evidence on the Institutes of Technology (Amen dment) Bill, 2010 has already been completed, the 
Secretariat may prepare a draft Report on the same for consideration of the Committee. 
3.   The Committee then took up for consideration d raft 227th Report on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill , 
2010 and after some discussions adopted the same. T he Committee, decided to present the 227 
th 
 Report to the 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha before 31st October 2010, the deadline fixed for presentation. 
4. * * * 
5.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. to meet again on Tuesday, the 19th October, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VII  
SEVENTH-MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 9th November, 2010 
in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes      ––      Chairman  
 2. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 3.  Shri M. Rama Jois 
 4. Shri Pramod Kureel 
 5.  Shri N.K. Singh 
 6. Shrimati Kanimozhi 
 7.  Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 8. Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 9. Shri Kirti Azad 
 10. Shri P.K.Biju 
 11.  Shri Jeetendrasingh Bundela  
 12.  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson  
 13.  Shri Rahul Gandhi 
 14.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda  
 15.  Shri P. Kumar 
 16.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar  
 17.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
 18.  Shri P. Vishwanathan 
  LIST OF WITNESSES 
  DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION  
 1. Smt. Vibha Puri Das, Secretary Higher Education ; 
 2. Sh. N.K. Sinha, Additional Secretary, Ministry of HRD; 
 3. Sh. N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary, Leg islative Deptt.;  
 4. Sh. Amit Khare, Joint Secretary, Deptt. Of High er Education; 
 5.  Prof. E.F.N. Ribeiro, Chairman School of Plann ing & Architecture, Bhopal; 
 6.  Dr. Shovan K. Saha, Director, School of Planni ng & Architecture, Vijayawada;  
 7.  Ar. J.R. Bhalla, Former President of Council o f Architecture; 
 8.  Ar. K. Rajagopalan, Eminent Architect and Memb er of Council of Architect; 
 9.  Ar. Vijay Garg, Jt. Hony, Secretary, Indian In stitute of Architecture; 
 10.  Prof. S. M. Akhtar, Dean, Faculty of Architec ture, Jamia Milia Islamia University;  
 11.  Prof. N.S. Gopalkrishnan, MHRD IPR Chair, CUS AT, Cochin; 
 12.  Dr. Harvinder Singh, Director, Ministry of HR D; 

 13.  Sh. G:R. Raghavender, Director, Deptt. of Hig her Education; 
 14.  Sh. B.K. Bhadri, Assistant Educational Adviso r, MHRD; and 
 15.  Sh. K.K. Mishra, Consultant, MHRD. 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri J. Sundriyal, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer 
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s to the meeting of the Committee which was 
convened to hear the views of the Secretary, Depart ment of Higher Education on the Architects (Amendme nt) 
Bill, 2010. The Chairman also informed the members that he has received some suggestions relating to clauses 
6 and 7 of the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010 ame nding sections 18 and 19 of the Copyright Act, 1957  
from Shri N.K. Singh and Shri Prakash Javadekar, me mbers of the Committee, incorporated in the Report 
relating to the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. T he Committee ascertained views of the Secretary, 
Department of Higher Education so that the said Rep ort is finalized and presented in the Parliament at  the 
earliest. 
3.  The Committee, then, heard the views of the Sec retary, Department of Higher Education with respect to 
amendments in Section 18 and 19 of the Copyright Ac t, 1957. Members sought certain clarifications to w hich 
the Secretary replied. The Committee directed the Secretary to send the response of the Department within one 
or two days. In view of the circumstance, the Committee decided to seek extension of time till 26th November, 
2010 for presentation of the Report on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
4. * * * 
5.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VIII  
EIGHTH - MEETING  
  The Committee on Human Resource Development met a t 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18th November, 
2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri Oscar Fernandes      ––      Chairman  
 2. Dr. K. Keshava Rao 
 3.  Shri Prakash Javadekar  
 4.  Shri M. Rama Jois 
 5.  Shri Pramod Kureel  
 6.  Shri N. Balaganga 
  LOK  SABHA  
 7.  Shri P.K.Biju 
 8.  Shri Suresh Chanabasappa Angadi  
 9.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 10.  Shri Joseph Toppo 
 11. Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey ‘Vinnu’ 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COUNCIL OF ARCHITECTURE  
1. Prof. Vijay Shrikrishna Sohoni, President, Counc il of Architecture  
2. Prof. Uday Chandrakant Gadkari, Member, Council of Architecture  
3. Prof. Inderjit Singh Bakshi, Member, Council of Architecture 
4. Shri Prakash Deshmukh, Member, Council of Archit ecture 
5. Mr. Bharat Thakordas Sheth, Member, Council of A rchitecture 
SECRETARIAT  
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary  
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director  
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Committee Officer  
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the member s to the meeting of the Committee convened for 
hearing the views of the representatives of the Cou ncil of Architecture on various provisions of the A rchitects 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chairman also made a re ference about the discussion held with the Secretar y, 
Department of Higher Education with regard to suggestions of two members on clauses 6 & 7 of the Copyright 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 during the meeting of the Co mmittee held on the 9th November, 2010. Based on th e 
deliberations and subsequent response received from the Department, necessary modifications had been carried 
out in the Committee’s Report on the Bill. 

3.  Thereafter, the Committee gave its approval to the aforesaid modification made in the 227th Report  on 
the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
4. * * * 
5.   The Committee decided to present its 22th Repo rt on the Copyright (Amendment) Bill, 2010 in both the 
Houses of Parliament on the 23rd November, 2010. 
6.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M. to meet again on Thursday, the 25th November, 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE - I  
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA  
19 APR., 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. XXIV  of 2010 
 
THE COPYRIGHT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Copyright Act, 1957;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:– 
 
1.  ( 1) This Act may be called the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2010. 
 ( 2) It shall come into force on such date as the Cent ral Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2.   In section 2 or the Copyright Act, 1957 (hereinaf ter referred to as the 
principal Act), – 
 ( i) in clause ( d),– 
 ( a) in sub-clause ( v), for the words “cinematograph film or sound 
recording, the producer; and”, the words “cinematog raph film, the producer 
and the principal director;” shall be substituted; 
 ( b) sub-clause ( vi ) shall be re-numbered as sub-clause (vii) thereof,  
and before sub-clause ( vii ) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
Short title and 
commencement. 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 “( vi ) in relation to a sound recording, the producer; and”; 
 ( ii ) in clause ( f), the portion beginning with the words “on any 
medium” and ending with the words. “produced by any  means” shall be 
omitted; 
 ( iii ) after clause ( f), ‘the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 
 ( fa ) “commercial rental” does not include the rental, lease or lending 
of a lawfully acquired copy of a computer programme , sound recording, 
visual recording or cinematograph film for non-prof it purposes by a non-
profit library or non-profit educational institution’; 
 ( iv ) for clause ( ff ), the following shall be substituted, namely: 
 ‘( ff ) “communication to the public” means making any wo rk or 
performance available for being seen or heard or ot herwise enjoyed by the 
public directly or by any means of display, or diff usion other than by issuing 
physical copies of it, whether simultaneously or at  places and times chosen 
individually, regardless of whether any member of t he public actually sees, 
hears or otherwise enjoys the work or performance so made available. 
 Explanation,  – For the purposes of this clause, communication through 
satellite or cable or any other means of simultaneous communication to more 
than one household or place of residence including residential rooms of any 
hotel or hostel shall be deemed to be communication to the public;’; 
 ( v) in clause ( m), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “Provided that a copy of a work published in any c ountry outside India 
with the permission of the author of the work and imported from that country 
into India shall not be deemed to be an infringing copy;”; . 
 ( vi ) in clause ( gg ), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 
 “Provided that in a cinematograph film a person wh ose performance is 
casual or incidental in nature and, in the normal c ourse of the practice of the 
industry, is not acknowledged anywhere including in  the credits of the film 
shall not be treated as a performer except for the purpose of clause ( b) of 
section 38B;”; 
 ( vii ) after clause ( x), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: 
 ‘( xa ) “Rights Management Information” means,– 
 ( a) the title or other information identifying the work or performance; 
 ( b) the name of the author or performer; 
 ( c) the name and address of the owner of rights; 
 ( d) terms and conditions regarding the use of the rights; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 ( e) any number or code that represents the informatio n referred to in 
sub-clauses ( a) to ( d), but does not Include any device or procedure int ended 
to identify the user;’ 
 ( viii ) after clause ( xx ), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: 
 ‘( xxa ) “visual recording” means the recording in any med ium, by any 
method including the storing of it by any electroni c means, of moving 
images or of the representations thereof; from whic h they can be perceived, 
reproduced or communicated by any method;’ 
 ( ix ) in clause ( z), the following Explanation shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
 “Explanation, – For the purposes of this clause, a cinematograph film 
shall be deemed as a work of joint authorship excep t in cases where the pro-
ducer and the principal director is the same person;” 
3.  In section 14, of the principal Act,– 
 ( i) in ‘clause ( c), for sub-clause ( i), the following sub-clause shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 “( i) to reproduce the work in any material form including – 
 ( A) the storing of it in any medium by electronic or other means; or  
 ( B) depiction in three-dimensions of a two-dimensional work; or 
 ( C) depiction in two-dimensions of a three dimensional work;” 
 ( ii ) in clause ( d),– 
 ( a) for sub-clause (1), the following sub-clause shal l be substituted, 
namely:— 
 “( i) to make a copy of the film, including— 
 ( A) a photograph of any image forming part thereof; or 
 ( B) storing of it in any medium by electronic or other means;”; 
 ( b) for sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause sha ll be substituted, 
namely:—  
 “( ii ) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for  sale or for such 
rental, any copy of the film;” 
 ( iii ) in clause ( e),– 
 ( a) in sub-clause ( i), after the words “embodying it”, the words 
“including storing of it in any medium by electronic or other means” shall be 
inserted; 
 ( b) for sub-clause ( ii ), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 14. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

namely:– 
 “( ii ) to sell or give on commercial rental or offer for  sale or for such 
rental, any copy of the sound recording”. 
4.   In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words  and figures, “Designs 
Act, 1911”, wherever they occur, the words and figures “Designs Act, 2000” 
shall be substituted.  
5.   In section 17 of the principal Act, in the provis o, after clause ( e), the 
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 “( f) in the case of a cinematograph film produced on o r after the 
commencement of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2010 , the producer and 
the principal director shall be treated jointly as the first owner of copyright; 
 ( g) in the case of a cinematograph film produced befo re the 
commencement of the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2010 , the principal 
director shall enjoy the copyright for a period of ten years after the expiry of 
the duration of copyright in the cinematograph film  subject to the principal 
director entering into a written agreement with the  owner of the copyright in 
the including the subsistence of copyright: 
 Provided that an agreement referred to in this cla use shall not be 
necessary in case where the owner and principal dir ector are the same 
person: 
 Provided further that in case of any work incorpor ated in a 
cinematograph work nothing contained in clauses ( b) and ( c) shall affect the 
right of the author in the work referred to in clau se ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 13;”. 
6.  In section 18 of the principal Act. in sub-section  ( 1), after the proviso, the 
following provisos shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “Provided further that no such assignment shall be  applied to any 
medium or mode of exploitation of the work which di d not exist or was not 
in commercial use at the time when the assignment w as made, unless the 
assignment specifically referred to such medium or mode of exploitation of 
the work: 
 Provided also that the author of the literary or m usical work, included 
in a cinematograph film or sound recording shall no t assign the right to 
receive royalties from the utilization of such work  in any form other than as 
port of the cinematograph film or sound recording except to the legal heirs or 
to a copyright society for collection and distribut ion and any agreement to 
the contrary shall be void.”. 
7.   In section 19 of the principal Act,---- 
 ( i) in sub-section ( 3), for the words “royalty payable, if any”, the 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 15. 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 17. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 19. 

words “royalty and any other consideration payable” shall be substituted; 
 ( ii ) after sub-section ( 7), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:—  
 “(8) The assignment of copyright in any work contr ary to the terms 
and conditions of the rights already assigned to a copyright society in which 
the author of the work is a member shall be void. 
 ( 9) No assignment of the copyright in any work to mak e a 
cinematograph film or sound recording shall affect the right of the author or 
the work to claim royalties or any other considerat ion payable in case of 
utilisation of the work in any form other than as p art of the cinematograph 
film or sound recording”. 
8.  In section 19A of the principal Act, in sub-sectio n ( 2), in the second 
proviso, for the words “Provided further that”, the  following shall be 
substituted, namely:– 
 “Provided further that, pending the disposal of an  application for 
revocation of assignment under this sub-section, th e Copyright Board may 
pass such order, as it deems fit regarding implemen tation of the terms and 
conditions of assignment including any consideratio n to be paid for the 
enjoyment of the rights assigned: 
 Provided also that”. 
9.  In section 21 of the principal Act,– 
 ( i) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “the “Registrar of Copyrights”; the 
words “the Registrar of Copyrights or by way of pub lic notice” shall be 
substituted; 
 ( ii ) after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:– 
 “( 2A ) The Registrar of Copyrights shall, within fourteen days from the 
publication of the notice in the official Gazette, post the notice on the official 
website of the Copyright Office so as to remain in the public domain for a 
period of not less than three years". 
10.  In section 22 of the principal Act, the brackets a nd words “(other than a 
photograph)” shall be omitted. 
11.   Section 25 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
12.   In section 26 of the principal Act, the following  proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
 “Provided that in the case of a principal director , the copyright shall 
subsist until seventy years from the beginning of t he calendar year next 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 19A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 21. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 22. 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 25. 
Amendment of 
section 26. 
 
 
 

following the year in which the film is published”. 
13.   In section 30 of the principal Act, for the words “writing signed by him”, 
the words “writing by him” shall be substituted. 
14.  ln section 30A of the principal Act and in its mar ginal heading, for the 
words, figures and letter, “section 19 and 19A”, th e word and figures 
“section 19” shall be substituted. 
15.  In section 31 of the principal Act,– 
 ( i) in sub-section ( l),– 
 ( a) for the words “any Indian work”, the words “any w ork” shall be 
substituted; 
 ( b) for the words “licence to the complainant” the wo rds “licence to 
such person or persons who, in the opinion of the C opyright Board, is or are 
qualified to do so” shall be substituted; 
 ( c) the Explanation shall be omitted; 
 ( ii ) sub-section ( 2) shall be omitted. 
16.   In section 31A of he principal Act,— 
 ( i)  in the marginal heading, for the words “Indian w orks”, the words 
“or published works” shall be substituted; 
 ( ii ) for sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely: – 
 “( 1) Where, in the case or any unpublished work or any  work 
published or communicated to the public and the wor k is withheld from the 
public in India, the author is dead or unknown or c annot be traced, or the 
owner of the copyright in such work cannot be found , any person may apply 
to the Copyright Board for a licence to publish com municate to the public 
such work or a translation thereof in any language”. 
17.   After section 31A of the principal Act, the follo wing sections shall be 
inserted, namely: – 
 31B. ( 1) An organisation, registered under section 12A of the Income-
tax Act, 1961 and working primarily for the benefit  of persons with 
disability, and recognised under Chapter X of the P ersons With Disabilities 
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full  Participation) Act, 1995, 
may apply to the Copyright Board in such form and m anner and 
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed, for a  compulsory licence to 
publish any work in which copyright subsists for the benefit of such persons, 
in a case to which clause ( zb ) of sub-section ( 1) of section 52 does not apply 
find the Copyright Board shall dispose of such appl ication as expeditiously 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 30. 
 
Amendment of 
section 30A. 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 31. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 31A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new section 31B, 
31C and 31D. 
 
Compulsory licence for 
benefit of disabled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of such application 
within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the application. 
 ( 2) The Copyright Board may, on receipt of an applica tion under Sub-
section ( 1), inquire, or direct such inquiry as it considers necessary to 
establish the credentials of the applicant and satisfy itself that the application 
has been made in good faith, 
 ( 3) If the Copyright Board is satisfied, after giving  to the owners of 
rights in the, work a reasonable opportunity of bei ng heard and after holding 
such inquiry as it may deem, necessary, that a comp ulsory licence needs to 
be issued to make the work available to the disable d, it may direct the 
Registrar of Copyrights to grant to the applicant such a licence to publish the 
work. 
 ( 4) Every compulsory licence issued under this sectio n shall specify 
the means and format of publication, the period during which the compulsory 
Iicence may be exercised and in the case of issue o f copies; the number of 
copies that may be issued: 
 Provided that where the Copyright Board bas issued  such a 
compulsory licence it may, on a further application  and after giving 
reasonable opportunity to the owners of rights, ext end the period of such 
compulsory licence and allow the issue of more copies as it may deem fit. 
 ( 5) The Copyright Board may specify the number of cop ies that may 
be published without payment of royally and may fix  the rate of royalty for 
the remaining copies. 
 31C. ( 1) Any person desirous of making a cover version, be ing a 
sound recording in respect of any literary, dramati c or musical work, where 
sound recordings of that work have been made by or with the licence of 
consent of the owner of the right in the work, may do so subject to the 
provisions of this section: 
 Provided that such sound recordings shall be in th e same medium as 
the last recording unless the medium of the last re cording is no longer in 
current commercial use. 
 ( 2) The person Making the sound recordings shall give  prior notice or 
his intention to make the sound recordings in the m anner as may be 
prescribed, and provide in advance, copies of all c overs or labels with which 
the sound recordings are to be sold, and pay ill ad vance, to the owner or 
rights in each work royalties in respect of all copies to be made by him, at the 
rate fixed by the Copyright Board in this behalf: 
 Provided that such sound recordings shall not be s old or issued in any 
form of packaging or with any cover or label which is likely to mislead or 
confuse the public as to their identity, and in par ticular shall not contain the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statutory licence for cover 
versions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

name or depict in any way any performer of all earlier sound recording of the 
same work or any cinematograph film in which such s ound recording was 
incorporated and, further, shall state on the cover  that it is a cover version 
made under this section.  
 ( 3) The person making such sound recordings shall not  make any 
alteration in the literary or musical work which ha s not been rnade 
previously by or with the consent of the owner of r ights, or which is not 
technically necessary for the purpose of making the sound recordings: 
 Provided that such sound recordings shall not be m ade until the 
expiration of five calendar years after the end of the year in which the first 
sound recordings of the work was made. 
 ( 4) One royalty in respect of such sound recordings s hall be paid for a 
minimum of fifty thousand copies of each work during; each calendar year in 
which copies of it are made: 
 Provided that the Copyright Board may, by general order, fix a lower 
minimum in respect of works in a particular languag e or dialect having 
regard to the potential circulation of such works.  
 ( 5) The person making such sound recordings shall mai ntain such 
registers and books of account in respect thereof, including full details of 
existing stock as may be prescribed and shall allow the owner of rights or his 
duly authorised agent or representative to inspect all records and books of 
account relating to such sound recording: 
 Provided that if on a complaint brought before the  Copyright Board to 
the effect that the owner of rights has not been pa id in full for any sound 
recordings purporting to be made in pursuance of th is section, the Copyright 
Board is, prima facie,  satisfied that the complaint is genuine, it may pa ss an 
order ex parte  directing the person making the sound recording to cease from 
making further copies and, after holding such inqui ry as it considers 
necessary, make such further order as it may deem f it, including an order for 
payment of royalty. 
 Explanation. – For the purposes of this section “cover version” means 
a sound recording made in accordance with this section. 
 31D. ( 1) Any broadcasting organisation desirous of communi cating to 
the public by way of broadcast or by way of perform ance of a literary or 
musical work and sound recording which has already been published may do 
so subject to the provisions of this section.  
 ( 2) The broadcasting organisation shall give prior no tice, in such 
manner as may be prescribed, of its intention to br oadcast the work stating 
the duration and territorial coverage of the broadc ast, and shall pay to the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Statutory licence for radio 
broadcasting of literary and 
musical works and sound 
recording. 
 
 
 
 

owner of rights in each work  royalties in the mann er and at the rate fixed by 
the Copyright Board: 
 ( 3) In fixing the manner and the rate of royalty unde r sub-section ( 2), 
the Copyright Board may require the broadcasting or ganisation to pay an 
advance to the owners of rights. 
 ( 4) The names of the authors and the principal perfor mers of the work 
shall, except in case of the broadcasting organizat ion communicating such 
work by way of performance, be announced with the broadcast, 
 ( 5) No fresh alteration to any literary or musical wo rk, which is not 
technically necessary for the purpose of broadcasti ng, other than shortening 
the work for convenience of broadcast, shall be mad e without the consent of 
the owners of rights. 
 ( 6) The broadcasting organisation shall – 
 ( a) maintain such records find books of account, and render to the 
owners of rights such reports and accounts; and 
 ( b) allow the owner of rights or his duly authorised agent or 
representative to inspect all records and books of account relating to such 
broadcast, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 ( 7) Nothing in this section shall affect the operatio n of any licence 
issued or any agreement entered into before the com mencement of the 
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2010.'.  
18.  In section 33 of the principal Act,– 
 ( i) in sub-section ( 1),– 
 ( a) for the words, brackets and figures “the Copyrigh t (Amendment) 
Act, 1994”, wherever they occur, the words, bracket s and figures “the 
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 2010" shall be substituted; 
 ( b) for the words “No person or association of person s”, the words 
“No association of authors” shall be substituted; 
 ( c) in the first proviso, for the words “owner of cop yright”, the words 
“author of work” shall be substituted; 
 ( d) in the second proviso, for the words “a performin g rights society” 
the words “the copyrights societies” shall be substituted; 
 ( ii ) in sub-section ( 3), for the words “owner of rights”, the words 
“author of works” shall be substituted. 
 ( iii ) in sub-sections ( 4) and ( 5)  for the words “owner of rights”, the 
words “author of works” shall be substituted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 33. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19.   After section 33 of the principal Act, the follow ing section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 
 “33A. ( 1) Every copyright society shall publish its Tariff Scheme in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
 ( 2) Any person who is aggrieved by the tariff scheme may appeal to 
the Copyright Board and the Board may, if satisfied  after holding such 
inquiry as it may consider necessary, make such orders as may be required to 
remove any unreasonable element, anomaly or inconsistency therein: 
 Provided that the aggrieved person shall pay to th e copyright society 
any fee as may be prescribed that has fallen due be fore making an appeal to 
the Copyright Board and shall continue to pay such fee until the appeal is 
decided and the Board shall not issue any order staying the collection of such 
fee pending disposal of the appeal: 
 Provided further that the Copyright Board may afte r hearing the 
parties fix an interim tariff and direct the aggrie ved parties to make the 
payment accordingly pending disposal of the appeal.”. 
20.  In section 34 of the principal Act, for the words “owner of rights”, 
wherever they occur, the words “author of works” shall be substituted, 
21.  Section 34A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
22.  In section 35 of the principal Act and its marginal heading, – 
  ( a) for the words “owners of rights”, wherever they o ccur, the words 
“author of work” shall be substituted;  
 ( b) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( c), for the word “owners”, the word 
“author” shall be substituted. 
23.   In section 36A of the principal Act,– 
 ( a) for the words “performing rights society”, the wo rds “copyright 
society” shall be substituted; 
 ( b) for the words, brackets and figures “the Copyrigh t (Amendment) 
Act, 1994", the words, brackets and figures “the Co pyright (Amendment) 
Act, 2010” shall be substituted. 
24.  In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section  ( 3), for clause ( e), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely:– 
 “( e) sells or gives on commercial rental or offer for sale or for such 
rental, any such sound recording or visual recordin g referred to in clause ( c) 
or clause ( d),” 
25.   In section 38 of the principal Act, sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) shall be 
Insertion of new 
section 33A. 
 
 
Tariff Scheme by copyright 
societies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 34. 
 
Omission of section 34A. 
 
Amendment of 
section 35. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 36A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 37. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 38. 

omitted. 
26.  After section 38 of the principal Act, the followi ng sections shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
 ”38A. ( 1) Without prejudice to the rights conferred on auth ors, the 
performer’s right which is an exclusive right subje ct to the provisions of this 
Act to do or authorize for doing any of the followi ng acts in respect of the 
performance or any substantial part thereof,  namely:— 
 ( a) to make a sound recording or a visual recording o f the 
performance, including– 
 ( i) reproduction of it in any material form including the storing of it in 
any medium by electronic or any other means; 
 ( ii ) issuance of copies of it to the public not being copies already in 
circulation; 
 ( iii ) communication of it to the public; 
 ( iv ) selling or giving it on commercial rental or offe r for sale or for 
commercial rental any copy of the recording; 
 ( b) to broadcast or communicate the performance to th e public except 
where the performance is already broadcast. 
 ( 2) Once a performer has, by written agreement, conse nted  to the 
incorporation of his performance in a cinematograph film he shall not, in the 
absence of any contract to the contrary, object to the enjoyment by the 
producer of the film of the performer’s right in the same film: 
 Provided that notwithstanding anything contained i n this sub-section, 
the performer shall be entitled far royalties in ca se of making of the 
performances for commercial use. 
 38B. The performer of a performance shall, indepen dently of his right 
after assignment, either wholly or partially of his right, have the right, –  
 ( a) to claim to be identified as the performer of his performance except 
where omission is dictated by the manner of the use of the performance; and 
 ( b) to restrain or claim damages in respect of any di stortion, 
mutilation or other modification of his performance that would be prejudicial 
to his reputation. 
 Explanation – For the purposes of this clause, it is hereby clarified that 
mere removal of any portion of a performance for th e purpose of editing, or 
to fit the recording within a limited duration, or any other modification 
required for purely technical reasons shall not be deemed to be prejudicial to 
the performer’s reputation. 
 
 
Insertion of new sections 38A 
and 38B. 
 
Exclusive right of performers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moral rights of the performer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27.   For section 39A of the principal Act, the followi ng section shall be 
substituted, namely:–  
 “39A ( 1) Sections 18, 19, 30, 30A, 33, 33A, 53, 55, 58, 63 , 64, 65, 
65A, 65B and 66 shall, with necessary adaptations a nd modifications apply 
in relation to the broadcast reproduction right in any broadcast and the 
performer’s right in any performance as they apply in relation to copyright in 
a work: 
 Provided that where copyright or performer’s right  subsists in respect 
of any work or performance that has been broadcast,  on licence to reproduce 
such broadcast, shall take without the consent of t he owner of right or 
performer, as the case may be, or both of them: 
 Provided further that the broadcast reproduction r ight or performer’s 
right shall not subsist in any broadcast or perform ance if that broadcast or 
performance is an infringement of the copyright in any work. 
 ( 2) The broadcast reproduction’ right or the performer’s right shall not 
affect the separate copyright in any work in respec t of which, the broadcast 
or the performance, as the case may be, is made.”. 
28.  In section 40 of the principal Act, in the proviso , in clause ( iii ), after the 
words "the order relates", the words “but such a te rm of copyright shall not 
exceed the term of copyright provided under this Act” shall be inserted. 
29.  In section 40A of the principal Act, sub-section ( 2), in clause (ii), the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “Provided that it does not exceed the period provi ded under this Act;”; 
30.  In section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in the proviso, – 
 ( i) for the words “relation to any goods”, the words “relation to any 
goods or services” shall be substituted; 
 ( ii ) for the words and figures "section of the Trade a nd Merchandise 
Marks Act, 1958" the words and figures “section 3 o f the Trade Marks Act, 
1999” shall be substituted. 
31.  In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),– 
  ( i) for clause ( a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
 “( a) a fair dealing with any work, not being a compute r programme, 
for the purposes of – 
 ( i) private or personal use, including research; 
 ( ii ) criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 
 ( iii ) the reporting of current events, including the reporting of a lecture 
Substitution of a new section 
for section 39A. 
 
Certain provisions to apply in 
case of broadcast 
reproduction right and 
performer's rights. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 40. 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 40A. 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 45. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of section 52. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

delivered in public. 
 Explanation. – The storing of any work in any electronic medium for 
the purposes mentioned in this clause, including the incidental storage of any 
computer programme which is not itself infringing c opy for the said 
purposes, shall not constitute infringement of copyright.”; 
 ( ii ) for clauses ( b), ( c), ( d), ( e), ( f), ( g), ( h), ( i) and ( j) , the following 
shall be substituted, namely:– 
 “( b) the transient and incidental storage of a work or  performance 
purely in the technical process of electronic trans mission or communication 
to the public;  
 ( c) transient and incidental storage of a work or per formance for the 
purpose of providing electronic links, access or integration, where such links, 
access or integration has not been expressly prohib ited by the right holder, 
unless the person responsible is aware or has reaso nable grounds for 
believing that such storage is of an infringing copy: 
 Provided that if the person responsible for the st orage of a copy, on a 
complaint from which any person has been prevented,  he may require such 
person to produce an order within fourteen days from the competent court for 
the continued prevention of such storage; 
 ( d) the reproduction of any work for the purpose of a  judicial 
proceeding or for the purpose of a report of a judicial proceeding; 
 ( e) the reproduction or publication of any work prepa red by the 
Secretariat of a Legislature or, where the Legislat ure consists of two Houses 
by the Secretariat of either House of the Legislatu re, exclusively for the use 
of the members of that Legislature;”; 
 ( f) the reproduction of any work in a certified copy made or supplied 
in accordance with any law for the time being in force; 
 ( g) the reading or recitation in public of reasonable  extracts from a 
published literacy or dramatic work; 
 ( h) the publication in a collection, mainly composed of non-copyright 
matter, bona fide  intended for instructional use, and so described i n the title 
and in any advertisement issued by or on behalf of the publisher, or short 
passages from published literary or dramatic works,  not themselves 
published for such use in which copyright subsists: 
 Provided that not more than such passages from wor ks by the same 
author are published by the same publisher during any period of five years. 
 Explanation. –In the case of a work of joint authorship, referen ces in 
this clause to passages from works shall include re ferences to passages from 
works by any one or more of the authors of those pa ssages or by any one or 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

more of those authors in collaboration with any other person; 
 ( i) the reproduction of any work– 
 ( i) by a teacher or a pupil in the course of instruction; or 
 ( ii ) as part of the questions to be answered in an examination; or 
 ( iii ) in answers to such questions; 
 ( j) the performance, in the course of the activities of an educational 
institution, of a literary, dramatic or musical work by the staff and students of 
the institution, or of a cinematograph film or a so und recording if the 
audience is limited to such staff and students, the  parents and guardians of 
the students and persons connected with the activities of the institution or the 
communication to such an audience of a cinematograp h film or sound 
recording;”; 
 ( iii ) for-clause ( n), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:– 
 “( n) the storing of a work in any medium by electronic  means by a 
non-commercial public library, for preservation if the library already 
possesses a non-digital copy of the work;”; 
  ( iv ) in clause ( o), for the words “public library”, the words, “non-
commercial public library” shall be substituted; 
 ( v) after clause ( v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “( w) the making of a three-dimensional object from a two-dimensional 
artistic work, such as a technical drawing, for the  purposes of industrial 
application of any purely functional part of a useful device; 
 ( vi ) in clause ( y), for the words “dramatic or”, the words “dramatic , 
artistic or” shall be substituted; . 
  ( vii ) rafter clause ‘( za ) and, the Explanation  thereunder, the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “( zb ) the adaptation, reproduction, issue of copies or communication 
to the public of any work in a format, including si gn language, specially 
designed only for the use of persons suffering from  a visual, aural or other 
disability that prevents their enjoyment of such works in their normal format; 
  ( zc ) the importation of copies of any literary or arti stic work, such as 
labels, company logos or promotional or explanatory  material, that is purely 
incidental to other goods or products being imported lawfully.”. 
32.  Section 52B of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
33.  For section 53 of the principal Act, the following  section shall be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Omission of section 52B. 
Substitution of new section 
for section 53. 
 

substituted, namely:– .. 
 “53. ( 1) The owner of any right conferred by this Act in respect of any 
work or any performance, embodied in such work; or his duly authorised 
agent, may give notice in writing to the Commissioner of Customs, or to any 
other officer authorised in this behalf by the Cent ral Board of Excise and 
Customs,– 
 ( a) that he is the owner of the said right, with proof thereof; and 
 (b) that he requests the Commissioner for a period  specified in the 
notice, which shall not exceed one year, to treat infringing copies of the work 
as prohibited goods, and that infringing copies of the work are expected to 
arrive in India at a time and a place specified in the notice. 
 (2 )The Commissioner, after scrutiny of the eviden ce furnished by the 
owner of the right and on being satisfied may, subj ect to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 3), treat infringing copies of the work as prohibite d goods that 
have been imported into India, excluding goods in transit: 
 Provided that the owner of the work deposits such amount as the 
Commissioner may require as security having regard to the likely expenses 
on demurrage, cost of  storage and compensation to the importer in case it is 
found that the works are not infringing. copies. 
 (3) When any goods treated as prohibited under sub -section ( 2) have 
been detained, the Customs Officer detaining them s hall inform the importer 
as well as the person who gave notice under sub-sec tion (1) of the detention 
of such goods within forty eight hours of their detention.  
 ( 4) The Customs Officer shall release the goods, and they shall no 
longer be treated as prohibited goods, if the perso n who gave notice under 
sub-section ( 1) does not produce any order from a court having ju risdiction 
as to the temporary or permanent disposal of such g oods within fourteen 
days from the date of their detention.”. 
34.  In section 55 of the principal Act, in sub-section  ( 2), for the portion 
beginning with the words “a name purporting to be” and ending with the 
words “as the case may be, appears”, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:– 
 “or, subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 3) of section 13, a 
cinematograph film or sound recording, a name purpo rting to be that of the 
author, or the publisher, as the case may be, of that work, appears”. 
35.   In section 57 of the principal Act,– 
 ( i) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( b), the words “which is done before 
the expiration of the term of copyright” shall be omitted;  
 ( ii ) in sub-section ( 2), the words “other than the right to claim 
 
 
 
Importation of infringing 
copies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 55. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 57. 
 
 
 

authorship of the work” shall be omitted. 
36.  After section 65 of the principal Act, the followi ng sections shall be 
inserted, namely:– 
 “65A. ( 1) Any person who circumvents an effective technolog ical 
measure applied for the purpose of protecting any o f the rights conferred by 
this Act, with the intention of infringing such rights, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine. 
 ( 2) Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall prevent any, person from,– 
 ( a) doing anything referred to therein for a purpose not expressly 
prohibited by this Act:  
 Provided that any person facilitating circumventio n by another person 
of a technological measure for such a purpose shall  maintain a complete 
record of such other person including his name, add ress and all relevant 
particulars necessary to identify him and the purpo se for which he has been 
facilitated; or 
 ( b) doing anything necessary to conduct encryption re search using a 
lawfully obtained encrypted copy; or 
 ( c) conducting any lawful investigation; or 
 ( d) doing anything necessary for the purpose of testi ng the security of 
a computer system or a computer network with the au thorisation of its 
owner; or 
 ( e) operator; or 
 ( f) doing anything necessary to circumvent technologi cal measures 
intended for identification or surveillance of a user; or 
 ( g) taking measures necessary in the interest of national security. 
 65B.  Any person, who knowingly,– 
 ( i) removes or alters any rights management informati on without 
authority, or 
 ( ii ) distributes, imports for distribution, broadcasts or communicates to 
the public, without authority, copies of any work, or performance knowing 
that electronic rights management information has b een removed or altered 
without authority, shall be punishable with impriso nment which may extend 
to two years and shall also be liable to fine: 
 Provided that if the rights management information  has been tampered 
with in any work, the owner of copyright in such wo rk may also avail of 
civil remedies provided under Chapter XII against t he persons indulging in 
 
 
Insertion of new 
sections. 65A and 65B. 
 
Protection of technological 
measures. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protection of Rights 
Management Information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

such acts.”. 
37.  In section 66 of the principal Act, after the word s “delivered up to ‘the 
owner of the copyright,” the words “or may make such order as it may deem 
fit regarding the disposal of such copies or plates” shall be inserted. 
38.  In section 78 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2),– 
 (i) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:– 
 “( cA ) the form and manner in which an organisation may apply to the 
Copyright Board for compulsory licence for disabled and the fee which may 
accompany such application under sub-section ( 1) of section 31 B; 
 ( cB ) the manner in which a person making sound recordi ng may give 
prior notice of his intention to make sound recording under sub-section( 2) of 
section 31 C; 
 ( cC ) the register and books of account and the details  of existing stock 
which a person making sound recording may maintain under sub-section ( 5) 
of section 31C; 
 ( cD ) the manner in which prior notice may be given by a broadcasting 
organisation under sub-section ( 2) of section 31D; 
 ( cE ) the reports and accounts which may be maintained under clause 
(a), and the inspection of records and books of accou nt which may be made 
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 6) Of section 31D; 
 ( ii ) after clause ( cc ), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:– 
 ( ccA ) the manner in which a copyright society may publi sh its Tariff 
Scheme under sub-section ( 1) of section 33A; 
 ( ccB ) the fee which is to be paid before filing an appe al to the 
Copyright Board under sub-section ( 2) of section 33A;”; 
 (iii ) clause ( db ) shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 66. 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 78. 
 
 
 
 
 

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS  
  The Copyright Act, 1957 was enacted to amend and consolidate the law relating to copyrights in India . 
To meet with the national and international require ments and to keep the law updated, the Act has been  
amended five times since then, once each in the years 1983, 1984, 1992, 1994 and 1999. The 1994 amendment 
was a major one which harmonised the provisions of the Act with the Rome Convention, 1961 by providing  
protection to the rights of performers, producers o f phonograms and broadcasting organizations. It als o 
introduced the concept of registration of Copyright  Societies for collective management of the rights in each 
category of copyrighted works. The last amendment i n 1999 introduced a few minor changes to comply wit h 
the obligations under the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights(TRIPS). 
2.  The Act is now proposed to be amended with the object of making certain changes for clarity, to remove 
operational difficulties and also to address certai n newer issues that have emerged in the context of digital 
technologies and the Internet. The two World Intell ectual Property Organisation (WIPO) Internet Treati es, 
namely, WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT), 1996 and WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT), 
1996 have set the international standards in these spheres, the WCT and the WPPT were negotiated in 19 96 to 
address the challenges posed to the protection of C opyrights and Related Rights by digital technology,  
particularly with regard to the dissemination of pr otected material over digital networks such as the Internet. 
The member countries of the WIPO agreed on the util ity of having the Internet treaties in the changed global 
technical scenario and adopted them by consensus. In order to extend protection of copyright material in India 
over digital networks such as internet and other computer networks in respect of literary, dramatic, musical and 
artistic works, cinematograph films and sound recordings works of performers, it is proposed amend the Act to 
harmonise, with the provisions of the two WIPO Inte rnet Treaties, to the extent considered necessary a nd 
desirable. The WCT deals with the protection for th e authors of literary and artistic works such as wr itings, 
computer programmes; original databases; musical wo rks; audiovisual works; works of fine art and 
photographs. The WPPT protects certain “related rig hts” which are the rights of the performers and pro ducers 
of phonograms. However, India has not yet signed th e above mentioned two treaties. Moreover, the main 
object to make amendments to the Act is that it is considered that in the knowledge society in which w e live 
today, it is imperative to encourage creativity for  promotion of culture of enterprise and innovation so that 
creative people realise their potential and it is n ecessary to keep pace with the challenges for a fas t growing 
knowledge and modern society: 
3.   The amendments proposed in the Bill, inter alia  seeks to,–  
(i)  make the provisions of the Act in conformity w ith World Intellectual Property Organisation’s 
WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and WIPO Performances a nd Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) and to 
ensure protection to the copyright holders against circumvention of effective technological 
measures applied for purpose of protection of their rights and circumvention of rights management 
information and to provide for punishment for two years and fine for violation of such rights; 
(ii)  provide exclusive rights and moral rights to performers in conformity with the WIPO 
Performances and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT); 
(iii)  provide for definition of new terms, namely “commercial rental”, “Rights Management 
Information” and “visual recording” and to amend th e existing definitions of the terms “author”, 

“cinematograph films”, “communication to the public”, “ infringing copy”, “performer” and “work 
of joint authorship”; 
(iv)  make provision for storing of copyrights mate rial by electronic means in the context of digital 
technology and to provide for the liability of internet service providers;  
(v)  enhance the term of copyright for photographer s to “life plus sixty years” instead of only sixty 
years” as at present; 
(vi)  introduce copyright term of seventy years for  principal director; 
(vii)  extend the copyright term for the producer f or another ten years that is from sixty years to se venty 
years if he enters into an agreement with the principal director; 
(viii) give independent rights to authors of literary and musical works in cinematograph films; 
(ix)  clarify that the authors would have rights to  receive royalties and the benefits enjoyed through  the 
copyright. societies;  
(x)  ensure that the authors of the works, in parti cular, author of the songs included in the 
cinematograph films or sound recordings, receive ro yalty for the commercial exploitation of such 
works; 
(xi)  allow the physically challenged persons to ac cess 10 copyright material in specialised formals; 
(xii)  make provision for compulsory licensing for certain entities for publication of copyright works  in 
other formats; 
(xiii)  introduce statutory licensing for version r ecordings of all sound recordings to ensure that wh ile 
making a sound recording of any literary, dramatic or musical work the interest of the copyright 
holder is duly protected; 
(xiv)  introduce a system of statutory licensing to  broadcasting organisations to access to literary a nd 
musical works and sound recordings without subjecti ng the owners of copyright works to any 
disadvantages; 
(xv)  make provision for compulsory licence (throug h the Copyright Board) to publish or communicate 
to the public such work or translation where the au thor is dead or unknown or cannot be traced or 
the owner of the copyright work In such work cannot be found; 
(xvi)  make provision far formulation and administration of copyright societies by the authors instead  of 
the owners; 
(xvii) make provision for formulation of a tariff s cheme by the copyright societies subject to scrutiny by 
the Copyright Board; 
(xviii)provide for continuous payment of royalties by aggrieved party pending the appeal before the 
Copyright Board and the Copyright Board may fix int erim tariff pending appeal on the tariff 
scheme; and 

(xix)  strengthen enforcement of rights by making provision of control of importing infringing copies by 
the Customs department, disposal of infringing copi es and presumption of authorship under civil 
remedies. 
4.  The notes on clauses explain in detail the vari ous provisions of the Bill. 
5.   The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
 
KAPIL SIBAL. 
   
 NEW DELHI ;  
The  30th March,  2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE II  
LIST OF WITNESSES  
  
Sl.No. Name of Organisation/Individual Date of Meet ing 
1. Shri Javed Akhtar 4/06/2010 
2. Film & Television Producers Guild of India Ltd. Mumbai 15/06/2010 
3. Indian Motion Picture Producers’ Association, Mu mbai -do- 
4. Federation of Indian Publishers, New Delhi -do- 
5. Association of Publishers in India, New Delhi -d o- 
6. Inclusive Planet, Kochi -do- 
7. Xavier’s Resource Centre for the Visually Challenge d, 
Mumbai. 
-do- 
8. Motion Picture Association, Mumbai 22/06/2010 
9. International Confederation of Societies of Authors  and 
Composers (CISAC) 
-do- 
10. Authors Guild of India, New Delhi -do- 
11. The News Broadcasting Association (NBA), New De lhi 29/06/2010 
12. The Indian Broadcasting Foundation, New Delhi - do- 
13. RPG Enterprises- Saregama, Kolkata -do- 
14. The Indian Music Industry, Mumbai -do- 
15. South India Music Companies Association, Chenna i -do- 
16. Business Software Alliance, New Delhi -do- 
17. Yahoo India Private Ltd., Bangalore -do- 
18. eBay India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai -do- 
19. Google India Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon -do- 
20. OnMobile Global Limited, Gurgaon -do- 
21. Internet and Mobile Association of India, New D elhi -do- 
22. Copyright Board 30/06/2010 
23. The Phonographic Performance Ltd., Mumbai -do- 
24. Indian Reprographic Rights Organization, New De lhi 30/06/2010 

25. The Indian Performing Right Society Limited, Mu mbai 15/07/2010 
26. Association of Radio Operators for India (AROI) , New Delhi -do- 
27. South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce, Chennai -do- 
28. Smt. Shubha Mudgal, Shri Sanjay Tandon 16/07/20 10 
  
 
 
 