Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Magha, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-sixth 
Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 58) 
of the Department of Higher Education
REPORT NO. 
252


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/
Observations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-sixth
Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 (Demand No. 58)
of the Department of Higher Education
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Magha, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—25
Chapter-I – Recommendations/Observations  which have been accepted by the
Government . ........................................................................................... 2
Chapter-II – Recommendations/Observations  which  the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply ................. 3—5
Chapter-III – Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 6—24
Chapter-IV – Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited ............................................................... 25
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 26—29
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 31—34
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 35 —43

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(Constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2012)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Tarun Vijay
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
9. Shri Baishnab Parida
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
*16. Shrimati Deepa Dasmunshi
@17. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
18. Dr. Charles Dias
19. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
20. Shri Virender Kashyap
21. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
24. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
25. Shri Sis Ram Ola
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Shri K. Chandrashekar Rao
28. Shri M.I. Shanavas
29. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
30. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
31. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
32. Shri Manicka Tagore
(i)
* Shrimati Deepa Dasmunshi was elevated to Union Minister of State, Urban Development on 28.10.2012.
@ Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f.  09.01.2013.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Two Hundred Fifty Second Report on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty Sixth Report on Demands for Grants
(Demand No. 58) of the Department of Higher Education.
2. The Two Hundred Forty Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 9
th May, 2012 and
laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 9 th May, 2012. Replies of the Government to the
recommendations/observations contained in the Report, were considered by the Committee at its
meeting held on the 21
st February, 2013.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the
21st February, 2013.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 21, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Magha 1, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Two Hundred Forty Sixth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No.58) of the Department of
Higher Education for the year 2012-13.
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations
contained in the 246
th Report, have been categorized as follow:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government –
paras 3.6
(Chapter-I) Total – 1
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s reply — paras 2.2, 9.8 and 9.9
(Chapter-II) Total – 3
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee — paras 2.3, 3.2, 3.3, 3.5, 4.2, 5.3, 6.2, 6.4,
6.6, 6.7, 7.5, 7.6, 8.3, 9.4, 9.6 and 9.7
(Chapter-III) Total – 16
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are
still awaited.
(Chapter-IV) Total – Nil

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT
III. UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
Recommendations/Observations
3.6 The Committee takes note of the following observation made in the Approach Paper to the
Twelfth Plan “UGC is the main vehicle of routing funds to Central and State Universities and
Colleges for funding. UGC has been administering around 75 schemes. The process of approval
and sanction is not only time-consuming, it also suffers from opaqueness and prolixity. Several
schemes are delayed and never achieve intended results. The process of approval is not norm-
based. It is proposed to adopt norm-based funding approach as far as general development grants
are concerned.”
The Committee hopes that with this kind of initiative both Central and State Universities
would be better placed so far as utilization of Central funds is concerned during the Twelfth Plan
Period.
Action Taken
The comments of the Committee have been noted and it may be mentioned that the
Department has already initiated steps to move towards a norm-based funding of Central and State
universities. During the Twelfth Plan, it is proposed to move from a demand-based grant system
towards a need-based and normative system of funding.
UGC has already initiated steps for funding Universities and other institutions on normative
basis. The Committee constituted to frame the guidelines on norm-based funding has submitted
draft guidelines which would be placed before the forthcoming meeting of the UGC. As soon as
it is finalized, norm-based funding pattern shall be followed with effect from the next financial year
during the Twelfth Plan.
UGC has also informed that the Committee constituted for funding the universities and other
institutions on normative basis, has submitted the draft guidelines which would be placed before
the Commission. As soon the guidelines are finalised, the norm-based funding pattern shall be
followed with effect from the next financial year during the Twelfth Plan. Further, in the
conference of VCs of Central Universities, UGC informed that existing system of project and
inspection-based allocation has been dispensed with and Central Universities has been asked to
Twelfth Plan requirement with the approval of the Statutory Bodies and allocation will be made on
block basis only.
2

3
3
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.2 The Committee takes note of the fact that allocation of Rs. 1772.30 crore for 2012-13, the
first year of the Twelfth Plan shows only a marginal decrease when compared with total allocation
of Rs. 84943.00 crore for the entire Eleventh Plan Period. This makes it clear beyond doubt that
there are no fund constraints so far as allocation for Higher Education Sector is concerned. What
is required is a well structured and coordinated approach for optimum and judicious utilization of
allocated funds. The Committee is well aware of the fact that State Governments have to play a
very vital role in this regard. They are not only the beneficiaries but also the designated authorities
for implementation of the schemes at the ground level. The Committee strongly feels that beginning
of a Plan period is the most appropriate time to sensitize the concerned authorities for successful
implementation of various centrally sponsored schemes. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
that the Department take necessary action in this regard.
Action taken
The budgetary allocation for Annual Plan 2012-13 is Rs. 15,458 crore. It may be mentioned
that the Gross Budgetary Support for the Twelfth Plan, which is still under finalization, is expected
to be Rs. 1,10,700 crore. The Department appreciates the view of the Committee that State
Governments have a vital role in implementing the policies of the education sector. It is due to this
fact that consultations with the State Education Ministers through the State Education Ministers
Conference and Central Advisory Board for Education (CABE) Meetings, are held on a regular
basis, at least twice in a year. It may be mentioned that in April 2012, a Consultative Meeting was
also held with the State Education Secretaries as part of on going consultations. In the Twelfth
Plan, it is proposed to increase the funding for State Universities which have a critical mass of
students in higher education and with a view to improve the quality of State universities. A new
umbrella scheme “Rashtriya Uchhatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA)” is under formulation and will be
launched in the Twelfth Plan to address issues of access, equity and excellence of higher education
institutions in the States.
IX. SETTING UP OF NEW TECHNICAL INSTITUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
9.8 The Committee observes that major initiatives for bringing reforms in the higher education
sector have been brought forward during the Eleventh Plan Period. A number of legislations were
formulated as indicated below:
– Bill to prevent, prohibit and punish educational malpractices
– Bill for mandatory assessment and accreditation in higher education through an
independent regulatory authority

4
– Bill to regulate entry and operation of Foreign Educational providers
– Bill to establish a Tribunal for fast-track adjudication of disputes concerning
stakeholders
– Bill for setting National Academic Depository
Parliamentary scrutiny of all these proposed legislations has been completed. Considerable
time has elapsed since then. However, these legislations duly revised based on the recommendations
made by the Committee after an extensive exercise are yet to come before the Parliament. The
Committee observes that enactment of all these legislations will bring about major transmission in
the higher education sector and thus restructure and reorient our higher education system to meet
the requirements of a knowledge economy in a globalized world. The Committee is of the firm
view that passing of these legislative proposals need not be delayed any further.
Action Taken
Prohibition of Unfair Practices in Technical Educational Institutions, Medical
Educational Institutions and Universities Bill, 2010
Status
A second set of amendments have been proposed based on suggestions of forum of SC/
ST Parliamentarians. These amendments have now been vetted by M/o Law and the Cabinet has
approved the official amendments. The Bill will be introduced in the Parliament in the next session.
National Accreditation Regulatory Authority for Higher Institutions Bill, 2010
Status
The composition of the Authority proposed under the Bill has now been expanded by
increasing the number of Members to 8 and providing representation to OBCs, minorities, SC, ST
and women. It is also proposed that higher education institutions established by State Governments
will apply to accreditation agencies owned and controlled by such State Govts. only. In addition,
the provision for imprisonment for contravention of the Act or rules and regulations made there
under has been removed. The Cabinet has approved the official amendments. Action to introduce
the amended Bill in Lok Sabha to consider and pass the Bill will be taken up in the next Session
of Parliament.
The Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operation) Bill, 2010
Status
A Bill for regulating the entry and operation of foreign educational institutions in India has
been introduced in Parliament. The Bill called the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of
Entry and Operation) Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 3
rd May, 2010. The Bill was
referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee (PSC). The PSC has submitted the report and
certain amendments to the Bill are being proposed for consideration of the Cabinet. Approval of the
Cabinet will be taken shortly.
The Educational Tribunals Bill, 2010
Status
The Educational Tribunal Bill was passed by Lok Sabha. The Educational Tribunal Bill, 2010

5
was further examined by the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The new amendments
proposed related to definition of the Central Educational Institutions which has now been amended
to read exactly as is defined in the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act,
2006. The Cabinet has approved the official amendments. Action to introduce the amended Bill in
Rajya Sabha to consider and pass the Bill will be taken up in the next Session of Parliament.
The National Academic Depository Bill, 2011
Status
The report of the PSC has been received and official amendments proposed by the Ministry
have been referred to M/o Law for examination and vetting.
Recommendations/Observations
9.9 The Committee takes this opportunity to observe that for quite some time, increasing
number of students have been opting for technical and professional courses for future employability
thus leaving the fields of social sciences and humanities neglected. The Committee would appreciate
if steps are initiated to attract students to the fields of social sciences and humanities also as these
subjects address vital social issues and public policies. Further, the Committee would like the
Department to give more focus to the three language formula in the education system as it would
also strengthen the concept of national integration in our society.
Action Taken
The number of students admitted in social sciences and humanities is about 36.5 per cent
of the total students admitted in the Higher Education sector. Further, a number of schemes of
University Grants Commission (UGC) such as Research Fellowships in Humanities and Social
Sciences for meritorious students, Dr. Radhakrishnan Post Doctoral Fellowships, Junior Research
Fellowships/ Senior Research Fellowships to National Eligibility Test (NET) qualified candidates,
Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowships to SC/ST students, Maulana Azad National Fellowship for
Minority Students, Indira Gandhi PG Scholarship Scheme for single girl child, Post Doctoral
Fellowships, Major and Minor Research projects and Research Awards to Teachers are in operation
to promote inter alia research in Humanities and Social Sciences. Fellowship rates have also been
enhanced by the Central Government in respect of the following organisations to attract bright
students to social science research to analyse vital social issues and public policies:–
1. Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla.
2. Indian Council of Historical Research, New Delhi.
3. Indian Council of Social Science Research, New Delhi.
4. Indian Council of Philosophical Research, New Delhi.
The University Grants Commission and the Research Councils have also been advised to
take pro-active measures to strengthen the concept of national integration.

6
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.3 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the Twelfth Plan Approach Paper which mentions
that about 18 per cent of all Government education spending or 1.12 per cent of GDP be spent
on higher education. This funding should be raised to 25 per cent and 1.5 per cent respectively.
State universities and their affiliated colleges that account for more than 90 per cent of enrolment,
suffer from severe fund constraints and poor governance leading to poor quality. There should be
some mechanism to check the shortfall for adequately funding the State Universities so as to
increase the GER and quality of education imparted in the Universities. The Department should also
ensure that the spending on R&D should be increased from 0.8 per cent of GDP to at least 1.5
per cent of GDP and this could be achieved through a careful monitoring of the investments made
by Central Government agencies, State Governments and private sector. Every educational
institution should set apart 3 per cent of its budget for research and also industry academia
collaboration should be encouraged. Higher Education being an important sector for the
development of the nation, the Committee feels that focused attention in terms of resources and
funds should be made available for development and quality research and innovation in this sector.
Action Taken
The comments of the Committee have been noted and the following is submitted:
(i) The Department of Higher Education is seized of the problem being faced by the
State universities and their affiliated colleges. It is aware of the funding and
governance deficit being faced by these state level institutions. In order to ameliorate
these conditions of state universities and their affiliated colleges, it is proposed to
launch a new scheme Rashtriya Uchhatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) during the Twelfth
Plan. This scheme will address infrastructural deficit faced by state universities and
will have focused interventions to address issues of quality as also ensure balanced
regional development.
(ii) The Twelfth Plan Document is under finalization. It may be mentioned that during the
Twelfth Plan there will be increased focus on research, innovation as well as quality
improvement initiatives across the spectrum of higher education.
(iii) The Department of Higher Education in its Working Group Report for the Twelfth
Plan had taken up the recommendation made by Dr. Anil Kakodkar Committee on
enhancing R&D spending by institutions as well as earmarking 2 per cent of budgeted
funds by educational institutions and Government of India Ministries for R&D.
(iv) As regards industry academia collaboration, it is proposed to set up Technology
Incubation Parks, Research Parks, Centres of Excellence, Cluster Innovation Centres
(CIC) and Design Innovation Centres (DIC) in educational institutions during the
6

7
Twelfth Plan. It is hoped that these initiatives would promote research, create an eco-
system for collaboration between academia, industry and research laboratories which
would enable better quality of education.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee welcomes the proposed launch of a new scheme i.e.  Rashtriya
Uchhatar Shiksha Abhiyan during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would like to impress
upon the Department to ensure availability of the required funds for the new scheme and
also involvement of all the stakeholders. Concerted efforts should be made so that all the
initiatives for promotion of research, creation of an eco-system for collaboration between
academics, industry and research laboratories during the Twelfth Plan take off at the
earliest.
III. UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
Recommendations/Observations
3.2 The Committee does not find the clarification given by the Department very convincing.
The Committee would like to point out that funds are allocated for specific schemes to be utilized
as per the Annual Action Plan indicating physical targets to be achieved every quarter. The very
fact that allocated funds remained to be utilized as envisaged is an indication that there are certain
problem-areas either in the formulation of the scheme itself or inability of the implementing
agencies to take benefit of the funds as mandated under the Action Plan. Either way such a
situation confirms the non-implementation of the scheme in a time-bound manner. Similarly, non-
submission of utilization certificates by the implementing agencies is an indicator of their failure to
adhere to the prescribed accounting norms. Even the smallest fraction of Government funds has
to be duly accounted for. Nobody can escape this primary responsibility. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the Department should initiate a review exercise with all concerned
so that the problem areas wherever identified are resolved and optimum and judicious utilization of
allocated funds is ensured.
Action Taken
As UGC is entrusted with the responsibility of releasing grants from the Government to the
universities, the Commission is already aware of the pending utilization certificates from the
Universities. Accordingly, it is reviewing the expenditure position in respect of each of the grantee
institutions by convening meetings with the Finance Officers and Registrars of all the Central
Universities and collecting latest expenditure position in respect of the funds released during
Eleventh Plan in respect of all Central Universities. This point was also emphasized in the
conference of Vice-Chancellors of Central Universities and the Central Universities were directed to
submit the requisite utilization certificates expeditiously.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not happy with the response of the Department to a crucial area
of concern emphasized by it. Mere awareness of utilization certificates pending with the
implementing agencies will not serve any purpose. What is required is pro-active action both
on the part of UGC and concerned Universities. The Committee would also appreciate if the
Department also remains in regular touch with UGC and takes appropriate steps whenever
any problem-areas are brought to the notice of UGC.

8
Recommendations/Observations
3.3 In the context of unspent balances, Committee’s attention has been drawn towards
substantive amount of funds lying with both Central and State Universities. Out of Rs. 1838.72
crore allocated to 23 Central Universities from 2009-10 to 2011-12, there was utilization of
Rs. 1535.75 crore, leaving an unspent balance of Rs. 554.09 crore, with the maximum availability
with the following Central Universities:
(Rs. in crores )
Central Funds released Expenditure Unspent
University 2009-10 to Balance Total
2011-12 Eleventh Plan release
AMU 89.00 70.08 48.73
Delhi University 83.00 61.28 65.93
JNU 101.27 71.98 43.42
BBAU 100.00 60.48 51.67
N-E Hill University 61.86 54.74 26.81
Nagaland University 63.00 40.49 26.58
Sikkim University 50.00 46.26 22.80
The Committee observes that for the sixteen new Central Universities, although funds have
been duly released during the Eleventh Plan Period, as on 01.02.2012, huge amount of unspent
balances, i.e. Rs. 653.57 crore is lying with them. What is more intriguing is that out of
Rs. 727.50 crore released to the new universities, expenditure figures are Rs. 503.47 crore but
unspent balance is Rs. 653.57 crore which clearly indicates that quantum of released funds to
different universities is much more. Following figures are self-revealing:–
(Rs. in crores )
Central Grant Released Expenditure Unspent
University 2009-10 to Balance as on
2011-12 01.02.2012
CU of Gujarat 31.00 17.62 29.58
CU of Haryana 44.00 24.68 50.51
CU of Himachal Pradesh 18.00 06.03 19.73
CU of Jharkhand 51.25 35.37 34.64
CU of Karnataka 115.00 69.36 83.97
CU of Kerala 16.50 10.59 23.91
CU of Orissa 44.75 30.62 43.34
CU of Punjab 40.00 28.50 31.92
CU of Rajasthan 84.00 70.60 63.92
CU of Tamil Nadu 100.00 76.49 89.53
Dr. Harisingh Gaur University 25.00 28.23 58.04
Guru Ghasidas University 65.00 47.21 43.39
HNB Garhwal University 60.00 46.28 52.39

9
The Committee observes that funds released to various Central Universities are meant for
their maintenance as well as further development. The Committee fails to understand the factors
behind the failure of almost all the Central Universities to make good use of funds released to them.
Action Taken
It has been informed by UGC that the amount of funds available with central universities,
is mainly under the head ‘Creation of Capital Assets’ for which Central Universities have to follow
the procedural requirements as per GFR 2005 and tendering requirements which takes a long time.
The time limit to utilize the funds released to Central Universities for completion of the building
projects has been extended by UGC up to 31.3.2014. However, UGC is reviewing the expenditure
positions by way of convening meetings with the Finance Officers and Registrars of all the Central
Universities and collecting latest expenditure position on the funds released during Eleventh Plan in
respect of all central universities.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is of the view that the proper monitoring of utilization of funds is
needed. For this, regular updates of the work done for development and maintenance need
to be sought from the Universities. The Committees strongly feels that accountability of
public funds has to be ensured by all concerned. The Committee also recommends that
procedural formalities for creation of Capital Assets may be looked into so that wherever
required, steps may be taken for removal of bottlenecks, to the extent possible.
Recommendations/Observations
3.5 The Committee is constrained to note that out of Eleventh Plan allocation of Rs. 1029.70
crore for 131 State Universities, funds released were less than half, i.e. Rs. 506.13 crore and total
expenditure was mere Rs. 54.96 crore. As many as 26 State Universities failed to spend even a
single paisa. It seems that State Universities are not simply inclined to take benefit from the Central
Funds. The Committee is not aware whether this matter has been taken up with the State
Universities so far. If not, it is high time with the Twelfth Plan Period commencing that the
Department ascertains the actual requirements of State Universities and only then make the funds
available to them. At the same time, the Department should ensure that funds available with the
State Universities are put to good use and pending works are completed at the earliest.
Action Taken
The exact allocation for State Universities under development grants (for improved
infrastructure) was Rs. 1139.63 crores. ( Rs. 1029.70 crores was the tentative allocation in the
scheme at the beginning of Eleventh Plan ). Assistance to State Universities under fellowships,
scholarships etc., Major and Minor Research Projects, College Development Grants, Centre of
Excellence and Special Assistance Programmes are over and above the amount earmarked for State
Universities under development grants which is mainly for improved infrastructure.
UGC has informed that the final allocation under the scheme was conveyed to State
Universities during the year 2009-10, only and as a result the Universities were able to utilize the
grant after 2009-10.
The latest status of grant allocated, sanctioned and utilized is as under:–
Grant allocated: Rs. 1139.63 crores
Grant sanctioned: Rs. 688.76 crores
Grant utilized: Rs. 313.35 crores

10
Communication of allocation to State Universities for Twelfth Plan period will be expedited
by UGC as soon as the Plan allocations are finalized.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that the delay was actually on the part of the Ministry and
UGC in actual allocation of funds to State Universities. Final allocation under the Scheme
was conveyed to State Universities during 2009-10 i.e. third year of the Eleventh Plan. As
a result, grants could be utilized after 2009-10, i.e. during the last two years of the Eleventh
Plan Period. The Committee finds no justification for delay in communicating allocation of
funds to State Universities once the plan allocation has been finalized. The Department has
to ensure that funds reach the State Universities at the earliest and thereafter monitor
their judicious and timely utilization.
IV. SETTING UP OF DEGREE COLLEGES IN EDUCATIONALLY  BACKWARD DISTRICTS
Recommendations/Observations
4.2 The Committee was informed that the scheme was launched in February, 2010. The
Committee finds that although almost two years have elapsed since the launching of the scheme,
proposal for setting up of colleges in 143 districts out of the identified 374 educationally backward
districts only have been received so far. There are some States/UTs like Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Uttaranchal, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Daman and Diu and Puducherry from whom
any proposal is yet to be received. Not only this, out of the 143 proposals, in majority of the cases
either the documents have been called for or proposal is under process or approval has been
conveyed. 32 proposals have been rejected. There are very few cases when grants have been
released. This clearly shows that the scheme is yet to take off. The pace of progress made so
far indicates that perhaps it would take the entire Twelfth Plan Period for setting up of colleges
that too in the educationally backward districts. The Committee is of the view that a very effective
monitoring mechanism will have to be put in place for the timely implementation the scheme. The
Committee feels that public representatives like the local M.P. and MLA can be easily involved in
this process.
Action Taken
The scheme to establish a Model Degree College in each of the 374 educationally backward
districts is an on-going centrally sponsored scheme, which will continue from the Eleventh Plan
to the 12th Plan period. As per Ministry of Finance instructions regarding continuation of ongoing
schemes from Eleventh to Twelfth Plan wherein all such schemes are required to be either
internally appraised or evaluated by an independent agency, NUEPA has been requested to evaluate
the said scheme and report submitted to this Ministry by 31
st October, 2012. Proposals have been
received from Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh. The
financial implication for implementation of the scheme in these states towards release of 1st
instalment amounting of 50 per cent of the entitlement is Rs. 62.68 crore. In the current financial
year, Rs. 10 crore has been provided for the scheme, out of which Rs. 1.33 crore has been
released to Silvasa UT by this Ministry. The additional fund requirement is Rs. 52.68 crore . UGC
has been requested to inform the concerned Hon’ble M.P./MLA about the approvals granted to
proposal for setting up of Model Degree College. NUEPA has also been informed of the
recommendation of the PSC, which it will take into consideration while evaluating the scheme.
In the Twelfth Five Year Plan, there is a proposal for launching a new scheme “Rashtriya
Ucchatar Shiksha Abhiyan” (RUSA) with the aim to incentivise States for improving higher education.

11
The proposed scheme will subsume the present scheme of Model Degree College in the
identified 374 EBDs. The object of RUSA is to achieve GER of 30 per cent in higher education
by 2020. By launching RUSA, it is expected (i) to expand the institutional base of higher education
by creating additional capacity in existing institutions, establishing new institutions and incentivising
State Governments; (ii) to provide opportunities of higher education to socially deprived
communities and remove disparities by promoting inclusion of women, minorities, SC/STs and
differently abled persons; and (iii) to remove regional imbalances in access to higher education by
setting up of institutions in unserved and underserved areas. Through RUSA, it is hoped to make
all institutions conform to prescribed norms, improve pupil-teacher ratio and address reforms in
examination, governance, accreditation issues and overhaul of the affiliation system.
Comment of the Committee
The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department. The Committee
notes that the new scheme i.e.  Rashtriya Ucchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) is being
launched with the objective of achieving GER of 30 per cent in higher education by 2020.
The Committee also takes note of the fact that the proposal for setting up of colleges in
143 districts out of identified 374 educationally backward districts is yet to take off. The
scheme for setting up of Degree Colleges in Educationally Backward Districts was launched
in February, 2010. So far proposals have been received only from Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh, J&K, Kerala and UP. Fund allocation position is also not very satisfactory. As per
the latest feedback made available to the Committee, a new scheme, ‘Rashtriya Ucchatar
Shiksha Abhiyan’ is proposed to be launched during the Twelfth Plan period. This scheme
will subsume the present scheme of Model Degree Colleges in the identified 374
Educationally Backward Districts. The Committee apprehends that this relaunching of the
earlier Scheme under a new Umbrella Scheme will only lead to further delay. The
Committee does not appreciate the practice of launching a new scheme and then after a gap
of only two-three years, relaunching the same in a different form. Such a trend only delays
the reach of new schemes to the targeted beneficiaries.
V. IMPROVEMENT IN SALARY SCALE OF UNIVERSITY AND COLLEGE TEACHERS
Recommendations/Observations
5.3 The Committee views with serious concern the inordinate delay in resolving an issue which
relates to better prospects for universities/college teachers. The Committee has been given to
understand that upon full implementation of the scheme, about 4.5 lakh teachers in State Universities
and colleges will be benefited. The improved pay package will undoubtedly help in attracting and
retaining talented teachers, resulting ultimately in improvement in the quality of higher education. The
Committee is of the firm view that this matter needs to be resolved without any further delay.
Action taken
The Central Government had revised the pay scales of teachers in Central Universities and
Colleges thereunder in order to attract and retain talent in the teaching profession.
In discharging its constitutional responsibility, the Central Government had decided to continue
to provide financial assistance to the State Governments who wish to adopt and implement the
Scheme of Revision of Pay Scales of University and College Teachers, subject to the condition that
the entire Scheme of revision of pay scales, together with all the conditions laid down in this regard
by the UGC by way of Regulations, including enhancement of the age of superannuation from 62
to 65 years is adopted and implemented by the State Government, as a composite scheme.

12
Accordingly, an amount of Rs. 2250 crore was provided in BE 2011-12, to enable release of Central
share of 80 per cent of the additional expenditure involved in the implementation of the pay revision
scheme. However, as no State Government had implemented the Scheme as a composite scheme nor
had disbursed the arrears to the teachers, the amount was reduced to Rs. 50 crore in RE
2011-12. Several State Governments had in the meeting of the State Education Ministers 2010,
requested the Hon’ble Minister of Human Resource Development to delink the condition of
enhancement of age of superannuation and disbursement by States of arrears before seeking
reimbursement of 80 per cent of central assistance. In its meeting on 19
th July, 2012 the Cabinet has
approved the proposal for delinking of enhanced age of superannuation form payment of Central
Share of 80 per cent arrears by way of reimbursement for implementation of UGC pay scales from
1.1.2006 to 31.03.2010. Necessary order in this regard has been sent to all State Governments on
14.8.2012.
In the current financial year, Rs. 2250 crore has been provided for the scheme.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that the Scheme of Revision of Pay Scales of University and
College teachers is important for attracting and retaining qualified and talented teachers
which would result in the improvement of quality in higher education. The Committee has
been given to understand that several State Governments had not implemented the scheme
and had requested the Ministry to delink the condition of enhancement of age of
superannuation from 62 to 65 years of age. The Committee is happy to note that the
Cabinet had approved the proposal for delinking of the enhancement of age of
superannuation from payment of the central share of 80 per cent of arrears on the
19
th July, 2012 and necessary order in this regard has also been sent to all the State
Governments on the 14 th August 2012. The Committee hopes that the State Governments
would have released the arrears of University and College teachers by now. The Committee
would like to emphasize that the funds in this scheme should be reimbursed to the State
Governments as soon as possible as the Higher Education sector is facing a shortage of
teachers which is affecting the quality of education imparted.
VI. V ACANCY POSITION IN UNIVERSITIES
Recommendations/Observations
6.2 The Committee observes that situation is quite discouraging at present. In Central
Universities, as per the data available upto 31
st March, 2010 in respect of 24 Universities across
16 States, on an average 35 per cent faculty positions are lying vacant. As regards State
Universities, data provided by UGC indicates that in 77 State Universities as on 1.05.2007, 19
universities have more than 50 per cent vacancies where in other 14 universities, 40 per cent posts
were lying vacant. In technical education also, there was a faculty deficit of around a lakh.
Action Taken
The proposed National Mission on Teachers and Teaching has been discussed in the State
Education Ministers Conference and CABE Meeting held on 5
th and 6 th June, 2012. Pursuant to the
CABE Committee Meeting, it was resolved to set up a CABE Committee under the Chairpersonship
of Hon’ble MOS Dr. (Smt.) D. Purandeshwari.
The National Mission on Teachers and Teaching is envisaged to address comprehensively
all issues related to teachers, teaching, teacher preparation and professional development. The
Mission would address, on the one hand, current and urgent issues such as supply of qualified
teachers, attracting talent into teaching profession and raising the quality of teaching in schools and

13
colleges. On the other, it is also envisaged that the Teacher Mission would pursue long term goal
of building a strong professional cadre of teachers by setting performance standards and creating
top class institutional facilities for innovative teaching and professional development of teachers.
The Mission would focus in a holistic manner dealing with the whole sector of education without
fragmenting the programmes based on levels and sectors as school, higher, technical etc.
The CABE Committee under the Chairpersonship of Hon’ble MOS Dr. D. Purandeswari is
required to formulate its recommendations with special focus on the following seven major thrust
areas:
(a) Enhancing the availability of teachers to meet the demands of the education systems.
This would involve an analysis of the present policies and institutional/organisational
structures at the local, district, state and national level for teacher development and
management; and the development of a comprehensive policy and strategy to address
issues relating to the preparation, recruitment and deployment of teachers;
(b) Ensuring that all the existing set of teachers are provided with continuing professional
development opportunities, and that teachers are properly supported with appropriate
working conditions and adequately remunerated to ensure high levels of teacher
performance, morale and motivation;
(c) Development of guidelines/frameworks for the improvement of the existing institutional
structures and processes involved in the continuing professional development of
teachers, with a view to ensuring that teachers at all levels would receive high quality
professional development opportunities that prepare them for carrying out their duties
in diverse social, economic, cultural, and technological contexts;
(d) Formulating strategies for attracting and retaining talented youth into the teaching
profession; significantly raising the social and professional status of teachers; ensuring
that teachers are properly supported with appropriate working conditions and incentives
for performance that are needed to sustain high levels of teacher motivation and
morale; giving teachers a sense of belonging and leadership in their profession and
involving them more in policy dialogues and in participatory action research within
their own teaching environments;
(e) Formulating strategies for attracting and retaining teachers from Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, OBCs and Minority communities;
(f) Formulating guidelines for recruitment of and provision of necessary facilities for
differently-abled teachers in schools, colleges and other educational institutions to make
education inclusive across all levels; and
(g) Enhancing quality of teaching, teacher education and teacher training and use of
technology.
The First Meeting of this Committee was held on 12
th September 2012 and four subgroups
have since been constituted to look into the following four focus areas:
· Managing Demand and Supply of Qualified Teachers and Attracting Talented Youth to
Teaching Profession
· Continuing Professional Development of Teachers
· Attracting and Retaining Teachers from SCs, STs, OBCs, Minorities and Differently-
abled
· Enhancement of quality of Teaching and use of Technology

14
Recommendations/Observations
6.4 The Committee would like to point out that it may be justified to some extent large number
of vacancies in the Central Universities set up in the past 3-4 years. But the shortage of teachers
in old universities, some of them established many decades back clearly indicates that this issue
has not engaged the attention of the concerned authorities in the right perspective. In any
organization, there is a prescribed procedure for filling up the vacancies as and when they arise.
The same is applicable in the case of Central Universities. Posts are duly sanctioned, prescribed
norms/procedure for recruitment is there, service conditions a teachers are also well specified.
There can be only two possibilities, either our young students are not attracted towards the
teaching profession or the recruitment process is a prolonged one and involves too many
procedural formalities. In either case, the Department being the nodal authority for the entire
country so far as higher education sector is concerned has to take proactive role so as to expedite
the filling up a sanctioned posts.
Action Taken
Central Universities have been requested by UGC to fill up the vacant positions at the
earliest possible.
Human Resource Development Minister wrote to Chairman, University Grants Commission
on 20.12.2011 to ensure filling-up of remaining identified backlog vacancies for SCs, STs and
OBCs as on 01.11.2008 and Persons with Disabilities as on 15.11.2009, by 31.03.2012. Secretary,
Department of Higher Education, mentioning the vacant faculty positions in Central Universities,
vide letter dated 16.07.2012 requested the Vice-Chancellors of all the Central Universities, to closely
monitor the selection process every month and keep the Executive Council informed of the
progress in the matter. They were also requested to start the process for filling posts on annual
basis sufficiently in advance so that by the time, a person retires his successor is ready to occupy
the position. The matter was also deliberated in the conference of Vice-Chancellors as well as the
request of Vice-Chancellors to expedite the review of UGC (Minimum qualifications for appointment
of teachers and other academic staff in universities/colleges) Regulation 2010 due to the reason that
candidates fail to measure up to the Performance Based Appraisal System/API. UGC informed that
it has already constituted an Anomaly Committee to look into this matter.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is seriously concerned about the huge backlog in the teaching
positions in Central Universities and other technical institutions. The unavailability of
faculty and the delay in recruitment of teachers would affect the quality of education being
imparted in the Universities and higher educational institutions. The Committee also notes
the fact that Department has set up a CABE Committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr. (Shrimati) D. Purandeshwari which would be looking into the matter of demand and
supply of qualified teachers and attracting talented youth to teaching profession,
professional development of teachers, enhancement of quality of teaching and use of
technology and attracting and retaining teachers from SC, ST, OBC Minorities and
Differently-abled. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department should make
concerted efforts for filling-up the vacant positions and formulate strategies for attracting
and retaining talented youth in the teaching profession. The Committee also emphasizes
that UGC should play a more pro-active role and understand the urgency of the matter.
Recommendations/Observations
6.6 The Committee notes that a National Mission on Teachers and Training is proposed to be

15
launched during the Twelfth Plan Period and a token provision of Rs. 90 Lakh has been made for
2012-13. The proposed Mission is to address among other issues relating to teachers, teacher
education and quality teaching such as teacher/faculty shortages and vacancies, recruitment
policies. The Committee feels that although quite delayed, this is a step in the right direction. The
Committee would appreciate if on a priority basis, an assessment of vacancies of teachers is made
across the country in all categories of higher educational institutions. Similarly, a critical review of
recruitment procedure along with eligibility criteria being followed by different university authorities
is also made in consultation with all the stakeholders. This should be followed by corrective
measures as and where required by the concerned authorities. The Committee also feels that
teacher training is one important area which should be given due priority if quality education is to
be imparted to the students. The Committee hopes that the Department would take immediate steps
in this regard.
Action taken
The proposed National Mission on Teachers and Teaching has been discussed in the State
Education Ministers Conference and CABE Meeting held on 5
th and 6 th June, 2012. Pursuant to the
CABE Committee Meeting, it was resolved to set up a CABE Committee under the Chairpersonship
of Hon’ble MOS Dr. (Shrimati) D. Purandeshwari. The National Mission on Teachers and Teaching
is envisaged to address comprehensively all issues related to teachers, teaching, teacher preparation
and professional development. The Mission would address, on the one hand, current and urgent
issues such as supply of qualified teachers, attracting talent into teaching profession and raising the
quality of teaching in schools and colleges. On the other , it is also envisaged that the Teacher
Mission would pursue long term goal of building a strong professional cadre of teachers by setting
performance standards and creating top class institutional facilities for innovative teaching and
professional development of teachers. The Mission would focus in a holistic manner dealing with
the whole sector of education without fragmenting the programmes based on levels and sectors as
school, higher, technical etc.
The CABE Committee under the Chairpersonship of Hon’ble MOS Dr. D. Purandeswari is
required to formulate its recommendations with special focus on the following seven major thrust
areas:–
(h) Enhancing the availability of teachers to meet the demands of the education systems.
This would involve an analysis of the present policies and institutional/organisational
structures at the local, district, state and national level for teacher development and
management; and the development of a comprehensive policy and strategy to address
issues relating to the preparation, recruitment and deployment of teachers;
(i) Ensuring that all the existing set of teachers are provided with continuing professional
development opportunities, and that teachers are properly supported with appropriate
working conditions and adequately remunerated to ensure high levels of teacher
performance, morale and motivation;
(j) Development of guidelines/frameworks for the improvement of the existing institutional
structures and processes involved in the continuing professional development of
teachers, with a view to ensuring that teachers at all levels would receive high quality
professional development opportunities that prepare them for carrying out their duties
in diverse social, economic, cultural, and technological contexts;
(k) Formulating strategies for attracting and retaining talented youth into the teaching
profession; significantly raising the social and professional status of teachers; ensuring
that teachers are properly supported with appropriate working conditions and incentives

16
for performance that are needed to sustain high levels of teacher motivation and
morale; giving teachers a sense of belonging and leadership in their profession and
involving them more in policy dialogues and in participatory action research within their
own teaching environments;
(l) Formulating strategies for attracting and retaining teachers from Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, OBCs and Minority communities;
(m) Formulating guidelines for recruitment of and provision of necessary facilities for
differently-abled teachers in schools, colleges and other educational institutions to make
education inclusive across all levels; and
(n) Enhancing quality of teaching, teacher education and teacher training and use of
technology.
The First Meeting of this Committee was held on 12
th September, 2012 and four subgroups
have since been constituted to look into the following four focus areas:
· Managing Demand and Supply of Qualified Teachers and Attracting Talented Youth to
Teaching Profession
· Continuing Professional Development of Teachers
· Attracting and Retaining Teachers from SCs, STs, OBCs, Minorities and Differently-
abled
· Enhancement of quality of Teaching and use of Technology.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is happy to note that the long pending problem of shortage of
qualified University teachers is proposed to be addressed through the National Mission on
Teachers and Training. As a follow-up, a CABE Committee has been set up for formulating
recommendations on seven major thrust areas. The Committee would, however, like to point
out that this crucial task needs to be carried out in a time-bound manner so as to resolve
this acute problem. The Committee also reiterates that an assessment of vacancies of
teachers across the country in all categories of higher educational institutions needs to be
made on priority basis. Also, a critical review of recruitment procedure along with eligibility
criteria being followed by various university authorities should also be made in consultation
with all the stakeholders.
Recommendations/Observations
6.7 The Committee also wishes to draw the attention of the Department towards the increasing
contribution of private sector so far as professional education is concerned. The Committee is well
aware of the fact that Government alone cannot be involved in the running of higher educational
institutions. Both Government and private sector have to compliment and provide substantive
support to each other. The Committee, however, has a word of caution. In the name of expansion
and autonomy, private educational institutions should not be given a free hand. The Committee feels
that problem of shortage of faculty is there in private institutions also. At present, there is no clear
picture in this regard. But the feedback available from the students as well as few visits made by
UGC inspection authorities clearly indicates that status of faculty would be more disappointing in
the private sector. There are reports that fresh pass outs from the same institution are given
teaching assignment. In Government institutions, number of faculty members would be below the
sanctioned strength but those in position would be both qualified and experienced. There is no such

17
guarantee in private institutions. Main support in such institutions is coming from visiting faculty.
The Committee, therefore, strongly feels that there is an urgent need for having an assessment
about the faculty position in private institutions. Wherever gaps are identified, corrective measures
taken accordingly.
Action Taken
University Grants Commission
Deemed to be Universities
The Deemed to be Universities are regulated by the UGC (Institutions Deemed to be
Universities) Regulations, 2010. The UGC has been reviewing the functioning of the Deemed to
be Universities in the past as per the provisions contained in the notifications issued by the
Government of India while declaring institutions as Deemed to be Universities. The UGC
conducted a comprehensive review of 124 Deemed to be Universities in the year 2009. This
review included availability of faculty as per the norms of relevant statutory council(s) and UGC,
whether faculty is qualified as per the norms of relevant statutory council(s) and UGC and
quality of the faculty in these Deemed to be Universities. It was found that the faculty was
inadequate in 17 Deemed to be University and needed further augmentation in 8 Deemed to be
Universities. The UGC asked these deemed to be universities to take corrective measures and
appoint the required faculty immediately. As such the UGC is already taking corrective measures
in this regard.
Private Universities
The Private Universities are regulated by the UGC (Establishment of and Maintenance of
Standards in Private Universities) Regulations, 2003. The UGC has already inspected 53 Private
Universities with the help of Expert Committees. During the inspection, the Expert Committees
examined whether the faculty in these Private Universities is as per the norms of relevant statutory
council(s) and UGC and whether the faculty is qualified as per the norms of relevant statutory
council(s) and UGC. The reports of these Expert Committees are available on the UGC website
www.ugc.ac.in. In cases where it was found that the faculty was inadequate and not qualified as
per the norms and standards prescribed by the UGC and concerned statutory council(s), the UGC
asked these universities to take corrective measures and appoint the required faculty immediately.
As such the UGC is already taking corrective measures in this regard.
AICTE
The All India Council for Technical Education Act of 1987 provides for establishment of an
All India Council for Technical Education with a view to the proper planning and co-ordinate
development of the technical education system throughout the country, the promotion of qualitative
improvement of such education in relation to planned quantitative growth and the regulation and
proper maintenance of norms and standards in the technical education system and for matters
connected therewith.
AICTE every year invites proposals for setting up of new technical institutions from
Society/Trust/Companies registered under section 25 of Companies Act, 1956/Central Government/
State Government etc.
In view of the above provision private sector can establish the professional education
institutions.

18
Further the approval are granted as per prescribed norms and standards laid down by
AICTE and compliance of these norms is monitored every year by granting them the extension of
approval, so that the quality of education is maintained,
Fees matters of these institutions are regulated by the authorities in the respective States.
As per the Supreme Court of India’s direction in the case of TMA Pai Foundation and subsequent
Judgments, State Level Fee Committees have been constituted by the concerned State Governments
to prescribe the tuition and other fees to be charged by technical institutions at UG and PG level
and to regulate and oversee the implementation. In order to promote the quality of education,
different programmes are also accredited through the National Board of Accreditation which is an
autonomous body of AICTE. Hence there is no free hand to the institutions.
The provisions laid down in the Approval Process Handbook of AICTE, prescribe the norms
for faculty which have to be complied by every institution. The same are verified at the time of
establishment of new institutions and thereafter every year institutions have to maintain the norms
and standards, regarding the faculty on a self disclosure basis on the AICTE portal
In order to address the issue of shortage of qualified faculties and also to facilitate the
students to pursue their higher study leading to award of M.Tech degree the AICTE has granted
permission to start second shift in the existing institutions.
Please refer to Annexure-I which shows the number of institutions in government and
Private sector and Annexure-II which shows the faculty positions in these institutions.
AICTE also conducts surprise visit to maintain quality. Hence there is always check on the
institutions, so that quality is maintained.
(Also please see reply against para 6.2)
Comments of the Committee
The Committee would like to express its serious concern regarding the shortage of
faculty in Deemed to be Universities and Private Universities. The faculty position in these
Universities is highly dissatisfactory which has a direct impact on the quality of education.
Even though UGC has been emphasizing upon the fulfillment of its norms and standards
with respect to faculty, the position still remains unchanged. The Committee also finds a
similar position with respect to technical institutions where the percentage of vacancy of
teachers is bad, especially in the fields of Architecture and Town Planning, Applied Arts and
Craft, Engineering and Technology etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that much
more seriousness is required in dealing with the shortage of faculty. Concerted efforts need
to be made by the University for filling up the vacant posts as early as possible so that the
quality of education is not compromised with.
VII. SCHOLARSHIP
Recommendations/Observations
7.5 From the pace of utilization of allocated funds, it is clear that the scholarship schemes for
students from non-Hindi speaking States and for scholars going abroad have failed to take off so
far. Not only this, the negligible amount of assistance has remained virtually unutilized for the last
three years so far as scheme of scholarship for college and university students is concerned, State-
wise details indicate its uneven spread. While States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka and

19
West Bengal have the maximum number of beneficiaries, States like Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir,
Mizoram, Nagaland show negligible coverage. Not only this, CBSE students taking benefit of this
scheme also show not a satisfactory coverage.
Action Taken
The Scholarship Scheme to Students from Non-Hindi speaking States was under review and
proposals from State Government were not received. Hence the funds allocated could not be
utilised. Now the Scheme is to be continued for the next 2 years. The funds (Rs. 80 lakhs) for
the scheme for scholars going abroad, is only meant for provision of TA/DA and incidentals to
experts who are members of the Interview Board to select students to be sent abroad for higher
studies. The cost of tution fees etc. for these students is met by the concerned country to which
the student is going. Funds are under utilised because the experts are called as per number of
subject fields in which selection is being made. In certain years, there may not be adequate number
of applicants in some subject fields.
Under the Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship for College and University Students, over
the last 3 years, off-take of scholarships has been adequate and the unutilised funds is on account
of the NER Component which cannot be fully utilised even if all the States/UT’s in this region
utilise the allocated quota of scholarships. Each State/UT is allocated a quota of scholarships, based
on the ratio of its population in the age group 18-25 years, after segregation of the share of CBSE.
Therefore in reality, there is no uneven spread of beneficiaries. The Quota allocated to CBSE is
5413 Fresh Scholarships per year. Over the last 3 Years, it has been observed that the off-take has
been satisfactory. Details of Indian scholars sent abroad to different countries during the last three
years are at Annexure-III.
Recommendations/Observations
7.6 The Committee is of the view that the eligibility criteria of 80
th percentile and having family
income below Rs. 4.5 lakh per annum if applied will make a very large number of students entitled
for the scholarship. It seems that there is lack of awareness about such a scheme across the
country. It would be appropriate if all the State Boards are sensitized in this regard well in time.
Initiative can be taken to focus on the educationally backward districts and districts having
concentration of SC/ST/Minority students.
Action Taken
After revision of the eligibility criteria, to include students above the 80
th percentile, there
has been an improvement in the off-take of scholarships. The State Boards are being sensitised for
publicizing this scheme to generate awareness and for this, the State Boards are being provided
funds under the head of Administrative Expenditure. Reservation as per Central Government norms
is being provided under this Scheme.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not fully convinced by the reply of the Department. The
Committee recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts like
advertizing in regional and national newspapers about the scholarships available to such
students. The Department should involve the State Boards pro-actively to extend
scholarships to such students.

20
VIII. POL Y TECHNICS
Recommendations/Observations
8.3 The above details about the achievement level during the Eleventh Plan Period compel the
Committee to conclude that inspite of required funds being available, the schemes handling
different components meant for expansion of polytechnics education have failed to move further.
The Committee also finds that the Department has also restricted its role to mere release of
funds. It seems that no monitoring mechanism is in place. This is borne out by the fact that
not even one polytechnic has been up-graded or any new polytechnics or women hostel
constructed so far. The Committee would appreciate if up-gradation/construction of polytechnics/
hostels is carried out in a timebound manner with continuous monitoring by the concerned
authorities. The Committee views with serious concern the integration of persons with disabilities
under the polytechnics. Both formal and non-formal training programmes have failed to take off.
The Committee can only say that special efforts have to be made to attract this vulnerable
section of the society so as to make their life normal to the extent possible. Here also the
Department can very well play a pro-active role.
Action Taken
The Ministry notes the Committee’s concern in expediting the pace of implementation
of the various schemes for expansion and development of Polytechnics. It may be respectfully
pointed out that the Schemes for Polytechnic expansion were approved in December, 2008 and
thus only 2 full years were available in the Eleventh Plan Period to implement the Scheme.
Since, the schemes involve a large component of developing physical infrastructure, involving
many State Governments and locations spread all over the country, the initial preparatory
activities took some time. The Polytechnics are administered by the State Governments and the
Ministry is taking up with State Governments on a quarterly basis, the status of the projects
in each State and conveying the urgency for completing the projects at the earliest. The
observations expressed by the Committee are also being conveyed to the State Governments.
As per the available reports, construction activities are already started at many locations and
the concerned Resource Institutions under the Ministry, i.e.  4 National Institutes of Technical
Teachers Training and Research at Bhopal, Chandigarh, Chennai and Kolkata have also sent
inspection teams to a few construction sites. However, the Ministry has noted the Committee’s
concern over implementing the schemes in a time bound manner and assures the Committee
that all efforts would be made to speed up the project implementation in consultation with
respective State Governments.
As regards the Scheme of integrating persons with Disabilities under Polytechnics, the
Ministry is proposing a review of the scheme and further action would be taken based on the
outcome of the review.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee would like to reiterate that the issue of upgradation of polytechnics/
hostels needs special attention. The Committee is glad to know that construction activities
have already started at many locations and the concerned Resource Institutions under the
Ministry at Bhopal, Chandigarh, Chennai and Kolkata had sent their inspection teams to a
few construction sites. The Committee is of the view that effective monitoring of the
progress of upgradation work could only make the scheme a success.

21
IX. SETTING UP OF NEW TECHNICAL INSTITUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
9.4 Another area of concern for the Committee is the running of all the new IITs from
temporary campuses inspite of their being set up in 2008-09/2009-10. The first batch of students
will be passing out this year in the case of IITs, set up in 2008-09. From the details made available
to the Committee, it is quite clear that time when all these new IITs would start functioning from
their well-structured and well equipped campuses is still far. Either the location of the permanent
campus is being finalized, or if land is allotted, construction work is yet to be started. The
Committee would like to quote one or two examples. In the case of IIT, Bhubaneshwar, foundation
stone was laid on 12 February, 2009. Similarly, foundation stone of IIT, Mandi was laid on
24 February, 2009. But no information about the progress made so far in construction of the
campus is available. The Committee can only presume that it is yet to commence. The Committee
is not very happy with this slow pace of progress. The Committee would appreciate if a team
having Department officers, IIT management representatives and State Government officials, is
mandated to pursue the construction work in a time-bound manner. It should not happen that the
second batch of students is also made to pursue its studies from a make shift campus.
Action Taken
The Ministry shares the concern of the Committee. All the eight new IITs have been set
the timeline of June, 2013 for shifting to their permanent campuses. Land allotted for these eight
IITs have been handed over to all of them. The master plan is ready and architects have been
finalized for the permanent campus by the IITs at Hyderabad, Patna, Bhubaneswar, Mandi and
Indore, whereas the same are in progress in the IITs at Rajasthan and Ropar. While in IIT,
Gandhinagar, the construction is yet to start, the construction of boundary wall has been completed
in IIT, Patna and Hyderabad and is in progress in the IITs at Rajasthan, Bhubaneswar, Ropar,
Mandi and Indore. Construction work of the permanent campus has commenced in IIT,
Bhubaneswar and IIT, Mandi. All the IITs have been advised to put in place a mechanism for
rigorous monitoring of the project. To oversee the growth and development of the Institute, Video
conferences are also organised with the Directors of IITs at the level of Secretary, Department of
Higher Education.
Comments of the Committee
Eight new IITs were set up in 2008-09/2009-10, and have been operating from
temporary campuses since then. The Committee has been given to understand that all these
new IITs have been set the timeline of June, 2013 for shifting to their permanent
campuses. The Committee is constrained to observe that real construction work is yet to
start. Construction of only boundary wall has been completed in IIT, Patna and Hyderabad.
Only in two IITs, i.e. IIT, Bhubaneswar and IIT, Mandi, construction work of the permanent
campus has commenced. The Committee wonders as to how it would be possible to meet the
timeline of June, 2013. The Committee can only emphasize that the construction work of
all the eight new IITs needs to be expedited. The new campuses should be made operational
as soon as possible so that students should avail the best facilities to pursue their studies.
The Committee would like to point out that one must not forget that IIT are the premier
institutions and attract the best talent from the youth of the country.
Recommendations/Observations
9.6 The Committee notes that all the five IISERs continue to function from temporary

22
campuses. These institutions are envisaged to carry out research in frontier areas of science and
to provide quality science education at undergraduate and post graduate level. The Committee
understands that for advanced studies and research that too in frontier areas of science, IISERs
have to have State-of-the art buildings, fully equipped labs and rich library so as to enable the
students in pursuing various advanced courses of higher learning. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that IISERs need to be made fully functional in the real sense. Required funds should
be provided as and when there is a need. All these IISERs were set up in the initial year of the
Eleventh Plan. Eleventh Plan has come to an end and Twelfth Plan has commenced from 2012-13.
It is high time that the IISERs move in their campus at the earliest so that the objective for setting
up such institutions is accomplished in the real sense.
Action Taken
The status of construction work at the IISERs is as under:
IISER Kolkata
70 per cent of Phase-I (Hostel and Dining Hall) has been completed.
65 per cent of electrical substation has been completed.
45 per cent of external services has been completed.
25 per cent of Lecture Theatre and lab complex has been completed.
IISER Pune
100 per cent of Guest House, Chemistry Block is complete.
95 per cent of Physics Block-2 and construction of Hostel Block-I has been completed.
70 per cent of Storm Water drains and entrance gate on Pashan side has been completed.
55 per cent of construction STP and Service Block, Lab and Lecture Block has been completed.
50 per cent of Biology Block-3 completed. It is expected to complete the work in 2014.
IISER Mohali
43.4 per cent of Boundary Wall, Central Analytical Facility, Hostels (2) for 524 students,
Residents (Director residence), Lecture Hall Complex, Engineering Building, Academic
Block-I has been completed.
44.2 per cent of 2 BRS Flats (28) for non teaching staff, Academic Block-II. Guest House,
Hostels (2) for 524 students, Informatics Centre have been completed. It is expected to
complete phase I in 2014 and phase II in 2017.
IISER Bhopal
95 per cent of Boundary Wall is Complete.
75 per cent of Package-I Hostel-I, Lecture Hall complex, Administrative Block I and II,
Dining Hall etc. completed.
40 per cent of Package I A (Hostel-II, Services) has been completed. It is expected to
complete Package I by 31.12.2012 and Package-II by 30.6.2013)

23
IISER TVM
20 per cent of Phase-I (mostly external services, common amenities etc.) has been
completed. It is expected to complete (Phase-I in March, 2013 and phase–II in September, 2015).
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the status of construction work at the five IISERs. The
Committee finds that work in not any one of IISERs is complete. The Committee would like
to remind that all these IISERs were set up in the initial year of the Eleventh Plan and
even in the beginning year of the Twelfth Plan, construction activities in the five IISERs
are still incomplete. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that speedy completion of
constructions activities should be focused upon so that these IISERs become functional as
soon as possible.
Recommendations/Observations
9.7 The Committee also takes note of ten new NITs which have commenced academic
operations from the academic session of 2010-11. Four NITs are functioning in the campus of their
respective mentor NITs and six NITs are operating from temporary campuses. The Committee
hopes that efforts would be made in the right earnest for making their functioning at par with other
NITs as early as possible.
Action Taken
“During the Eleventh Plan Period, the Government of India has set up ten new NITs which
are located at: Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Goa (also
catering to the needs of Daman and Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep), Delhi (also
catering to the needs of Chandigarh), Uttarakhand and Puducherry (also catering to the needs of
A and N Islands).
The first academic session of these 10 new NITs started from the academic year 2010-11
with an annual intake of 90 students ( i.e. 30 each in 3 branches) for each NIT. Two academic
sessions (2010-11 and 2011-12) of these NITs have been over and total 1626 students are
admitted against sanctioned intake of 1800 students. Out of 10 NITs, 7 are functioning in
temporary campus and three are running in their respective mentor institutes. Directors of 9 new
NITs have been appointed and one Director in NIT Manipur is yet to be appointed. The NIT
(Amendment) Act, 2012 has received the assent of President on 07.06.2012. The ten new NITs
are now under the ambit of NIT Act: Status of allotment of land in respect of these NITs are
at Annexure-IV .
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that ten new NITs are in their third academic year (2012-13).
Out of the ten NITs, seven NITs are functioning in temporary campus and three are
running in their respective mentor Institutes. As per the latest feedback made available to
the Committee, required land for NITs in Mizoram, Sikkim, Puducherry, Delhi and Goa is
in different stages of allocation. With regard to NIT in Uttarakhand, land is yet to be
identified by the State Government. In respect of the remaining NITs to be set up in
Manipur, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, land has already been handed over.
The Committee observes that no further progress is there where land has already been
made available for the NITs. Only foundation stone has been perhaps laid. The Committee
apprehends that completion of initial procedural formalities will take considerable time.

24
Only thereafter, construction work would start which would again be a protracted procedure
likely to be further prolonged due to the difficult terrain of these new NITs. What is
required to be done on a priority basis is to have an appropriate Action Plan for the purpose
to be implemented in a time-bound manner under an effective monitoring mechanism. The
Committee would also appreciate if the process of handing over of the identified and
approved land for the other NITs is also expedited without any further delay.

25
25
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
NIL

26
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee welcomes the proposed launch of a new scheme i.e.  Rashtriya
Uchhatar Shiksha Abhiyan during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would like to impress
upon the Department to ensure availability of the required funds for the new scheme and
also involvement of all the stakeholders. Concerted efforts should be made so that all the
initiatives for promotion of research, creation of an eco-system for collaboration between
academics, industry and research laboratories during the Twelfth Plan take off at the
earliest. (Para 2.3)
III. UTILIZATION OF FUNDS
The Committee is not happy with the response of the Department to a crucial area
of concern emphasized by it. Mere awareness of utilization certificates pending with the
implementing agencies will not serve any purpose. What is required is pro-active action both
on the part of UGC and concerned Universities. The Committee would also appreciate if the
Department also remains in regular touch with UGC and takes appropriate steps whenever
any problem-areas are brought to the notice of UGC. (Para 3.2)
The Committee is of the view that the proper monitoring of utilization of funds is
needed. For this, regular updates of the work done for development and maintenance need
to be sought from the Universities. The Committees strongly feels that accountability of
public funds has to be ensured by all concerned. The Committee also recommends that
procedural formalities for creation of Capital Assets may be looked into so that wherever
required, steps may be taken for removal of bottlenecks, to the extent possible.
(Para 3.3)
The Committee notes that the delay was actually on the part of the Ministry and
UGC in actual allocation of funds to State Universities. Final allocation under the Scheme
was conveyed to State Universities during 2009-10 i.e. third year of the Eleventh Plan. As
a result, grants could be utilized after 2009-10, i.e. during the last two years of the Eleventh
Plan Period. The Committee finds no justification for delay in communicating allocation of
funds to State Universities once the plan allocation has been finalized. The Department has
to ensure that funds reach the State Universities at the earliest and thereafter monitor
their judicious and timely utilization. (Para 3.5)
IV. SETTING UP OF DEGREE COLLEGES IN EDUCATIONALLY BACKWARD DISTRICTS
The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department. The Committee
notes that the new scheme i.e.  Rashtriya Ucchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) is being
launched with the objective of achieving GER of 30 per cent in higher education by 2020.
The Committee also takes note of the fact that the proposal for setting up of colleges in
143 districts out of identified 374 educationally backward districts is yet to take off. The
scheme for setting up of Degree Colleges in Educationally Backward Districts was launched
in February, 2010. So far proposals have been received only from Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh, J&K, Kerala and UP. Fund allocation position is also not very satisfactory. As per
26

27
the latest feedback made available to the Committee, a new scheme, ‘Rashtriya Ucchatar
Shiksha Abhiyan’ is proposed to be launched during the Twelfth Plan period. This scheme
will subsume the present scheme of Model Degree Colleges in the identified 374
Educationally Backward Districts. The Committee apprehends that this relaunching of the
earlier Scheme under a new Umbrella Scheme will only lead to further delay. The
Committee does not appreciate the practice of launching a new scheme and then after a gap
of only two-three years, relaunching the same in a different form. Such a trend only delays
the reach of new schemes to the targeted beneficiaries. (Para 4.2)
V. IMPROVEMENT IN SALARY SCALE OF UNIVERSITY AND COLLEGE TEACHERS
The Committee notes that the Scheme of Revision of Pay Scales of University and
College teachers is important for attracting and retaining qualified and talented teachers
which would result in the improvement of quality in higher education. The Committee has
been given to understand that several State Governments had not implemented the scheme
and had requested the Ministry to delink the condition of enhancement of age of
superannuation from 62 to 65 years of age. The Committee is happy to note that the
Cabinet had approved the proposal for delinking of the enhancement of age of
superannuation from payment of the central share of 80 per cent of arrears on the
19
th July, 2012 and necessary order in this regard has also been sent to all the State
Governments on the 14 th August 2012. The Committee hopes that the State Governments
would have released the arrears of University and College teachers by now. The Committee
would like to emphasize that the funds in this scheme should be reimbursed to the State
Governments as soon as possible as the Higher Education sector is facing a shortage of
teachers which is affecting the quality of education imparted. (Para 5.3)
VI. V ACANCY POSITION IN UNIVERSITIES
The Committee is seriously concerned about the huge backlog in the teaching
positions in Central Universities and other technical institutions. The unavailability of
faculty and the delay in recruitment of teachers would affect the quality of education being
imparted in the Universities and higher educational institutions. The Committee also notes
the fact that Department has set up a CABE Committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr. (Shrimati) D. Purandeshwari which would be looking into the matter of demand and
supply of qualified teachers and attracting talented youth to teaching profession, professional
development of teachers, enhancement of quality of teaching and use of technology and
attracting and retaining teachers from SC, ST, OBC Minorities and Differently-abled. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Department should make concerted efforts for filling
up the vacant positions and formulate strategies for attracting and retaining talented youth
in the teaching profession. The Committee also emphasizes that UGC should play a more pro-
active role and understand the urgency of the matter. (Para 6.2 and 6.4)
The Committee is happy to note that the long pending problem of shortage of
qualified University teachers is proposed to be addressed through the National Mission on
Teachers and Training. As a follow up, a CABE Committee has been set up for formulating
recommendations on seven major thrust areas. The Committee would, however, like to point
out that this crucial task needs to be carried out in a time-bound manner so as to resolve
this acute problem. The Committee also reiterates that an assessment of vacancies of
teachers across the country in all categories of higher educational institutions needs to be
made on priority basis. Also, a critical review of recruitment procedure along with eligibility
criteria being followed by various university authorities should also be made in consultation
with all the stakeholders. (Para 6.6)

28
The Committee would like to express its serious concern regarding the shortage of
faculty in Deemed to be Universities and Private Universities. The faculty position in these
Universities is highly dissatisfactory which has a direct impact on the quality of education.
Even though UGC has been emphasizing upon the fulfillment of its norms and standards
with respect to faculty, the position still remains unchanged. The Committee also finds a
similar position with respect to technical institutions where the percentage of vacancy of
teachers is bad, especially in the fields of Architecture and Town Planning, Applied Arts and
Craft, Engineering and Technology etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends that much
more seriousness is required in dealing with the shortage of faculty. Concerted efforts need
to be made by the University for filling up the vacant posts as early as possible so that the
quality of education is not compromised with. (Para 6.7)
VII. SCHOLARSHIP
The Committee is not fully convinced by the reply of the Department. The
Committee recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts like
advertizing in regional and national newspapers about the scholarships available to such
students. The Department should involve the State Boards pro-actively to extend
scholarships to such students. (Para 7.5 and 7.6)
VIII. POL YTECHNICS
The Committee would like to reiterate that the issue of upgradation of polytechnics/
hostels needs special attention. The Committee is glad to know that construction activities
have already started at many locations and the concerned Resource Institutions under the
Ministry at Bhopal, Chandigarh, Chennai and Kolkata had sent their inspection teams to a
few construction sites. The Committee is of the view that effective monitoring of the
progress of upgradation work could only make the scheme a success. (Para 8.3)
IX. SETTING UP  OF NEW TECHNICAL INSTITUTIONS
Eight new IITs were set up in 2008-09/2009-10, and have been operating from
temporary campuses since then. The Committee has been given to understand that all these
new IITs have been set the timeline of June, 2013 for shifting to their permanent
campuses. The Committee is constrained to observe that real construction work is yet to
start. Construction of only boundary wall has been completed in IIT, Patna and Hyderabad.
Only in two IITs, i.e. IIT, Bhubaneswar and IIT, Mandi, construction work of the permanent
campus has commenced. The Committee wonders as to how it would be possible to meet the
timeline of June, 2013. The Committee can only emphasize that the construction work of
all the eight new IITs needs to be expedited. The new campuses should be made operational
as soon as possible so that students should avail the best facilities to pursue their studies.
The Committee would like to point out that one must not forget that IIT are the premier
institutions and attract the best talent from the youth of the country. (Para 9.4)
The Committee takes note of the status of construction work at the five IISERs. The
Committee finds that work in not anyone of IISERs is complete. The Committee would like
to remind that all these IISERs were set up in the initial year of the Eleventh Plan and
even in the beginning year of the Twelfth Plan, construction activities in the five IISERs
are still incomplete. The Committee, therefore, reiterates that speedy completion of
constructions activities should be focused upon so that these IISERs become functional as
soon as possible. (Para 9.6)

29
The Committee observes that ten new NITs are in their third academic year (2012-13).
Out of the ten NITs, seven NITs are functioning in temporary campus and three are
running in their respective mentor Institutes. As per the latest feedback made available to
the Committee, required land for NITs in Mizoram, Sikkim, Puducherry, Delhi and Goa is
in different stages of allocation. With regard to NIT in Uttarakhand, land is yet to be
identified by the State Government. In respect of the remaining NITs to be set up in
Manipur, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, land has already been handed over.
The Committee observes that no further progress is there where land has already been
made available for the NITs. Only foundation stone has been perhaps laid. The Committee
apprehends that completion of initial procedural formalities will take considerable time.
Only thereafter, construction work would start which would again be a protracted procedure
likely to be further prolonged due to the difficult terrain of these new NITs. What is
required to be done on a priority basis is to have an appropriate Action Plan for the purpose
to be implemented in a time-bound manner under an effective monitoring mechanism. The
Committee would also appreciate if the process of handing over of the identified and
approved land for the other NITs is also expedited without any further delay. (Para 9.7)

MINUTES

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
21st February, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Shri Derek O’ Brien
6. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Suresh Angadi
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
11. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
12. Shri Virender Kashyap
13. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
14. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
16. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla
17. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the ***   *** draft 249
th, 250 th, 251 st and 252 nd Report on Action
Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in 243 rd, 244 th, 245 th and
33
*** Relate to other matters.

34
246th Reports on the Demands for Grants 2012-13 of the Ministry of Women and Child
Development, Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
and Department of Higher Education respectively.
3 . ***
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the draft 249
th, 250 th, 251 st and 252 nd
Reports on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/observations contained in the
Reports on Demands for Grants 2012-13 pertaining to the four Departments/Ministries under the
purview of the Committee
5. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned five Reports in both the Houses
of Parliament on 26
th February, 2013. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence
Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem and in the absence of both, Shri Baishnab Parida to present the
Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla and in his absence Shri Manicka Tagore
to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

35
ANNEXURES

36

37
ANNEXURE-I
Programme and Region-wise-Institute Count (All-Institute Analytics)
Region Application Institution Engineering and Management MCA Pharmacy Hotel Applied Arts Architecture and No. of
for Type T echnology Management and Crafts T own Planning Institutes
and Catering
12 3 4 56 7 8 9 1 01 1
Eastern All Existing Government 104 14 7 12 1 3 8 149
Institute Unaided Private 273 149 79 30 12 4 547
University
managed 89 6 2 2 5
Govt. Aided 14 2 4 1 21
All New Government 1 1 1 3
Institute
Unaided Private 11 4 15
New Plus Govt. Aided 3 2 2 2 1 2 12
Existing Government 3 2 2 7
Institute Unaided Private 4 3 3 3 13
University
managed 1 1
Eastern Total 422 186 104 47 14 3 17 793
South- All Existing Government 120 4 1 15 4 3 147
Central Institute Unaided Private 729 965 658 302 2 1 2657
Govt. Aided 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 16
University
managed 31 1 5
All New Government 8 2 1 11
Institute Unaided Private 27 21 5 5 58
New Plus Unaided Private 6 7 6 3 1 23
Existing Governments 1 1
Institute University
managed 21 1 4
South Central Total 899 1003 674 331 2 7 6 2922
Northern All Existing University
Institute managed 51 4 9 2 1 3 1
Government 111 19 5 15 1 2 4 157
Unaided Private 419 573 145 142 27 9 17 1332
Govt. Aided 27 16 7 2 2 54

38
12 3 4 56 7 8 9 1 01 1
All New Unaided Private 52 24 3 1 7 87
Institute Government 1 1
University
managed 1 1
New Plus Government 26 6 1 2 1 36
Existing Unaided Private 17 19 4 4 4 48
Institute
Government Aided 1 1 2
Northern Total 660 672 170 169 30 13 35 1749
North All Existing Government 126 35 8 22 2 12 12 217
West Institute Govt. Aided 22 8 6 3 2 41
Unaided Private 742 503 174 172 20 2 14 1627
University
managed 10 15 4 8 2 1 40
New Plus Unaided Private 17 19 16 2 3 5 62
Existing Govt. Aided 2 1 3
Institute Government 17 3 3 2 25
University
managed 12 1 1 5
All New Government 18 2 4 1 25
Institute Unaided Private 65 17 9 3 94
University
managed 51 6
Govt. Aided 5 2 1 8
North West Total 1030 606 226 215 28 14 34 2153
Central All Existing Government 110 11 3 10 1 4 7 146
Institute Govt. Aided 14 7 6 7 1 35
Unaided Private 363 353 146 212 7 9 1090
University
managed 11 14 12 7 44
New Plus Unaided Private 5 8 5 4 22
Existing Govt. Aided 3 1 1 1 2 8
Institute Government 11 2 2 1 16
University
managed 11 2
All New Unaided Private 18 5 4 27
Institute University
managed 11 1 3
Government 2 2 4
Central Total 538 404 181 242 9 4 19 1397

39
Western All Existing Government 54 1 4 8 3 2 2 74
Institute Unaided Private 604 402 128 286 16 5 8 1449
Govt. Aided 23 3 1 25 2 1 1 56
University
managed 69 4 2 1 2 2
All New Unaided Private 51 27 5 6 89
Institute Government 1 1 2
University
managed 1 1
New Plus Government 2 1 3
Existing Unaided Private 6 8 6 1 21
Institute University
managed 21 3
Western Total 748 453 148 329 22 8 12 1720
South All Existing Government 169 10 10 5 4 5 203
West Institute Govt. Aided 60 8 7 2 4 81
Unaided Private 310 269 115 100 21 1 10 826
University
managed 14 4 5 3 1 27
All New Unaided Private 18 3 2 1 24
Institute Government 6 1 1 8
University
managed 1 1
New Plus Unaided Private 6 4 4 1 15
Existing Government 11 2 1 14
Institute Govt. Aided 2 2 1 5
University
managed 1 1
South-West Total 598 301 144 110 24 7 21 1205
Southern All Existing Government 44 9 9 3 1 2 1 69
Institute Unaided Private 817 380 295 37 7 6 1542
Govt. Aided 36 10 20 1 2 69
University
managed 45 3 1 1 3
New Plus Government 5 5
Existing Unaided Private 13 11 5 2 31
Institute Govt. Aided 1 1

40
12 3 4 56 7 8 9 1 01 1
University
managed 11 2
All New Unaided Private 39 11 50
Institute Government 1 1
Southern Total 959 428 332 42 9 2 11 1786
GRAND TOTAL 5854 4053 1979 1485 138 58 155 13722

41
ANNEXURE-II
Faculty Position
State Applied Arts Architecture and Engineering and Hotel Management Management MCA Pharmacy
and Crafts Town Planning Technology and Catering
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Andhra Pradesh 191 20 67749 15 11311 8356 6724
Arunachal Pradesh 3 – 129 – 4 – –
Assam – – – – 70 57 33
Jharkhand – – 1259 27 204 20 34
Meghalaya 4 5 127 – 2 10 –
Odisha 2 3 11626 2 1269 580 456
Tripura 1 1 76 – 1 – –
West Bengal 1 21 7586 135 552 355 330
Andman and Nicobar – – 23 – – – 1
Manipur – – 35 – – 7 –
Sikkim – – 190 – 17 15 30
Mizoram – – – – – – 12
Bihar 2 – 949 8 373 125 41
Uttar Pradesh 180 273 24627 326 6669 1686 2210
Uttarakhand 19 31 2498 108 582 246 386
Dadra and Nagar – – 26 – 8 – 23
Haveli
Chandigarh 34 13 358 – 17 – 34

42
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Delhi 3 57 1839 30 798 185 123
Haryana 71 53 15051 63 1852 511 651
Himachal Pradesh 10 8 1605 – 139 54 222
Jammu and Kashmir 2 10 862 – 144 112 9
Punjab 21 134 12522 130 1482 731 942
Rajasthan 121 21 12036 96 1682 417 887
Chhattisgarh 23 3 4237 – 327 140 289
Gujarat 1 118 10407 20 1393 691 1655
Madhya Pradesh 13 89 18685 75 2630 1116 2090
Goa 13 7 471 22 26 – 40
Maharashtra 124 102 38669 242 5840 1506 3956
Daman and Diu – – 21 – – – –
Karnataka 141 146 25823 382 2967 1091 2115
Kerala 54 57 1 1670 93 736 575 615
Puducherry 24 – 1379 7 62 59 12
Tamil Nadu 445 126 69548 95 4340 4286 1264
Grand Teacher Total 1503 1298 342083 1876 45497 22931 25184
Grand Total Student 21425 38740 6354523 40564 591464 256461 392764
Teacher required 2142 2583 423634 2704 59146 25646 26187
% Vacancy of Teachers 30% 50% 20% 31% 24% 11% 4%

43
43
ANNEXURE-III
Details of Indian Scholars sent abroad to differenct countries during last three years
Sl. No. Name of the Number of Benefited Indian
Country Scholars
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
1. Japan 34 33 26
2. China 14 15 15
3. Israel 04 05 05
4. Mexico 02 01 03
5. Korea 06 09 02
6. U.K. 21 25 22
7. Belgium 03 02 02
8. Italy 04 10 32
9. Malaysia Nil Nil Nil
10. Turkey 01 01 Nil
11. New Zealand Nil Nil Nil
T
OTAL : 89 101 107
Note:– Apart from these countries Scholarships. The External Scholarship Division, Department of
Higher Education also processes the application for Agatha Harrison Memorial Fellowship which is fully
funded by the Government of India. A consolidated stipend of 27,603 (U.K. Pound) and return Air-fare
is paid to the selected scholar placed at St. Antony’s College, Oxford (U.K.).

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.