 1
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
215
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
TWO HUNDRED-FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE TWO HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT ON 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2008-2009 (DEMAND NO. 105)  
OF THE  
THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH NOVEMBER, 2009) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26TH NOVEMBER, 2009) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
OCTOBER, 2009/ KARTIKA, 1931 (SAKA) 
 


 2
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED- FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
THE TWO HUNDRED EIGHTH REPORT ON 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2008-2009 (DEMAND NO. 105)  
OF THE  
THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS & SPORTS 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26TH NOVEMBER, 2009) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26TH NOVEMBER, 2009) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
OCTOBER, 2009/ KARTIKA, 1931 (SAKA)
 


 3
CONTENTS 
 
               
          PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................   (i)-(ii)    
2. PREFACE ........................................................................................................................   (iii) 
3. REPORT ..........................................................................................................................    
 
CHAPTER I  Recommendations/Observations which have been    
accepted by the Government ............................................................. 
  
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not              
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply .......................... 
  
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the         
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ...................  
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the          
Government are still awaited .............................................................  
 
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE.....   
5. MINUTES .............................................................................................................................  
6. *ANNEXURES .....................................................................................................................  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Will be appended at printing stage. 
 
 

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD 
(2009-10) 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes    Chairman 
2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
4. Shri Vijaykumar Rupani 
5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
6. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Tiwari 
8. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran 
9. Shri N.K. Singh 
10. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
11 Shri Suresh Angadi 
12 Shri Kirti Azad 
13 Shri P.K. Biju 
14 Shri Jitendrasingh Bundela 
15  Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
16  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
17 Shri Rahul Gandhi 
18  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
19  Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
20  Shri Suresh Kalmadi 
21  Shri P. Kumar 
22  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
23  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
24  Shri Sis Ram Ola 
25  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
26  Shri Tapas Paul 
27  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
28  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
29  Shri Joseph Toppo  
30  Shri P. Viswanathan 
31.   Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
(i) 
  
 
 

 5
 SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Secretary 
Smt. Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri M.K. Khan, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-relate d Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authoris ed by the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, do hereby presen t this Two Hundred-fifteenth  Report on Action Taken by 
Government on the Recommendations containe d in the Two Hundred-eighth Report on 
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for 
the year 2008-09.  The Action Taken Report contains only those paragraphs which 
entailed recommendations/observations and it leaves the narration. 
 
2. The Two Hundred-eighth Report of th e Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 
17th April, 2008 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 23 rd April, 2008.  Replies of 
the Government to the recommendations/obs ervations contained in  the Report, were 
considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 30th October 2009. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Repor t and adopted the same at its meeting 
held on the 30th October, 2009. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;             OSCAR FERNANDES  
OCTOBER 30, 2009                                             Chairman, 
KARTIKA 8, 1931 (SAKA)                   Department-related Parliamentary 
                         Standing Committee on 
                        Human Resource Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 7
REPORT 
 
 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on 
the recommendations contained in its Two Hundred eighth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Demands for Grants (Demand No.105) of 
the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports for the year 2008-09. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes received from th e Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 208th Report have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations wh ich have been accepted by the    
  Government-paras 1.7, 5.2, 6.3, 7.6 & 16.1 
 
 (Chapter-I) Total – 5 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not  
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply-paras 1.3, 1.5, 2.4, 3.2, 
3.7, 4.2, 4.3, 4.5, 4.7, 4.11, 7.2, 8.2, 10.4, 10.5, 12.2, 13.1, & 15.4 
 
  (Chapter-II) Total –  17 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of  
the Government have not been acce pted by the Committee-paras  2.3, 2.7, 
2.8, 3.5, 3.6, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 8.5, 8.6, 9.3, 11.4, 12.3, 14.1, 14.2 & 14.3 
 
 (Chapter III) Total – 16 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited. 2.10 & 4.8 
 
(Chapter IV) Total – 2 

 8
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.7 Keeping into account our vast youth popul ation, the Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should make all out effort s to review the National Youth Policy 
incorporating in it the key areas  such as education, health, sustainable development, self-
confidence, social harmony and national inte gration.  The Committee also recommends 
that special attention should be focused on those youth and adolescents who are living 
under poverty line in rural and urban areas. 
Action Taken 
 
 The recommendations of the Committee in th is regard have been noted and will 
be complied with while reviewing the National Youth Policy.  
 
V. NATIONAL SERVICE VOLUNTEER SCHEME 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
5.2 The Committee feels that NSVs who pl ay a major role in the successful 
implementation of Youth Programmes, need prop er motivation. It is encouraging that the 
revision of their honorarium is under c onsideration. The Committee hopes that the 
evaluation by IIM, Ahmedabad would be e xpedited so that necessary steps for 
strengthening the scheme can be taken at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
  
Noted for compliance. 
 
VI. RASHTRIYA SADBHAVANA YOJANA 
Recommendations/Observations 
6.3 Rashtriya Sadbhavna Yojna is at presen t under the review by IIM, Ahmedabad.  
The Committee hopes that the study by IIM would be expedited and corrective measures 
would be initiated so as to ensure the reach of the scheme to States not performing well.  

 9
Action Taken 
 
 Noted for compliance. 
 
VII. YOUTH HOSTELS 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7.6 The Committee feels that in view of  the past experience, the idea of 
maintaining/constructing Youth Hostels under Public Private Partnership could perhaps 
salvage the situation. On a note of caution, the Committee would, however, like to say 
that implementation of a Scheme under PPP mode is likely to  have dangerous 
implications/consequences, which need to be carefully looked into while finalising 
modalities for this purpose. 
 Action Taken 
 
The recommendations of the Committee in this regard have been noted and will 
be kept in mind while finalizing the modalities for the purpose. 
 
XVI. NATIONAL CHAMPI ONSHIP FOR WOMEN 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
16.1 The Committee is, however, constrained to observe that al location of Rs. 60.00 
lakhs and Rs. 1.10 crore in 2006-07 and 2007-08 respectively has rema ined unutilised.  
The Committee apprehends that the same position may be there in 2008-09 also.  The 
Committee would appreciate if a review of this scheme is carried out so as to identify the 
problem areas followed by corrective measures. 
Action Taken 
 
The Government has taken note of the obs ervations of the Committee and assures 
that the funds allocated for the National Championship for Women during 2008-09 would 
be fully utilized. 

 10
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.3 The Committee appreciates the reorienta tion of the fragmented Schemes into an 
integrated framework with a multi-pronged approach towards youth empowerment and 
their participation in the planning of their development.  The Committee is of the view 
that youth development being a multidimensional  activity will be bett er achieved if we 
have a holistic approach towards it.  That appears to be the main reason that we have not 
had significant achievements in this regard, so far.   The Committee expects that now the 
Ministry would be able to focus on all th e thrust areas of the Youth Development 
simultaneously to achieve the desired objectives under an umbrella scheme.  
 
Action Taken 
 A new scheme “National Programme fo r Youth and Adolescents Development” 
has been introduced with effect from 2008-09.  The main objectives of this scheme are to 
provide opportunities for holistic developm ent of youth including adolescents for 
realization of their fullest potential, de velop leadership qualit ies and personality 
development of youth and to channelize their energy towards socio economic 
development and youth of the nation, promot e national integrati on, strengthen secular 
and lactate outlook through creative expr ession by youth.  The scheme would be 
implemented in a project mode.  The Project Implementing Agencies will be required to 
clearly indicate in their proposals well defi ned geographical area where the scheme will 
be implemented and expected outcome of the project.  It is expected that the 
implementation of the scheme in a project m ode and in a well defi ned geographical area 
would enable the Project Implementing Agenci es to focus on individual activities for a 
defined target group and show visible results. 
 
 
 

 11
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
1.5 The Committee is worried about an a pparent lack of coordination among the 
Central Government, State Governments and National Sports Federations.  The 
Committee feels that this situation should not be allowed to continue any further.  It 
would be against the interests of the spor ts particularly, keep ing into account the 
forthcoming Commonwealth Games, 2010. The Committee recommends that all the 'key 
stakeholders should regularly interact by inte grating their synergies for the promotion of 
games, motivation of players and development of 'sports infrastructure'. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Government is conscious of the need to ensure proper planning and timely 
preparation for the Commonwealth Games, 2010 and to this end a number of institutional 
arrangements have been made.  These in clude a Core group of Ministers (GoM) under 
the co-Chairmanship of the Minister for Human Resource Development and the Home 
Minister for coordinating the various works related to the conduct of the Games; an Apex 
Committee headed by the Minister for Youth A ffairs and Sports to oversee preparations; 
an Organizing Committee (OC) headed by the President, Indian Olympic Association for 
the conduct of the Games; and a Committee of Secretaries headed by the Cabinet 
Secretary which is responsible for monitoring the implementation of the decisions of the 
GoM and taking decisions on other related matte rs.  In addition to these arrangements at 
the Central level, there is a sub-committee under the Chief Mi nister of Delhi to take 
decisions in respect of all ma tters pertaining to infrastructu re and other preparations for 
the Games within the jurisdiction of the Government of NCT of Delhi.  The Lt. Governor 
Delhi has been entrusted with the overall responsibility for matters coming under DDA 
and with specific reference to security, la w and order.  An Empowered Committee has 
been set up under the chairmanship of Ch ief Secretary, GNCTD, with representatives 
from all the agencies/authorities concerned to facilitate speedy cleara nces in respect of 
Games-related projects.  Another Committ ee has been set up under the Secretary, 
Ministry of Urban Development to facilita te clearances pertaining to the Delhi Urban 
Arts Commission (DUAC).  Keeping in view the need for developi ng adequate tourist 

 12
accommodation in readiness for the large expected influx of visitors for the 
Commonwealth Games, an inter-Ministerial task force has been set up under the Ministry 
of Tourism (MoT) for monitoring and co-ordinating further action in this regard by all the 
agencies concerned.  A Committee for expedi ting Central Governme nt clearances in 
respect of hotels coming up in Uttar Pradesh has also been set up under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary,  Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. 
  
All the ‘Key Stakeholders’ viz. Ministry  of Youth Affairs a nd Sports, Organizing 
Committee, Commonwealth Games, 2010, Govt . of NCT of Delhi, Indian Olympic 
Association (IOA), National Sports Federa tions (NSFs) meet regularly in various 
meetings, to facilitate speedy disposal/ clea rance of various proj ects related to the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010.  
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.4 While advocating the need for enhanced  allocation for schemes meant for our 
youth, the Committee has a word of caution for the Ministry.  Committee’s experience 
about the utilization status of plan allocati on during the previous y ears has not been very 
encouraging.  During 2005-06, against a pr ovision of Rs.438.99 crore, expenditure 
reported was only Rs.386.10 crore.  Plan allocation of Rs.600.00 crore for 2006-07 
remained underutilized with an expenditu re of Rs.457.19 crore.  The Committee finds 
that position has remained unchanged in  2007-08.  Against a provision of Rs.700.00 
crore, the Ministry could manage to utilize only Rs.466.26 crore upto 31st January, 2008.  
The Committee is not fully convinced by the a ssurance given by the Secretary that by the 
end of the financial year, allocated funds would be fully utilized. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Utilization of funds shown under the Sche mes of Youth Hostels and Promotion of 
Youth Activities and Training is not correct.  Under the Schemes of Youth Hostels and 
Promotion of Youth Activities and Training, the funds were released as follows: 
 

 13
Sl. 
No 
Scheme 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 upto 31.108 
  BE Actual BE Actual BE Actual 
1. Youth Hostels 4.50 4.27 4.50 2.77 1.25 1.23 
2. Promotion of 
Youth Activities 
& Training 
9.00 4.86 6.30 3.20 3.50 3.12 
 
 In so far as the scheme of Developm ent and Empowerment of Adolescents is 
concerned, against an approved budget of Rs. 11.00 crores, the expendi ture at the end of 
the financial year was of the order of Rs . 10.75 crores, which is 97.7% of the total 
allocation under the scheme. 
 As regards the utilization of the allocation made for sports and physical education 
during 2007-08, the actual expend iture was Rs.509.92 crore agai nst an allocation of Rs. 
534.77 crore i.e., the percentage utilization of funds was 95%.  All efforts will be made to 
better it in the coming years. 
 Due to some difficulties pertaining to  old pending Utilization Certificates, no 
expenditure was allowed for va rious organizations during th e year 2006-07.  Practically, 
there were no releases for about seven mont hs from June, 2006.  It was taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance and only after the Mi nistry of Finance gave their conditional 
approval, the releases were made in that particular year.  By the time the Ministry 
obtained the approval for exemption from submission of Utilization Certificate on 
conditional basis, budget allocation for 2006-07 was already curtailed as no expenditure 
was incurred by the Ministry.  In so far as the Schemes of National Integration and 
Promotion of Adventure are c oncerned, the Section had utiliz ed the budget allocation at 
RE stage.  Even though the problems still persisted during the year 2007-08, YS.IV 
Section was able to incur an  expenditure of Rs. 1100 lakhs  against the budget allocation 
of Rs. 1150 lakhs.  The releases amount to 95.65% of the budget allocation. 
 
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN  (NYKS) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.2 Against a projection of Rs. 110.00 crore for Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan for 
2008-09 by the Ministry, Plan allocation of  Rs. 68.00 crores has been made.  The 
Committee can understand the basis for the qu antum of funds proposed simply because 

 14
of a variety of programmes/ac tivities being administered by the NYKS at different levels 
through different agencies.  However, the Committee is disturbed to note that the 
Sangathan has failed to keep pace with the funds allocated during the last two years.  Plan 
allocation of Rs. 45.00 crore in 2006-07 had to  be brought down to Rs. 36.75 crore at the 
RE stage and expenditure reported was Rs. 32.25 crore.  Position worsened in 2007-08 so 
much so that allocation of Rs. 58.50 crore had to be drastically reduced to Rs. 29.78 crore 
at the RE stage with expe nditure reported upto 31.1.08 being only Rs. 19.00 lakhs  The 
Committee takes a serious view of the fact that unspent balance available from the 
previous year led to such a situation.  The Committee wonders as to whether the NYKS 
has been able to successfully carry out its mandate. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 During the year 2006-07 due to general cut the RE was brought down to Rs. 36.75 
crore.  In 2006-07 the actua l expenditure was Rs. 41.54 cror es.  The savings available 
with NYKS were used for meeting this exces s expenditure.  In 2006-07 Director General 
Audit Central Revenue while conducting the au dit of NYKS had observed that there was 
an amount of Rs. 57.16 crore lying unspe nt with the NYKS being the savings 
accumulated over the years.  In the year 2007-08 NYKS was allocated Rs. 58.15 crore for 
the regular grant under the Plan  Head.  Since the unspent ba lance lying with NYKS rose 
to Rs. 63.91 crores, no grant was released  to NYKS during this year.  They were 
however, granted permission to carry forwar d the unspent balance of 63.91 crores and 
utilize the amount in the year 2007-08.  NYKS was also released an amount of Rs. 10.00 
Crores for North East and Rs. 21.94 crores under Non-Plan in the year 2007-08.  It can be 
stated that though total plan a llocation could not be released during the year, activities at 
grass-root level did not suffer as various ot her major events such as jung-e-azadi rally, 
RRE Project, Panchayat Yuva Shakti A bhiyan, SGSY Project, NSVS, RSY and 
Adolescent project were also organized during the year. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.7 The Committee hopes that the study of IIM, Ahmedabad would help the Ministry 
in drawing up a plan of acti on to restructure NYKS.  The Co mmittee is of the view that 

 15
such an exercise is necessary not onl y because NYKS is the key agency in 
implementing/overseeing majority of Youth act ivities/programmes, but its role is going 
to be widened further.  NYKS is going to take up sports and games on a big scale by 
having a convergence of Youth and Sports Programmes. 
 
Action Taken 
 
IIM Ahmedabad has already submitted its draft study report.  A presentation was 
also made by the team of IIM, Ahmedabad on 30
th July, 2008 to the Board of Governors 
of NYKS under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister (YA&S).  Further action on the 
Report is being taken. 
 
IV NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.2 The Ministry has proposed to change th e current funding pattern of NSS between 
Centre and States/UTs.  The existing cost norm of Rs.160/- and Rs.300/-, which 
translates to Rs.12/- per day per volunteer for one Regular Activity Camp and Rs.30/- per 
day per volunteer for Special camping Progr amme which includes boarding, loading and 
transport to the adopted village has been f ound to be quite insufficient to conduct better 
quality programmes.  The duration of 10 days is also becoming an inhibiting factor for 
students who are primarily devoted to comp etitive study.  These norms were last 
approved by the Cabinet in  its meeting held on 24
th June, 2000.  Similarly, the existing 
funding pattern is 7:5 between th e Centre and the States in th e rest of India and 3:1 for 
NE and hilly States.  In some cases, the State Governments have not been able to 
contribute their share timely as per the contemporary funding norms.  
 
4.3 Hence, in order to conduct the progra mme on a more realistic and meaningful 
manner, it is proposed to rais e the cost norm for Regular Ac tivities and Special Camping 
Programme and change the funding pattern under NSS as mentioned below w.e.f  2008-
09:- 
 
 

 16
(i) Cost norm for programme activities  
 
Unit Cost  (per volunteer per annum)      Existing provision Proposed 
provision 
(i)  Regular activities  
(a)  For normal areas 
(b)  For hilly terrain/areas 
 
 
Rs 160/-  
Rs 200/- 
 
Rs. 300/- 
Rs.400/- 
 
 
(ii) Special Camping 
(a) For normal areas 
(b)  For hilly terrain/areas 
 
 
Rs. 300/- 
Rs. 400/- 
(10 days camp) 
 
Rs.500/- 
Rs 600/- 
(1 week camp) 
 
(ii) Funding Pattern 
 
Category Existing provision Proposed 
provision 
Rest of India  7:5 75 : 25 
NE States including Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh and 
other Hilly Areas as notified by Planning Commission 
from time to time. 
 
3:1 
 
90:10 
J&K and UTs without Legislature, Kendriya 
Vidyalayas and Navodaya Vidyalayas 
100% 100% 
 
Action Taken 
  
Paras (4.2 & 4.3)  A proposal for Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for 
enhancement of the cost norms for regular  and special camping programme of NSS and 
change in the funding pattern between the Centre and States/UT Governments was 
circulated to the appraising agencies on 19.3.2008.  Planning Commission had observed 
on this proposal, that, as per the instructions of the Department of Expenditure, additional 
expenditure over and above the prescribed approved ceiling for individual Schemes shall 
not be permitted.  In case of amendment of the Scheme for additional allocation, 
matching savings from some other projects/S chemes under the relevant “Demand” must 
be indicated.  Hence, Planning Commission a dvised that the Ministry may continue with 
the existing Scheme such that expenditure is contained within the 11
th Plan outlay of Rs. 
425 crores.  Further, it was also stated th at no fresh EFC approval is required for a 
continuing Scheme.  It is now proposed to continue the Scheme as per existing 
parameters, within the approved plan outlay for the 11
th Plan. 

 17
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.5 The Committee is happy to note that amount being paid to NSS volunteers has 
been increased and this Scheme was being expanded as well.  While the Committee 
agrees in principle that given the utility of the Scheme in nation-building, allowing 
opening of new NSS units on self-financing basis would be a welcome step. The 
Committee would, however, like th e Ministry to ensure that  this does not become a 
channel to collect funds from the studen ts by unscrupulous SFUs. The Committee would 
like to know the experience of Delhi and Maharashtra in this regard.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 As stated in Replies to  Paras 4.2 and 4.3, the funding pattern by the Government 
remains unaltered and the Scheme is continuing as per existing parameters within the 
approved plan outlay for the 11
th Plan.  However, the Scheme is now being expanded 
through the introduction of Self Financing Un its.  This Ministry is now permitting 
opening of new NSS Units on Self Financing basi s, in addition to the present system of 
fully funded units.  These Self Financing Un its will be at par w ith other regular NSS 
units, except that the funding for the regul ar activities and Special Camping and 
institutional establishment expenses will be borne by the Self Financing Unit (SFU) 
institutions.  The Institutions/Universities having NSS units will be allowed to mobilize 
additional resources internally for conducting their regular activities and special camps at 
enhanced rates.  In order to maintain an Al l India uniformity, an indicative cost norm of 
Rs. 300/- for Regular activities and Rs. 500/ - for Special Camping is suggested for 
normal areas.  For the NE Region and other hilly areas, as notified by the Planning 
Commission, an indicative cost norm of Rs. 40 0/- for Regular activities and Rs. 600/- for 
special camping is suggested.  It has also been decided that the number of days of Special 
Camping will be reduced from 10 days to 7 days, though the budgetary allocation will 
remain the same as that of  10 days.  Th e accounts of NSS SFU shall be maintained 
separately by the Pragramme Coordinator/Pr ogramme Officer concerned and the audited 
account should be placed before the re spective NSS Advisory Committee of the 
University/+2 Council/Institution annuall y.  The experiment has been running 

 18
satisfactorily in some of the States like De lhi and Maharashtra (w here 58 and 105 Self 
Financing Units, respectively) are already functioning.   
  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.7 The State-wise details made availa ble by the Ministry however, reveal a 
somewhat different position.  The Committee finds that Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu 
& Kashmir, Nagaland and West Bengal are th e only States to have complied with the 
prescribed norm.  Remaining States are s howing pendency with De lhi being the major 
defaulter by settling amounts upto 1982-83 only. The accounts of State Governments of 
Chattisgarh and Lakshdweep Administration were  last settled upto 2001-02.  This is an 
area of concern where the Ministry needs to  strengthen its monito ring in consultation 
with State Governments, otherwise the pe rformance of the Scheme would remain 
questionable.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take up the settlement of 
accounts with the States to clear the backlog at the earliest. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 In the past few years due to non settlement of NSS accounts, no funds were 
released to the Governments of Delhi,  J&K and Assam. This year the Ministry has made 
efforts to settle their accounts and requis ite funds have been released to Jammu & 
Kashmir and Assam.  The Accounts of Delhi Government have been settled up to 2006-
07 and the release of funds is under process.   This year i.e  2008-09, the Ministry had 
released the Ist installment to all the Regional Centres who have submitted their 
settlement of accounts up to 2004-05 except a few.  Chhattisgarh and Lakshadweep have 
also settled their accounts up to 2006-07 and 2005-06 respectively. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.11 The Committee has been given to unders tand that NSS is a self-evaluating 
programme for addressing the local programme s locally.  The programme is evaluated 
through social audit in the institutional campus es.  Besides that, concomitant evaluations 
are carried out by the 14 Training and Orient ation Centres and 4 Training and Research 
Orientation Centres.  The Committee is of the view that these Centres should take up the 

 19
issue of non- expansion of NSS Programme in the NE and Northern Region by making 
an assessment based on inter-action with all concerned. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Ministry has emphasized the need for expansion of NSS th rough out the country 
as the third dimension of edu cation.  With regard to the proposal that evaluation of NSS 
Scheme be carried out by 14 TOC and 4 TORC, and that these Centres should take up the 
issue of non-expansion of NSS programme in the North East and Northern Region, it is 
stated that Government is setting up a TOC at NEHU, Shillong for catering to the training 
needs of North Eastern Region. 
 
VII. YOUTH HOSTELS 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7.2 The Committee has been monitoring th e performance of Youth Hostels and 
continuously expressing its serious concer n on the tardy progress in completion of 
projects.  The Committee observes that posi tion remains unchanged.  Every year, plan 
allocation is being duly made which is drastic ally reduced in the mi ddle of the year, and 
that also remains under-utilised.  During 2005- 06, against a plan a llocation of Rs. 4.50 
crore, expenditure reported was only Rs. 1.49 crore.  During 2006-07 position could not 
improve as only Rs. 57.04 lakhs could be spent inspite of there being an allocation of Rs. 
4.50 crore.  Construction of only 4 Youth Hostel s could be carried out against a target of 
12 Hostels.  The Committee finds that the last  year i.e., 2007-08 was also no exception.  
Allocation of Rs. 1.25 crore was kept with a target of 8 Hostels.  In spite of increasing the 
allocation only Rs. 16.53 lakh could be utilized.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 It may be clarified that during 2006-07, an expenditure of Rs. 2.77 crore were 
incurred.  Ministry has utilized the funds of Rs. 2.77 Crores (and not Rs. 57 lakhs) against 
an allocation of Rs. 4.50 crores during 2006-07.  Similarly, during the year 2007-08, 

 20
against an allocation of Rs. 1.25 crore, th e Ministry had spent Rs. 1.23 crores till 
31.1.2008 (and not Rs. 16.53 lakhs) and Rs. 1.25 crores upto 31st March, 2008. 
 
VIII. SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
8.2 The Committee would like to have a detailed note on the targets and 
achievements of SAI in 2007-08.  The Committee would like to draw the attention of the 
Ministry to the observati ons contained in its 195
th Report on the mismatch between 
utilization of funds and the targets fixed.  U nder-utilization of funds in an organization 
under the control of the Ministry leaves much  to be desired.  The financial management 
in SAI needs to be strengthened to ensure  that the gaps between the allocation and 
utilization are kept under check.  Committee’s attention has been drawn to a number of 
pending paras regarding SAI in CAG Reports  of 2006 and 2007.  These paras pertain to 
penalty due to low power factor (Rs. 1.95 cr ore), idling of equipment (Rs. 1.10 crore), 
inadmissible expenditure (Rs. 72.03 lakh) avoidable interest payment (Rs.12.75 lakh) and 
expenditure due to short recoveries and de layed deposit of service tax (Rs. 63.65 lakh).  
The Committee notes that in all these cases, th e audit observations are being examined in 
consultation with SAI and thereafter the Action Taken Note will be submitted.  The 
Committee understands that there is a set pr ocedure for taking follow-up action on CAG 
Report which is a prolonged exercise.  The Committee would, however, like to point out 
that the very fact that CAG has been commenting on non-adherence to financial norms by 
SAI indicates that there are problem areas in the functioni ng of SAI.  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should get a thorough review of the functioning of SAI 
through some independent agency. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Steps are being taken to st rengthen the procurement process in SAI.  SAI already 
has an equipment support division, which is responsible for the pr ocurement of sports 
consumables and non-consumables. 
 The unspent balance from the previous y ear and shortfall in meeting the projected 
expenditure led to the cut.  With a view to  decentralizing the proc urement process, the 

 21
Government has allowed the National Sports Federations to procure sports consubables 
for training  in National Camps, instead of the earlier practice of all such procurement 
being made through SAI. 
 There has been improvement in expenditu re in 2007-08 compared to the previous 
year as shown below: 
(Figures in lakhs of Rupees) 
Head Open. 
Balance as on 
1.4.2007 
Grant in aid 
received 
during 2007-
08 
Total Tantative 
Exp. 2007-08 
Exp. 2006-
07 
Plan 3272.05 12000.00 15272.05 14001.32 11961.07 
Plan (NER)   909.19   3780.00   4689.15   3373.83   1714.89 
 
 The details of tentative expenditure as  shown above have been compiled on the 
basis of monthly accounts received from the Units/Regional Centres.  Final figures will 
be available after the annual accounts for the year 2007-08 are compiled, which is under 
process.  A statement containing the details  of scheme-wise fina ncial targets as per 
Annual Action Plan for the year 2007-08 and Financial Achievements  is enclosed at 
Annexure-II.  A statement of Physical target achievement is enclosed at Annexure III. 
 Against the total alloca tion of Rs. 135.25 crores dur ing the year 2006-07, total 
expenditure is 136.76 crores, which is 101.12% of  the approved allocation.  Instructions 
were also issued to SAI Head Qtr. To all the Units/Regional Centres of SAI to ensure 
optimum utilization of alloca ted funds during the year 2007-08.  SAI has achieved the 
Physical targets during 2006-07, as indicated in statement at Annexure IV. 
 Continuous efforts are being made to impr ove the financial management in SAI.  
Some of the improvement achieved is an under:  
(i) The Annual Accounts of SAI is now co mpiled in the prescribed format 
introduced by Government of India for autonomous bodies of Central 
Government. 
 
(ii) The compilation of Annual Accounts has been outsourced to a firm of 
Chartered Accountants so as to ensure that the accounts are compiled on 
mercantile basis and all subsidiary records are maintained. 
 
(iii) SAI has been granted registration unde r Section 12A of the Income Tax Act 
for the year 2003-04 onwards after long persuasion of the matter with the 
Income Tax Department as well as ITAT. 

 22
 
(iv) The order of the DIT (Exemption) for rejecting the application of SAI for 
granting registration under Section 12A  from 1984 has been set aside by 
ITAT.  It is expected that SAI will get registration under Section 12A of the 
Income Tax Act from the date of its inception and will be entitled for the 
exemptions under Section 11 of the Income Tax. 
 
(v) Annual accounts of SAI are now compiled and submitted to DGACR for audit 
as per approved time schedule. 
 
 It is further submitted that implementation of various plan schemes is to be 
monitored by the respective divisions implementing the schemes. 
 There has been adherence to financial norms and procedures as outlined in 
General Financial Rules.  All cases, which come to finance, are duly scrutinized before 
giving concurrence or making any recommendation.  Audit system is in place. 
 Steps have also been taken to create fresh posts in National Anti-Doping Agency 
(NADA) and National Anti-Doping  Laboratory (NDTL) with a view to relieve SAI of 
these two responsibilities. 
 
X. SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
10.4 The Committee recommends that the Central Government should meet its 
obligation in cases where Stat e contribution has been releas ed, though the projects were 
not completed.  The Committee would also like th e Ministry to take up such cases with 
the Ministry of Finance and Planning Co mmission where Government of India has 
sanctioned amount but the State Governments failed to provide matching grant.   
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Centrally sponsored Sports Infrastr ucture Schemes stand transferred to the 
state sector w.e.f. 1.4.2005 and as such, no fresh proposals were considered after 
1.4.2005.  Only committed liabilities were being considered upto 31.3.2007 as per the 
relaxation given by the Planning commission.  The matter was taken up with all the State 
Governments for furnishing information on their pending/ongoing/co mpleted projects 
which were approved prior to 1.4.2005.  This issue was also discussed in the National 

 23
Conference of State Ministers of Youth Affairs & Sports held on 9.7.2008, Based on the 
information furnished by the State Governments, the committed liabilities work out to Rs. 
55.00 crore in respect of Sports  Infrastructure projects an d Rs. 5.4 crore in respect of 
Synthetic Surface projects.  The Ministry had already taken up the matter with the 
Planning commission for according its approval to  meet these liabilities from the new 
scheme proposed for the creation of sports infras tructure in urban areas.  An allocation of 
Rs. 10 crore has been provided for this in the BE for 2008-09, which can be augmented at 
RE stage. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
10.5 The Committee would appreciate if a St atus Note giving details about the 
infrastructure projects (State-wise) is submitted to it at the earliest.  The Committee is of 
the view that schemes relating to creation of s ports infrastructure are required to be given 
due importance simply because of their bei ng in place is essential for nurturing sports 
talent in a country. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 As mentioned in reply to recommenda tion in para 10.4 above, the Ministry had 
already taken up the matter with the Planning Commission for meeting the committed 
liabilities.  In the meanwhile, the G overnment has approved the proposal for 
implementing a nation-wide rural sports in frastructure development Scheme under the 
title “Panchayat Yuva Krid a and Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA)”, which aims at providing 
basic sports facilities at the panchayat level in a phased manner over a period of  10 years 
apart from promoting rural sports competitions at the block and district level.  The 
Planning Commission has made allocation of Rs. 1500 crores for the implementation of 
PYKKA during the XIth Five Year Plan.  Similarly, they  have also made a token 
provision of Rs. 10 crores for 2008-09 for undert aking a sports infrastructure scheme in 
urban areas. 
 
 
 
 

 24
XII. SCHEME OF INCENTIVES  FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
12.2 The Committee strongly feels that ther e is an urgent need for monitoring the 
holding of State level tournaments/competit ions and also ensuring incentives to 
participants.  One should not forget the fact that nurturing of sports  talents starts from 
school/college level only. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Under the umbrella scheme of Incentives for Promotion of Sports, there were five 
schemes viz Sports Scholarship Scheme, Rural Sports Programme, National Sports 
Development Fund, Pension to Meritorious S portspersons and Promo tion of Sports and 
Games in Schools and College.  In this cont ext, it is stated that the Rural Sports 
Programme has been subsumed in the newly introduced Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel 
Abhiyan (PYKKA).  The schemes of Sports Scholarship and the Promotion of Sports and 
Games in Schools and Colleges are being merg ed into a new scheme  entitled ‘Promotion 
of Sports and Games in Schools, Colleges an d Universities, which has been formulated 
and would soon be placed before the Expenditure Finance Committee for its 
consideration and approval. 
 Under the competition component of P YKKA, competitions at block level, 
district level, state level and national leve l are envisaged, which will be implemented and 
monitored by the National Inst itute of Sports, Patiala in  consultation with state 
governments.  The broad-basing of sports through PYKKA will widen the seedbed of 
talent, leading to better performances by our sportspersons in nati onal and international 
events.  The draft Scheme of Promotion of Games and Sports in Schools, Colleges and 
Universities will aim at identifying and nurturing sports talent from schools and colleges.  
The draft scheme was discussed in the Nati onal Conference of St ate Sports and Youth 
Affairs held on 9.7.2008 and all state governments endorsed the Scheme. 
 
 
 

 25
 
XIII. PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
13.1 The Committee has been constantly e xpressing its sense of dissatisfaction over 
the level of disregard being shown to this  Scheme.  During 2005-06, a token provision of 
Rs. 90.00 lakhs was made which could not be utilised as the Scheme had not been 
formulated.  No allocation was made in 2006-07  as it was proposed to be merged in the 
Umbrella Scheme relating to Events.  Du ring 2007-08, plan allocation of Rs. 5.00 crore 
remained unutilized as the Scheme was bei ng reformulated.  Fina ncial year 2008-09 has 
started but the Scheme continues to be at the formulation stage.  The Committee takes 
note of a provision of Rs. 5.00 Crore in 2008- 09 with the noble objective of covering 2 
percent of the 30 million disabled in the country during 2008-09 by conducting sports and 
games for the physically and ment ally challenged in all the di stricts of the country.  The 
Committee apprehends that this laudable objective might remain on paper in 2008-09 
also.  It is very discouraging to realise that  the most marginalised segment of our society 
continues to be deprived of any State patrona ge.  Assistance being provided at present to 
mentally and physically challenged sportspe rsons through Sports Federations like 
Paralympics Committee of India, special Ol ympic Bharat and the All India Sports 
Council of Deaf cannot be considered adequate enough.  The Committee once again 
strongly recommends that the Scheme for Promotion of Sports among Disabled should be 
formulated without any further delay so as to ensure its launching during 2008-09 itself. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Ministry of Youth affairs & Spor ts has formulated a draft Scheme for 
Promotion of sports among disabled, whic h was also discussed in the National 
Conference of State Sports and Youth Affairs Ministers.  All state ministers endorsed the 
draft Scheme.  The draft Scheme would soon be placed before the Expenditure Finance 
Committee for its consideration and approval. 
 It is also pertinent to mention that , pending finalization of the Scheme for 
Promotion of Sports among disabled, assistan ce to paralympic Committee of India (PCI) 

 26
and Special Olympic Bharat (SOB), the spor ts federations which are associated with 
promotion of sports among disabled, is being provided under the Scheme of Assistance to 
National Sports Federations.  Assistan ce of Rs. 2.19 crore and Rs. 0.87 crore was 
provided to PCI and SOB respectively during 2007-08, excluding expenditure on the 
conduct of national camps, which was around Rs. 2.50 crore. 
 
XV. PANCHAYAT YUVA KRIDA OR KHEL ABHIYAN 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
15.4 The Committee appreciates the lofty-idea ls with which the ambitious Scheme of 
Panchayat Yuva Krida and Khel Abhiyan is being started.  There are, however, 
apprehensions over the proposed channelisation of funds through numerous 
implementing agencies.  The Committee would like the Ministry to set up an effective 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that divers ion of funds to other schemes does not open 
the door for misappropriation.  The Committee would also like the Ministry to examine 
the feasibility of including the pending infrastr ucture projects under this Abhiyan.  This 
would, however, require proper and regular co -ordination with the State Governments 
and the concerned Ministries  for better utilization of f unds.  The Committee hopes that 
the Ministry would implement this flagship scheme with all the seriousness it deserves.  
After discontinuance of Infrastructure Sc heme in April 2005, all hopes for sports 
infrastructural development in our rural ar eas would be on Panchayat Yuva Krida and 
Khel Abhiyan. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Ministry is committed to implemen tation of Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel 
Abhiyan (PYKKA) with all the seriousness it deserves.  A two day national conference 
on Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiya n was organized in Vigyan Bhawan, New 
Delhi on 21
st and 22nd May, 2008 in which sports Secretar ies of State  Governments and 
representatives from other concerned or ganizations such as Nehru Yuva Kendra 
Sangathan, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, Indi an Olympic Association participated.  A 
National Conference of State S ports & Youth affairs Ministers was also organized on 9 th 

 27
July in which State Sports Ministers co mplimented the Union Government for coming 
out with such a good scheme. 
 The proforma for submission of proposal s by State Government s for seeking the 
Central Government’s share of capital seed as sistance under the scheme has already been 
circulated to all the State Governments and Union Territory Ad ministrations.  The 
proforma for conduct of sports competitions at block, district, stat e and national levels 
has also been circulated to all state govern ments/UTs by the National Institute of Sports, 
Patiala, which has been entrusted with the tasks of implementing competition component 
of PYKKA.  Meeting of the General Council, the hi ghest policy making body for 
PYKKA, was held on 29.8.2008, wherein the Council approved, inter alia , the 
operational guidelines for implementation of PYKKA. 
 Proposals from some of the State Gove rnments have been received, which are 
being processed for grant of assistance to them under the Scheme. 

 28
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN  RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NO T BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/observations  
 
2.3 The Committee firmly believes that the Ministry would face financial constraints 
due to slashing of their projections.  The ba sic exercise of prepar ing projections gets 
defeated if the final allocati on gets curtailed drastically to  less than half from Rs. 1836 
crores to Rs. 890 crores only.  Either the projections were unreasonably high or the 
Ministry failed to put across their case c onvincingly before the Pl anning Commission.  
Both the situations call for serious review .  The Committee would like the Ministry to 
approach the Planning Commission as well as the Ministry of Finance again for 
additional funds so that important developmen t schemes on both Youth as also on Sports 
sectors were not affected due to shortage of funds.  This is more important in view of 
huge finances required for hosting the forthcoming Commonwealth Games. 
 
Action Taken 
 Against the projections of Rs. 2326 cr ore for XI Five Year Plan, for the 
Commonwealth Games, an amount of Rs. 95 0 crore was allocated by the Planning 
Commission which is inadequate keeping in view the cost estimates given by different 
agencies for construction of sports infras tructure, development of Competition/Training 
venues of Delhi University, Jamia Millia Islamia University, DPS, R.K. Puram, 
preparation for Indian Team for Commonwealth Games etc. 
 For the current financial year also i. e 2008-09, against the proposed outlay of Rs. 
883.70 crore, an amount of Rs. 224.00 crore has been allocated under Plan Head of the 
Commonwealth Games.  The re lease of required funds fo r expeditious completion of 
sports infrastructure projects,  preparation of teams, has be en taken up with the Ministry 
of Finance/Planning Commission and it is expect ed that total funds, as required, will be 
made available during the 1st batch of supplementary demands for grants/RE stage. 

 29
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is of the considered op inion that the Ministry’s plea about 
shortage of funds should be read in the context of funds projection in both the youth 
and sports sectors. There has been utter confusion about the required funds, with 
varying figures floating about the need of money for the forthcoming 
Commonwealth Games.  The Committee, ther efore, impresses upon the Ministry to 
prepare the realistic estimate s of funds required for various development schemes 
so that there is not much variation in th e projection for funds and actual allocation 
of funds by the Planning Commission.  Th e excuse about slashing of Ministry’s 
projections by the Planning Commission is not going to sustain in the absence of 
realistic demands.  
Youth Bureau 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.7 The Committee has been voicing its se rious concern over the pendency of 
Utilization Certificates under different Sc hemes of the Ministry.  The Committee 
appreciates that as a result of efforts made by  the Ministry during the last one-two years, 
the pendency level has come down.  As per th e latest reports, number of pending UCs as 
on 31.12.2007 was 6297 involving an amount of Rs . 98.52 crores.  While appreciating 
the progress made in bringing down the pe ndency level of UCs, the Committee would 
like to point out that position still leaves  enough scope for improvement.  Committee's 
concern arises from the fact that a very large number of UCs for varying amounts are to 
be furnished by NGOs running different Youth Welfare Schemes as shown below:- 
Scheme Year No., of NGOs from whom Ucs 
are awaited 
Promotion of National 
Integration 
2005-06 56 
 2006-07 22 
Promotion of Adventure 2005-06 15 
 2006-07 9 
Promotion of Youth Activities 
and Training 
2005-06 35 
 2006-07 28 
Scheme of Development of 
Empowerment of Adolescent 
2005-06 34 
 2005-07 74 

 30
Action Taken 
 There is a tremendous improvement with  regard to the outstanding UCs under the 
Scheme of Financial Assistance for Prom otion of Youth Activities and Training.  
Ministry has reminded all the NGOs who have  outstanding UCs to submit the documents 
immediately.  Many of the NGOs have submitted the UCs, which have been issued after 
examination.  The number of pending UCs which was 35 and 28 in the year 2005-06 and 
2006-07 respectively stands reduced to 28 and 15 respectively as on 26.5.08. 
 As per the directions of the Committee,  Ministry has reminded all the defaulted 
NGOs who have outstanding UCs, to submit the documents immediately.  Many of the 
NGOs have submitted the documents, which are under examination.  In cases where 
NGOs have not submitted the UCs despite remi nders, action as per GFR is also being 
taken, besides blacklisting such NGOs. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The past experiences suggest that issuing of reminders and calling for 
documents for scrutiny has not yielded th e desired results with regard to pendency 
of utilization certificates. The Committee suggests that th e Ministry devise a more 
stringent monitoring mechanism especially  for those NGOs which neither bother to 
respond to the reminders nor submit the documents.  Penal action against such 
defaulters needs to be contemplated.  They cannot afford to escape the 
accountability for the funds allotted from Government exchequer. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.8 The Committee has been given to understa nd that no grants ar e being released to 
any NGO against whom UC is pending except under exceptional cases.   Another action 
taken by the Ministry is to put the list of blacklisted NGOs on the website.  The 
Committee is not aware whether any action has been initiated so far for recovery of funds 
lying with these NGOs.  On a specific query in this regard, the Secret ary of the Ministry 
admitted that recovery of funds from NGOs was a major problem, specially with regard 
to NGO-run Schemes.  One of the initiatives ta ken by the Ministry is to release funds to 

 31
only those NGOs duly recommended by the Stat e Governments.  Ministry would be 
directly dealing with only National leve l NGOs.  The Committee is not convinced by 
these initiatives.  The reason being that th ere have been cases where blacklisted NGOs 
have approached the Ministry under new names, thus getting further re leases of funds.  
Seriousness of this problem can be imagined  by the forthright admi ssion of the Secretary 
in this regard.  The Committee is of the opinion that there is an urgent need for putting in 
place a very stringent mechanism for screen ing of NGOs for releas e of Central funds.  
The Committee understands that one of the ma in reasons for NGOs flouting prescribed 
norms is their being registered under the Soci eties Registration Act which is a very old 
Act having no teeth.  The Committee, accordingly, feels that it is high time that feasibility 
of having an effective legislation for registration of NGOs is explored.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 In the new umbrella scheme “Nationa l Programme for AYouth and Adolescents 
Development” introduced with effect from 2008 -09, the eligibility c onditions have been 
made more stringent requiring the NGOs to  submit details of their bank accounts, PAN 
number, financial position, as also the infrastructural facilities and resources available for 
implementation of the projects.  The Stringent eligibility conditions and the guidelines for 
implementing project under the new scheme are expected to disc ourage the non-serious 
and unsound organizations from applying for financial assistance. 
 As per the above mentioned scheme of National Programme for Youth and 
Adolescent Development, the Ministry is ente rtaining applications direct from only from 
all Indian Organisations.  In all other cases, the proposals will be considered only if the 
same are received with specific recommendations from the concerned State 
Governments. 
 In so far as new legislat ion for registration of NGOs is concerned, the Societies 
Registration Act is being administered by th e Ministry of Corporate Affairs in the 
centrally administered areas and for the St ates the respective State Governments are 
responsible.  The Ministry has already writte n to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and 
also to the State Governments for maki ng suitable amendments to the Societies 
Registration Act 1860 (Act 21 of 1860)  

 32
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee would like to have a st atus of the response received from the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs with regar d to the amendments proposed to the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860. 
 
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN  (NYKS) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
3.5 The Committee has been pursuing this case for the last several years. It had been 
informed earlier by the Ministry that the re cruitment could not take place as the posts 
were not duly sanctioned by the Ministry of Fi nance.  The Committee in its earlier report 
had taken the stand that the candidates w ho had already passed the recruitment test 
should be given priority in appointment.   
 
The Committee finds that the candidates filed the case because they were not 
recruited.  Now, if the Ministry files an application in the court with the promise to 
appoint these successful candidates, the pr oblem can be solved.  The Committee finds 
argument too technical that it was the recr uitment process that was cancelled and the 
selection was not completed.   D.G, NYKS conceded before the Committee that there 
was a communication gap with regard to the r ecruitment.  According to him neither the 
posts were sanctioned nor the selection process was completed and no list of selected 
candidates was finalised. 
 
3.6 The Committee expresses its deep anguish  over the manner in which the issue of 
the recruitment of the Youth C oordinators has been dealt with.  It was quite disturbing 
that on earlier occasions, the Ministry had in formed that selection was done but the case 
was sub-judice.  The new fact about stalling of sele ction process and absence of list of 
final candidates is a revelation to the Committ ee.  If the Ministry  has not adopted the 
correct procedure, the successful  candidates cannot be left to suffer for no fault of theirs.  
The Committee strongly feels that the candidates who deserved to be recruited should not 
be deprived of their right as  a matter of natural justice.  The Committee would like the 
Ministry to give priority in  appointments to those candida tes who have qualified in the 

 33
test.  The Committee directed the Secretary to check the records again and report back the 
status of the case to the Committee.  The Se cretary promised to do so but nothing was 
heard thereafter till this report was adopted by the Committee. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 In this context a reply was sent to Ra jya Sabha Secretariat vide O.M. No.H. 
11018/2/2008-YS-I/381, dated 19th August, 2008 (copy at Annexure-I.) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee deprecates the manner in wh ich the issue of the recruitment of 
the youth coordinators has been handled by the Ministry and NYKS.  The Ministry’s 
note dated 19
th August, 2008 does not reveal any new fact.  Despite Secretary’s 
assurance before the Committee for status of th e issue, the information as on the day of 
evidence has been repeated.  The reply that th e Ministry is referring to in their action 
taken note was in pursuance of the Committee’s specific query regarding existence of a 
final list of the candidates.  Since Ministry’s answer to this specific query is affirmative, 
the Committee reiterates its observation that the candidates who qualified the tests of 
the Youth Coordinators during the year 1997-98 should be given priority in 
appointments. The procedural lapse in the entire selection process has gone against 
these candidates amounting to denial of the righ t to natural justice.  Even in their latest 
communication received in March, 2009 the Minist ry enclosed a copy of its earlier note 
dated 19th August 2008 pleading that the matter is sub judice and action in the matter 
can be taken once the case is finally disposed off by of High Court.   Therefore, the 
Committee calls upon the Ministry to take note of the corrective measures suggested by 
the Committee earlier including appropriat e departmental action against officials 
responsible for misplacing of the papers and documents relating to the selection 
process.  The Committee would like the Ministry to keep it informed of the status of the 
case in the High Court and follow up action on the final list of candidates, which has 
floated in Ministry’s file and surprisingly not traceable within the Ministry’s walls. 
 
VII. YOUTH HOSTELS 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7.3 The Committee notes that a provision of Rs. 2.00 crore made for 2008-09 is 
meant for completion of 8 Youth Hostels.  The Committee apprehends that the scenario 

 34
would remain unchanged in 2008-09 also.  Out of 7 Youth Hostels wh ere construction is 
in full swing, work only at one Hostel at Vizianagaram has been completed, 30% of the 
work has been competed in two hostels and 55% in one hostel.  Status report of 9 Hostels 
where construction is yet to start makes a dismal reading.  In some cases, the plot 
identified for the Hostel remains to be fi nalized due to conflicting opinion about the 
suitability thereof emerging af terwards.  Another problem area noticed is undue delay 
taking place in the preparation of estimates by CPWD. 
Action Taken 
 The status of the 7 youth hostels where construction is in fu ll swing, and 9 youth 
hostels where construction is yet to start was reviewed by the Central Policy Committee 
on Youth Hostel (CPC) in its meeting held on 21.08.2008.  Out of 7 youth hostels, 
construction works in Vizianagaram (Andhra Pradesh) and Ooty (Tamil Nadu) have been 
completed.  In respect balance 5 youth hostels , the need for effective monitoring at State 
and Central level was emphasized. 
 In respect of the 9 youth hostels, where c onstruction is yet to start, the Committee 
observed that many Youth Hostels have be en languishing for long time, mainly on 
account of finalization of the site.  Keeping in view the observations of the Planning 
Commission, and the budget allocations in the 11
th plan, it was decided that the Youth 
Hostels, where the sites have not been finalized, and/or where no expenditure on 
construction has been incurred, may not be pursued further, and their in principle 
approval may be treated as cancelled. 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7.4 The Committee has been informed that  ongoing construction work of 7 Youth 
Hostels will be completed within two years.  The Committee can thus presume that target 
of completion of 8 Youth Hostels in 2008-09 would simply remain on paper.  Element of 
helplessness is evident in acceptance of the Ministry about persistent delays in the 
preparation of estimates, fina lization of sites and development thereof by CPWD/State 
Government.  Another negative aspect as mentioned by the Ministry is the poor 
management of Youth Hostels by the State Governments. 

 35
Action Taken 
 Out of 7 Youth Hostels, 2 Youth Hostels viz. Vizianagram and Ooty have already 
been completed.  Efforts are being made to complete remaining 5 Youth Hostels early.  
The Ministry has also reviewed the c onstruction of ongoing projects and factors 
responsible for delay in constr uction.  Efforts are being made  to complete the projects 
expeditiously and monitoring inspection of these projects is being done on regular basis.l 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
7.5 The Committee has been informed that  the Planning Commission has suggested 
construction of Youth Hostels under public priv ate partnership (PPP).  It has also been 
suggested that some portion of the Youth Ho stel could be earmarked with differential 
tariff facilities so as to generate funds  for proper maintenance and upkeep. Wider 
consultations on this new concept are require d with State Governme nts and other stake 
holders.  Only thereafter, the scheme will be revamped. The Committee reiterates its 
earlier recommendations made for expediting the completion of construction work of 
ongoing hostel projects.  It is high time that the Ministry takes the initiative and gets 
these projects completed under its direct monitoring.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Ministry has reviewed the scheme of  Youth Hostels in the context of the 11
th 
Plan by the Working Group constituted by the Planning commission.  It has been decided 
that the issue of construction of hostels  for youth under “Youth Hostel” scheme on PPP 
mode/franchising mode would be examined when the current scheme comes up for 
revision.  Presently, the existing scheme will be continued.  Ministry is making every 
possible effort to have the 7 on-going projects completed.  As stated earlier, out of these 7 
projects, 2 projects viz. Vi zianagram in Andhra Pradesh a nd Ooty in Tamil Nadu have 
already been completed. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply  of the Ministry on the Committee’s 
recommendations/Observations as contained in paras 7.3, 7.4 & 7.5 pertaining to 

 36
youth hostels.  Three things emerge from the reply viz (i) out of the seven youth 
hostels commissioned earlier construction  of only two youth hostels has been 
completed; (ii) about the proposed nine you th hostels, since the sites have not been 
finalized, their principle approval is to be treated as cancelled, and (iii)  the Ministry 
will consider the Planning Commission’s suggestion regarding construction of 
Youth Hostels under Public Private Partners hip (PPP) while it reviews the existing 
scheme.  The Committee feels that the state and the central agencies responsible for 
the construction work should co-ordinat e and monitor effectively so that the 
construction works of the Youth Hostels does not suffer on any account.  The 
Ministry’s argument for cancellation of the proposed construction of more youth 
hostels due to non-finalization of the site s is not acceptable to the Committee. This 
factor should have been sorted out before moving the proposal for construction of 9 
more Youth Hostels.  The Committee feels that the Planning Commission’s 
suggestion for Public Private Partnershi p (PPP) for the construction of youth 
hostels is worth considering and the Minist ry should work out the modalities of the 
suggestion before taking any final decision.  
 
VIII. SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
8.5 The Committee is not satisfied with th e manner in which the coaches are being 
deployed.  Particularly, the mass transfer of  700 coaches in one go in 2005 was said to 
have created a mess.  As a result, both the players and the coaches were put to a lot of 
inconvenience and the sports sector had to suffer due to that wh imsical step.  The 
Committee found that the SAI had no transfer policy in place which despite persistent 
persuasion by this Committee is yet to be formulated.   
 
Action Taken 
 
 SAI has been advised to prepare a comp rehensive transfer policy, with a strong 
computerized data base for effective implementation. 
 
 

 37
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee notes that a comprehensive  transfer policy for the coaches is 
under formulation.  It hopes that the po licy would take care of all the teething 
problems relating to tran sfer and placement of coac hes as pointed out by the 
Committee earlier. It would like the SAI to expedite the formulation of transfer 
policy.  The Ministry may keep the Commi ttee informed about the status of the 
policy. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
8.6 The Committee finds that the selecti on procedure for the coaches also needs 
improvement. The Ministry needs to adopt a more transparent and pragmatic approach 
with regard to the selection as well as deployment of coaches.  The Committee would 
also like the Ministry to pursue with the Ministry of Finance for lifting the ban on 
recruitment of coaches so that  the vacant posts c ould be filled up and the players do not 
suffer in the absence of coaches.   
 
Action Taken 
 
 SAI is being advised to review the recrui tment rules for coaches.  As regards the 
lifting of ban on recruitment, it is relevant to mention that the SIU report submitted in 
November 2000, recommended the reduction in  the strength of coaches from 1623 to 
831.  This was mainly on account of their recommendation to withdraw the District 
Coaching Centre (DCC) scheme and to restri ct the deployment of coaches in State 
Coaching Centres to 8 per State, In the mean while, there has been a lot of expansion in 
the coverage of SAI and Ministry’s sche mes and also increase in the number of 
disciplines. 
 As on date there are 1336 coaches.  The vacancy position is 617 if the sanctioned 
strength of 1953 is taken into account.  However if the vacancy position is worked out on 
the sanctioned strength accepted by SIU i.e. 1623 coaches, it comes to 313.  The 
deficiency in coaches is being partly met through the appointment of contract coaches.  
At present, SAI has 87 contract coaches in different disciplines.  The  Ministry is 
reviewing the ban in recruitment in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. 

 38
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee is of the view that 313 vac ancies of coaches is a substantial 
figure.  The engagement of contract coaches is  worrisome as the desired amount       
of commitment cannot be expected from them .  It is, however, encouraging that the 
Finance Ministry has been consulted fo r reviewing the ban on recruitment of 
coaches.  The Committee would like to know the status of such consultation.  The 
Committee reiterates its observation that the SAI should formulate a comprehensive 
and transparent policy with regard to recruitment of coaches.  The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministry to expeditiousl y fill in the vacant posts of coaches for 
various disciplines so that non-availability of coaches does not adversely affect the 
training of the players. 
 
IX.  SAI TRAINING CENTRE SCHEME (STC) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
9.3 The Committee observes that coaches ha ve not been deployed in the Extension 
Centres under STC despite repeated requests on that account.  The trainees are ready and 
the kits distributed but the tr aining cannot start in the ab sence of the coaches.  This 
situation, according to the Co mmittee, will not augur well fo r the development of sports.  
The Committee would like the Government to immediately depute coaches in all STC 
Centres.  The Committee does not find any ge nder-segregated data in respect of STC 
trainees.  The Committee recommends that a status report showing outlay and outcome as 
also the percentage of expenditure on girl tr ainees be provided to the Committee.  The 
Committee stresses that such data should invariably be co mpiled in respect of all the 
schemes under the Ministry. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 At present there are 58 centres functioning under STC Schemes all over the 
country and 7790 trainees are under  training in various sports disciplines i.e. Athletics, 
Archery, Badminton, Basketball, Boxing, Lawn  Tennis, Canoeing & Kayaking, Cycling, 

 39
Fencing, Football, Gymnastics, Hockey, Handball, Judo, Kabaddi, Kho-Kho, Karate, 
Swimming/diving, Speak-Takraw, Shooting,  Softball, Table Tennis, Taekwondo, 
Volleyball, Wrestling, Water Sports, Wushu a nd Weightlifting.  The functioning of the 
Centres is being reviewed by Sports Authority of India (SAI) and brought to the notice of 
Governing Body/Finance Committee of SAI.   It is submitted that coaching and 
administration support have been  provided to the centres as  per their requirements.  
During the year 2007-08, the STC Scheme tr ainees have won 396 medals (360 National 
and 36 International.)  
 In order to provide effective coaching in each Extension Centre under STC, SAI 
has deployed 14 coaches in 83 Centres for pr oviding the training to 781 Boys and 445 
girls. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee opines that despite Mini stry’s claimed action for effective 
coaching system, the number of coache s deployed in the Extension Centres 
continues to be on the lower side.  The Committee desires a more realistic approach 
in deployment of coaches in the extension centres. The trainees have won 396 medals 
during the year 2007-08 and they need to be nurtured and encouraged further for 
better performance.  
 
XI. NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS (NSFS) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
11.4 The Committee feels that more and more as to-turfs are needed to be laid.  There 
should be astro turf facility in each district .  The Committee reminds the Ministry of its 
observation about the astro-turf in SAI Cent re of Bangalore and desires to know the 
status thereof. 
 
Action Taken 
 
Consequent upon the transfer of the Spor ts Infrastructure Schemes including the 
scheme of Installation of Synthetic Surfaces to the state sector w.e.f. 1.4.2005 and due to 

 40
non availability of funds under the scheme fr om 2007-08 onwards, the Ministry is not in 
a position to consider any fresh cases for instal lation of synthetic surfaces in the country.  
However, the Ministry had already taken- up the matter with the Planning Commission 
for revival of the Sports Infrastructure Sche me for creation of modern sports facilities, 
including Astroturfs. 
 Governing Body of SAI has already a pproved laying of 10 new astro-turfs at 
various centres of SAI across th e country.  Further, as the la ying of full size astro-turfs is 
quite costly, it is being examined by SAI whether one fourth size astro-turfs can be laid 
for practice of hockey players. 
 Regarding present status of synthetic hoc key turf at SAI Sub Centre, Bangalore, it 
is submitted that the new synthetic hockey turf installed at Bangalore was inspected by 
the Joint Acceptance Committee on 10.5.2007 comp rising of Dr. A.K. Ghosh, Prof. IIT, 
New Delhi, Deputy Secretary (Sports), MOYAS and Superintendent Engineer, SAI, New 
Delhi.  The Committee recommended the acceptance of the replayed synthetic hockey 
surface at SAI Centre, Bangalore. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee emphasizes the need for adequa te number of synthetic turfs      
so that our players get regular practice. In  case of some sport disciplines practice 
and playing on synthetic turfs is a necessity if India is to compete at global level.  
The cost factor for the laying  of requisite number of synt hetic turfs is secondary.  
The Committee desires an affirmative an d expeditious time bound action for 
augmenting the synthetic turf facilities across the country.  
 
XII SCHEME OF INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
12.3 The Committee would like to have a st atus note on the numbe r of Sportspersons 
being granted pension.  The Committee unde rstands that under the National Sports 
Development Fund, another component of the Um brella Scheme, athletes are assisted for 
training and participation in international tournaments in identified sports disciplines.  
The Committee hopes that a grievance redre ssal mechanism must be in place so as to 

 41
ensure reach of incentives to deserving sportspersons and welfare of our retired 
sportspersons.  The Committee would like to have an idea in this regard. 
 
Action Taken  
  
 Under the Scheme of Pension to Meritori ous Sportspersons, which is in existence 
since 1994, those sportspersons, who are Indian  citizens and who have  won Gold, Silver 
or Bronze medals in Olympic Games, Wo rld Cup/World Championship, Asian Games, 
Commonwealth Games and Para-Olympic Game s, who are above 30 years of age and 
have retired from active sports career, are el igible for pension.  At present, 461 persons 
are getting pension under this Scheme.   
 The rates of pension under the Scheme  have been doubled from 1.7.2008 pursuant 
to decision taken to this effect by the Ge neral Committee, which is the apex body for 
managing the “Sports Fund for Pension to Me ritorious Sportspersons”, in its meeting 
held on 10.7.2008.  The enhanced rates of pens ion will be applicable to both existing 
meritorious sportspersons drawing pension as well as future eligible sportspersons. 
 The revised rates of pension after enhancement are as follows: 
S. No. Category of meritorious s portspersons  Existing rates of 
pension (Rs./PM) 
Enhanced Rates of 
Pension (Rs./PM) 
1. Medalists at the Olympic Games 5000 10000 
2. Gold medalists at the World Cup/World 
Championships in Olympic and Aisan 
Games disciplines 
4000 8000 
3. Silver and Bronze medalists at the World 
Cup/World Championships in Olympic 
and Asian Games disciplines 
3500 7000 
4. Gold medalists of the 
Asian/Commonwealth Games  
3500 7000 
5. Silver and Bronze medalists of the 
Asian/Commonwealth Games 
 
3000 6000 
6. Gold Medalists of Para-Olympic Games 2500 5000 
7. Silver medalists of Para-Olympic Games 2000 4000 
8. Bronze medalists of Para-Olympic Games 1500 3000 
 
 Under the National sports Development F und, assistance is being provided to elite 
athletes for their individualized extensive training in India and abroad and providing them 
funds for procurement of sports equipments fo r preparing them for th eir participation in 
mega sporting events including the Beijing Olympic Games. 

 42
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the status of sportspersons being granted 
pension.  The Ministry could have given the category wise details of sportspersons 
along with the committed liability of Government under the revised rates of 
pension.  The Committee hopes that the de sired details would be made available to 
it.  The Ministry has also chosen to remain silent over the grievance redressal 
mechanism relating to incentives to deservin g sportspersons.  It has come to the 
notice of the Committee that th e cases of pension to dese rving sportspersons remain 
pending for a long time.  The fact remain s that these sportspersons are forced to 
approach the authorities for clearance of th eir pension, which other wise should be 
released by Government without any appl ication from the sportsperson.  The 
scheme clearly stipulates the criteria and amount of pension for different categories 
and therefore the sportspersons should not be made to beg for the rewards they 
truly deserve. Since the grievances on this account are not properly addressed, there 
is an urgent need to set up an effect ive redressal mechanism otherwise the very 
purpose of the scheme would be defeated .  The Committee would like the Ministry 
to furnish the details of applications fo r pension pending with it.  The Committee 
also expects the Ministry to devise a mech anism so that the cases are cleared within 
one month of the receipt of application. 
 
XIV. COMMONWEALTH GAMES 2010 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
14.1 Commonwealth Games, 2010 are scheduled  to be held in Delhi from 3
rd to 14 th 
October, 2010, with the objective of deve loping world class infrastructure and 
preparation of Indian teams in various di sciplines for the Commonwealth Games, 2010. 
Specific time lines have been fixed for various competitions and training venues.  The 
Committee notes that in order to ensure strict  adherence to the time-lines of each project, 
the Ministry has set up a web-based monito ring system.  The Committee hopes that there 
would be no deviation from the time-sche dule fixed for different  projects related to 
Commonwealth Games. 

 43
 
Action Taken 
 
The various stakeholders of Commonwea lth Games, 2010 have fixed specific 
timelines for completion of Competition/ Training Venues relate d to Commonwealth 
Games, 2010.  Most of these sports infras tructure projects will be completed by 
December, 2009.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee finds that the reply is t oo general and not specific and is of 
the considered opinion that the Commonwealth Games bein g an international event 
showcasing India to the world, preparations therefor  in terms of infrastructure and 
other related facilities should have b een accorded top priority and completed 
strictly within the prescribed time limits.  In the light of this, the Committee finds 
the Ministry’s reply that “most of thes e sports infrastructure projects will be 
completed by December, 2009” as being vagu e.  The Committee impresses upon the 
Ministry to make concerted efforts to en sure that all the sports infrastructural 
projects be completed in time and the Commi ttee be regularly kept apprised of the 
progress made in the matter.   
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
14.2 The Committee understands that (Training Practice) sports venues in 17 
disciplines for Commonwealth Games 2010 are to  be got ready by different agencies as 
per the action plan laid down for them.  Out of 26 venues, a large number of them will be 
new venues.  As per the schedule, these venues will be ready by the end of 2009 or 
middle of 2010.  The Committee feels that th e present completion schedule would be too 
late for sportspersons fo r required training/practic e at these venues for the 
Commonwealth Games to be held in 2010.  Acco rding to the Committee, there is already 
a confusion prevailing about our preparedness for the Games and the delayed completion 
schedule may create problems at the last mo ment.  The Secretary clarified before the 
Committee that the venues other than the Commonwealth Games were already available 
for the players.  The Committee has seen the co ndition of these play field itself; less said 
is better about them.  Facilities for running national coachi ng camps and national 
preparatory camps were also no better. Government is at tempting to provide playing 

 44
conditions of international standard in these venues.   The Committee is of the view that 
the schedule for completion of different venue s will adversely affect preparation of our 
national teams.  The Committee urges upon the Ministry to prepare the venues within the 
scheduled target so that our players get some exposures on these venues before the 
Games. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The Ministry has developed a web-ba sed monitoring system to monitor the 
progress of sports infrastr ucture projects related to commonwealth Games, 2010. The 
progress of different sports infrastructure projects is be ing monitored regularly at highest 
levels of Government. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee while reiterating its above observation would like the 
Ministry to keep the Committee apprised  of the progress of different sports 
infrastructural projects regularly.  The Committee would further like to have a 
status report on the projects that are likely  to be delayed along with the reasons for 
delay and the remedial steps proposed to be taken. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
14.3 The Committee fails to understand the r easons for such wide variations in the 
proposals and allocations.  The Committee str ongly feels that shortage of funds should 
not be cited as one of the factors for any delay both in the completion of projects and 
preparation of our teams.  The Committee r ecommends that require d funds need to be 
made available as and when required.  At th e same time, every step may be taken for 
completion of all the projects at per the time-schedule. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 In this connection, it would be pe rtinent to mention that against budgeted 
provision (B.E.) of  Rs. 150.00 crore for th e financial year 2007-08, an amount of Rs. 
239.98 crore was expended under different sub heads of the Commonwealth Games.  For 

 45
the current financial year i.e. 2008-09, against the proposed outlay of Rs. 896.60 crore, an 
amount of Rs. 224.00 crore has been allocate d under Plan Head of the Commonwealth 
Games which is not adequate to meet the requirements for completing milestones of 
different sports infrastructure as well as other important schemes/projects like Scheme for 
‘Preparation of Indian Team for Commonweal th Games’.  The rel ease of required funds 
for expeditious completion of Sports infrastr ucture projects, preparation of teams, has 
been taken up. 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee observes that the reply of  the Ministry does not specify the 
reasons for wide variations in the proposal  and actual allocations.  The gap is a 
cause of worry.  It appears the Ministry ha s failed to defend its projections.  Given 
the fact that the Commonwealth Games are fast approaching and there are 
speculations and doubts over the timely comple tion of projects, the plea       
regarding non availability of funds will do more harm than good at this stage.  In 
the light of this, the Committee would like the Ministry to take every conceivable 
step to mobilize the requisite funds from the Planning Commission.  Commonwealth 
Games being an international event, the Country’s prestige is at stake, the 
Government should endeavour not only to arrange the adequate funding but also 
timely completion of the projects.  The Committee hopes that all sports agencies will 
collectively work in tandem to make the event a grand success.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 46
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMNT ARE ATILL AWAITED 
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
2.10 The Committee in one of its earlier re ports had asked the Mi nistry to provide 
views of all the States on the issue of bringing  sports to the Concurre nt List.  Ministry is 
yet to furnish that information.  The Committee would firm up its opinion only after 
framing the response of the States on the proposal. 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Dialogue with States on this matter is being carried forward to ascertain their 
positions on the matter. 
 
IV NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS) 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.8 The Committee notes that re puted agency like Tata Inst itute of Social Sciences 
has been engaged to study and report on NSS.   The Committee desires that an evaluation 
of NSS Scheme needs to be carried out so as  to know its social impact and its importance 
in nation-building. The Committee hopes that th e study of TISS would cover this aspect 
also.  
 
Action Taken 
 
 In the current financial year the Tata In stitute of Social Science, Mumbai who was 
entrusted with the task of evaluation of the NSS Scheme has submitted their proposal.  
Ministry has already released 50% of the estimated cost as an advance to TISS for the 
assignment of this study. 
 
 
 

 47
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
  
 The Committee is of the considered op inion that the Ministry’s plea about 
shortage of funds should be read in the context of funds projection in both the youth 
and sports sectors. There has been utter confusion about the required funds, with 
varying figures floating about the need of money for the forthcoming 
Commonwealth Games.  The Committee, ther efore, impresses upon the Ministry to 
prepare the realistic estimate s of funds required for various development schemes 
so that there is not much variation in th e projection for funds and actual allocation 
of funds by the Planning Commission.  Th e excuse about slashing of Ministry’s 
projections by the Planning Commission is not going to sustain in the absence of 
realistic demands.               (Para 2.3) 
 
Youth Bureau
 
 
The past experiences suggest that issuing of reminders and calling for 
documents for scrutiny has not yielded th e desired results with regard to pendency 
of utilization certificates. The Committee suggests that th e Ministry devise a more 
stringent monitoring mechanism especially  for those NGOs which neither bother to 
respond to the reminders nor submit the documents.  Penal action against such 
defaulters needs to be contemplated.  They cannot afford to escape the 
accountability for the funds allotted from Government exchequer.             (Para 2.7) 
 
 The Committee would like to have a st atus of the response received from the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs with regar d to the amendments proposed to the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860.             (Para 2.8) 
 
III. NEHRU YUVA KENDRA  SANGATHAN  (NYKS) 
 
The Committee deprecates the manner in wh ich the issue of the recruitment of 
the youth coordinators has been handled by the Ministry and NYKS.  The Ministry’s 
note dated 19 th August, 2008 does not reveal any new fact.  Despite Secretary’s 
assurance before the Committee for status of th e issue, the information as on the day of 
evidence has been repeated.  The reply that th e Ministry is referring to in their action 
taken note was in pursuance of the Committee’s specific query regarding existence of a 
final list of the candidates.  Since Ministry’s answer to this specific query is affirmative, 
the Committee reiterates its observation that the candidates who qualified the tests of 

 48
the Youth Coordinators during the year 1997-98 should be given priority in 
appointments. The procedural lapse in the entire selection process has gone against 
these candidates amounting to denial of the righ t to natural justice.  Even in their latest 
communication received in March, 2009 the Minist ry enclosed a copy of its earlier note 
dated 19th August 2008 pleading that the matter is sub judice and action in the matter 
can be taken once the case is finally disposed off by of High Court.   Therefore, the 
Committee calls upon the Ministry to take note of the corrective measures suggested by 
the Committee earlier including appropriat e departmental action against officials 
responsible for misplacing of the papers and documents relating to the selection 
process.  The Committee would like the Ministry to keep it informed of the status of the 
case in the High Court and follow up action on the final list of candidates, which has 
floated in Ministry’s file and surprisingly not traceable within the Ministry’s walls.
 
                 (Para 3.5 & 3.6)  
 
VII. YOUTH HOSTELS 
 
  The Committee takes note of the reply  of the Ministry on the Committee’s 
recommendations/Observations as contained in paras 7.3, 7.4 & 7.5 pertaining to 
youth hostels.  Three things emerge from the reply viz (i) out of the seven youth 
hostels commissioned earlier construction  of only two youth hostels has been 
completed; (ii) about the proposed nine you th hostels, since the sites have not been 
finalized, their principle approval is to be treated as cancelled, and (iii)  the Ministry 
will consider the Planning Commission’s suggestion regarding construction of 
Youth Hostels under Public Private Partners hip (PPP) while it reviews the existing 
scheme.  The Committee feels that the state and the central agencies responsible for 
the construction work should co-ordinat e and monitor effectively so that the 
construction works of the Youth Hostels does not suffer on any account.  The 
Ministry’s argument for cancellation of the proposed construction of more youth 
hostels due to non-finalization of the site s is not acceptable to the Committee. This 
factor should have been sorted out before moving the proposal for construction of 9 
more Youth Hostels.  The Committee feels that the Planning Commission’s 
suggestion for Public Private Partnershi p (PPP) for the construction of youth 
hostels is worth considering and the Minist ry should work out the modalities of the 
suggestion before taking any final decision.                                    (Para 7.3, 7.4 & 7.5) 
 
 
VIII. SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI) 
 
The Committee notes that a comprehensive  transfer policy for the coaches is 
under formulation.  It hopes that the po licy would take care of all the teething 
problems relating to tran sfer and placement of coac hes as pointed out by the 
Committee earlier. It would like the SAI to expedite the formulation of transfer 
policy.  The Ministry may keep the Commi ttee informed about the status of the 
policy.               (Para 8.5) 
 
 
 

 49
The Committee is of the view that 313 vac ancies of coaches is a substantial 
figure.  The engagement of contract coaches is  worrisome as the desired amount       
of commitment cannot be expected from them .  It is, however, encouraging that the 
Finance Ministry has been consulted fo r reviewing the ban on recruitment of 
coaches.  The Committee would like to know the status of such consultation.  The 
Committee reiterates its observation that the SAI should formulate a comprehensive 
and transparent policy with regard to recruitment of coaches.  The Committee 
impresses upon the Ministry to expeditiousl y fill in the vacant posts of coaches for 
various disciplines so that non-availability of coaches does not adversely affect the 
training of the players.              (Para 8.6) 
 
IX.  SAI TRAINING CENTRE SCHEME (STC) 
 
The Committee opines that despite Mini stry’s claimed action for effective 
coaching system, the number of coache s deployed in the Extension Centres 
continues to be on the lower side.  The Committee desires a more realistic approach 
in deployment of coaches in the extension centres. The trainees have won 396 medals 
during the year 2007-08 and they need to be nurtured and encouraged further for 
better performance. (Para 9.3) 
 
XI. NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS (NSFS) 
 
The Committee emphasizes the need for adequa te number of synthetic turfs      
so that our players get regular practice. In  case of some sport disciplines practice 
and playing on synthetic turfs is a necessity if India is to compete at global level.  
The cost factor for the laying  of requisite number of synt hetic turfs is secondary.  
The Committee desires an affirmative an d expeditious time bound action for 
augmenting the synthetic turf facilities across the country.                          (Para 11.4) 
 
XII SCHEME OF INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the status of sportspersons being granted 
pension.  The Ministry could have given the category wise details of sportspersons 
along with the committed liability of Government under the revised rates of 
pension.  The Committee hopes that the de sired details would be made available to 
it.  The Ministry has also chosen to remain silent over the grievance redressal 
mechanism relating to incentives to deservin g sportspersons.  It has come to the 
notice of the Committee that th e cases of pension to dese rving sportspersons remain 
pending for a long time.  The fact remain s that these sportspersons are forced to 
approach the authorities for clearance of th eir pension, which other wise should be 
released by Government without any appl ication from the sportsperson.  The 
scheme clearly stipulates the criteria and amount of pension for different categories 
and therefore the sportspersons should not be made to beg for the rewards they 
truly deserve. Since the grievances on this account are not properly addressed, there 
is an urgent need to set up an effect ive redressal mechanism otherwise the very 

 50
purpose of the scheme would be defeated .  The Committee would like the Ministry 
to furnish the details of applications fo r pension pending with it.  The Committee 
also expects the Ministry to devise a mech anism so that the case s are cleared within 
one month of the receipt of application.                     (Para 12.3) 
 
XIV. COMMONWEALTH GAMES 2010 
 
 The Committee finds that the reply is t oo general and not specific and is of 
the considered opinion that the Commonwealth Games bein g an international event 
showcasing India to the world, preparations therefor  in terms of infrastructure and 
other related facilities should have b een accorded top priority and completed 
strictly within the prescribed time limits.  In the light of this, the Committee finds 
the Ministry’s reply that “most of thes e sports infrastructure projects will be 
completed by December, 2009” as being vagu e.  The Committee impresses upon the 
Ministry to make concerted efforts to en sure that all the sports infrastructural 
projects be completed in time and the Commi ttee be regularly kept apprised of the 
progress made in the matter.          (Para 14.1)   
 
 
 The Committee while reiterating its above observation would like the 
Ministry to keep the Committee apprised  of the progress of different sports 
infrastructural projects regularly.  The Committee would further like to have a 
status report on the projects that are likely  to be delayed along with the reasons for 
delay and the remedial steps proposed to be taken.         (Para 14.2)   
 
The Committee observes that the reply of  the Ministry does not specify the 
reasons for wide variations in the proposal  and actual allocations.  The gap is a 
cause of worry.  It appears the Ministry has failed to defend its projections.  Given 
the fact that the Commonwealth Games are fast approaching and there are 
speculations and doubts over the timely comple tion of projects, the plea       
regarding non availability of funds will do more harm than good at this stage.  In 
the light of this, the Committee would like the Ministry to take every conceivable 
step to mobilize the requisite funds from the Planning Commission.  Commonwealth 
Games being an international event, the Country’s prestige is at stake, the 
Government should endeavour not only to arrange the adequate funding but also 
timely completion of the projects.  The Committee hopes that all sports agencies will 
collectively work in tandem to make the event a grand success.                  (Para 14.3)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 51
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 

 52
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Deve lopment met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 
the 30th October, 2009 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes   Chairman 
2. Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan 
3. Shrimati Mohsina Kidwai 
4. Shri Penumalli Madhu 
5. Shri M. Rama Jois 
6. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
7.  Shri P.K. Biju 
8.   Shrimati J. Helen Davidson 
9.  Shri P.C. Gaddigoudar 
10.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11.  Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav 
12.  Shri P. Kumar 
13.  Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar 
14.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad 
15.  Dr. Vinay Kumar Pandey 
16.  Shri Tapas Paul 
17.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
18.  Shri Ashok Tanwar 
19.  Shri Madhu Goud Yaskhi 
 

 53
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Smt.Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary 
Shri M.K. Khan, Director 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director 
Shri Sanjay Singh, Assistant Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman apprised the Members of the agenda before the 
Committee.  The Committee then took up the National Commission for Minority 
Educational Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2009 for clause-b y-clause consideration.  The 
Committee took note of a statement prepared by the Secretariat indicating a comparative 
analysis of the provisions of  the relevant Act of 2004, the amended Act of 2006 and the 
proposed provisions of the Bill alongwith the views of both the Department of Higher 
Education and the Commission on the proposed Bill.  After some deliberations, the 
Committee decided to adopt the Report on the Bill in its next meeting.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee consid ered and adopted the draft 214
th and 215th Action 
Taken Reports, on the action taken by Govern ment on the recommendations/observations 
contained in its 207 th and 208 th Reports on Demands for Grants 2008-09 pertaining to 
Department of Higher Education and Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports respectively. 
 
4. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 
Thursday, the 12
th November, 2009.   
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                   ARUN SHARMA  
30
th OCTOBER, 2009                                                           JOINT DIRECTOR 
 