PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 248
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
ON
THE UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH AND INNOVATION BILL, 2012
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2013/MAGHA, 1934 (SAKA)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26 FEBRUARY, 2013)TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 26 FEBRUARY, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Magha, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012
REPORT NO. 
248


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT
The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Magha, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (v)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—39
5. N OTE OF D ISSENT .................................................................................................................. 41—45
6. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 46—58
7. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 59—76
8. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 77 —137

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2012-13)
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Tarun Vijay
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
8. Dr. Janardhan Waghmare
9. Shri Baishnab Parida
10. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Suresh Angadi
12. Shri P.K. Biju
13. Shri Jeetendra Singh Bundela
14. Shri Sivasami C.
15. Shrimati Helen Davidson
*16. Shrim ati Deepa Dasmunshi
@17. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
18. Dr. Charles Dias
19. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
20. Shri Virender Kashyap
21. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
22. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
23. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
24. Capt. Jai Naraian Prasad Nishad
25. Shri Sis Ram Ola
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Shri K. Chandra Shekar Rao
28. Shri M.I. Shanavas
29. Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla
30. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
31. Shri Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
32. Shri Manicka Tagore
(i)
* Shrimati Deepa Dasmunshi was elevated to Union Minister of State, Urban Development on 28.10.2012.
@ Nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 09.01.2013.

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorized by the Committee, present this Two Hundred
and Forty Eighth Report of the Committee on the Universities for Research and Innovation
Bill, 2012. *
2. The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012 was introduced in the Lok Sabha
on 21 May, 2012. In pursuance of Rule 270 relating to the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with Speaker, Lok Sabha
referred** the Bill to the Committee on 30 May, 2012 for examination and report.
3. The Bill is a major policy initiative for the establishment of Universities for Research and
Innovation having wide implications for high quality research and innovation in the country. The
Committee held extensive interactions with a large number of stakeholders which included the
Secrertary, Department of Higher Education, Chairman, UGC, Chairman, AICTE, Vice Chancellors
of Delhi University, IGNOU, HNB Garhwal University, Panjab University, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, Delhi Technological University, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University and Jamia
Milia Islamia, Amity University, Professors of JNU, representatives of Delhi University Teachers
Association, Indian Council of Universities, Education Promotion Society for India and Delhi
Science Forum.
4. The Committee, while drafting the Report, relied on the following:
(i) Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education;
(ii) Note on the clauses of the Bill received from the Department of Higher Education;
(iii) Summary of consultation held with the stakeholders;
(iv) Verbatim record of the oral evidence taken on the Bill;
(v) Presentation made and clarification given by the Secretary, Department of Higher Education;
(vi) Replies to questionnaire and comments on areas of concern on the Bill received from
the Department of Higher Education; and
(vii) Replies to questionnaire received from the stakeholders.
5. The Committee considered the Bill in eight sittings held on 6 November, 19 December, 2012
and 3, 11, 22 and 30 January and 7 and 21 February, 2013.
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report on the Bill and adopted the same in its meeting
held on 21 February, 2013.
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2 dated the 21 st May, 2012.
** Rajya Sabha Secretariat Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No.49716 dated the 30 th May, 2012.

7. One Note of dissent given by Shri P.K. Biju is appended to the Report.
8. For facility of the reference, observations and recommendations of Committee have been
printed in bold letters at end of Report.
OSCAR FERNANDES
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 21, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary
Magha 1, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Human Resource Development.
(iv)

ABBREVIATIONS
1 IGNOU - Indira Gandhi National Open University
2 EPSI - Education Promotion Society of India
3 ICT - Information and Communication Technology
4 DEC - Distance Education Council
5 UGC - University Grants Commission
6 AICTE - All India Council for Technical Education
7 HRD - Human Resource Development
(v)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012 was referred to the Department
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development by the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 30 May, 2012 for examination and report.
1.2 The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012 seeks to provide for the
establishment and incorporation of universities for research and innovation and for enabling them
to emerge as centres for ecosystems to develop as hubs of education, research and innovation and
to promote research and innovation in learning and design, development and delivery of solutions
and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
1.3 The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill reads as follows:
“Innovation carries spin-off benefits and yields social dividends for the society through
reduction in poverty, improved health, greater education, wealth creation, empowerment of
women and vulnerable groups. Universities are places where ideas germinate, applications
emerge from ideas, and innovation flourished in an atmosphere of intellectual challenge and
freedom. Universities where the faculty and students constantly challenge existing
boundaries of knowledge, amidst a prevailing culture of creativity, are ideally positioned to
be the powerhouse of an innovation led knowledge economy.
There is also a growing realization that if India has to achieve a leadership role in the
future global knowledge economy, mere public expenditure on higher education is not going
to be sufficient and a substantial part of the funding must flow into the education sector
through not-for-profit private participation.
The “Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012” provides for establishment and
incorporation of Universities for Research and Innovation which would be at the fount of
making India the global knowledge hub and set benchmarks for excellence for other
institutions of higher learning through path-breaking research and promoting synergies
between teaching and research to create institutions universally recognized for quality in
teaching, learning and research. The Bill aims to lay down an enabling legislative
framework for establishment of Universities for Research and Innovation. The Bill provides
for setting up of Universities for Research and Innovation both in the private sector and
the public sector. Presently, there is no central law which provides for this framework, hence
the need for a central legislation”.
1.4 Giving a background of the Bill, the Department of Higher Education submitted that despite
having one of the largest higher education systems in the world with 600 Universities and 33000
colleges-publicly and privately funded, only a few Indian institutions of learning like IITs, IIMs and
IISCs have been able to make a mark on the global stage. There was a growing realization that
if India had to achieve a leadership role in the future global knowledge economy, mere public
expenditure on higher education was not going to be sufficient and a substantial part of the funding
must flow into the education through not-forprofit private participation. India, having the largest
highest education systems in the world, was positioned to adopt a leadership role in the global
knowledge economy of the future, provided it was able to reap benefits of creative knowledge
organizations, both existing as well as new. Universities are places where ideas germinate,
applications emerge from ideas and innovation flourishes in an atmosphere of intellectual challenge

2
and freedom. Such universities where faculty and students constantly challenge existing boundaries
of knowledge, amidst a prevailing culture of creativity are ideally positioned to be the powerhouse
of an innovation led knowledge economy. In order to foster the spirit of innovation, the
establishment and incorporation of Universities for Research and Innovation were proposed which
would be at the forefront of making India a global knowledge hub and set benchmarks for
excellence for other institutions of higher learning. These Universities would be embedded in
ecosystems developed for promoting synergies among education, research and incubation centres
or industry and to create institutions universally recognized for research and innovation experience
embedded in learning and design, development and delivery of solutions.
1.5 The Secretary, Department of Higher Education in his deposition before the Committee on
the Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012 said that the existing structure of
universities was not conducive to research and innovation as there was lack of autonomy in these
universities. There was weak industry-university interface in research and innovation, lack of
international mix of students and faculty and absence of inter-disciplinary learning and research. He
submitted that there was a need for a new class of universities devoted to innovation and research
which would provide space to private and top class universities. These would be completely free
from Governmental control and would be free to determine their standards.
1.6 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that as per the data given by UNESCO
Institute for Statistics, India’s position in the share of world researchers was quite low. Compared
to other countries like US (20.3%) and China (20.1%), India only has 2% of the share of world
researchers. India’s share in R&D investment is also quite low. The challenge for India was to
create opportunities to pursue high education and research and job prospects at par with
destinations favoured by the Indian diaspora.
1.7 Tracing the evolvement of the proposed universities, the Secretary informed the Committee
that the Planning Commission had recommended for setting up of 16 Central Universities and 14
Universities aiming at world class standards. NDC approved setting up of 14 World class
Universities during the Eleventh and Twelfth Plan. Sixteen Central Universities were set up through
the Central Universities Act, 2009. However, the so called ‘World class’ Universities could not be
set up since the concept of what constituted a ‘World class’ university had to be developed. The
Approach Paper to Twelfth Plan mentions internationalization of education as one of the aims of
the plan period. With higher education becoming an increasingly global enterprise, Indian institutions
needed to embrace internationalization that could provide them with new opportunities. Against this
background, the draft legislation had been introduced, aiming to provide for establishment and
incorporation of Universities for Research and Innovation which would be making India, the global
knowledge hub and set benchmarks for excellence for other institutions of higher learning through
path-breaking research and promoting synergies between teaching and research to create institutions
universally recognized for quality in teaching, learning and research.
1.8 On a specific query about the global scenario in the context of research universities, the
Committee was given to understand that in most of the developing countries, universities can be
broadly categorised into two categories, those which focus on teaching and learning for
undergraduate and postgraduate classes and those which are oriented more towards undertaking
research in basic and fundamental disciplines, in turn creating a corpus of new knowledge which
can be subsequently converted into economic gains.
1.9 The Californian System of Education laid down in 1960 envisaged a three tier structure of
tertiary educational institutions, the first tier being elite and merit based universities which
contribute towards new knowledge creation. Most of the research universities existing in the world
today were public funded universities. Research universities were a category created by the
‘Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education’ in 1973 to indicate universities in the

3
United States that engage in extensive research activity. Universities in the USA have had very
strong elements of research and innovations in their higher education system. Australia has the
Innovative Research Universities (IRU), which is a network of seven comprehensive universities
conducting research of national and international standing. It pursues the objective, inter alia, of
creating opportunities for students and stakeholders through collaboration and partnership. China
launched the ‘Project 211’, as part of its national priority in the 21
st century, involving important
universities and colleges in 1995 with the intent of raising the research standards of high-level
universities and cultivating strategies for socio-economic development. It subsequently launched the
‘Project 985’ in 1998 to further promote the development and reputation of the Chinese higher
education system. The project involves large allocations of funding to select universities in order
to build new research centres, improve facilities, attract world-renowned faculty and visiting
scholars etc. As a result of ‘Project 985’, nine universities in China were converted into Research
Universities. The progress of these universities in R&D was so immense that most of them now
were recognised world over for their research output. The Committee was given to understand that
while the exact nomenclature may not exist elsewhere, higher education systems abroad were
replete with initiatives that emphasised and promoted collaborations, inter-disciplinary approach
aimed at creating new knowledge, research resulting in innovations which would benefit society.
The present legislation draws from this international experience to create universities with similar
objectives.
1.10 Giving an idea about the structure of the proposed universities, the Department submitted
that these universities would concentrate less on teaching and more on research and innovation.
These universities would also be non-affiliating universities and enrolments would mostly be at the
postgraduate (PG) and post-PG level. These universities would provide for the knowledge needs
of the country, in training professionals, specialists, scientists and researchers needed by society
and the economy, in generating new knowledge to support national innovation systems, and to
nurture, develop and evolve values of humanism for a better citizenry. Each university would focus
on one area or problem of significance to India and build an ecosystem of research and teaching
around different related disciplines and fields of study, which were relevant thereto, and search for
solutions that were globally valid and in the process develop education at under-graduate and higher
levels. Theme based research was expected to yield significant dividends in terms of intellectual
property due to focused and inter-disciplinary research in an area of study. These universities
would also be instrumental in building innovation clusters in the country by promoting colocation
of relevant institutes, industry and incubation centres etc. These universities would have to
structure a governance framework that would not only promote autonomy but also inculcate the
spirit of accountability. There would be autonomy in matters of academics, faculty, personnel,
finances and administration; assignment of appropriate incomes by the Central Government, through
grants or otherwise, commensurate with the expenditure responsibilities, ability of the university to
raise additional sources of incomes at its level, including the ability to adjust its fee structure and
clarity in division of functional responsibilities at various levels of the university.
1.11 The Committee understands that traditional universities in our country are so over-
burdened with imparting undergraduate and postgraduate education and managing the
affiliation system that they are not able to focus on research and innovation. Problems
arising out of prevalent legacy systems, governance structures and the socio-cultural milieu
of the existing institutions do not make room for a conducive environment for world-class
research and innovation. In such a scenario, especially in the global context, the proposed
legislation for setting up universities for Research and Innovation is a long-awaited and
welcome step. These universities would be at the fount of making India the global
knowledge hub and set benchmarks for excellence for other institutions of higher learning
through path-breaking research and promoting synergies between teaching and research
quality in teaching, learning and research.

4
1.12 The Committee notes that the proposed universities would have complete autonomy
in design of programmes. They would be structured around Schools/Faculties, cutting across
disciplines and decision-making on academic matters would be devolved to School/Faculty.
Introduction of courses would be decided at School/Faculty level based on Peer Group
Academic Audit. School/Faculty would have freedom to prescribe fee structure, provide
scholarships to students based on academic performance as well as fellowships for research
programmes.
1.13 While agreeing that the proposed universities will give great impetus to quality
research in the higher education sector, the Committee is also aware about the likely
impact on the existing universities, two different categories of universities, one autonomous
and free from any control or monitoring as envisaged for the other category of universities,
having better service conditions for their faculty as compared to the existing universities.
Not only this, establishment of the proposed universities is to be through an altogether
different mechanism, doing away with the scrutiny of Parliament or in other words through
a mechanism where Executive has an upper hand over the Legislature. The Committee is
of the view that the proposed legislation has to be considered, taking care of all the aspects,
leaving no doubts or grey areas unaddressed. The Committee, has, accordingly, made every
effort to examine the proposed legislation thoroughly, which is reflected in the succeeding
paragraphs through its observations and recommendations.
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
2.1 Keeping in view the initiative of the Department of Higher Education for the establishment
of Universities for Research and Innovation, the process of consultations assumes immense
importance. The Committee was informed by the Department that a national level interactive
session to discuss the draft legislation on the proposed legislation was held on 28 August, 2010
where academics, scholars and representatives from industry were present. Several members of the
academics and industry like Prof. Yashpal, Prof. Jain (VC, BITS), Prof. Deepak Pental, Mr. Analjit
Singh, Prof. Ananth, Prof. Nayanjot Lahiri, Prof. B.B.Bhattacharya, Prof. S. Iyenganr, Prof. Srinath
Reddy, Prof. Sanjay Dande, Prof. Khole etc. attended the interactive session. An overwhelming
majority was of the view that while the proposed legislation was welcome, it should be ensured
that the existing universities and institutions were also facilitated for adopting world class standards
and for undertaking innovation and research.
2.2 The various points raised by the members of the academia were:–
- The new universities should not contribute to further fragmentation of knowledge and
ensure that spirit of enquiry was not curbed or discouraged.
- Caution against these universities doing innovation only in applied sciences at cost of
disciplines of arts and humanities.
- Apprehension was expressed that these universities would concentrate only an applied
research at the cost of pure theoretical research. Pure research should be strongly built
in the proposed structure.
- It was not advisable to have universities devoted to one or more disciplines and that
they should provide holistic learning.
- There should be an endeavour to encourage inter-disciplinary research wherein the
academics and industry should come together and special Inter-University Centres
(IUCs) may be set up.

5
- Young talent should be encouraged rather than always harping upon Research
Professors or Nobel Laureates to take up leadership positions.
- Universities were suffering from resource crunch, autonomy issues, bureaucratization
and excessive control and there was a need to better the quality of research in existing
universities rather than setting up new universities. While promoting new universities,
care should be taken to strengthen the existing universities and institutions like IITs
and IIMs.
- There was a need to study best global practices.
- Apprehensions about what kind of degrees would be given by these universities were
expressed and whether these degrees would be regular degrees or have the flavour of
thematic degrees.
- A review mechanism should be built into the legislation which can provide for review
of the work of Innovation Universities after every ten years. Encouragement should be
given to indigenous innovation and not merely focus on utilization aspects of innovation.
2.3 While the views of the academia supported making existing institutions stronger in terms of
autonomy and innovation, the industry representatives were of the view that this legislation created
an excellent facilitating framework for research and innovation in areas which were generally
neglected by the regular programmes of regular universities.
2.4 The Committee was also informed that all the concerned Ministries and Departments of the
Central Government were consulted. Some of the important observations/comments of the
Ministries are as follows:
Ministry of Finance, Department of the Expenditure:
- Existing universities/institutions are already having infrastructure for research
and teaching and Government is spending a considerable amount of money for
the same. Instead of having another set of universities, a few potential existing
universities/institutions may be identified for the purpose of high quality research and
teaching.
- It is important to find out why the existing system of Universities/Institutions is not
generating world class research and innovations. Without identifying the underlying
reasons behind such under-performances, decision to set up new universities for
innovations may not be advisable.
- It would be difficult to support the proposal to make privately funded universities
eligible for public funding for research unless the results of such research are
accessible to Government for public good.
- Shortage of qualified faculties has reportedly been a major hurdle faced by the Ministry
of Human Resource Development in implementing its various on-going schemes. The
shortage of qualified faculties is an issue which needs attention, especially in view of
the critical role of research in the current Bill.
Ministry of Labour and Employment
- Since privately funded universities are proposed to be made eligible for public funding
for research activities and student scholarships but from the contents of the Bill, it is
noted that issues of private and PPP mode universities have not been covered
appropriately.

6
- As an amount of Rs. 2800 crores for establishing publicly funded universities has been
earmarked for Eleventh Plan, therefore, mentioning that no financial implication is
involved does not seem to be appropriate.
- Universities are to be a distinct legal entity not for profit. How the private universities
and PPP mode universities would be covered by the Bill?
- “Autonomy to University”: Autonomy to “invest and manage moveable property” has
been mentioned. Perhaps it would be appropriate that immovable property is managed
by the public university totally in consultation with the appropriate Government and it
is not to be given a complete autonomy.
- It is proposed that the Bill for “Establishment of Universities for Innovation” may also
be reviewed with the existing Universities Bill and be analyzed by the Ministry of HRD
to avoid any negative impact on each other or clashing of interest on each other.
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
- It is suggested that a transparent method of appointment, as is done in public
appointments, like open advertisement etc. may be followed and appointment on
invitation.
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
- It would be desirable if a few areas are prioritized by Government so that research
is directed towards the areas where it is most needed.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
- Clarity on the nature of the innovation proposed to be fostered by the new universities
and whether the innovation is in the structure and governance of the new universities
or the output expected to be generated by them.
- Since these new universities could be either private or public, the law should possibly
differentiate between the governance and financing structures in public and private
universities. Section 8(1) requires that a university for innovation shall be a non-profit
entity. It is not clear, given this condition, how private players will be attracted to this
field.
- The issue of faculty shortage, as is the case in institutions of medical education and
central universities, needs to be addressed.
Planning Commission
- Creating new universities may not make them world-class and innovative. Innovation
Universities need not be planned from scratch. We should concentrate our efforts on
making the existing institutions attain world class standards rather than creating new
ones.
- When some universities are given superior status at the cost of existing universities,
it may send wrong signals to existing universities and create a predetermined
hierarchical structure of universities. Expansion of universities should be within the
frame-work of national university system.

7
- MHRD could initially take the more pragmatic way of upgrading/converting a few
universities as the collaborative mode of establishing new Innovation Universities.
- There are almost no world class universities which have been set up on a thematic
basis. There is a need to identify a broad list of emerging knowledge domains which
have global relevance so that multi-disciplinary programmes can be offered rather than
specializing in a single discipline.
- There should be provisions for accountability based on outcomes.
- Salary differential between these universities and others may set off an exodus of good
faculty and aggravate the faculty shortage problems in existing institutions.
- It is also not clear whether any reservations will be applicable to these universities.
Ministry of Urban Development
- It is felt that the requirement of universities desiring to be promoters for setting up
of a UIF to be in existence for 50 years and prescribing no such condition for others,
takes away the level-playing field for newer universities, both national and international
that have come up after 1960 vis-à-vis private companies/trusts/societies.
Ministry of Earth Sciences
- An appropriate co-ordinating mechanism may be considered for the proposed
universities.
Ministry of Agriculture
- Age restriction (25 years/50 years) is unclear as some old universities may become
‘business-as-routine’ over time and on the other hand, some relatively new universities
may have excellent vision and performance.
Ministry of Minority Affairs
- While financial autonomy is no doubt desirable for setting up a world-class university,
there must be inbuilt provisions for scholarships/exemption of fees on merit-cum-
means basis so that poor students who are otherwise bright, are not put to any
difficulty.
2.5 The Department also submitted that the Bill was examined by a Committee of Secretaries
based on whose recommendations, the following actions were taken:–
(a) the preamble to the Bill was re-drafted to capture the intent and objects of the
proposed legislation.
(b) the name of proposed universities was changed from the earlier ‘Universities of
Innovation’ to Universities for Research and Innovation.
(c) the provisions of the Bill were modified to enable existing institutions also to be
declared as Universities for Research and Innovation.
(d) it was explicitly stated in the Bill that provisions of this chapter will be in addition to
and not in derogation of any law for the time being in force relating to intellectual
property.

8
2.6 On a specific query of the Committee regarding consultations with State Governments, the
Department submitted that the legislative proposal was discussed in 55 th and 57 th meetings of CABE
held on 10 February, 2009 and 19 June, 2010. The meetings were attended by HRD Minister and
other Ministers in charge of Education of State Governments. The Committee was given to
understand that no State had opposed the proposal. The proposal was also placed in the meeting
of the State Secretaries of Higher and Technical Education on 13 April, 2012. In addition, the
Human Resource Development Minister wrote to the Chief Ministers of fourteen States (Kerala,
Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Bihar, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, West Bengal, Assam, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh) in 2009, outlining the proposal to set
up world class universities and requesting them to earmark land for the establishment of publicly
funded Universities for Research and Innovation. The Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Punjab,
Bihar, Gujarat, Maharashtra, West Bengal, Assam, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh responded by
supporting the proposal. No response was received from the remaining five States.
2.7 The Committee is constrained to observe that no serious efforts have been made by
the Department of Higher Education to have wide-ranging consultations with all the
stakeholders. State Governments are the most crucial stakeholders when such a
pathbreaking initiative in the higher education sector is being proposed. Discussions with
the Education Ministers in the CABE meetings cannot be considered enough. The
Committee is aware that fourteen States were approached by the Government in 2009,
outlining the proposal to set up world class universities and requesting them to earmark
land for the establishment of publicly funded Universities for Research and Innovation. The
Committee would like to point out that these States were approached in 2009. Since then,
the proposed legislation has seen some modifications. Details of the meeting held with State
Secretaries of Higher and Technical Education held on 13 April, 2012 have not been shared
with the Committees. Not only this, out of the 14 States, major States like Kerala, Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan failed to respond. States
representing North-Eastern Region, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and all the UTs
have been kept out of this exercise. Apparently, the main objective behind approaching
these States was for earmarking land for the proposed universities. The Committee is of the
firm view that a national consensus on such a major initiative has to be built upon without
any hindrance.
2.8 The Committee finds it very strange that a major segment of stakeholders having
rich experience of running universities and also well-known education experts and
academicians, has not been involved in the consultation exercise. Nobody can deny the fact
that their views would have benefited the Government in formulating the proposed
legislation. Interactive session with academicians, scholars and representatives from
industry was definitely not enough. The Committee feels that the Department should have
elicited the views of all the concerned stakeholders before introducing the Bill. Another
major area not explored by the Department is the global scenario with respect to these
universities. A study of the experiences and outcomes of Universities for Research and
Innovation in countries like Australia, America, Germany and China should have been
undertaken in order to have a fair idea of running successfully such universities which
would have helped in promoting innovation and research in the country and also adopted/
adapted the best global practices in research and innovation.
2.9 In order to have a broad-based consultation on the proposed legislation, the Committee
decided to hear the views of as many stakeholders it could in the short period of time available
to it. The Committee heard the views of many stakeholders in interactions spread over in eight
meetings. These included the Department of Higher Education, Delhi University, IGNOU, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, Delhi Technological University, Indraprastha University, Jamia Milia Islamia,

9
Panjab University, HNB Garhwal University, Amity University, Indian Council of Universities,
Education Promotion Society for India, UGC, AICTE, academicians of JNU, Delhi Science Forum
and ex-President, DUTA. The Committee began this exercise by issuing a Press Release on 8 June,
2012 inviting comments on the Bill from all concerned. Unfortunately, it failed to receive the
desired response. The Committee concluded its extensive deliberations by sharing the areas of
concern highlighted by various stakeholders with the Secretary, Higher Education. Besides that,
questionnaire were sent to the Department and all the stakeholders for their written comments
thereon. Feedback received and the issues that emerged from the deliberations proved of immense
help to the Committee and enabled the Committee to understand the ramifications of the proposed
legislation and formulate its views/recommendations on various provisions of the Bill.
2.10 The Committee started its interactions by hearing the views of the Vice-Chancellor of
IGNOU and representatives of Amity University on the Bill in its meeting held on the 19 December,
2012. The Vice-Chancellor, IGNOU supported the introduction of the Bill and pointed out that there
was lack of competition that should have come in research and innovation among the universities
competing for finding a space and building of the knowledge base. He informed the Committee that
IGNOU had made provisions for offering fellowship from its own funds to students for research
and had more than 700 scholars with it. IGNOU was associated in major innovative projects to
give a thrust to research output in the country. The Director, IGNOU placed on record their
appreciation of the fact that open and distance learning had been recognized as a research-oriented
system and had, accordingly, been included in the Bill. He also added that incorporation of
traditional knowledge systems and their relationship with innovation should be widened. It was also
emphasized that like IGNOU, universities should be in a position to generate their own funds.
2.11 The representative of Amity University submitted before the Committee that instead of
starting new universities for research and innovation, existing universities in the country which
were doing good work should be identified and given more autonomy. Expressing concern about
the proposed establishment of Universities for Research and Innovation by a MOA, he pointed out
that universities had to be established by Central or State Act. He further added that there was no
provision for measuring the outcome of these universities and emphasized the need for the same
through continuous internal review and self-correction. He also highlighted that since the Bill
allowed branch campuses and offshore campuses outside the country and distance learning,
universities might start investing the funds which they received in building infrastructure and
campuses across the country and outside and on distance learning. These universities should be
unitary universities with focus on research. In the age of inter-disciplinary research across the
world, all the departments worked together and if the universities would focus on one specific area,
it might be detrimental to research. He also added that by defining just a very few universities as
research and innovation universities, research and innovation being done in the existing universities
would be undermined. It was also submitted that private universities needed more funds for
research as they funded research only to a limited extent because they had to provide for
fellowships from their own resources.
2.12 In its interaction with the Vice Chancellor, JNU, the Committee was informed by him that
there was a need to expand excellence in the higher education system. The proposed Bill was one
such model for doing so by creating new Universities for Research and Innovation. But it was also
pointed out that there was a tremendous need that the existing Universities, both Central and State,
also received the attention of the Government in terms of creating innovation. Another suggestion
was that the existing universities which had already shown better performance in terms of
academic output and their commitment to the society could be considered as innovation
universities. It was mentioned that during the last Plan, creation of 15 universities resulted in almost
50 per cent cut in the budget of the existing universities. It was emphasized that excellence of the
existing universities, their growth and development should not be hampered. It was also submitted

10
that the broader aims and objectives of all the existing universities were not totally different from
those suggested for the proposed universities. It was also suggested that the governance structure,
the financial autonomy structure and the kind of programmes to be taken up by them needed to
be spelt out. Lastly, it was advocated that only a few such universities, that too in the public sector
may be set up initially.
2.13 The Vice-Chancellor, Delhi Technological University submitted before the Committee that the
proposed legislation was being introduced at a highly opportune time as India was currently in
search of quality, relevance and excellence in the higher education system. There was a tremendous
amount of pressure for creation of knowledge and excellence in the university system. India’s
higher technical education system was on the threshold of major institutional reforms. It was,
therefore, important that a University for Research and Innovation should have a different structure
and design as compared to conventional universities. In order to succeed in ensuring that a
University for Research and Innovation comes up to the expectations of a world quality university
to compete with top ten universities of the world, it was essential to re-design the laboratories
which needed to be world class research centres. Accordingly, the whole structure of such
universities needed to be tuned to the higher objectives of creation of knowledge which could be
of direct relevance to the society and industry. Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact
that while the objects of the Bill were very well and carefully drawn, it would require tremendous
amount of detailing in terms of working out the structure of these universities. A positive aspect
in the Bill highlighted was that it linked research at the undergraduate level itself. Percolating
research culture right down to undergraduate level was the surest way to reach higher levels of
research and innovation. It was also suggested that well-established research and development
organizations, corporates and leading industries, which have shown their vibrancy at the national
and international level may be motivated to come forward and set up universities for research and
innovation. Corporates like BHEL, NTPC, IOC, Infosys, Tata, Wipro, HP, Microsoft Samsung and
research and development organizations, like ISRO, DRDO, BARC could be given opportunity
through the proposed legislation.
2.14 The Vice Chancellor, Jamia Millia Islamia presented a very critical view of the proposed
legislation. It was pointed out that the philosophy of allowing the private sector into establishing
Universities for Research and Innovation needed to be looked into or reviewed. This was so
because ideologically, private participation would not ever mean ‘not for profit’. There were
underlying dangers to the affirmative action that the Government believed in. Further, the freedom
to pay enhanced salaries also meant that fees of private institutions would be higher. Apprehensions
were also expressed that the Bill may dissipate funds for the existing universities on many fronts.
Availability of good quality faculty was yet another problem. It was urged that the existing
universities needed to be strengthened. The idea to establish new universities was good but it
should not be at the cost of the existing universities into which enormous investment had been
made by the Government and which provided cost-subsidized advanced education so as to
empower all sections of the society. The need was to improve and expand the existing system of
higher education. Also, by suitably modifying the present system, the aims of the Bill could be
achieved even in the existing system without creating a new structure by giving them more
autonomy, better governance structure and reorientation etc. Innovation and research in the social
sectors was very critical for the healthy growth of the country. The Bill in its present form was
not acceptable and it needed redrafting after wide consultation with real stakeholders i.e. the
academic community.
2.15 The Committee also heard the views of Vice-Chancellor, Indraprastha University on the Bill.
The Vice Chancellor supported the Bill and highlighted the fact that there was a need to create an
appropriate structure for managing these Universities. Complete synchronization of the systems,
processes and structures in place was required, if these universities were to excel. It was pointed

11
out that the Bill did not have a focus in terms of specific provisions that would facilitate a culture
of research and innovation in the proposed universities. It was required to use technology foresight
to select critical technologies in the national perspective and receive proposals for establishment of
universities accordingly. It was also emphasized that the proposed Universities for Innovation and
Research should not undertake undergraduate programmes and focus on post graduate programmes
and doctoral research programmes. Further, an alternative governance structure, different from that
in the traditional universities had to be there for these universities. Liberal funding provisions to
attract foreign scholars and faculty to these universities as visiting faculties was also suggested.
2.16 The Committee had the opportunity to interact with representatives of the Indian Council
of Universities and Education Promotion Society for India which represented many of the existing
private universities in the country. The representative of ICU welcomed the proposed legislation as
a great initiative of the Government to create universities and empower them to perform
independently and allow them to go beyond the rigid standards so that universities of the country
could excel in research and innovation. However, it was suggested that each university should be
established only by an Act of Parliament and not by MOA. It was also pointed out that the Bill
should not be an attempt for the backdoor entry of foreign universities and sufficient care needed
to be taken in this regard. Committee’s attention was also drawn to some inherent contradictions
in the proposed legislation when compared with other laws including those at the finalization stage
dealing with higher education. The most crucial aspect of the proposed legislation was giving
autonomy to the new category of universities which was not enjoyed by the traditional universities.
2.17 While deposing before the Committee, the Chairman, UGC, submitted that India had one of
the largest system of higher educations in terms of number of institutions. Having set up such a
massive system, one of the inadequacies of the system was that most of the universities and
colleges fell in the category of learning system, wherein the knowledge was transmitted and
certified but the knowledge was created elsewhere. Very few institutions in the country belonged
to the category of knowledge systems. The biggest challenge was to transform the existing
institutions into knowledge systems. Uptill now, there was no Central law that provided for setting
up of a private university and a public and private university together. The requirements of the
present system were such that the State was not able to fulfill that obligation. Therefore, there was
a need for ensuring harmonious co-existence of both, public and private partnership. Also, there
were some inherent problems in converting existing institutions into Universities for Research and
Innovation. It was pointed out that one of the serious inadequacies of the existing system was the
question of autonomy, as most of the time, autonomy was confined only to academics and not
given to the governance and administration. It was felt that the Bill was a new initiative as it
provided complete autonomy in matters pertaining to academics, governance, administration, hiring
of teachers and supporting staff required for the Universities for Research and Innovation. These
universities were expected to create knowledge, technology and unique applications of knowledge
coupled with the technology that would lead to innovation and inclusive development of the society.
This Bill would provide greater resources to the institutions which would be able to solve the
problems and challenges facing the society.
2.18 The Chairman, AICTE, in his deposition before the Committee, while endorsing the
proposed legislation submitted that such an effort to create a University for Research and
Innovation would do a lot of good to the current educational system. In all the educational
systems, there was a synergy needed between the teaching processes, society and industry. All the
educational systems have to be industry-relevant as all the job opportunities happened there and also
freedom should be given for linkages with other institutions. It was pointed out that for promoting
research and innovation in a society, it was necessary to provide autonomy. In order that the
country become a knowledge-based economy, it needed to contribute significantly to research in
the world which meant certain value addition in the existing body of knowledge. That would come

12
through research and innovation and it would happen only when there would be research done in
relevant areas and relevant disciplines. It was submitted that all universities were set up as multi-
discipline institutions where different departments ran courses together and created inter-disciplinary
research but somewhere along the way, universities had got into an affiliation system where they
had a lot of other institutions to take care of and most of their time was being spent on conducting
examinations, declaration of results etc. Also, currently the existing structures in universities
seemed to be restrictive due to lack to sufficient autonomy and too many decision-making bodies
within the universities. However, there were several provisions in this Bill which allowed the
institutions to come up and explore new areas like green technology, environment etc.
2.19 In their presentation before the Committee, the representatives of Education Promotion
Society for India submitted that they appreciated the noble cause of promoting research and
innovation in the higher education sector. However, they were of the view that the Bill was based
on a premise that by creating huge elite Research and Innovation Universities, the whole problem
would be solved but attention was not being given to dealing with problems which were being
faced by universities spread across the country. The existing universities were suffering from lack
of equipment, funds, teachers and resources. Even though infrastructure development was being
witnessed in the country, it was essential to see what went wrong in developing research and
innovation in the country. It was pointed out that research and innovation was needed at all levels
which required long-term vision, direction and supporting environment along with investment at all
levels of higher education and research. It was, however, emphasized that any university created
by an Act of Parliament or by executive order would not become a research and innovation
university from day one. It was believed that the kind of autonomy as suggested in the Bill to
existing institutions would completely transform the vast ground of research work. It was also a
fact that funds for high end research always posed a problem. Therefore, existing infrastructure,
physical and human resources should be harnessed to get greater value of scarce resources rather
than creating a new structure of universities with lot of investment. Another serious apprehension
expressed was that the proposed Bill might provide a backdoor entry to foreign universities and big
business houses to set up institutions without being regulated, monitored or assessed for quality
by existing constitutionally mandated bodies for regulation.
2.20 The Vice-Chancellor, Delhi University in his presentation before the Committee submitted
that there was a need for some path-breaking models for research and innovation. The proposed
Bill with its structure would allow these universities a certain degree of freedom to pick and employ
faculty of high calibre. It was, therefore, required that the top leadership that would be put in place
to set up the whole structure should also be of high calibre. The existing universities had many
restrictions imposed on them as they enjoyed no freedom to start a socially relevant course on
programme of study, bring people of eminence into the structure or set up campuses abroad.
Endorsing the proposed legislation, he believed that the freedom and autonomy to be given to these
universities would be productive.
2.21 The Committee also heard the views of Vice Chancellors of the Central Universities of
Garhwal and Panjab. The Vice Chancellor of HBN Garhwal University was of the view that the Bill
would provide greater autonomy in the management of the university which would have enough
flexibility compared to what the present universities had. It was a desirable legislation which would
create new universities with the basic structures as was prevalent in the country with respect to
IIMs and IITs. This was the first time that a Bill had been brought forward which provided for
open co-operation and participation by industry and private enterprises which were rich in
knowledge, finances and resources. Also, the proposed legislation was an attempt to make it
mandatory that the fruits of knowledge reached the university or the people of the country so that
all the segments of the society were benefitted. The main aim of the universities to be established
under the Bill was to go for inclusiveness in the gamut of excellence which was a very difficult

13
job. The existing universities were already lacking in infrastructural and other resources even at the
undergraduate level. It was also emphasized that practical problems in converting an existing
university into a university for research and innovation needed to be taken into account. He also
shared his views on some of provisions of the Bill but on the whole, he welcomed the proposed
legislation which would provide greater autonomy in management and enough flexibility in the
structure of governance to allow for creation of knowledge, its dissemination and application to
find solutions for various problems facing our society, especially the deprived and under-privileged
sections.
2.22 The Vice-Chancellor, Panjab University was of the view that the proposed Bill was an
attempt to create model universities in large numbers, maybe one in every state. He believed that
gradually even the existing universities could be made free from the current rules and regulations
of UGC and move to a regime where there would be one University for Research and Innovation
in each state. The Bill was a step forward to move towards a system where there would be high
class faculties selected in an objective manner and selected in a way that would be free from the
current bureaucratic controls. It envisaged the process of recruitment in a different way which was
a positive move as it would give autonomy to make appointment of qualified persons.
2.23 The Committee interacted with members of the academia from JNU to garner their views
on the Bill. Shri C.P Chandrashekhar from the School of Social Sciences, JNU submitted that there
were three positive aspects envisaged in the proposed Legislation. First, the Bill was being
envisaged with the principle that higher education in the country would be a non-profit activity and
if there were surpluses generated in the activity, it would be ploughed back into the institution
concerned. Secondly, the Bill would not allow the system to deviate from the principles of
affirmative action. Thirdly, the Bill attempted in principle to combine research and teaching. He,
however, expressed his apprehension that the Bill would be creating a hierarchy by designating
Universities for Research and Innovation which would be given privileges over and above the
existing universities. Further, the governance system, especially for private organizations was highly
questionable as there would be a promoter who would have complete freedom in terms of
nominating the Board. The governance structure envisaged did not seem democratic structure as
it would have substantial freedom for setting standards, for making appointments etc.
2.24 Shri Saumen Chattopadhayay from Zakir Hussain Centre for Educational studies, JNU was
of the view that the Bill had to be understood and appraised in the context of three major objectives
of higher education i.e. expansion, access and excellence. The Bill gave academic freedom to the
faculty and the stakeholders to carry out the teaching and research activity. However, the mode
of funding as given in the Bill would create an uneven field for the public-funded universities and
the privately-funded universities, making it extremely crucial for understanding the objectives and
realization of objectives by universities and achieving excellence. It was apprehended that after the
initial capital investment by the Government for establishing a private university for research and
innovation, there would inevitably be a tendency among the private players to recover the cost of
functioning from the students and from selling their research in the absence of sustained support
from the Government. Also, different accounting practices for public-funded and privately-funded
universities as envisaged in the Bill should be replaced by having similar practices for both. Further,
it was pointed out that the social responsibility of a university could be compromised, if it was
a privately funded one. If the focus is on research and innovation with the impetus from the
market or from IPR or from other research areas, teaching could be compromised. Another
important issue of appraisal or assessment of these universities for research and innovation was
highlighted as no mechanism for doing this purpose was envisaged in the Bill.
2.25 Dr. A.K Ramakrishnan of the Centre of West Asian Studies, JNU submitted before the
Committee that the distinction between the public-funded universities and privately funded

14
universities was not clear in the Bill. According to the Bill, grants would be given even to privately
funded universities. If that would be the case, then all the measures of social justice i.e.
reservations etc. should be applicable on them. Further, it was important to see the kind of
institutional structure the Bill would be creating. Instead of having a single issue based university,
concept of a university should be more likely on the lines of inter-disciplinary enterprise which
would not only include science and technology but also humanities and social sciences. A notion
of university where ideas would be debated and discussed in a democratic framework, values
which would be socially relevant should be a part and parcel of a university mechanism.
2.26 The Committee had the opportunity to interact with the representative of the Delhi Science
Forum. Shri Prabir Purkayastha of DSF pointed out to the Committee that the country had a
university system which was losing its quality. Even the existing research institutions like IITs etc.
were ill-equipped by international standards. He suggested that instead of setting up separate
institution structures, need was to find ways to rejuvenate the existing structures because unless
research was brought as a component into the education system, quality teachers would not be
there to train the next generation of students. He was of the view that research was an inevitable
component of teaching in present times in any education system anywhere in the world. Separating
some institutions as special institutions of research and innovation while the rest of the institutions
continued to churn out graduates would be a mistake. Secondly, he highlighted the fact that
research funding in most of the countries was always State funded like in US and China. Believing
that private sector would delve into serious research funding would be a mistake too. The primary
focus should be to strengthen the State support to research, particularly in science and technology.
He also suggested that matters relating to intellectual property rights should be left to the Bill which
was being reworked by the Department of Science and Technology as it would be impractical and
result in duplicity.
2.27 The President, DUTA in his written submission to the Committee pointed out that the Bill
was based on an assumption that new and socially useful research could be promoted by setting
up separate universities for research and innovation. However, it did not provide any statistics or
summary of the kind of research being carried out in India and the participation of existing public
funded universities therein. It assumed that the private players would invest money in solving
societal problems without keeping profit making in mind. The Bill also implied that existing
universities did not provide adequate environment and infrastructure for research and innovation.
There was no mention of strength even in the existing public funded university system to promote
innovative research. According to him, the Bill seemed to pave way for public-private partnership
and foreign universities. The Bill had completely precluded the need for public monitoring of
standards and criteria through any regulatory mechanism. Universities established under this Bill
would have absolute autonomy on matters related to investment and utilization of resources,
appointment of teachers and administrators and criteria thereof, academic content, uses of research
etc. In the light of this, the need and purpose of the Bill seemed defeated and unacceptable in the
present form.
2.28 The Committee also had the opportunity to hear the views of ex-President, DUTA,
Shri Vijendra Sharma on the Bill. He expressed several reservations on the Bill. First and foremost,
these universities would be established by MOA and not through Acts of Parliament or State
Legislatures. Secondly, these Universities would enjoy unfettered freedom in financial administration,
academic and other matters. They would also enjoy complete autonomy in the constitution of Board
of Governors which would have all the freedom to appoint Academic Boards, School of Studies,
choose the Vice-Chancellor on the recommendation of Search-cum-Selection Committee etc.
Further, these Universities would have no accountability and would also have full freedom to
determine and receive payment of fees and other charges. The wideranging freedom available to
these universities, especially private one would promote commercialization and would gravely affect

15
the publicly funded system of higher education. It would also be an alternative route for foreign
institutions and private players for establishing campuses in India.
III. Areas of concern
3.1 During the course of its interactions with various stakeholders, certain very pertinent areas
of concern emerged which needed to be examined thoroughly. The Committee sought the views
of the Department in this regard. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee has made an
attempt to analyse each and every such area of concern and given its observations and
recommendations.
Existing Universities functioning satisfactorily can be motivated and facilitated to operate as
Universities for Research and Innovation.
3.2 The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012 seeks to provide for the
establishment and incorporation of Universities for Research and Innovation and for enabling them
to emerge as centres for ecosystem to develop as hubs of education, research and innovation. The
Bill provides for setting up of Universities for Research and Innovation both in the private and
public sector.
3.3 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that traditional universities in the country were
so over-burdened with imparting undergraduate and postgraduate education and managing the
affiliation system that they were not able to focus on research and innovation. Fruitful research and
innovation was not a distinguishing feature of existing institutions. Problems arising out of prevalent
legacy systems, governance structures and the socio-cultural milieu of the existing institutions did
not make for a conducive environment for world class research and innovation.
3.4 The Committee in its interaction with various stakeholders, which included Vice-Chancellors
of some very prominent universities, was given to understand that instead of having another set
of universities, a few premier universities/institutions may be identified for the purpose of higher
quality research and teaching. It was pointed out that Universities like JNU, Delhi University,
Hyderabad Univesity, IISC etc. have been functioning with research as an integral component of
teaching. It was admitted that autonomy was the major issue in most of the universities. They may
be enjoying academic autonomy, but in the matters of administration and finance, universities,
especially public-funded universities did not have autonomy and were governed by mundane rules,
which were not so conducive for performing serious research and also for innovation. It was,
accordingly, suggested that administrative and financial autonomy with flexible rules would facilitate
and motivate research and innovation. It was also felt that interface between universities and
research labs like CSIR, DRDO, etc. and industries needed to be strengthened.
3.5 It was emphasized that those universities which were already doing good work/research and
having a proven track record needed to be identified so that they may be given more autonomy
to function as Universities for Research and Innovation. It was strongly felt that strengthening
research within the existing universities with Government support was a viable proposal. All the
major stakeholders were of the view that by suitably modifying the present university system,
objectives of the proposed legislation could be achieved. There was little to be gained by creating
a new structure.
3.6 The Committee also takes note of the opinion of the Planning Commission that
creating new Universities may not make them world-class and innovative. Innovation
Universities need not be planned from scratch. Efforts needed to be concentrated on making
the existing institutions attain world class standards rather than creating new ones. The
Commission has also pointed out that when some universities would be given super status

16
at the cost of existing universities, it might send wrong signals to existing universities and
create a pre-determined hierarchical structure of universities. Expansion of universities
should be within the framework of national university system. The Commission had,
accordingly, suggested that Ministry of HRD could initially take a more pragmatic way of
upgrading/converting a few universities as the collaborative mode of establishing new
Innovation Universities. A few state and Central universities may be identified for
upgradation and a few may be started by private sponsors or in PPP mode.
3.7 The Committee is also seized of the view of AICTE that the existing universities
were currently burdened by the need to conduct UG and PG programmes. Several
universities were also of the affiliating type and hence were burdened by massive
examination requirement and found it difficult to participate in research and innovation due
to lack of time. More funds were also required for them.
3.8 The Department of Higher Education, justifying the rationale for the present proposal stated
that the need for having such universities for Research and Innovation had emanated from the fact
that while every effort was being made to encourage existing institutions to undertake fruitful
research and innovation, a separate class of institutions was required which was free from the
legacy systems of the past and was devoted to theme based research and innovation. The
Department had submitted that the governance structures and socio-cultural milieu of the existing
institutions were not conducive to world class research and innovation making them not
immediately eligible to be declared as Universities for Research and Innovation. Committee’s
attention was also drawn to clause 10(1) of the Bill which provided for converting existing
institution into a University for Research and Innovation, provided it adopted the new governance
structure and innovation and be aligned with the objects of such a university.
3.9 The Committee is of the view that it would be difficult to convert any existing
university into a University for Research and Innovation, given the basic difference in their
governance structures. In the event of such traditional universities being converted as
universities for research and innovation, it may lead to average students being deprived of
getting UG/PG education, thus defeating the objective of higher education being within the
reach of as many students as possible. It is a fact that most of the universities in the
country are predominantly occupied in the conduct of UG and PG programmes and only few
universities are able to concentrate on research and innovation. However, it is equally true
that some of our well-established Central Universities and Research Organisations are doing
commendable work so far as research is concerned. The Committee strongly feels that such
universities need to be identified and then strengthened by giving them more autonomy as
well as by equipping them with the required resources and funds so that they can easily
evolve as Universities for Research and Innovation in a short time period. The Committee
also finds some merit in the views of the stakeholders that setting up of world-class
research and innovation universities would not be an easy task. Viability of setting up of
such universities needs to be looked into. Further, the Committee is in full agreement with
the suggestion of the Planning Commission that a few state and Central universities be
identified as universities for research and innovation on an experimental basis with flexible
governance structures and full autonomy. A study of the experience of such converted
universities for research and innovation would give a fair idea about the functioning of the
proposed universities. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Department to
identify a few existing central/state universities with a proven track record in the field of
research and innovation on a pilot basis. The global scenario of having such universities
through government funding also needs to be looked into. The Committee would like to
draw the attention of the Department to ‘Project 985’ launched by China in 1998
whereunder nine universities were converted into Research Universities and the progress of

17
these universities in R & D was so immense that most of them now are recognized world
over for their research output.
Shortage of faculty
3.10 Shortage of faculty in every category of existing universities is a serious problem, adversely
affecting the higher education system of the country. Right from well-established Central
Universities to those set up recently, state universities as well as private universities, premier
institutions like IITs, NITs and IIMs, this problem has emerged as the biggest handicap with no
visible solution in the near future. Nobody can deny the fact that shortage of faculty needs to be
addressed by taking concerted measures. The Committee takes note of the view of the Planning
Commission that salary differential between the Universities for Research and Innovation and others
might set off an exodus of good faculty and aggravate the faculty shortage problems in existing
institutions.
3.11 On this issue being taken up with the Department, it submitted that shortage of faculty was
being addressed in several ways. Funding of research of both public and private universities would
encourage mobility of researchers both ways. Proposed universities would have more autonomy
and flexibility in engaging world class faculty. It was also pointed out that there was nothing to
restrain a teacher from leaving one institution for another for reasons of emoluments, research
facilities and teaching freedom, prestige or location convenience. It was felt that exodus of faculty
would be at least within the country and not outside. Even in present times, outstanding teachers
were leaving institutions and going abroad for various reasons. This trend could be arrested or at
least slowed down. Also, the potential of the proposed universities to attract high quality faculty
from abroad would only add to the posts of teachers.
3.12 The Committee is not convinced by the justification of the Department. Even though
the Department has submitted that the problem of shortage of faculty was being addressed
in several ways, the problem persists and ails most of the universities of the country. The
Committee has been persistently drawing the attention of the Department to this problem
which is becoming more serious day by day. Information available with the Committee
depicts a very grim scenario. Although substantive expansion in the higher education sector
has taken place in the recent times, the position at the ground level remains quite
disturbing. Mere setting up new universities and institutions does not serve any purpose in
the absence of qualified and experience teachers.
3.13 The Committee observes that the ultimate losers are the students and their future.
Government efforts to attract our young students to teaching profession by providing all
kinds of incentives have failed to result in any visible improvement. With the proposed
universities coming up, having better service conditions and higher pay scales for their
teachers, migration of qualified and experienced teachers from traditional universities would
definitely occur. The Department has, therefore, to make concerted efforts in a balanced
manner so that our existing universities may not suffer at the cost of the proposed
universities. The need of the hour is to attract the bright talent of the country to the
profession of teaching. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to
accelerate its efforts for reducing the shortage of faculty.
Apprehension about easy entry of foreign Universities in India
3.14 One concern which was raised again and again by majority of the stakeholders was that
the proposed legislation provided easy entry to foreign Universities for establishing their campuses
in India. It was pointed out that an alternative route to foreign universities was being made available
in place of the one proposed through the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and

18
Operations) Bill, 2010. The Bill proposed to give unfettered freedom, complete autonomy to the
Board of Governors with no control of the Central Government over such universities being set
up for research and innovation. It envisaged the removal of most of the restrictions which were
proposed in the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010.
That Bill allowed only those foreign universities to set up campuses in India which had a stipulated
corpus fund, which was missing in the present Bill. Moreover, the very purpose of inviting foreign
universities to set up campuses in India was questioned as the kind of foreign universities finally
setting up their campuses in the country was not clear. The interest of foreign universities coming
to India was also questioned as it was unclear as to why these universities would engage in
research which would be pertinent to the Indian society. Another apprehension regarding the entry
of foreign universities in India was that the faculty in the existing universities in the country would
look towards the foreign universities which would definitely be incentivizing the faculty
remuneration and offering better service conditions. It was also pointed out that usually basic
research was a State enterprise as in the US. It was a priority kind of area serving the national
interest. Hence, foreign participation in research and innovation needed to be considered very
carefully. Another drawback highlighted was that foreign universities would only cater to 2-3 per
cent of Indian student community who would be able to afford to pay high fees. It was
emphasized that these universities would, therefore, not help in expanding the higher education
system of the country. Rather, they would lead to a differentiated society and educational system
and also a differential labour market in terms of employability between students studying in foreign
universities and those in others, resulting in compromising the very objective and mandate of a
university.
3.15 Justifying the entry of foreign universities in India, the Department submitted that only
reputed foreign universities which have been functioning for at least 50 years in the country in
which they had been established or incorporated and recognized, would be permitted to set up
Universities for Research and Innovation. However, apart from the condition that they should have
been in existence for at least 50 years, foreign universities too would be subjected to the same
processes and scrutiny as would other persons who intended setting up such universities. Hence,
the vision plan, draft MOA and a detailed project report focusing on area or areas with problems
of significance, capital investment, the sources of financing, audited accounts, availability of land,
infrastructure to be provided in the university, standards of higher education proposed to be
maintained and programmes of study, plan for funding the operations and management of the
university etc. would be required to be submitted by the foreign universities before the MOA would
be placed before the Parliament for approval.
3.16 The Committee is inclined to agree with the contention of the stakeholders that in
view of the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010
envisaging regulating the entry and operations of foreign universities in the country, it is
not proper to provide an alternative and comparatively easier route to foreign universities
through this proposed legislation without any proper checks and balances. The Committee
would like to point out that under the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry
and Operations) Bill, 2010, the Central Government has the power of withdrawal and
rescission of notification of foreign education provider and there is a specific penalty
provision also. In contrast, there is only a provision of review of Universities for Research
and Innovation after fifteen years of their establishment and thereafter every tenth year.
There is no provision for initiating any action in case of violation of MOA by such
universities. It does not seem to be a wise move to give entry to foreign universities
without specified criteria for a corpus fund and giving full autonomy in all respects to the
institutions with no proper regulatory and monitoring mechanism for their functioning.
Taking the easy way out, most of the foreign universities would attempt to gain entry
through the proposed legislation, thereby defeating the very objective of the earlier Bill.

19
3.17 The Committee has serious apprehensions about the problem of shortage of faculty
being aggravated once the foreign universities set up their campuses in the country. The
Committee agrees with the stakeholders that with better opportunities, especially with
respect to high remuneration for the faculty, there is high probability that the faculty in
existing universities would be diverted to the foreign universities. The Committee believes
that consequences of such an eventuality need to be thought of beforehand.
3.18 The Committee is of the view that the idea for giving entry to foreign universities
through this Bill should be deliberated upon taking care of all conceivable aspects. All the
pros and cons of the likely impact of this Bill need to be considered beforehand. Since the
area of research and innovation is intrinsic to the development of the higher education
system and also to the national interest, the setting up of these Universities for Research
and Innovation as envisaged in the Bill may be initiated by the State funded Universities
only before permitting the private and foreign universities. The Committee, taking a clue
from the other countries like US and China, feels that the research and innovation should
be done wholly and solely by the Government so that the benefits accruing from research
and innovations are directly utilised by the State for the development of the country.
No mechanism in the Bill for monitoring/regulating the Universities for Research and
Innovation
3.19 The proposed Bill envisaging Universities for Research and Innovation gives complete
autonomy to these universities in matters of academics, faculty, personnel, finances, administration
and in the development of a vision for the future. These universities would enjoy unfettered
freedom in financial administration also. They would, therefore, be free to evolve their own
admission criteria, decide their own fee structure and other charges, appoint teachers, determine
their salaries and service conditions etc. Unlike public funded universities, private universities would
not be under the purview of the CAG.
3.20 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that there was no mechanism specified in the
Bill for monitoring/regulating the functioning of the proposed universities. Further, standards of
teaching and research were expected to be higher than the minimum standards determined by the
statutory regulatory body in the relevant field. Where no standards had been determined, the
standards were to be equivalent or higher than the standards of the best international universities
about which nothing has been provided in the Bill. If any dispute arose between such a university
and the statutory regulating authority with regard to standards etc, it would be referred to a
Committee of three persons, thereby overlooking the educational tribunals. The Committee would
comprise of three persons, one from the concerned Innovation University, the second from the
statutory regulatory authority and the third from another Innovation University. Thus, the
representatives from the Innovation Universities would be in a majority and the decision of the
Committee would be final and binding. These universities would be having no accountability as
such. Apprehension has been expressed that such freedom and autonomy would only help
promoters, companies and foreign universities seeking to take advantage of the provisions of the
Bill.
3.21 The Department of Higher Education clarified that while each University for Research and
Innovation would determine and declare its standards of education, such standards would be higher
than minimum standards in the relevant field of knowledge laid down by or under any law.
Presently such minimum standards were set by UGC and AICTE as the case maybe. In case of
any dispute between the University for Research and Innovation and regulatory authority in matters
of standards of higher education it would be referred to a Committee where the regulatory authority
would be represented. Further, productivity of research projects undertaken by Universities for

20
Research and Innovation would be measured in accordance with norms as may be specified by the
UGC. The Department also submitted that Chapter VII of the Bill provided for evaluation and
review of every University for Research and Innovation after fifteen years after its establishment
and thereafter at the expiration of every tenth year, by a committee of experts. Committees
constituted for evaluation and review of the performance of a University for Research and
Innovation would be on the basis of such metrics as may be defined, prior to the commencement
of such review, by the UGC. The recommendation of the Committee along with the response of
the concerned University would be submitted to the Central Government, who shall cause the
report to be laid in Parliament. Further, clause 28 mandated the disclosure of Intellectual Property
(IP) created out of public funds by every university. Clause 30 clearly specified the powers of
Central Government to ensure proper utilization of the IP and empowered the Government to
acquire the title to any IP in certain cases.
3.22 The Committee is of the firm belief that mere evaluation and review of every
University for Research and Innovation after fifteen years after its establishment by a
Committee of Experts cannot take the place of an inbuilt effective monitoring mechanism
for these universities. The Committee feels that such a mechanism has to be put in place
for regulating and monitoring the research done and innovations made by these universities
so that the quality of research and innovation is not compromised at any cost. Moreover,
the need for such a mechanism would be felt more in respect of these universities as they
would be enjoying complete autonomy. Therefore, there has to be a balance of autonomy
and accountability, if these universities are aimed to set benchmarks for excellence and
indulge in path-breaking research which would be beneficial for the society at large. The
Committee also feels that by having two categories of universities, one being made
accountable at every step and having autonomy in name and the other category of
universities not having any accountability, an environment of deep frustration and
dissatisfaction, especially in our teaching community is likely to emerge. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends to the Department that a provision of a healthy regulatory and
monitoring mechanism be included in the Bill for ensuring that the unfettered freedom and
autonomy given to these universities is not misused, at any stage.
No provision regarding imposition of penalties
3.23 The Committee observes that the proposed legislation does not have any provision regarding
imposition of penalties, monetary or others for contravening the provisions of the Bill or any rules
made thereunder. In case of any violation of declared standards, no penalty has been prescribed
in the Bill as provided in other recently introduced higher education related Bills. The Committee
also notes that there is no provision to tackle a situation where a promoter University deviates from
the MOA entered into with the Central Government. The Committee is well aware of the fact that
with the substantive increase in the number of higher educational institutions in the country,
incidents of malpractices have also increased, especially in the private sector. It is against this
backdrop that the Prohibition of Unfair Practices in Technical Educational Institutions, Medical
Educational Institutions and Universities Bill, 2010 has been envisaged by the Government. In this
background, having no provision for penalties for digressing from the Bill or MOA was not a wise
move.
3.24 On a specific query about the manner in which the problems emerging on violation of MoA
by the promoter would be tackled, the Committee was informed by the Department that the MoA
as any other MOA would contain scope of agreement between the two parties. The MoA between
the promoter and the Government would entail the aims and objectives of the MoA, other terms
and conditions and a description of conditions under which the MoA could be terminated. It would,
therefore, be ensured by the Government that the aims and objectives of the proposed university,

21
responsibilities of the promoter would be clearly spelt out with attendant timelines where applicable.
Failure to adhere to the conditions of the MoA would result in certain penalties and in extreme
conditions, termination. Since each MoA would be different in terms of its scope, aims and
objectives etc., the responsibilities of promoters too would vary in each case as would grounds for
penalties/termination. Hence such a provision has not been specifically mentioned in the Bill since
it is implied that it would be a part of the MoA.
3.25 The Committee is of the considered view that there might be instances of
contravention of provisions of the proposed Bill or the MoA more so in view of the
autonomy and flexibility envisaged for the Universities for Research and Innovation. The
Committee feels that there is a need to define probable offences in the Bill and also the
corresponding penalties for them. The Committee does not agree with the contention of the
Department that terms and conditions of MoA will take care of contravention of same. The
Committee would like to point out that the MoA would be between the promoter and the
Central Government. Clause 10 pertaining to the MoA is silent on any clause about
contravention of any terms and conditions included therein. The Committee is not inclined
to buy the argument that since each MoA would be different in terms of its scope, aims and
objectives etc., the responsibilities of promoters too would vary in each case as would
grounds for penalties/termination. The Committee strongly feels that a specific provision
outlining the kind of penalties liable to be imposed in case of non-adherence to the terms
and conditions can be easily incorporated in the Bill. Such a provision is required to be
there, keeping in view the kind of autonomy and freedom from bureaucratic control
envisaged for the proposed universities.
3.26 The Committee would like to point out that in the case of Central Universities,
Visitor, i.e., President of India has the powers to order inspection/inquiry to be conducted
as per the prescribed procedure and whenever required, advise the Vice-Chancellor to take
appropriate action. However, in the new Universities will not be any Visitor. Further, the
Chancellor would be appointed by the Promoter and the Vice-Chancellor by the Board of
Governors. Thus, it is very clear that there is no independent authority which can tackle
contravention of MoA or other provisions of the Bill. Not only this, review of these
universities will take place after fifteen years and thereafter, after every tenth year. The
Committee also fails to understand as to in what manner, provisions of the Prohibition of
Unfair Practices in Technical Educational Institutions, Medical Educational Institutions and
Universities Bill, 2010 can be made applicable to the Universities for Research and
Innovation. These universities are entirely different from the universities established
through an Act of Parliament or State legislation which fall under the ambit of that Act.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that a specific provision pertaining to penalties,
authority having the power to impose the same and the procedure therefor may be
incorporated in the Bill. The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the
Department that a specific clause providing for penalties/revocation in case of violation of
terms of conditions of MoA would be included in the Bill.
Absence of Grievance Redressal Mechanism for students and teachers in the Bill
3.27 The Committee notes that Universities for Research and Innovation would be of a different
kind compared to the existing universities with different governance structure, autonomy,
recruitment of faculty/researchers, service conditions etc. The Committee observes that there is no
provision for a mechanism for redressal of grievances of teachers and students studying/doing
research in these universities. The Bill envisages setting up of not just public-funded universities
but also private and foreign universities. There is no mention of any way out for registering
complaints of teachers and students and disposing the same by an authority which would be

22
objective and fair. The Committee also notes that seeking redressal of grievances from the
Educational Tribunals is also not mentioned in the Bill even though these tribunals are envisaged
to be the specialized agency for adjudicating disputes arising in the higher education system through
a fast track and speedy recourse to delivery of justice.
3.28 The Department of Higher Education submitted to the Committee that as per clause 40, the
provisions of the Bill would be in addition to and not in derogation of the provision of any other
law. UGC regulations which have the force of subordinate legislation, provide students’ entitlement
framework and grievance redressal mechanism and this would be applicable to Universities of
Research and Innovation. The provisions of Prohibition of Unfair Practices (Technical Educational
Institutions, Medical Educational Institutions and Universities) Bill, 2010, would also be applicable
to these Universities after the enactment of this legislation.
3.29 The Committee is not convinced by the response of the Department. The Committee
finds that it is unclear about the role to be played by UGC in the regulation of these
Universities. The Committee would also like to remind the Department that the Higher
Education and Research Bill, 2011 entailed that the regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTE and
NCTE would be subsumed to form an over-arching Commission. As per the Higher Education
and Research Bill, 2012, the Commission will be the designated authority to regulate the
functions of universities. But these universities would be the ones that are not established
through an Act of Parliament and State Legislature. In such an eventuality, there would not
be any mechanism for grievance redressal for students and the grievance redressal of
teachers/researchers, would, thus remain unaddressed.
3.30 The Committee would like to point out that the Central Universities Act, 2009 has
specific provisions like ‘Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against
students’ and ‘Right to appeal’. Not only this, statutes to be made under the Act are to
provide for the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students
and the university and also the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any
employee or student against the action of any officer or authority of the University. The
Committee fails to understand the reasons for not having similar provisions in the proposed
legislation.
3.31 The Committee is of the view that university autonomy has to be balanced with the
desired levels of accountability in a Parliamentary democracy. These universities would have
to structure a governance framework that not only promotes autonomy but also inculcates
the spirit of accountability. The Committee is well aware of the fact that these universities
are proposed to be structured at a higher scale, having higher standards as well as more
autonomy when compared with traditional universities. However, it is also equally true that
student and teaching community will be the most prominent stakeholders as students will
be doing research under the guidance of their teachers. And for protection of their rights,
there has to be an inbuilt mechanism for redressal of their grievances. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that all the required provisions as incorporated in other related
Acts may be incorporated in the proposed legislation also.
Application of laws not barred and contradiction between the existing laws and the proposed
legislation
3.32 Clause 40 of the proposed Legislation provides for application of other laws not barred. It
provides that subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 6, the provisions of
the Bill would be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law, including
such law on reservation in admission as applicable to the University for research and innovation
for the time being in force.

23
3.33 The Committee has been given to understand that the application of other laws was not
barred so far as universities established under the proposed legislation were concerned. However,
provisions are also there in the proposed legislation to exempt the universities established under this
law from any other laws for the time being in force. These were thus self-contradictory provisions.
For instance, there is a specified exemption from the UGC Act, 1956 which governs the
Universities all over the country and other laws in force under section 6(4) as indicated below:
“not withstanding anything contained in the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 or
any other law for the time being in force, every University for Research and Innovation
shall have the power to determine the nomenclature of degrees, diplomas and other
academic distinctions awarded by it”.
3.34 The Committee takes note of the fact that the definition of the term ‘University’ as
given in the earlier legislations relating to higher education in recent times and the one
entailed in the present Bill would vary as in the former, the universities are to be created
by an Act of Parliament or State Legislature while in the latter, they would be created by
a MoA. Due to such a difference, the existing laws and the recent Bills once enacted cannot
be on the Universities for Research and Innovation. In such an eventuality of contradictory
laws, there would be simply no mechanism for regulating the functioning of the proposed
universities.
3.35 Another aspect highli ghted before the Committee was that the legislations proposed in recent
times relating to higher education had provisions which were taking away autonomy of Universities
and higher educational institutions while the present Bill was giving full autonomy and flexibility to
the Universities for Research and Innovation, in all academic, personnel and financial matters
without any regulation on these Universities. For instance, the main features of the Higher
Education and Research Bill, 2011 tended towards centralization of powers and control over
academic matters. On the other hand, the present Bill focused on decentralization and gave
unlimited autonomy. The Department, however, submitted that these Universities would be governed
by UGC Regulations also. No blanket exemption was to be given to these Universities from the
regulatory purview of UGC or AICTE or from any of the existing laws governing higher education.
3.36 The Committee observes a number of contradictions which may emerge in the
coming times between the present Bill and the existing laws and other Bills in the pipeline.
Even though applicability of other laws has not been barred in the present Bill, there would
be problems in applicability of existing laws due to the simple fact that the establishment
procedure is entirely different so far as the traditional universities and the proposed
universities are concerned. The Committee observes that the issue of non-compatibility
between the two different categories of universities can be easily resolved by following the
same mode for setting up the universities for Research and Innovation as made applicable
for the traditional universities. In this way, all the legislations both enacted and at the
finalization stage would be made applicable to the proposed universities.
The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some provisions of
the Bill:–
IV. CLAUSE 3 : DEFINITIONS
Clause 3 deals with definitions
4.1 Clause 3(f) of the Bill defines “distance education systems” as :-
“distance education systems” means the system of imparting education through any means
of communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, seminars,

24
contact programmes or a combination of any two or more of such means and includes
imparting of education through multiple media and technologies for interactive multi-
directional educational delivery involving only limited class room contact between the
teacher and student;”
4.2 Representatives of IGNOU welcomed the recognition of open and distance learning as a
research-oriented system for the first time. Embargo on research through distance education by the
UGC and other regulatory bodies was not found acceptable by the University. The Committee was
informed that IGNOU was having 700 research scholars associated with it and more than 100
fellowships for research were being offered to its students. It was pointed out by some of the
stakeholders that distance education, unless it is of very superior quality, should be left to IGNOU
and other such institutions. It was also suggested that the provision of limited classroom contact
between the teacher and student in the Bill should be made mandatory as otherwise the situation
would become similar to private students who have minimum or no classroom contact and they
are just required to fill the forms for examination and clear the exams.
4.3 On this issue being taken up with the Department, the Committee was informed that the
proposed Universities for Research and Innovation would have complete autonomy in design of
programmes, teaching etc. and these would be structured around Schools/Faculties cutting across
disciplines and decision-making on academic matters would be devolved to Schools/Faculty. The
universities would be having complete research freedom in the areas of pure basic, strategic basic,
applied and experimental research. Accordingly, these universities would also have powers to
institute teaching including distance systems, research or other academic positions as required by
it. The class room contact in terms of hours etc would, accordingly, vary across academic areas.
4.4 The Committee observes that definition of the term ‘distance education systems’
makes it quite clear that component of limited class-room contact between the teacher and
student is inbuilt into it. From the feedback given by IGNOU, it is also true that the
University is involved in research work also. The Committee would, however, like to point
out that research work requires continuous participation and greater involvement of
students which has to be sustained so as to ensure the quality of research. This has to be
borne in mind if distance education mode is being used for conducting research work.
4.5 Clause 3 (r) defines “teachers of the university” as:–
“teachers of the University” means the persons as may be, by whatever designation,
appointed for imparting instructions, teaching or conducting research in a University for
Research and Innovation and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;
4.6 The Committee was given to understand that three different categories were involved with
teaching of students, i.e. instructors, teachers and the people who conduct research who are
scientific officers, research officers and project officers. For all these three categories,
qualifications, appointment procedures, service conditions and pensionary benefits are quite
different. Bringing all the three together under the definition of ‘teachers’ may lead to lot of
problems and litigations.
4.7 On its attention being drawn to this issue, the Department informed that these universities
would have full freedom in appointing officers and staff on such tenure, term or otherwise to
teaching research and academic faculties as deemed fit. It was expected that terms, tenure and
other conditions of appointment of teaching, research and academic faculties would be clearly spelt
out to minimize complications and litigations. The Department further contended that the university
will have to designate specific categories as teachers through its ordinances. However, the
Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the definition of “teachers of the
University” as provided in the Central Universities Act, 2009 which reads as follows:

25
“teachers of the University means Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors,
and such other persons as may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting
research in the university or in any college or institution maintained by the university and
are designated as teachers by the ordinances”.
4.8 The Committee finds this definition more specific and accurate. As a research and
innovation university would have similar categories of faculties besides having other professionals
such as scientific officers, research officers etc., it would be proper if each of these terms are
specified more clearly along with qualifications, appointment procedures, service conditions ete.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that definition of “teachers of the University” may be
clearly spelt out along with other professionals/officers associated with such universities.
V . CLAUSE 4 : ESTABLISHMENT AND INCORPORATION OF UNIVERSITIES FOR
RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION AND CLAUSE 10 : MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
5.1 Clause 4 relates to the establishment and incorporation of Universities for Research and
Innovation. Central Government may, by notification, establish one or more such universities and
specify the name and headquarters of every such university. Jurisdiction of each university shall extend
to the whole of India. Each university may also establish campuses and study centres in foreign
countries. Clause 10 pertains to Memorandum of Agreement to be entered into with the Central
Government along with a project report by the promoter. The MoA would be subject to the approval
of both the Houses of Parliament. The clause also enumerates the procedure for approval of MoA.
5.2 Stakeholders expressed strong reservations on this provision of the Bill which envisaged
establishment of Universities for Research and Innovation through notification which would be based
on Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) between the Central Government and the promoters of these
universities. The promoters would include companies, trusts and societies registered under Indian
laws, being organizations of repute having financial capability and expertise, Indian universities and
foreign universities. Presently, universities in India can only be established through an Act of
parliament or State legislation. Even the private universities are established through the same
procedure. Universities set up through an Act of Parliament come under the category of Central
Universities and the universities set up through State legislatures are called State Universities. Then,
there are autonomous institutions such as IITs, NITs, Indian Institutes of Science Education &
Research, Indian Institutes of Management etc., which also have been established through an Act of
Parliament. If any new Central or State or autonomous institution is required to be set up, it is always
through either by fresh legislations or amendments in the respective parent Acts of Parliament/State
legislatures governing that specific category of Universities/Institutions. It was strongly argued by the
stakeholders that establishment of Innovation and Research Universities through notifications would
impinge upon the authority and powers of Parliament and would amount to by-passing the apex
legislative body. As for the Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) also, it was strongly argued that it
was not a good idea that the powers of establishment of any institution of higher education could
be vested in the Executive through a Memorandum of Agreement. It should only be by an Act of
Parliament for the better future of such institutions and in the larger interests of the country.
Otherwise, it would amount to shifting from legislative process to executive process for establishing
an institution of higher education thus diluting the supremacy of our parliamentary system.
5.3 The Department justified the establishment of the proposed universities through notification
by stating that since the area of concern of each such university would be different and the means
of establishment varied, it was considered appropriate and expedient to adopt more flexible and
efficient approach. Therefore, instead of introducing a new legislation for each category of
Innovation and Research university, it was thought more expedient to delegate to the Central
Government powers to establish such universities through notification. On a further query in this
regard, the Department replied that there was no attempt to bypass any Constitutional provisions.

26
The only difference is that powers of Parliament are proposed to be delegated to Central
Government. However, as per provisions of the Bill, ratification of MoA by Parliament would be
required to prevent excessive delegation and any encroachment into its legislative powers.
Parliament would have powers either to disapprove of the issue of the MoA or approve of such
issue with any modification under clauses 11 and 12 of the Bill. It would also enable public
scrutiny and corrective action concurrently. Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that
through the UGC Act, 1956, Parliament has delegated powers to the Government to declare an
institution as a deemed to be university on the recommendations of the UGC. Hence it would not
be the first time that such a delegation was being made.
5.4 The Committee finds substance in the arguments of the stakeholders. The Committee
feels that even though the proposed Universities for Research and Innovation are envisaged to
be different than the traditional universities, the procedure for their establishment need not be
necessarily different. Establishment of universities has been the domain of the Parliament and
State legislatures which has stood the test of time. Hence, there is no need to adopt a different
approach. With time there has evolved an established system of parliamentary scrutiny of such
legislations and there is no immediate need, exigency to bypass the well-established system. The
Committee does not agree with the argument that since the area of concern of each such
university would be different, the means of establishment would also vary. The Committee
observes that the so called expedient and flexible procedure will also involve a period of eight
months, two months for putting the vision document on the website of the Ministry and six
months to finalise the MoA. The Committee is also aware that the power given to the Central
Government to declare an institution as a deemed to be university on the recommendations of
UGC has led to a situation where a large number of such institutions elevated as ‘deemed to
be universities’ have proved to be substandard institutions. The apex court had to intervene so
as to protect the interests of students.
5.5 It may not be out of place to mention that Parliament scrutiny involves a very
intensive examination of the proposed legislation by the concerned Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee. The Committee system has evolved into a well
established mechanism for scrutiny of legislations to be passed by Parliament. It is a well-
known fact that these Committees conduct a very detailed study of draft legislation by
interacting with all the stakeholders and analyzing all the conceivable aspects connected
with the same. Recommendations made by the Committees have compelled the Central
Government to bring out necessary modifications in draft legislations. However, this kind
of scrutiny would not be available in the case of Universities for Research and Innovation.
MoA will be drawn between the promoter and the Central Government. In the name of
Parliamentary scrutiny, it will have to be laid in draft form for thirty days on the Table of
both Houses of Parliament. Nobody can deny the fact that this would be a mere formality
and cannot be compared with the well established system applicable in respect of other
categories of universities/higher educational institutions.
5.6 Committee’s attention has also been drawn to the Supreme Court judgment in Prof. Yashpal
& others Vs the State of Chhatttisgarh & others case wherein certain sections of the Chhattisgarh
Niji Kshetra Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapna Aur Viniyam) Adhiniyam, 2002 were struck down. The
impinged Act empowered the State Government of Chhattisgarh to incorporate and establish self-
financed private universities for higher education by issuing a Gazette notification. There also the
apex court had held that each university should be independently made by law of Parliament or
State legislatures.
5.7 The Committee, therefore, is of the concerted opinion that the existing system of
establishing universities though an Act of Parliament should be made applicable in the case
of the proposed universities also. A Model Act on the lines of the Parent Act governing

27
Central Universities, IITs or NITs can be easily drafted and enacted. The proposed
legislation can very well serve the purpose. The Committee observes that the Bill has
almost all the provisions required for governance and running of these universities.
5.8 Committee also takes note of the proviso to sub-clause (4) of clause 4 which
empowers the University for Research and Innovation to establish campuses and study
centres in foreign countries in accordance with the provisions of the laws of such foreign
countries. The Committee finds the option unviable on the premise that how would such
campuses and study centres be regulated under the proposed legislation. Committee’s
attention has been drawn to the fact that existing universities regulations such as DU
regulations do not allow setting up of campuses and study centres even within India. The
Committee also finds the proposal too far fetched and feels that there is no need to set up
campuses or study-centres in foreign countries.
VI. CLAUSE 5 : OBJECTS OF UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
6.1 Clause 5 of the Bill enumerates a number of objects of the University for Research and
Innovation. Quite a few apprehensions were expressed by stakeholders on the provisions of this
clause. These apprehensions included :–
- the clause seeks to accomplish too many objects, lacks clarity;
- no need for offering research and innovation for under graduate programmes; it should
be only for post graduate and doctoral programmes besides research projects of
societal relevance;
- it is not clear how humanities, social sciences and other nonmarket disciplines would
become part of these universities;
- how would the industry leaders promote humanities and social sciences;
- universities are primarily meant for research in basic sciences. However, the proposed
universities would be focusing on applied sciences. If the focus is more on research
in applied sciences that would compromise academic culture;
- ideally teaching and research should be blended together. But if the focus is on
research and innovation and the impetus is coming from market or IPR or from other
research areas, then the teaching might get compromised.
- no framework, benchmarks have been provided in the provisions of this clause for
defining global standards to make the education system or various fields of knowledge
globally competitive;
- existing universities have also been focusing on real problems of the society and are
not restricted to doing research in abstract academic pursuits.
6.2 The Department clarified that these universities are meant to concentrate more on research
and innovation and enrolment would mostly be at postgraduate and post-PG level. Each university
would focus on one area or problem of significance to India and build an ecosystem of research
and teaching around different related disciplines and field of study which are relevant thereto and
search for solutions that are globally valid and in the process develop education at undergraduate
and higher levels. Theme based research is expected to yield significant dividends in terms of
intellectual property due to focused and inter-disciplinary research in an area of study. These
universities would also be instrumental in building innovation clusters in the country by promoting
co-location of relevant institutes, industry and incubation centres etc.

28
6.3 The Committee notes that the apprehensions of the stakeholders are three-fold. The
Bill might promote research and innovation in applied sciences in place of pure or basic
sciences. This would create a situation for the private player to go for research and
innovation in applied sciences only due to its profitability and commercial value at the cost
of pure or basic sciences. Secondly, such universities may get motivated to undertake
research and innovation from market or IPR driven areas. Thirdly, given the focus on
science and technology in today’s time, private players may not give importance to research
in humanities and social sciences. The first two factors would also result in private players
appropriating the intellectual property rights and the third would lead to a situation where
real problems of the society may not get addressed. As the Bill envisages three types of
Universities viz. Public funded, Private funded (for which some part of funding would come
from the government) and PPP mode, the areas of research and innovation may get
lop-sided. Private funded universities may focus more on market driven areas than on
humanities and social sciences. Public funded universities may restrict their domain to
humanities and social sciences and PPP mode universities may focus on areas of their
concern. As the Bill seeks to open all fields/areas of knowledge for these universities, there
is a greater probability of objects being inter-mingled. Seen in this context, the Committee
would suggest that objects for each category of university should be clearly spelt.
VII. CLAUSE 6 : FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND
INNOV ATION
7.1 Clause 6 of the Bill enlists various functions and powers assigned to a University for
Research and Innovation.
7.2 Every such university shall exercise autonomy in financial administration, academic and
other matters in regard to the achievement of its objects. It shall (i) impart instructions in such
branches of learning consistent with its objects as such university may, from time to time
determine; (ii) award degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions; (iii) institute teaching
including distance education systems, research or other academic positions; (iv) organize, promote
and conduct research in such university or in collaboration or association with any other university,
institution of research or body corporate; (v) make provision for dissemination of knowledge
emerging from research and for that purpose to enter into such arrangements including consultancy
and advisory (vi) establish campuses and study centre overseas in accordance with the law of the
host country; (vii) provide consultancy and advisory services; (viii) to establish companies or
incubation centres. It was contended by the stakeholders that clause 6(1) gave sweeping powers
to these universities in terms of complete autonomy in financial, administrative, academic and other
matters for achieving their objects. It was strongly argued that unfettered full autonomy in all these
matters was not accompanied by corresponding provisions for regulatory mechanism and
accountability. Other reservations on various sub-clauses of clause 6 are as indicated below:–
- Clause 6(2)(i) allows these universities to impart instructions in all or any branches of
learning which may prove counter productive, especially in case of universities opened
by private players with the help of public funds. It was apprehended that this sweeping
power may lead the university to behave like a pure commercial entity shifting from
one marketable area to another;
- 6(2)(iv) empowers these universities to impart instructions in distance education also
which may provide an opportunity to private players to earn money with very less
investment. It was said to be a matter of debate as to how distance learning may
promote research and innovation in a field. It was apprehended that it may lead to
unregulated business opportunity in higher education sector for private players;

29
- 6(2)(x) allows these universities to determine the fees and other charges. This
provision would be applicable uniformly to public funded, private funded and PPP
mode universities. There would be no monitoring mechanism and each category of
university would have full freedom to determine and receive payment of fees and other
charges. Such full freedom may impede accessibility to education, research and
innovation to deserving qualified people;
- 6(2)(xvi) allows these universities to define standards of admission, examination or any
other method as determined by the University. It was contended that these important
parameters cannot be left entirely to the universities, especially to the private
universities where the management is more concerned about profit. Numerous reports
about closing down of management and engineering colleges in private sector was said
to be a pointer;
- (6)(2)(xviii) allows these universities to do all such other acts and things as may be
necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects. It was
said to be too sweeping and completely uncalled for;
- 6(2)(xix) allows universities to establish companies or incubation centres. However,
there is no criteria provided in the Bill for establishing such companies or centres.
Further it could lead to business network that could siphon off the surplus/benefits of
innovation.
- 6(3) empowers universities to determine standards in higher education. It was argued
that it is not for a university to define standards in isolation. Standards are fixed by
the quality of education, faculty, infrastructure and employability of the graduating
students. These are determined by the peer group opinion, awards and other
distinctions given by academic group or societies;
- 6(3) provides for a mechanism in case of a dispute between a regulatory authority and
university. It was stated that what kind of disputes are foreseen is not clear and the
committee has more representation from the university;
- 6(4) allows these universities to determine nomenclature of degrees, diplomas and
other academic distinctions. The provision contravenes section 22 of the UGC Act
which prohibits awarding any degree other than specified by the UGC.
7.3 The Department justified the provisions in clause 6 by stating that autonomy in matters of
academic, governance and administration is a sina qua  non for quality institutions to emerge. First
two powers provided in clause 6 are not exceptional for this particular legislation as the existing
universities in the country are also empowered by their respective Acts to define standards of
admission, examination and evaluation, to receive benefactions, donations and gifts, to acquire,
hold, manage and to dispose of any property, movable and immovable including trust and
endowment properties. The Department admitted that the only new power granted to these
universities under clause 6 is that of incorporating start-up companies or establishing incubation
centres. The rationale for this power was said to be that any intellectual property or new
knowledge created by means of pure, basic or applied research needs to be converted into
marketable products which require instruments of such conversions that new knowledge created
does not remain confined to laboratories or classrooms and get converted into socially and
economically useful products and patents.
7.4 The Committee feels that the apprehensions of the stakeholders cannot be ignored.
These universities are intended to enjoy unfettered freedom in financial, administrative,
academic and other matters and would also be having the power to evolve their own

30
admission criteria, determine the nomenclature of their degrees and other academic
distinctions, irrespective of existing provisions. While enjoying full academic, management
and financial autonomy, there are no provisions provided in the Bill which would regulate
their functioning and make them accountable. In fact, there is no regulatory mechanism
provided in the Bill. This state of affairs presents a grim scenario as the Bill intends to
especially facilitate the entry of private players in the higher education sector in a big
way. It is common knowledge that participation of private sector in higher education
through deemed to be universities, State Universities, self financed colleges/institutions
etc has led to large-scale undesirable practices. Even the existing UGC, AICTE rules/
regulations have not been able to address such undesirable practices, especially by private
institutions.
7.5 On a specific query in this regard, the Department submitted that the proposed universities
would be governed by UGC regulations also. No blanket exemption is given to these universities
from regulatory purview of UGC or AICTE or from any of the existing laws governing higher
education. It is expected that on the lines of UGC regulations governing deemed universities and
private universities, specific regulations to regulate universities for research and innovation would
also be framed. It was also contended by the Department that the accountability of private
universities for research and innovation would be ensured through reviews by Academic Research
Peer Group for research work and academic audit of teaching through a Peer Group for course
work and teaching. Scrutiny and accountability would be defined by outcomes rather than
processes.
7.6 The Committee is not convinced by the arguments of the Department. There is no
regulatory mechanism provided in the Bill. UGC and AICTE are proposed to be subsumed
by the National Commission for Higher Education under the Higher Education and Research
Bill, 2011. There are no provisions dealing with offences and penalties and there are no
provisions providing for grievance redressal mechanism in the present legislation. The
Committee is also not inclined to agree with the view that unfettered autonomy is a sina-
qua-non for quality institutions to emerge. Universities may have any number of functions
and powers, however, these must be accompanied by a proper regulatory mechanism. Private
sector has already made the higher education system in the country too unwieldy and
unmanageable inspite of there being quite a few regulations. Existing state of affairs itself
requires corrective measures and it should not be overburdened further with the entry of private
players and foreign universities. Not only this, Government has brought forward a number of
legislations with the objective of regulating their functioning, having a well-structured monitoring
mechanism in place and also a Grievance Redressal Mechanism.
7.7 Committee’s attention was drawn to the provision of the Higher Education and Research
Bill, 2011 wherein the proposed Commission has been empowered to specify norms and standards
in higher education for all the universities including state universities. Similarly, under the
Prohibition of Unfair Practices in Technical Educational Institutions, Medical Educational
Institutions and Universities Bill, 2010, norms and procedures for publishing prospectus,
uploading information on website and many other matters will be lay down. Both these
previous legislations laid down standards and norms for providing a mechanism for
regulation. The Committee is unable to understand as to why such a mechanism cannot be
provided under the proposed legislation also. Both autonomy and accountability have to go
side by side so that required checks and balances are inbuilt into the proposed legislation
which is going for a path-breaking initiatives. The Committee accordingly, recommends that
along with the powers and manifold functions envisaged for these universities, effective
monitoring and regulatory mechanism should be put in place under the proposed legislation
also.

31
VIII. CLAUSE 7 : UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION TO BE OPEN TO
ALL
8.1 Clause 7 provides that the University for Research and Innovation would be open to all
persons of either sex, irrespective of religion, race, caste, creed or class. The clause further lays
down that the provisions of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservations in Admissions) Act,
2006 would be applicable to all public funded Universities for Research and Innovation.
8.2 Plain reading of the clause conveys that private and foreign universities would be under no
obligation to provide for reservations of backward classes. Only public funded universities would
take care of the applicability of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservations in Admissions)
Act, 2006. Divergent views were expressed by the stakeholders on this provision. It was contended
that application of reservation policy only in public funded universities would accentuate existing
socio-economic divide. Even though private funded universities would not be bound to implement
reservation policy, they could still specify such criteria in the matter of admission as would account
for diversities in entry level benchmarks for of any class or category of applicants for admission.
8.3 Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that this would create two sets of universities,
private not following reservations to achieve higher standards and public to follow reservation to
achieve higher education. The Committee would like the Department to take note of the
apprehensions and ensure that provisions of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservations in
Admissions) Act, 2006 are followed.
8.4 The Committee takes note of the following proviso to section 7 relating to
‘University open to all castes, creed, race or class of the Central Universities Act, 2009:–
“Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from
making special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with
disabilities or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in
particular, of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens”.
The Committee is of the view that suitable provision with respect to women, persons
with disabilities and persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society may be
incorporated in this clause of the Bill.
IX. CLAUSE 9 : CRI TERIA FOR ESTABLISHING A UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND
INNOV ATION
9.1 Clause 9 lays down the criteria for establishing a university for research and innovation. It
says that an organization being a company or a society or a trust recognized as an organization
of repute with proven innovation in research and financial capability may set up a university. The
clause further lays down that a university established or incorporated in India functioning for 25
years and a university established or incorporated outside India functioning for 50 years may also
establish such universities.
9.2 According to the Department a company, society or trust are being allowed to set up
universities for research and Innovation because public expenditure on higher education is not going
to be sufficient and a substantial part of the funding must flow into the education sector through
not for profit private participation. The Twelfth Plan also mentions the need for encouraging private
investments in higher education and evolving workable Public Private Partnership (PPP) models in
this regard. According to the Department, stiff parameters have been laid in the clause for
establishing universities. The promoter or promoters of each University for Research and
Innovation would be required to submit to the Central Government a vision plan and a MoA,

32
proposed to be entered into with the Central Government along with a detailed project report. The
conditions for qualifying as a private promoter have been kept quite staff. The Department’s
justification for laying down timeframes of 25 and 50 years for establishing universities for
research and innovation was that universities grow organically over a considerable period of time
where ideas germinate, applications emerge from ideas and innovation flourishes. This would
happen over a period of time before existing institutions would be able to reorient their academic
content and concern towards research and innovation and the research output and academic quality
of a university recognized.
9.3 Strong reservations were expressed by the stakeholders against this provision of the Bill.
First objection was that all kinds of private players, be they companies, societies or trusts would
be establishing such universities. It was apprehended that most of such private players would open
these universities for commercial gains. Further, how would the ability and reputation of these
companies, societies or trusts be determined is not clear. The performance of many of the private
universities set up through the Acts of State legislatures was cited as an example. Private
universities have been running unheard of courses, flouting norms of regulatory authorities such as
AICTE and UGC. Secondly, residency period of 25 and 50 years of existence for Indian and
foreign universities to set up Universities for Research and Innovation was said to be not a viable
proposal. It was strongly emphasized that many universities have been focusing on research and
innovation since their inception. In place of residency period of 25 or 50 years, the criteria should
be academic performance, reputation of faculty members, ranking by accreditation agencies,
international collaboration, availability of research facilities, social commitment etc. It was
suggested that whichever university is willing to provide infrastructure, funds and intellectual
resources should be encouraged to set up university for research and innovation. Another view was
that performance and not the timeframe should be the criteria for establishing such a university.
In case of foreign universities, it was pointedly asked as to why such universities would come in
India for research which would be relevant to Indian society. This particular provision was said
to be providing alternate route for the entry of foreign universities. Even the Foreign Educational
Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010 allowed only those foreign universities
to set up campuses in India which had a stipulated corpus maintained. The present Bill lacked any
such restriction.
9.4 The Committee finds the issues raised by the stakeholders to be of substance. The
entry of private and foreign players in the research and innovation area may result in many
undesirable consequences, especially when there are no regulatory mechanisms provided in
the Bill to ensure that companies, societies or trusts are not flouting the required rules/
regulations while establishing and running such universities. Universities established by
companies, societies or trusts would essentially fall in the category of private funded
universities for which greater autonomy is envisaged in the Bill. These universities will also
be financed by the Central Government in the form of land, contribution to capital
investment, grants for supporting research and the promotion and development of higher
education. Inspite of all this, the Central Government will not have any monitoring or
regulatory control over them. Review by an Expert Committee after fifteen years of
establishment and after every tenth year cannot be equated with a well-structured and
effective monitoring mechanism. There are no provisions under which the Central
Government or any regulatory authority would inspect the affairs of these universities. The
Committee strongly feels that there is no exigency to involve private players in establishing
universities for research and innovation in the country. In the first instance, only the
public-funded universities may be allowed to establish such universities.
9.5 As for the time-frame criteria for establishing universities for research and
innovation the Committee feels that instead of time-frame it should be performance of the

33
university. There would be other factors which could be taken into account for determining
criteria such as academic quality, accreditation rating, infrastructure, intellectual resource,
availability of research facilities etc.
9.6 The Committee also feels that there is no need for providing entry of foreign
universities to establish universities for research and innovation in India. When the
proposed legislation lacks provision for regulatory mechanism even in the case of private
funded universities, how the foreign universities would be subject to regulatory mechanism,
is beyond comprehension. The Committee is of the view that if foreign universities are to
be allowed in India, it should be through the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation
of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010 and not under the proposed legislation.
9.7 The Committee is of the view that the Universities for Research and Innovation are
envisaged to be at a higher level in all respects when compared with the traditional
universities. These universities would set benchmarks for excellence for other institutions
of higher learning, path-breaking research and promoting synergies between teaching and
research to create institutions universally recognized for quality in teaching, learning and
research. The Committee, therefore, feels that these universities should remain in the
domain of Government Sector at least in the initial stages. This has been the scenario
when we look at countries like China, USA and Australia. Simultaneously, Government
should also take the initiative to identify premier research institutions and well-
established industry houses to be Universities for Research and Innovation. The
Committee strongly feels that our research organizations have been doing pioneering
research work in very diverse fields and in the process making great contributions for the
development and growth of the country. Their recognition as Universities for Research and
Innovation with full support from the Government would be a step in the right direction
which is long awaited.
9.8 Besides the foreign universities, the Committee does not find Indian Universities
having been there for 25 years, inspite of being well-established would be in a position to
set up another university, that too envisaged to operate at a higher level, reason being, our
universities inspite of being well-established, are also facing all kinds of constraints- be it
lack of funds, inadequate infrastructure or lack of qualified and experienced faculty. To
expect from them, to set up another university having higher standards and envisaged to
do high quality research work is indeed a tall order.
X. CLAUSE : 13 BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND
INNOV ATION
10.1 Clause 13 of the Bill provides the structure of Board of Governors. The University for
Research and Innovation has been given complete freedom in constituting Board of Governors. The
Members of the Board would be appointed, nominated, sponsored by the promoter or promoters
as provided in the Memorandum of Agreement. It further lays down that one-third of its members
will be from teachers or officers of the concerned university and not less than one half of the
members would be independent who would be innovators and industry leaders and one-half of such
independent persons will be women.
10.2 The Board of Governors would be carrying out all the functions and powers of the
University for Research and Innovation, be it management, making of statutes, providing for
administration, management and operation, establishing school of studies, approving annual budget,
constituting Academic Board, Research Council , appointing of Vice-Chancellor and other officers
of the university etc. A Number of reservations were expressed on this particular provision as
indicated below :–

34
- Number of Members that would comprise of Board of Governors not specified.
Minimum number could be specified;
- there is no nominee of the Government on the Board of Governors;
- academia is under-represented in the BoG;
- No democratic procedure for appointment, nomination;
- Promoter or promoters would have complete freedom to appoint, nominate and
sponsor;
- Who will chair the meetings of the BoG; and
- What would be the criteria for selecting innovators and industry leaders.
10.3 The Committee feels that the governance structure as proposed in this clause is not
democratic and entails top down approach. No model statute for governance or frame-work
for Board of Governors has been envisaged in the Bill. The Committee feels that BoG
should comprise primarily of members from academia and at least half of its members
should be appointed through democratic process from amongst the faculty members of the
university. The number of nominated independent persons should be significantly less than
the number of teachers represented in the BoG so as to justify the objects with which such
university shall be established. The role of creator of knowledge and innovation should be
given due importance in the governance structure.
XI. CLAUSE 17 : RESEARCH COUNCILS
11.1 Clause 17 provides for the constitution of Research Council consisting of a Director and
such other members as may be specified by the Board of Governors. The Research Council has
been entrusted with many important functions.
11.2 It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the provisions dealing with the creation
of Research Council, appointment system and policies to attract highly qualified and talented
academicians, were a welcome departure from the way traditional universities have been
functioning. It was further noticed that both the Academic Board and Research Council are to be
created by the Board of Governors and both are important authorities of the University. It needed
to be clarified in the relevant clause whether the Research Council was supposed to work under
the Academic Board or as parallel organization. Department’s reply in this regard was that the role
of both the bodies would complement each other. The Board would create an enabling environment
within which the Councils would function.
11.3 The Committee, however, would like the Department to bring clarity in the provision
as it is not clear how the Research Council and Academic Board would complement each
other. Further, the Research Council should report to only one authority so that there is
no conflict between the BoG and Academic Board.
CLAUSE 18 : THE CHANCELLOR, VICE-CHANCELLOR AND OTHER OFFICERS OF THE
UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
12.1 Clause 18 deals with the appointment of Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor and other officers of
the Universities for Research and Innovation.
12.2 The Chai rman, AICTE in his interaction with the Committee pointed out that the
appointment process needed to be based on merit, transparency and accountability. It was
suggested that such important functionaries need to be appointed through a Joint Committee of

35
Indian Academy of Science and Engineering and eminent academics. The Vice-Chancellor, DTU
submitted that the Bill stipulated promoter to appoint the Chancellor or Vice-Chancellor. The
assumption was that those who had come forward to set up those universities be given the vital
freedom to put together their own team. However, the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor were very
important functionaries in a university system. They must be free from all burdens and pressures
in order to make a meaningful contribution. This could not be achieved unless these two
functionaries were appointed through a system where they would be responsible only to the nation
and to the very cause for which the university was established and not to their promoters or
masters. It was suggested that this clause could be modified to provide for a joint committee
consisting of representatives from Indian Academy of Science, Indian Academy of Engineering,
medical science and other academies. This could make them free from external pressures.
12.3 The Ministry of Urban Development’s concern was that while the qualification of the
Chancellor has been made part of Bill, the qualification for the VC had not been prescribed and
has been left to selection by the Board of Governors on the basis of recommendations of search
cum selection Committee. It was felt that qualifications for VC should also be laid in the Bill
otherwise persons from non-academic background and qualifications, might get appointed. The
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances also advocated for a transparent method of appointment.
12.4 The Committee observes that both the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor are important
functionaries of a university and they should not be at the mercy of promoters. The
Committee was in full agreement with the suggestion of the stakeholders that Chancellor
and Vice-Chancellor should be appointed by a Joint Committee of academies of different
fields. This would be more transparent and also free the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor
from pressures of promoters and help in making these universities march towards the path
of excellence.
CLAUSE 20 : GRANTS BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FOR SUPPORTING HIGHER
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
13.1 Clause 20 deals with the grants by Central Government for supporting higher education and
research to the universities for research and innovation.
13.2 It was strongly argued before the Committee that the funding in the form of grants by
Government must be a accompanied by control over fees and provision of reservations in
admission in the private institutions as well. While the Government must take responsibility towards
inclusiveness, it must be ensured that arbitrarily high fees were not charged to siphon Government
fund towards surplus creation. The concept of social audit and management audit along with
financial audit should be made mandatory so as to ensure efficient and productive utilization of
public money and money collected from people. A provision for a minimum corpus was also
suggested so that the promoters and companies desiring to get some government funding may not
use the universities for their business activities. Such stipulated minimum initial corpus could be
reviewed from time to time by the Central Government. Another viewpoint put forth was that
research grant could be subject to the provisions of memorandum of agreement as well as
fellowship to SC/ST scholars. Also, liberal funding provisions could be incorporated to attract
foreign scholars and faculty to come to these universities as visiting scholars and faculty. A
differing point made was that section 12 of the UGC Act prohibited giving any grant to universities
not declared by the Commission fit to receive such grants.
13.3 The Ministry of Finance opined that it would be difficult to support the proposal to make
privately funded universities eligible for public funding for research unless the results of such
research were accessible to Government for public good. The Department’s stand was that any
grants would only be made after due appropriation made by Parliament and would be subject to

36
the provisions of memorandum of agreement. Thus the purpose, manner of utilization and expected
outcomes of such grants would be mentioned in the MoA. This clause also stipulates for
constituting an expert group for Research Audit to evaluate and assess the research undertaken with
public funds. The Department also submitted that in the Private Universities for Research and
Innovation, accountability would be ensured through reviews by the Academic Research Peer
Group for research work and Academic Audit of T eaching through a Peer Group for course work
and teaching. Private funded Universities would not be subject to CAG Audit.
13.4 The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Government and observes that
the grants given by the Central Government to any university whether public or private
should be accounted for and there should be some audit mechanisms evolved apart from the
above mentioned Research and Academic Audit Peer Groups for accountability of private
universities not funded by Government grants.
CLAUSE 29 : PROTECTION AND UTILISATION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY BY
UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
14.1 Clause 29 of the Bill deals with the protection and utilization of intellectual property by
University for Research and Innovation.
14.2 It was pointed that each university would disclose to the Central Government about the new
research leading to an intellectual property and apply for its protection. The Government will pass
on all profits or royalty earned to the university from such intellectual property, and it will be
shared with the creator of the property. However, the Central Government may acquire the title of
such intellectual property and restrict its publication or communication which is considered as
prejudicial to the interests of the security of India. It would include the intellectual property for
making a product which relates to fissionable material, arms etc. However, this provision was
applicable only to the public funded universities and the private funded universities were kept out
of the purview of the provision.
14.3 The Ministry of Commerce pointed out that it was not clear how title of public funded
intellectual property would be retained. A title could be retained only after it is obtained and in case
of patents, it could be obtained only after it was formally granted and once it was granted, how
would the Central Government refuse title to the University. It appeared that the intention was that
the Central Government could in the public interest, refuse permission to Innovation University to
patent such an innovation. The Ministry pointed out that such an approach may be counter-
productive as a third party may patent it. They were of the view that it would be better if the
Innovation Universities could be allowed to patent their ideas and the Central Government using its
powers under the Patents Act could take it over at any time. The Department of Industrial Policy
and Promotion submitted that the Intellectual Property (IP) was granted to an inventor or the
university and unless this was legally assigned and registered with the Controller of Patents/
Registrar of Trademarks the ownership could not be transferred under the present Intellectual
Property laws. Any order of Central Government which transferred a public funded IP to its name
would violate the present legal frame-work and was, therefore, untenable.
14.4 The Department clarified that the provisions were fully in consonance with the Patents Act.
“Realization” of IP meant the grant of patent or registration of a copyright. Specific provisions
relating to the use and acquisition of “title” were needed since even private funded Universities for
Research and Innovation (URI) were supposed to be funded by the Government. The provisions
of the present Bill did not clash with any of the existing laws on IP. The clause clearly mentioned
that the university shall disclose the acquisition of IP after its realization. The proviso to the clause
ensured that the Government is intimated about the fact of an IP created as soon as possible.
Clause 100(1) of the Patent Act also empowered the Government to use the invention for public

37
purpose. The effect of nonintimation about the acquisition would be that the IP shall belong to the
Government. The Bill did not in any way prevent a University for Innovation to patent an invention
and had merely empowered the Government to direct it for proper use.
14.5 The Committee has been given to understand that the Department has taken into
consideration the provisions of other related Acts relating to intellectual property while incorporating
Chapter V relating to ‘Protection and Utilization of Intellectual Property emerging from public
funded research. A proviso has also been added to this Chapter as per which, the provision of
Chapter V shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in
force, relating to intellectual property. The Committee, however, feels that a review of Chapter
V dealing with intellectual property may be undertaken in consultation with the concerned
Ministries so as to eliminate any doubt or ambiguity which may lead to unwelcome
developments once the Bill was enacted.
XV. CLAUSE 38 : REVIEW OF UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
15.1 This clause deals with the review of Universities for Research and Innovation and states that:–
Every University for Research and Innovation shall, within fifteen years from the
establishment and incorporation of such University under this Act and thereafter at the
expiration of every tenth year, constitute a committee of experts to evaluate and review the
performance in achievement of the objects of such University during the said period of
fifteen years or ten years, as the case may be.
15.2 During its interactions with various stakeholders, it was emphasized that review of the
functioning of the proposed universities initially after a gap of fifteen years and thereafter after
every tenth year was too inadequate. It was pointed out that there was no provision under which
the Central Government or any regulatory authority could inspect the affairs of these universities.
Also, there was a need for distinction between totally public funded, semipublic funded and totally
private funded universities for conducting a review. It was, accordingly, suggested that the time
period should be scaled down to within 10 years from the establishment and incorporation of such
universities under this Act and thereafter the review should be after every five years. Another view
was that the review of the university should be carried out initially every 5 years for the first 15
years and thereafter every 10 years to ensure that the peer pressure was created for the
achievement of the noble objectives of world quality and industry and society relevant research and
innovation. The need for having a mechanism for continuous internal review and self correction
which could be outcome-based was also felt. Another view point which emerged was that there
should be a standard field for assessing the universities meant for research and innovation and it
should not be left to the universities own experts, bodies or people to assess their output.
15.3 The Department, in its reply, submitted that the Bill provided for an evaluation and review
of every University for Research and Innovation (URI) within 15 years after its establishment and
thereafter after the expiration of every tenth year by a Committee of Experts. The recommendation
of the Committee along with the response of the concerned university shall be submitted to the
Central Government, who shall cause the report to be laid in Parliament. Further, the productivity
of research projects undertaken by URIs shall be Every University for Research and Innovation
shall, within fifteen years from the establishment and incorporation of such University under this
Act and thereafter at the expiration of every tenth year, constitute a committee of experts to
evaluate and review the performance in achievement of the objects of such University during the
said period of fifteen years or ten years, as the case may be. measured in accordance with norms
as may be specified by the UGC, Committee constituted for evaluation and review of the
performance of the URI shall be on the basis of such metrics as may be defined, prior to
commencement of such review by the UGC.

38
15.4 The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Government and recommends
that the review and evaluation of the Universities for Research and Innovation should be
done after10 years as 15 years is a long time. The Committee is also of the opinion that
the Government should nominate a member in the review Committee so that there is an
impartial assessment or it should appoint a body like NAAC for assessment of the URIs.
However, this provision alone would not be adequate enough. An effective monitoring
mechanism ensuring an element of accountability will also have to be incorporated in the
Bill.
XVI. CLAUSE 40: APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS NOT BARRED
16.1 This clause provides that subject to the provisions of section 6 (2) and (3), the provisions
of the proposed legislation shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, the provisions of any
other law, including such law on reservation in admission as applicable to the University for
Research and Innovation, for the time being in force.
16.2 The Committee observes that as per clause 40, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition
to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law. When asked to clarify the applicability
of other laws on the proposed legislation, the Department informed that subject to provisions of
clause 6 (2) and (3), all other laws, for the time being in force, would be applicable on the
proposed legislation. The Committee finds the contention of the Department somewhat
contradictory and also having very crucial implications. The Committee has been given to
understand that while each University for Research and Innovation will determine and declare its
standards of education, such standards would be higher than minimum standards in the relevant
field of knowledge laid down by or under any law. In case of any dispute between the university
and regulatory authority (UGC/NCHER) in matters of standards of higher education the same would
be referred to a Committee where the regulatory authority (UGC/NCHER) would be represented.
Plenary powers of regulations of all universities including the new ones would be with NCHER.
The Committee notes that clause 6 (2) enumerates the powers and functions of the proposed
universities and as per clause 6 (3), every proposed university shall determine and declare, on its
website, the standards of such education sought to be provided in such university in its teaching,
learning and research.
16.3 Clause 6 (2) empowers the proposed universities to decide all matters related to their
functioning which include imparting instructions, making provisions for research and innovations,
awarding degrees, diplomas etc., appointing officers/staff, creating administrative and other posts,
appointing guest faculty, determining and receiving fees and other charges, establishing chairs of
studies, establishing campuses and study centres overseas, acquiring, holding, investing, managing
or disposing of movable/immovable property, defining standards of admission to the university,
including examination, evaluation etc., establishing companies or incubation centres. The
Committee notes that many of the powers proposed to be given to these universities are
not there with the existing universities. Clause 40 clearly stipulates that Universities for
Research and Innovation will have all the autonomy to decide not only all the crucial
matters but also some additional powers having wider implications. No existing law in force
can be made applicable to these universities so far clause 6 (2) is concerned. The only
saving grace is that in case of any dispute between these universities and a regulatory
authority constituted to determine and co-ordinate standards of higher education, the same
will be referred to a three-member Committee where again two members will be
representing such university and the third member will be nominated by the regulatory
body. It is not clear as to which authority would be constituting this Committee and who
will chair it. Another pertinent issue which has drawn the attention of the Committee is
that from the wording of clause 40, it seems that only the existing laws which are in force

39
would be applicable on the proposed legislation. In other words, the Bill would be outside
the purview of legislations yet to be enacted dealing with Educational Tribunals, unfair
practices and over arching Commission of Higher Education. Even otherwise all these laws
are meant for existing Universities set up through an Act of Parliament or State legislation.
The Committee views this with serious concern and directs the Department to remove all
ambiguities in clause 40.
XVII. CLAUSE 42 : STATUTES, HOW MADE
17.1 This clause relates to making of statutes. The Board of Governors of every University for
Research and Innovation shall make statutes to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
17.2 The Committee observes that under the Central Universities Act, 2009 which has
been enacted to establish and incorporate universities for teaching and research in various
states, the first statutes have been included in the Act itself. It is true that the Executive
Council of the University may make new or additional statutes or may amend or repeal the
statutes. But every new statute or addition to the statutes or any amendment or repeal of
a statute shall require the assent of the Visitor (President of India) who may assent thereto
or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for re-consideration. However, no such
provision is there in the proposed legislation. Clause 42 simply states that the Board of
Governors of every University for Research and Innovation shall make, amend or repeal
statutes. The Committee is of the view that model statutes ideally should have been
incorporated in the Bill itself and also there should be an independent authority to have the
final view to deciding making, amending or repealing of statutes.
XVIII. GENERAL
18.1 The Committee observes that provisions relating to conditions of service of
employees, etc, procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students,
right appeal, provident and pension funds are missing in the proposed legislation. The
Committee finds no justification for non-inclusion of such provisions which are primarily
meant to protect the interests of students and teachers/employees. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that these provisions may be suitably incorporated in the Bill.
XIX. CONCLUSION
19.1 It is an undisputed fact that our country is yet to make its presence felt in the world
so far as pioneering research work is concerned. The Committee is also aware that quite
a few of our universities and research organizations have been doing commendable work
inspite of persistent constraints being faced by them. Lack of funds resulting in the absence
of minimum infrastructure, severe shortage of qualified and experienced faculty and also no
autonomy even in issues strictly falling under their domain can be cited as the main
impediments in their functioning. In such a scenario, the objective behind the proposed
legislation is laudable and needs to be supported by all concerned. The Committee also
welcomes the initiative of the Government for proposing the new category of specialized
universities. However, the Committee, after making an in-depth analysis of the Bill and its
likely impact has drawn the attention of Government to the shortcomings, lack of required
provisions and contradictions observed in the Bill in the Report. The Committee would
appreciate that necessary modifications are brought out in the Bill as recommended by it.
******

NOTE OF DISSENT

43
P.K. BIJU
Member of Parliament
(Lok Sabha)
Alathur, Kerala
Member:
• Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development
• Consultative Committee for Information
Technology
• Court of Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Web Site: www.pkbijump.in
102, South Avenue,
New Deihi-110011
Phone : 011-23795681
Fax : 011-23795683
Mobile : +91 9013180313
K. Madhavan Smaraka Mandiram
Nair Thara, Vadakkencherry
Palakkad, Kerala-678683
Phone : 04922-257600
Fax : 04922-257900
Moblie : +91 9447719000
E-mail : pkbijump@gmail.com
21.02.13
Dear Chairman,
I am expressing my strong dissent on “The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill,
2012”.
The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012 promises “path breaking” innovations in the
academic field of our country. But a careful examination of the bill reveals that this bill also, like
a string of other recent bills introduced for educational reforms, paving the way for
commodification of education in our country. Innovation in knowledge is an arduous process
through generations. But here the government is trying to slide down innovation by establishing
innovation universities flouting all rules of the land and sabotaging the noble aims of education.
There is no justification for the introduction of such innovation universities in a time where the
countries existing universities and premier institutions are reeling under severe financial,
infrastructural and faculty crunch. I have strong disagreement in the implementation of this bill due
to the following reasons.
My apprehensions are four-fold. I have strong reservations against: firstly, bypassing the
parliamentary process in establishment of the universities, secondly ruthless privatization, thirdly,
the invasion of foreign universities in the academic spaces of our country, forthily, violation of the
constitutional rights of the weaker sections in terms of reservation in educational institutions.
A major threatening provision of the bill is the bypassing of the parliamentary process in
establishing universities in India. A Central University in India is established by Act  of Parliament
and is under the purview of the Department of Higher Education in the Union Human Resource
Development Ministry. In general, universities in India are recognized by the University Grants
Commission (UGC), which draws its power from the University Grants Commission Act, 1956.
Central universities, in addition, are covered by the Central Universities Act, 2009, which regulates
their purpose, powers governance etc.
But according to the “Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012”, a mere notification is
enough to establish an innovative university (clause 1). These notifications will be based on
memoranda of agreement (MoA) between the central government and the promoters of such
universities (clause 10). This provision is totally in favor of abdicating the parliament’s

44
responsibility to debate and discuss the very important thing which is going to influence our nation
in several ways. The present “umbrella” Bill allows setting up of any number of innovation
universities without any separate legislation for each university. Clause 6 (4) says that every
university shall determine its own nomenclature of degrees, diplomas, etc., notwithstanding
anything contained in the University Grants Commission Act or any other laws for the time being
enforced. On the contrary, section 22 of the UGC Act prohibits awarding any degree other than
specified by the UGC. Neither the existing rules of the UGC or any other public body in neither
higher education nor the provisions of any of the Acts/Bills under process are applicable to these
universities. They have unfettered freedom to establish campuses and study centers anywhere in
India and foreign countries. Breaking free of conventional higher education concepts, where
university is seen as a cradle of ideas and a means to break the shackles of discriminative society,
the present bill direct our education towards the unruly capitalist markets. They will be away from
the ambit of state control and social justice.
The trend of privatization is evident in the provisions of the bill. In the grab of efficiency and
quality the bill seeks to establish three categories of universities i.e. Public funded, Private funded
and PPP mode. These universities are going to be established under the guise of not-for-profit legal
entities and will be outside the purview of CAG (clause 8 & 9).According to clause 20(2) and (3)
they will appoint their own auditors. According to the bill, surplus in the revenue, after meeting
all expenditures, can only be invested in their growth and development. But it gives freedom to
establish campuses and study centers in foreign countries which will function “in accordance with
provisions of the laws of such foreign country”. So, that the promoters will be able to appropriate
the surplus in revenue acquired from these countries. This construes that these universities will
actually be profit-making entities. Further clause (5) says that there should be strong industry
linkage in these universities. The provision of promoter (Clause 4 (1)) actually implies a private
entity. The promoter has unlimited power and it appoints the board of governors. The governance
of these new universities is structured around an all-powerful board of governors. The universities
are free to constitute their board of governors. This board is responsible for all the policies and
directions of the university, and the management of its affairs. Representation of government is
avoided despite the funding from the central government. The provision of not less than half the
independent person’s members gives opportunity to market leaders a free hand in decision making.
In all cases, the board of governors appoints the vice-chancellor. The board of governors will
decide the annual budget estimates, qualifications and other eligibility criteria and the processes for
appointment to the posts of vice chancellor, professors emeritus, professors, associate professors,
assistant professors and other officers. In sum, the Bill provides for setting up autonomous
universities with no accountability of any kind. Given the experience with private universities and
foreign institutions in India, one wonders how to justify the unlimited freedom that the Bill
guarantees to these institutions.
It is a fact that private universities established under this bill promotes research and innovation only
in applied sciences in place of pure or basic sciences. This would create a situation for the private
player to go for research and innovation in applied sciences only due to its profitability and
commercial value at the cost of pure or basic sciences. Secondly, such universities may get
motivated to undertake research and innovation from market or IPR driven areas. These factors
would also result in private players appropriating the intellectual property rights. Given the focus
on science and technology in today’s time, private players may not give importance to research in
humanities and social sciences. This would lead to a situation where real problems of the society
may not get addressed. A related issue is the marginalization of the existing universities. With the
establishment of innovation universities the existing universities will further suffer in terms of
number of faculties and financial aid.
Regarding the establishment of foreign universities, one question is pertinent. Why universities from

45
abroad would want to come and set up a whole, university in order to promote research in this
country? It  is very clear from the IT  sector that, the multinationals are exploiting the cheap and
best labor force in India. In the case of innovative university also, they would possibly prefer to
set up a lab and use staff at a lower cost. There is no provision for initiating any action in case
of violation of MOA by such universities Taking the easy way out, most of the foreign universities
would attempt to gain entry through the proposed legislation, thereby defeating the very objective
of the earlier Bill on the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill,
2010, the Central Government which has the power of withdrawal and rescission of notification.
Since the area of research and innovation is intrinsic to the development of the higher education
system and also to the national interest, the setting up of these Universities for Research and
Innovation as envisaged in the Bill may be initiated by the State funded Universities only before
permitting the private and foreign universities. If India take a cue from the other countries like US
and China it is emphasized that the research and innovation should be done wholly and solely by
the Government so that the benefits accruing from research and innovations are directly utilized by
the State for the development of the country.
Finally, the provisions of universities for innovation also violating the constitutional right of the
weaker sections and draws questions on social justice in education. The Constitution of India states
in Article 15 (4) that “The State shall promote with special care the educational and economic
interests of the weaker sections of society (in particular, of the scheduled castes and aboriginal
tribes), and shall protect them from social “injustice” and all forms of exploitation. The Article
further states that nothing in Article 15(4) will prevent the nation from helping SCs and STs for
their betterment [‘betterment’ up to the level enjoyed by the average member of other
communities”, The present bill is a blatant violation of the constitutional rights of SCs and STs.
It is silent on the provision of reservation of these categories of students (clause 7). The bill says
that it will be applicable only to public funded universities for innovation and that too in accordance
with the presence of only Indian students. The absence of any provision for mandatory reservation
could accentuate existing socio-economic divide. The freedom given for determination of fee and
provisions for payment of differential salaries and perks for the staff could become avenues for
commercialization of education.
To sum up, this bill is a prelude to the establishment of foreign universities and private players for
establishing their campuses in India. Against the backdrop of the above mentioned reasons I urge
the ministry to stop the implementation of the “The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill,
2012” in any of its forms.
Yours faithfully,
P.K Biju
The Chairman
Standing Committee on HRD,
Parliament of India,
New Delhi.

46
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
I. INTRODUCTION
The Committee understands that traditional universities in our country are so over-
burdened with imparting undergraduate and postgraduate education and managing the
affiliation system that they are not able to focus on research and innovation. Problems
arising out of prevalent legacy systems, governance structures and the socio-cultural milieu
of the existing institutions do not make room for a conducive environment for world-class
research and innovation. In such a scenario, especially in the global context, the proposed
legislation for setting up universities for Research and Innovation is a long-awaited and
welcome step. These universities would be at the fount of making India the global
knowledge hub and set benchmarks for excellence for other institutions of higher learning
through path- breaking research and promoting synergies between teaching and research
quality in teaching, learning and research. (Para 1.11)
The Committee notes that the proposed universities would have complete autonomy
in design of programmes. They would be structured around Schools/Faculties, cutting across
disciplines and decision-making on academic matters would be devolved to School/Faculty.
Introduction of courses would be decided at School/Faculty level based on Peer Group
Academic Audit. School/Faculty would have freedom to prescribe fee structure, provide
scholarships to students based on academic performance as well as fellowships for research
programmes. (Para 1.12)
While agreeing that the proposed universities will give great impetus to quality
research in the higher education sector, the Committee is also aware about the likely
impact on the existing universities, two different categories of universities, one autonomous
and free from any control or monitoring as envisaged for the other category of universities,
having better service conditions for their faculty as compared to the existing universities.
Not only this, establishment of the proposed universities is to be through an altogether
different mechanism, doing away with the scrutiny of Parliament or in other words thro1fgh
a mechanism where Executive has an upper hand over the Legislature. The Committee is
of the view that the proposed legislation has to be considered, taking care of all the aspects,
leaving no doubts or grey areas unaddressed. The Committee, has, accordingly, made every
effort to examine the proposed legislation thoroughly, which is reflected in the succeeding
paragraphs through its observations and recommendations. (Para 1.13)
II. CONSULTATION PROCESS
The Committee is constrained to observe that no serious efforts have been made by
the Department of Higher Education to have wide-ranging consultations with all the
stakeholders. State Governments are the most crucial stakeholders when such a path-
breaking initiative in the higher education sector is being proposed. Discussions with the
Education Ministers in the CABE meetings cannot be considered enough. The Committee is
aware that fourteen states were approached by the Government in 2009, outlining the
proposal to set up world class universities and requesting them to earmark land for the
establishment of publicly funded Universities for Research and Innovation. The Committee
would like to point out that these states were approached in 2009. Since then, the proposed
46

47
legislation has seen some modifications. Details of the meeting held with State Secretaries
of Higher and Technical Education held on 13 April, 2012 have not been shared with the
Committees. Not only this, out of the 14 states, major states like Kerala, Andhra Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan failed to respond. States
representing North-Eastern Region, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and all the UTs
have been kept out of this exercise. Apparently, the main objective behind approaching
these states was for earmarking land for the proposed universities. The Committee is of the
firm view that a national consensus on such a major initiative has to be built upon without
any hindrance. (Para 2.7)
The Committee finds it very strange that a major segment of stakeholders having
rich experience of running universities and also well-known education experts and
academicians, has not been involved in the consultation exercise. Nobody can deny the fact
that their views would have benefited the Government in formulating the proposed
legislation. Interactive session with academicians, scholars and representatives from
industry was definitely not enough. The Committee feels that the Department should have
elicited the views of all the concerned stakeholders before introducing the Bill. Another
major area not explored by the Department is the global scenario with respect to these
universities. A study of the experiences and outcomes of Universities for Research and
Innovation in countries like Australia, America, Germany and China should have been
undertaken in order to have a fair idea of running successfully such universities which
would have helped in promoting innovation and research in the country and also adopted/
adapted the best global practices in research and innovation. (Para 2.8)
III. AREAS OF CONCERN
The Committee also takes note of the opinion of the Planning Commission that
creating new Universities may not make them world-class and innovative. Innovation
Universities need not be planned from scratch. Efforts needed to be concentrated on making
the existing institutions attain world class standards rather than creating new ones. The
Commission has also pointed out that when some universities would be given super status
at the cost of existing universities, it might send wrong signals to existing universities and
create a pre-determined hierarchical structure of universities. Expansion of universities
should be within the frame-work of national university system. The Commission had,
accordingly, suggested that Ministry of HRD could initially take a more pragmatic way of
upgrading/converting a few universities as the collaborative mode of establishing new
Innovation Universities. A few state and central universities may be identified for
upgradation and a few may be started by private sponsors or in PPP mode. (Para 3.6)
The Committee is also seized of the view of AICTE that the existing universities
were currently burdened by the need to conduct UG and PG programmes. Several
universities were also of the affiliating type and hence were burdened by massive
examination requirement and found it difficult to participate in research and innovation due
to lack of time! More funds were also required for them. (Para 3.7)
The Committee is of the view that it would be difficult to convert any existing
university into a University for Research and Innovation, given the basic difference in their
governance structures. In the event of such traditional universities being converted as
universities for research and innovation, it may lead to average students being deprived of
getting UG/PG education, thus defeating the objective of higher education being within the
reach of as many students as possible. It is a fact that most of the universities in the
country are predominantly occupied in the conduct of UG and PG programmes and only few

48
universities are able to concentrate on research and innovation. However, it is equally true
that some of our well-established Central Universities and Research Organisations are doing
commendable work so far as research is concerned. The Committee strongly feels that such
universities need to be identified and then strengthened by giving them more autonomy as
well as by equipping them with the required resources and funds so that they can easily
evolve as Universities for Research and Innovation in a short time period. The Committee
also finds some merit in the views of the stakeholders that setting up of world-class
research and innovation universities would not be an easy task. Viability of setting up of
such universities needs to be looked into. Further, the Committee is in full agreement with
the suggestion of the Planning Commission that a few state and central universities be
identified as universities for research and innovation on an experimental basis with flexible
governance structures and full autonomy. A study of the experience of such converted
universities for research and innovation would give a fair idea about the functioning of the
proposed universities. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Department to
identify a few existing central/state universities with a proven track record in the field of
research and innovation on a’ pilot basis. The global scenario of having such universities
through government funding also needs to be looked into. The Committee would like to
draw the attention of the Department to ‘Project 985’ launched by China in 1998
whereunder nine universities were converted into Research Universities and the progress of
these universities in R & D was so immense that most of them now are recognized world
over for their research output. (Para 3.9)
Shortage of Faculty
The Committee is not convinced by the justification of the Department. Even though the
Department has submitted that the problem of shortage of faculty was being addressed in
several ways, the problem persists and ails most of the universities of the country. The
Committee has been persistently drawing the attention of the Department to this problem
which is becoming more serious day by day. Information available with the Committee
depicts a very grim scenario. Although substantive expansion in the higher education sector
has taken place in the recent times, the position at the ground level remains quite
disturbing. Mere setting up new universities and institutions does not serve any purpose in
the absence of qualified and experience teachers. (Para 3.12)
The Committee observes that the ultimate losers are the students and their future.
Government efforts to attract our young students to teaching profession by providing all
kinds of incentives have failed to result in any visible improvement. With the proposed
universities coming up, having better service conditions and higher pay scales for their
teachers, migration of qualified and experienced teachers from traditional universities would
definitely occur. The Department has, therefore, to make concerted efforts in a balanced
manner so that our existing universities may not suffer at the cost of the proposed
universities. The need of the hour is to attract the bright talent of the country to the
profession of teaching. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to
accelerate its efforts for reducing the shortage of faculty. (Para 3.13)
Apprehension about easy entry of foreign Universities in India
The Committee is inclined to agree with the contention of the stakeholders that in
view of the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010
envisaging regulating the entry and operations of foreign universities in the country, it is
not proper to provide an alternative and comparatively easier route to foreign universities
through this proposed legislation without any proper checks and balances. The Committee

49
would like to point out that under the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation of Entry
and Operations) Bill, 2010, the Central Government has the power of withdrawal and
rescission of notification of foreign education provider and there is a specific penalty
provision also. In contrast, there is only a provision of review of Universities for Research
and Innovation after fifteen years of their establishment and thereafter every tenth year.
There is no provision for initiating any action in case of violation of MOA by such
universities. It does not seem to be a wise move to give entry to foreign universities
without specified criteria for a corpus fund and giving full autonomy in all respects to the
institutions with no proper regulatory and monitoring mechanism for their functioning.
Taking the easy way out, most of the foreign universities would attempt to gain entry
through the proposed legislation, thereby defeating the very objective of the earlier Bill.
(Para 3.16)
The Committee has serious apprehensions about the problem of shortage of faculty
being aggravated once the foreign universities set up their campuses in the country. The
Committee agrees with the stakeholders that with better opportunities, especially with
respect to high remuneration for the faculty, there is high probability that the faculty in
existing universities would be diverted to the foreign universities. The Committee believes
that consequences of such an eventuality need to be thought of beforehand. (Para 3.17)
The Committee is of the view that the idea for giving entry to foreign universities
through this Bill should be deliberated upon taking care of all conceivable aspects. All the
pros and cons of the likely impact of this Bill need to be considered beforehand. Since the
area of research and innovation is intrinsic to the development of the higher education
system and also to the national interest, the setting up of these Universities for Research
and Innovation as envisaged in the Bill may be initiated by the State funded Universities
only before permitting the private and foreign universities. The Committee, taking a clue
from the other countries like US  and China, feels that the research and innovation should
be done wholly and solely by the Government so that the benefits accruing from research
and innovations are directly utilised by the State for the development of the country.
(Para 3.18)
No mechanism in the Bill for monitoring/regulating the Universities for Research and
Innovation
The Committee is of the firm belief that mere evaluation and review of every
University for Research and Innovation after fifteen years after its establishment by a
Committee of Experts cannot take the place of an in built effective monitoring mechanism
for these universities. The Committee feels that such a mechanism has to be put in place
for regulating and monitoring the research done and innovations made by these universities
so that the quality of research and innovation is not compromised at any cost. Moreover,
the need for such a mechanism would be felt more in respect of these universities as they
would be enjoying complete autonomy. Therefore, there has to be a balance of autonomy
and accountability, if these universities are aimed to set benchmarks for excellence and
indulge in path- breaking research which would be beneficial for the society at large. The
Committee also feels that by having two categories of universities, one being made
accountable at every step and having autonomy in name and the other category of
universities not having any accountability, an environment of deep frustration and
dissatisfaction, especially in our teaching community is likely to emerge. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends to the Department that a provision of a healthy regulatory and
monitoring mechanism be included in the Bill for ensuring that the unfettered freedom and
autonomy given to these universities is not misused, at any stage. (Para 3.22)

50
No provision regarding imposition of penalties
The Committee is of the considered view that there might be instances of
contravention of provisions of the proposed Bill or the MoA more so in view of the
autonomy and flexibility envisaged for the Universities for Research and Innovation. The
Committee feels that there is a need to define probable offences in the Bill and also the
corresponding penalties for them. The Committee does not agree with the contention of the
Department that terms and conditions of MoA will take care of contravention of same. The
Committee would like to point out that the MoA would be between the promoter and the
Central Government. Clause 10 pertaining to the MoA is silent on any clause about
contravention of any terms and conditions included therein. The Committee is not inclined
to buy the argument that since each MoA would be different in terms of its scope, aims and
objectives etc., the responsibilities of promoters too would vary in each case as would
grounds for penalties/termination. The Committee strongly feels that a specific provision
outlining the kind of penalties liable to be imposed in case of non-adherence to the terms
and conditions can be easily incorporated in the Bill. Such a provision is required to be
there, keeping in view the kind of autonomy and freedom from bureaucratic control
envisaged for the proposed universities. (Para 3.25)
The Committee would like to point out that in the case of Central Universities,
Visitor, i.e., President of India has the powers to order inspection/inquiry to be conducted
as per the prescribed procedure and whenever required, advise the Vice-Chancellor to take
appropriate action. However, in the new Universities will not be any Visitor. Further, the
Chancellor would be appointed by the Promoter and the Vice-Chancellor by the Board of
Governors. Thus, it is very clear that there is no independent authority which can tackle
contravention of MOA or other provisions of the Bill. Not only this, review of these
universities will take place after fifteen years and thereafter, after every tenth year. The
Committee also fails to understand as to in what manner, provisions of the Prohibition of
Unfair Practices in Technical Educational Institutions, Medical Educational Institutions and
Universities Bill, 2010 can be made applicable to the Universities for Research and
Innovation. These universities are entirely different from the universities established
through an Act of Parliament or State legislation which fall under the ambit of that Act.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that a specific provision pertaining to penalties,
authority having the power to impose the same and the procedure therefor may be
incorporated in the Bill. The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the
Department that a specific clause providing for penalties/revocation in case of violation of
terms of conditions of MOA would be included in the Bill. (Para 3.26)
Absence of Grievance Redressal Mechanism for students and teachers in the Bill
The Committee is not convinced by the response of the Department. The Committee
finds that it is unclear about the role to be played by UGC in the regulation of these
Universities. The Committee would also like to remind the Department that the Higher
Education and Research Bill, 2011 entailed that the regulatory bodies like UGC, AICTE and
NCTE would be subsumed to form an over-arching Commission. As per the Higher Education
and Research Bill, 2012, the Commission will be the designated authority to regulate the
functions of universities. But these universities would be the ones that are not established
through an Act of Parliament and State Legislature. In such an eventuality, there would not
be any mechanism for grievance redressal for students and the grievance redressal of
teachers/researchers, would, thus remain unaddressed. (Para 3.29)

51
The Committee would like to point out that the Central Universities Act, 2009 has
specific provisions like ‘Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against
students’ and ‘Right to appeal’. Not only this, statutes to be made under the Act are to
provide for the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students
and the university and also the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any
employee or student against the action of any officer or authority of the University. The
Committee fails to understand the reasons for not having similar provisions in the proposed
legislation. (Para 3.30)
The Committee is of the view that university autonomy has to be balanced with the
desired levels of accountability in a Parliamentary democracy. These universities would have
to structure a governance framework that not only promotes autonomy but also inculcates
the spirit of accountability. The Committee is well aware of the fact that these universities
are proposed to be structured at a higher scale, having higher standards as well as more
autonomy when compared with traditional universities. However, it is also equally true that
student and teaching community will be the most prominent stakeholders as students will
be doing research under the guidance of their teachers. And for protection of their rights,
there has to be an inbuilt mechanism for redressal of their grievances. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that all the required provisions as incorporated in other related
Acts may be incorporated in the proposed legislation also. (Para 3.31)
Application of laws not barred and contradiction between the existing laws and the proposed
legislation
The Committee takes note of the fact that the definition of the term ‘University’ as
given in the earlier legislations relating to higher education in recent times and the one
entailed in the present Bill would vary as in the former, the universities are to be created
by an Act of Parliament or State Legislature while in the latter, they would be created by
a MOA. Due to such a difference, the existing laws and the recent Bills once enacted cannot
be on the Universities for Research and Innovation. In such an eventuality of contradictory
laws, there would be simply no mechanism for regulating the functioning of the proposed
universities. (Para 3.34)
The Committee observes a number of contradictions which may emerge in the
coming times between the present Bill and the existing laws and other Bills in the pipeline.
Even though applicability of other laws has not been barred in the present Bill, there would
be problems in applicability of existing laws due to the simple fact that the establishment
procedure is entirely different so far as the traditional universities and the proposed
universities are concerned. The Committee  observes that the issue of non-compatibility
between the two different categories of universities can be easily resolved by followi6g the
same mode for setting up the universities for Research and Innovation as made applicable
for the traditional universities. In this way, all the legislations both enacted and at the
finalization stage would be made applicable to the proposed universities. (Para 3.36)
The Committee makes the following observations/recommendations on some
provisions of the BiII:-
IV. CLAUSE 3 : DEFINITIONS
The Committee observes that definition of the term ‘distance education systems’
makes it quite clear that component of limited class-room contact between the teacher and
student is in built into it. From the feedback given by IGNOU, it is also true that the
University is involved in resear ch work also. The Committee would, however, like to point

52
out that research work requires continuous participation and greater involvement of
students which has to be sustained so as to ensure the quality of research. This has to be
borne in mind if distance education mode is being used for conducting research work.
(Para 4.4)
The Committee finds this definition more specific and accurate. As a research and
innovation university would have similar categories of faculties besides having other
professionals such as scientific officers, research officers etc., it would - be proper if each
of these terms are specified more clearly along with qualifications, appointment procedures,
service conditions etc. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that definition of “teachers
of the University” may be clearly spelt out along with other professionals/officers associated
with such universities. (Para 4.8)
V. CLAUSE 4 : ESTABLISHMENT AND INCORPORATION OF UNIVERSITIES FOR
RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION AND CLAUSE 10 : MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
The Committee finds substance in the arguments of the stakeholders. The
Committee feels that even though the proposed Universities for Research and Innovation
are envisaged to be different than the traditional universities, the procedure for their
establishment need not be necessarily different. Establishment of universities has been the
domain of the Parliament and State legislatures which has stood the test of time. Hence,
there is no need to adopt a different approach. With time there has evolved an established
system of parliamentary scrutiny of such legislations and there is no immediate need,
exigency to bypass the well-established system. The Committee does not agree with the
argument that since the area of concern of each such university would be different, the
means of establishment would also vary. The Committee observes that the so called
expedient and flexible procedure will also involve a period of eight months, two months for
putting the vision document on the website of the Ministry and six months to finalise the
MoA. The Committee is also aware that the power given to the Central Government to
declare an institution as a deemed to be university on the recommendations of UGC has led
to a situation where a large number of such institutions elevated as ‘deemed to be
universities’ have proved to be sub-standard institutions. The apex court had to intervene
so as to protect the interests of students. (Para 5.4)
It may not be out of place to mention that Parliament scrutiny involves a very
intensive examination of the proposed legislation by the concerned Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee. The Committee system has evolved into a well-
established mechanism for scrutiny of legislations to be passed by Parliament. It is a well-
known fact that these Committees conduct a very detailed study of draft legislation by
interacting with all the stakeholders and analyzing all the conceivable aspects connected
with the same. Recommendations made by the Committees have compelled the Central
Government to bring out necessary modifications in draft legislations. However, this kind
of scrutiny would not be available in the case of Universities for Research and Innovation.
MoA will be drawn between the promoter and the Central Government. In the name of
Parliamentary scrutiny, it will have to be laid in draft form for thirty days on the Table of
both Houses of Parliament. Nobody can deny the fact that this would be a mere formality
and cannot be compared with the well-established system applicable in respect of other
categories of universities/higher educational institutions. (Para 5.5)
The Committee, therefore, is of the concerted opinion that the existing system of
establishing universities though an Act of Parliament should be made applicable in the case
of the proposed universities also. A Model Act on the lines of the Parent Act governing

53
Central Universities, IITs or NITs can be easily drafted and enacted. The proposed
legislation can very well serve the purpose. The Committee observes that the Bill has
almost all the provisions required for governance and running of these universities.
(Para 5.7)
Committee also takes note of the proviso to sub-clause (4) of clause 4 which
empowers the University for Research and Innovation to establish campuses and study
centres in foreign countries in accordance with the provisions of the laws of such foreign
countries. The Committee finds the option unviable on the premise that how would such
campuses and study centres be regulated under the proposed legislation. Committee’s
attention has been drawn to the fact that existing universities regulations such as DU
regulations do not allow setting up of campuses and study centres even within India. The
Committee also finds the proposal too far fetched and feels that there is no need to set up
campuses or study-centres in foreign countries. (Para 5.8)
VI. CLAUSE 5 : OBJECTS OF UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
The Committee notes that the apprehensions of the stakeholders are three-fold. The
Bill might promote research and innovation in applied sciences in place of pure or basic
sciences. This would create a situation for the private player to go for research and
innovation in applied sciences only due to its profitability and commercial value at the cost
of pure or basic sciences. Secondly, such universities may get motivated to undertake
research and innovation from market or IPR driven areas. Thirdly, given the focus on
science and technology in today’s time, private players may not give importance to research
in humanities and social sciences. The first two factors would also result in private players
appropriating the intellectual property rights and the third would lead to a situation where
real problems of the society may not get addressed. As the Bill envisages three types of
Universities viz. Public funded, Private funded (for which some part of funding would come
from the government) and PPF mode, the areas of research and innovation may get lop-
sided. Private funded universities may focus more on market driven areas than on
humanities and social sciences. Public funded universities may restrict their domain to
humanities and social sciences and PPP mode universities may focus on areas of their
concern. As the Bill seeks to open all fields/areas of knowledge for these universities, there
is a greater probability of objects being inter-mingled. Seen in this context, the Committee
would suggest that objects for each category of university should be clearly spelt.
(Para 6.3)
VII. CLAUSE 6 : FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND
INNOV ATION
The Committee feels that the apprehensions of the stakeholders cannot be
ignored. These universities are intended to enjoy unfettered freedom in financial,
administrative, academic and other matters and would also be having the power to evolve
their own admission criteria, determine the nomenclature of their degrees and other
academic distinctions, irrespective of existing provisions. While enjoying full academic,
management and financial autonomy, there are no provisions provided in the Bill which
would regulate their functioning and make them accountable. In fact, there is no
regulatory mechanism provided in the Bill. This state of affairs presents a grim scenario
as the Bill intends to especially facilitate the entry of private players in the higher
education sector in a big way. It is common. knowledge that participation of private sector
in higher education through deemed to be universities, State Universities, self financed
colleges/institutions etc. has led to large-scale undesirable practices. Even the existing

54
UGC, AICTE rules/regulations have not been able to address such undesirable practices,
especially by private institutions. (Para 7.4)
The Committee is not convinced by the arguments of the Department. There is no
regulatory mechanism provided in the Bill. UGC and AICTE are proposed to be subsumed
by the National Commission for Higher Education under the Higher Education and Research
Bill, 2011. There are no provisions dealing with offences and penalties and there are no
provisions providing for grievance redressal mechanism in the present legislation. The
Committee is also not inclined to agree with the view that unfettered autonomy is a sina-
qua-non for quality institutions to emerge. Universities may have any number of functions
and powers, however, these must be accompanied by a proper regulatory mechanism. Private
sector has already made the higher education system in the country too unwieldy and
unmanageable inspite of there being quite a few regulations. Existing state of affairs itself
requires corrective measures and it should not be overburdened further with the entry of
private players and foreign universities. Not only this, Government has brought forward a
number of legislations with the objective of regulating their functioning, having a well-
structured monitoring mechanism in place and also a Grievance Redressal Mechanism.
(Para 7.6)
Committee’s attention was drawn to the pr ovision of the Higher Education and
Research Bill, 2011 wherein the proposed Commission has been empowered to specify norms
and standards in higher education for all the universities including state universities.
Similarly, under the Prohibition of Unfair Practices in Technical Educational Institutions,
Medical Educational Institutions and Universities Bill, 2010, norms and procedures for
publishing prospectus, uploading information on website and many other matters will be lay
down. Both these previous legislations laid down standards and norms for providing a
mechanism for regulation. The Committee is unable to understand as to why such a
mechanism cannot be provided under the proposed legislation also. Both autonomy and
accountability have to go side by side so that required checks and balances are inbuilt into
the proposed legislation which is going for a path-breaking initiatives. The Committee
accordingly, recommends that along with the powers and manifold functions envisaged for
these universities, effective monitoring and regulatory mechanism should be put in place
under the proposed legislation also. (Para 7.7)
VIII. CLAUSE 7 : UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION TO BE OPEN TO
ALL
The Committee takes note of the following proviso to section 7 relating to
‘University open to all castes, creed, race or class of the Central Universities Act, 2009:-
“Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making
special provisions for the employment or admission of women, persons with disabilities or of
persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and educationally backward classes of
citizens”.
The Committee is of the view that suitable provision with respect to women, persons
with disabilities and persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society may be
incorporated in this clause of the Bill. (Para 8.4)
IX. CLAUSE 9 : CRITERIA FOR ESTABLISHING A UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND
INNOV ATION
The Committee finds the issues raised by the stakeholders to be of substance. The

55
entry of private and foreign players in the research and innovation area may result in many
undesirable consequences, especially when there are no regulatory mechanisms provided in
the Bill to ensure that companies, societies or trusts are not flouting the required rules/
regulations while establishing and running such universities. Universities established by
companies, societies or trusts would essentially fall in the category of private funded
universities for which greater autonomy is envisaged in the Bill. These universities will also
be financed by the Central Government in the form of land, contribution to capital
investment, grants for supporting research and the promotion and development of higher
education. Inspite of all this, the Central Government will not have any monitoring or
regulatory control over them. Review by an Expert Committee after fifteen years of
establishment and after every tenth year cannot be equated with a well-structured and
effective monitoring mechanism. There are no provisions under which the Central
Government or any regulatory authority would inspect the affairs of these universities. The
Committee strongly feels that there is no exigency to involve private players in establishing
universities for research and innovation in the country. In the first instance, only the
public-funded universities may be allowed to establish such universities. (Para 9.4)
As for the time-frame criteria for establishing universities for research and
innovation the Committee feels that instead of time-frame it should be performance of the
university. There would be other factors which could be taken into account for determining
criteria such as academic quality, accreditation rating, infrastructure, intellectual resource,
availability of research facilities etc. (Para 9.5)
The Committee also feels that there is no need for providing entry of foreign
universities to establish universities for research and innovation in India. When the
proposed legislation lacks provision for regulatory mechanism even in the case of private
funded universities, how the foreign universities would be subject to regulatory mechanism,
is beyond comprehension. The Committee’ is of the view that if foreign universities are to
be allowed in India, it should be through the Foreign Educational Institutions (Regulation
of Entry and Operations) Bill, 2010 and not under the proposed legislation. (Para 9.6)
The Committee is of the view that the Universities for Research and Innovation are
envisaged to be at a higher level in all respects when compared with the traditional
universities. These universities would set benchmarks for excellence for other institutions
of higher learning, path-breaking research and promoting synergies between teaching and
research to create institutions universally recognized for quality in teaching, learning and
research. The Committee, therefore, feels that these universities should remain in the
domain of Government Sector at least in the initial stages. This has been the scenario when
we look at countries like China, USA and Australia. Simultaneously, Government should
also take the initiative to identify premier research institutions and well-established
industry houses to be Universities for Research and Innovation. The Committee strongly
feels that our research organizations have been doing pioneering research work in very
diverse fields and in the process making great contributions for the development and growth
of the country. Their recognition as Universities for Research and Innovation with full
support from the Government would be a step in the right direction which is long awaited.
(Para 9.7)
Besides the foreign universities, the Committee does not find Indian Universities
having been there for 25 years, inspite of being well-established would be in a position to
set up another university, that too envisaged to operate at a higher level, reason being, our
universities inspite of being well-established, are also facing all kinds of constraints- be it
lack of funds, inadequate infrastructure or lack of qualified and experienced faculty. To

56
expect from them, to set up another university having higher standards and envisaged to
do high quality research work is indeed a tall order. (Para 9.8)
X. CLAUSE : 13 BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF UNVIERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND
INNOV ATION
The Committee feels that the governance structure as proposed in this clause is not
democratic and entails top down approach. No model statute for governance or frame-work
for Board of Governors has been envisaged in the Bill. The Committee feels that BoG
should comprise primarily of members from academia and at least half of its members
should be appointed through democratic process from amongst the faculty members of the
university. The number of nominated independent persons should be significantly less than
the number of teachers represented in the BoG so as to justify the objects with which such
university shall be established. The role of creator of knowledge and innovation should be
given due importance in the governance structure. (Para 10.3)
XI. CLAUSE 17 : RESEARCH COUNCILS
The Committee, however, would like the Department to bring clarity in the provision
as it is not clear how the Research Council and Academic Board would complement each
other. Further, the Research Council should report to only one authority so that there is
no conflict between the BOG and Academic Board. (Para 11.3)
CLAUSE 18 : THE CHANCELLOR, VICE-CHANCELLOR AND OTHER OFFICERS OF THE
UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
The Committee observes that both the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor are important
functionaries of a university and they should not be at the mercy of promoters. The
Committee was in full agreement with the suggestion of the stakeholders that Chancellor
and Vice-Chancellor should be appointed by a Joint Committee of academies of different
fields. This would be more transparent and also free the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor
from pressures of promoters and help in making these universities march towards the path
of excellence. (Para 12.4)
CLAUSE 20 : GRANTS BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FOR SUPPORTING HIGHER
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Government and observes that
the grants given by the Central Government to any university whether public or private
should be accounted for and there should be some audit mechanisms evolved apart from the
above mentioned Research and Academic Audit Peer Groups for accountability of private
universities not funded by Government grants. (Para 13.4)
CLAUSE 29 : PROTECTION AND UTILISATION OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY BY
UNIVERSITY FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
The Committee has been given to understand that the Department has taken into
consideration the provisions of other related Acts relating to intellectual property while
incorporating Chapter V relating to ‘Protection and Utilization of Intellectual Property
emerging from public funded research. A proviso has also been added to this Chapter as
per which, the provision of Chapter V shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
any other law for the time being in force, relating to intellectual property. The

57
Committee, however, feels that a review of Chapter V dealing with intellectual property
may be undertaken in consultation with the concerned Ministries so as to eliminate any
doubt or ambiguity which may lead to unwelcome developments once the Bill was enacted.
(Para 14.5)
XV. CLAUSE 38 : REVIEW OF UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
The Committee is not convinced by the reply of the Government and recommends
that the review and evaluation of the Universities for Research and Innovation should be
done afterl0 years as 15 years is a long time. The Committee is also of the opinion that
the Government should nominate a member in the review Committee so that there is an
impartial assessment or it should appoint a body like NAAC for assessment of the URIs.
However, this provision alone would not be adequate enough. An effective monitoring
mechanism ensuring an element of accountability will also have to be incorporated in the
Bill. (Para 15.5)
XVI. CLAUSE 40 : APPLICATION OF OTHER LAWS NOT BARRED
Clause 6 (2) empowers the proposed universities to decide all matters related to their
functioning which include imparting instructions, making provisions for research and
innovations, awarding degrees, diplomas etc., appointing officers/staff, creating
administrative and other posts, appointing guest faculty, determining and receiving fees and
other charges, establishing chairs of studies, establishing campuses and study centres
overseas, acquiring, holding, investing, managing or disposing of movable/immovable
property, defining standards of admission to the university, including examination,
evaluation etc., establishing companies or incubation centres. The Committee notes that
many of the powers proposed to be given to these universities are not there with the
existing universities. Clause 40 clearly stipulates that Universities for Research and
Innovation will have all the autonomy to decide not only all the crucial matters but also
some additional powers having wider implications. No existing law in force can be made
applicable to these universities so far clause 6 (2) is concerned. The only saving grace is
that in case of any dispute between these universities and a regulatory authority constituted
to determine and co-ordinate standards of higher education, the same will be referred to a
three-member Committee where again two members will be representing such university
and the third member will be nominated by the regulatory body. It is not clear as to which
authority would be constituting this Committee and who will chair it. Another pertinent
issue which has drawn the attention of the Committee is that from the wording of clause
40, it seems that only the existing laws which are in force would be applicable on the
proposed legislation. In other words, the Bill would be outside the purview of legislations yet
to be enacted dealing with Educational Tribunals, unfair practices and over arching
Commission of Higher Education. Even otherwise all these laws are meant for existing
Universities set up through an Act of Parliament or State legislation. The Committee views
this with serious concern and directs the Department to remove all ambiguities in clause
40. (Para 16.3)
XVII. CLAUSE 42: STATUTES, HOW MADE
The Committee observes that under the Central Universities Act, 2009 which has
been enacted to establish and incorporate universities for teaching and research in various
states, the first statutes have been included in the Act itself. It is true that the Executive
Council of the University may make new or additional statutes or may amend or repeal the
statutes. But every new statute or addition to the statutes or any amendment or repeal of

58
a statute shall require the assent of the Visitor (President of India) who may assent thereto
or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for re-consideration. However, no such
provision is there in the proposed legislation. Clause 42 simply states that the Board of
Governors of every University for Research and Innovation shall make, amend or repeal
statutes. The Committee is of the view that model statutes ideally should have been
incorporated in the Bill itself and also there should be an independent authority to have the
final view to deciding making, amending or repealing of statutes. (Para 17.2)
XVIII. GENERAL
The Committee observes that provisions relating to conditions of service of
employees, etc, procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students,
right appeal, provident and pension funds are missing in the proposed legislation. The
Committee finds no justification for non-inclusion of such provisions which are primarily
meant to protect the interests of students and teachers/employees. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that these provisions may be suitably incorporated in the Bill.
(Para 18.1)
XIX. CONCLUSION
It is an undisputed fact that our country is yet to  make its presence felt in the world
so far as pioneering research work is concerned. The Committee is also aware that quite
a few of our universities and research organizations have been doing commendable work
inspite of persistent constraints being faced by them. Lack of funds resulting in the absence
of minimum infrastructure, severe shortage of qualified and experienced faculty and also no
autonomy even in issues strictly falling under their domain can be cited as the main
impediments in their functioning. In such a scenario, the objective behind the proposed
legislation is laudable and needs to  be supported by all concerned. The Committee also
welcomes the initiative of the Government for proposing the new category of specialized
universities. However, the Committee, after making an in-depth analysis of the Bill and its
likely impact has drawn the attention of Government to  the shortcomings, lack of required
provisions and contradictions observed in the Bill in the Report. The Committee would
appreciate that necessary modifications are brought out in the Bill as recommended by it.
(Para 19.1)

59
MINUTES

III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday,
the 6 th November, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Tarun Vijay
6. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Sivasami C.
10. Shrimati Helen Davidson
11. Dr. Charles Dias
12. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
13. Shri Virender Kashyap
14. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
16. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
17. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
18. Shri M.K. Raghavan
19. Shri M.l. Shanavas
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
61

62
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Examination of The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012
(I) Department of Higher Education
(i) Shri Ashok Thakur, Secretary
(ii) Shri Anant Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary
(iii) Shri S.S. Mantha, Chairman, AICTE
(iv) Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, UGC
(v) Shri Harpreet Singh, Director
(II) Ministry of Law and Justice
(i) Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary & LC
(ii) Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee ***
***     ***     *** and to have a preliminary discussion with Secretary, Department of Higher
Education on the Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012.
3. ***          ***          ***          *** The Chairman and Members discussed some
areas of concerns and various other aspects of the Bill and also gave their views/suggestions. The
Committee directed the Secretariat to prepare a draft report on the Bill to be considered and
adopted in its next meeting.
4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Higher
Education on the Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012. The Members raised queries
which were replied to by the Secretary. The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the
Department for their written comments.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

63
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the
19th December, 2012 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramchandra Khuntia
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Shri Derek O’ Brien
6. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shrimati Helen Davidson
11. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
12. Shri Virender Kashyap
13. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
14. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
15. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
16. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
17. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012
(I) IGNOU
(i) Prof. Gopinath Pradhan, Vice-Chancellor
(ii) Prof. Ravindra Kumar, Director
63

64
(II) AMITY UNIVERSITY, UTTAR PRADESH
(i) Dr. D.V . Singh, Visitor, AUUP
(ii) Shri Atul Chauhan, Chancellor, AUUP & President, RBEF
(iii) Dr. Sunil Saran, Chairman, Amity International Centre for Post Harvest Technology
and Cold Chain Management
(iv) Dr. Balvinder Shukla, Acting Vice-Chancellor, AUUP
(v) Dr. Ashok K. Chauhan, Founder President
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the representatives of the IGNOU and Amity University, Uttar Pradesh on the
Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012.
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Vice-Chancellor of IGNOU and
representatives of Amity University, Uttar Pradesh on the Universities for Research and Innovation
Bill, 2012. The members raised certain queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The
Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to both these Universities for their written
comments.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 10.55. 
A.M.

65
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
3rd January, 2013 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramchandra Khuntia
3. Shri Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
5. Shri Tarun Vijay
6. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
8. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Suresh Angadi
10. Shri P.K. Biju
11. Shri Sivasami C.
12. Shrimati Helen Davidson
13. Dr. Charles Dias
14. Shri Virender Kashyap
15. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
16. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
17. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
18. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati  Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012
(I) Jawaharlal Nehru University
(i) Prof. Sudhir K. Sopory, Vice-Chancellor
(ii) Professor (Mrs) Sudha Pai, Rector
65

66
(II) Delhi Technological University
(i) Prof. P.B. Sharma, Vice-Chancellor
(ii) Dr. Shailesh Mani Pandey, Assistant Professor
(III) Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University
(i) Prof. Dilip K. Bandyopadhyay, Vice-Chancellor
(IV) Jamia Milia Islamia
(i) Shri Najeeb lung, Vice-Chancellor
(V) Indian Council of Universities
(i) Shri Ashok Mittal, Member, Chancellor, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara
(ii) Dr. R.D. Kaushik, Member, Director, Lovely Professional University, Delhi
(VI) Education Promotion Society for India
(i) Dr. H. Chaturvedi, Alternate President, EPSI, Director, BIMTECH, Greater Noida
(ii) Shri P.K. Gupta, Immediate Past President, EPSI Chancellor, Sharda University,
Greater. Noida
(iii) Prof. G.D. Sharma, Member, President, Society for Education and Economic
Development, New Delhi
(iv) Shri P. Palanivel, Executive Secretary, EPSI
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Vice Chancellors of Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi
Technological University, Jamia Milia Islamia and Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University and
the representatives of Education Promotion Society for India and Indian Council of Universities on
the Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012.
3 . *** *
The Chairman further added that with respect to the Universities for Research and
Innovation Bill, 2012, the Committee was still in the process of hearing the views of the
stakeholders and would also hold clause-by-clause consideration, prior to finalizing its observations
and recommendations on the Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012. The deadline for
presentation of Report on the Bill was 31st January, 2013. The Committee felt that it needed more
time for presentation of Report on the Bill and decided to seek extension of time for it. The
Committee, therefore, authorized the Chairman of the Committee to seek extension of time till
28
th February, 2013 from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for presenting a Report on the
Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012.
*** *** *** ***
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Vice Chancellors of Jawaharlal Nehru
University, Delhi Technological University, Jamia Milia Islamia and Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha
University and the representatives of Indian Council of Universities and Education Promotion
Society for India on the Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012. The Chairman and
members raised queries which were replied to by the witnesses. The Committee also decided to
forward a questionnaire to the witnesses for their written comments.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 6.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

67
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.30 P.M. on Friday, the
11th January, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramchandra Khuntia
3. Shri Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
6. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Suresh Angadi
8. Shri P.K. Biju
9. Shri Sivasami C.
10. Shrimati Helen Davidson
11. Dr. Charles Dias
12. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
13. Shri Virender Kashyap
14. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
15. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
16. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
17. Shri Sheesh Ram ala
18. Shri M.K. Raghavan
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati  Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012
(I) University Grants Commission (Ugc)
(i) Prof. Ved Prakash, Chairman, UGC
67

68
(II) All India Council For Technical Education (AICTE)
(i) Prof. S.S. Mantha, Chairman, AICTE
(III) Delhi University (DU)
(i) Prof. Dinesh Singh, Vice-Chancellor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Chairmen of University Grants Commission, All India Council
for Technical Education and Vice-Chancellor, Delhi University on the Universities for Research and
Innovation Bill, 2012.
3. The Committee then heard the views of the Chairmen of UGC and AICTE and Vice-
Chancellor of Delhi University on the Bill. The members raised some queries which were replied
to by the witnesses. The Committee decided to forward questionnaire to the witnesses for their
written comments.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30. 
P.M.

69
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the
22nd January, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramchandra Khuntia
3. Shri Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.K. Biju
7. Dr. Charles Dias
8. Shri Virender Kashyap
9. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
10. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
11. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
12. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
13. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
14. Shri M.I. Shanavas
15. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Committee Officer
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012
(I) Panjab University
(i) Prof. Arun K. Grover, Vice-Chancellor, Panjab University
69

70
(II) Hnb Garhwal (Central) University
(i) Prof. S.K. Singh, Vice-Chancellor, HNB Garhwal (Central) University
(III) Professors From JNU
(i) Dr. A.K. Ramakrishnan, Centre for West Asian Studies, JNU;
(ii) Shri C.P. Chandrasekhar, School of Social Sciences, JNU;
(iii) Shri Saumen Chattopadhyay, Zakir Hussain Centre for Educational Studies, JNU;
(IV) Delhi Science Forum
(i) Shri Prabir Purkayastha
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of the Vice Chancellors of Panjab University, Hemwati Nandan
Bahuguna Garhwal (Central) University, Professors from Jawaharlal Nehru University and a
representative from the Delhi Science Forum on the Universities for Research and Innovation
Bill, 2012.
3. The Committee then heard the views of the Vice Chancellors of Panjab University and
Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal (Central) University on the Universities for Research and
Innovation Bill, 2012. The members raised some queries which were replied to’ by the witnesses.
The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the witnesses for their written comments.
(The witnesses then withdrew).
4. The Committee thereafter heard the views of the Professors from lawaharlal Nehru
University and the representative of Delhi Science Forum on the Universities for Research and
Innovation Bill, 2012. The members raised some queries which were replied to by the witnesses.
The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the witnesses for their written comments.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40. 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matter.

71
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the
30th January, 2013 in Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ramchandra Khuntia
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
6. Shri Baishnab Parida
7. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Suresh Angadi
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Sivasami C.
11. Dr. Charles Dias
12. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
13. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
14. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
15. Shri M.K. Raghavan
16. Shri M.I. Shanavas
17. Shri Bhoopendra Singh
18. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012
I. Shri Vijendra Sharma, Ex-President, DUTA
71

72
II. Department of Higher Education
(i) Shrimati Amita Sharma, Additional Secretary
(ii) Shri R.P. Sisodia, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the views of Shri Vijendra Sharma, Ex-President, DUTA and Additional Secretary,
Department of Higher Education on the Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012.
3. The Committee, then, heard the views of Shri Vijendra Sharma, Ex-President DUTA on the
Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012. The members raised some queries which were
replied to by the witness. The Committee decided to forward a questionnaire to the witness for
his written comments. (The witness then withdrew).
4. The Committee, thereafter, heard the views of the Additional Secretary Department of
Higher Education on the areas of concern identified by the Committee during its deliberations with
stakeholders on the Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012. The Chairman and
members raised some queries which were replied to by the witnesses.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40. 
P.M.

73
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 2.30 P.M. on Thursday, the
7th February, 2013 in Committee Room No. ‘B’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
3. Shri Tarun Vijay
4. Shri Baishnab Parida
5. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
6. Shri N. Balaganga
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P.K. Biju
8. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
9. Shri Virender Kashyap
10. Shri Prasanta Kumar Majumdar
11. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
12. Shri Sheesh Ram Ola
13. Shri M.K. Raghavan
14. Shri M.I. Shanavas
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
LIST OF WITNESSES
The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Amendment Bill, 2012
Ministry of Women and Child Development
(i) Shri Prem Narain, Secretary
(ii) Ms. Rugmini Parmar, Economic Advisor
(iii) Shri Amit Ray, Director
73

74
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to have a clause-by-clause discussion on the Universities for Research and Innovation
Bill, 2012.
*** *** *** ***
3. The Committee then had a clause-by-clause discussion on the Universities for Research and
Innovation Bill, 2012. Members of the Committee gave their views and suggestions on various
provisions of the Bill. The Committee, then, directed the Secretariat to prepare a draft report on
the Bill.
4 . *** *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20. 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

75
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 4.00 P.M. on Thursday, the
21st February, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Oscar Fernandes — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna
4. Shri Tarun Vijay
5. Shri Derek O’ Brien
6. Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem
7. Shri Baishnab Parida
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Suresh Angadi
9. Shri P.K. Biju
10. Shri Mahadev Singh Khandela
11. Shri Kapil Muni Karwariya
12. Shri Virender Kashyap
13. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup
14. Shri Raghuvir Singh Meena
15. Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
16. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla
17. Shri Manicka Tagore
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
Shrimati  Harshita Shankar, Assistant Director
2. * * * *
75
*** Relates to other matter.

76
3. The Committee, then, considered and adopted the draft 248 th Report on the Universities for
Research and Innovation Bill, 2012. Shri P.K. Biju, M.P., Lok Sabha submitted his note of dissent
on the Bill.
4 . *** *
5. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned five Reports in both the Houses
of Parliament on 26
th February, 2013. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence
Chaudhary Munabbar Saleem and in the absence of both, Shri Baishnab Parida to present the
Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Balkrishna K. Shukla and in his absence Shri Manicka Tagore
to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.25. 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

77
ANNEXURES

79
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 61 of 2012
THE UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION BILL, 2012
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent, commencement and applicability.
2. Declaration of Universities for Research and Innovation as institutions of national
importance.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
U
NIVERSITIES  FOR R ESEARCH  AND I NNOVATION
4. Establishment and incorporation of Universities for Research and Innovation.
5. Objects of University for Research and Innovation.
6. Functions and powers of University for Research and Innovation.
7. University for Research and Innovation to be open to all.
8. University to be a distinct legal entity not for profit.
9. Criteria for establishing a University for Research and Innovation.
10. Memorandum of Agreement.
11. Laying of memorandum of agreement before both Houses of Parliament.
12. Publication of memorandum of agreement and its date of effect.
CHAPTER III
G
OVERNANCE  OF U NIVERSITIES  FOR R ESEARCH  AND I NNOVATION
13. Board of Governors of University for Research and Innovation.
14. Powers and functions of Board of Governors.
15. Academic Board.
16. Faculties or schools of studies.
17. Research Council.
18. The Chancellor, Vice-Chancellor and other officers of University for Research and
Innovation.
19. Autonomy over appointments of academic Staff.

80
CHAPTER IV
GRANTS, A CCOUNTS AND A UDIT
CLAUSES
20. Grants by Central Government for supporting higher education and research.
21. University Endowment Fund.
22. Books of account to be kept by University for Research and Innovation.
23. Annual accounts and balance sheet.
24. Appointment, powers and duties of auditors.
25. Report of Vice-Chancellor.
26. Annual Meeting of Board of Governors to consider statement of accounts.
27. Annual report.
CHAPTER V
P
ROTECTION  AND U TILISATION  OF I NTELLECTUAL  P ROPERTY  E MERGING  FROM
PUBLIC F UNDED  R ESEARCH
28. Disclosure of intellectual property created out of public funded research and vesting
of title of such property.
29. Protection and utilisation of intellectual property by University for Research and
innovation.
30. Powers of Central Government in relation to public funded property.
CHAPTER VI
SPECIAL  PROVISIONS  REGARDING  P UBLIC F UNDED  U NIVERSITIES  FOR
RESEARCH  AND I NNOV ATION
31. Provisions of this Chapter to apply to Universities for Research and Innovation
entirely funded by Central Government.
32. Board of Governors of public funded University for Research and Innovation.
33. Visitor.
34. Grants by Central Government for development and maintenance of public funded
Universities for Research and Innovation.
35. Statement of accounts and audit of public funded University for Research and
Innovation.
36. Annual report of each public funded University for Research and Innovation.
37. Returns and information to Central Government.
CHAPTER VII
R
EVIEW OF U NIVERSITIES  FOR R ESEARCH  AND I NNOVATION
38. Review of Universities for Research and Innovation.

81
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
CLAUSES
39. Proceedings of authorities of bodies not invalidated by vacancies.
40. Application of other law not barred.
41. Power of Central Government to make rules.
42. Statutes, how made.
43. Power to make Ordinances.
44. Laying of rules before Parliament.
45. Power to remove difficulties.

AS I NTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 61 of 2012
THE UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
BILL, 2012
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment and incorporation of Universities
for Research and Innovation and for enabling them to emerge
as centres for ecosystems to develop as hubs of education,
research and innovation and to promote research and
innovation in learning and design, development and delivery
of solutions and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Universities for Research
and Innovation Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act.
83
Short title,
extent,
commencement
and applicability.

84
(4) It applies to the Universities for Research and Innovation,
declared as such, and so notified by the Central Government.
2. Whereas the objects of every University for Research and
Innovation as is established under this Act are of national
importance, it is hereby declared that every such University for
Research and Innovation is an institution of national importance.
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Academic Board” means the Academic Board
constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 15;
(b) “Board of Governors” means the Board of
Governors constituted under section 13;
(c) “Board of Studies”, in relation to a University for
Research and Innovation, means the Board of Studies of a
Faculty or School of Studies of the University;
(d) “Chancellor” and “Vice-Chancellor”, mean,
respectively, the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor of a
University for Research and Innovation;
(e) “Commission” means the University Grants
Commission established under section 4 of the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956, or its successor body;
(f) “distance education systems” means the system of
imparting education through any means of communication,
such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses,
seminars, contact programmes or a combination of any two
or more of such means and includes imparting of education
through multiple media and technologies for interactive multi-
directional educational delivery involving only limited class
room contact between the teacher and student;
(g) “intellectual property” refers to patents, trade mark,
copyright, design, semiconductor layout, geographical
indications and plant variety as respectively defined under the
Patents Act, 1970, the Trade Marks Act, 1999, the Copyright
Act, 1957, the Designs Act, 2000, the Semiconductor
Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Act, 2000, the Geographical
Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999
and the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights
Act, 2001, or any other law governing right to intellectual
property;
(h) “intellectual property creator” means the person
employed or engaged by a University for Research and
Innovation for research and development and who created the
public funded intellectual property;
Declaration of
Universities
for Research
and Innovation
as institutions
of national
importance.
3 of 1956.
Definitions.
39 of 1970.
47 of 1999.
14 of 1957.
16 of 2000.
37 of 2000.
48 of 1999.
53 of 2001.

85
(i) “knowledge clusters” mean local innovation systems
in an agglomeration of research and production oriented
organisations, for new learning, design, development and
delivery of solutions, where first applications of knowledge
through research and innovation are obtained leading to value
creation.
(j) “memorandum of agreement” means a memorandum
of agreement referred to in section 10;
(k) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(l) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(m) “programme of study” means a course or
programme of study leading to the award of a degree or a
diploma by a University for Research and Innovation;
(n) “promoter” means an organisation or university
fulfilling the criteria specified in section 9 for being a
promoter of a University for Research and Innovation;
(o) “public funded intellectual property” means an
intellectual property which is the outcome of research and
development in a University for Research and Innovation for
which the Central Government, or any agency established, by
or under any law or otherwise by the Central Government,
has provided grants under sub-section ( 1) of section 20;
(p) “public funded University” means a University for
Research and Innovation where the entire capital investment
for its establishment is provided, directly or indirectly, by the
Central Government;
(q) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the
Statutes and the Ordinances, for the time being in force, of
a University for Research and Innovation ;
(r) “teachers of the University” means the persons as
may be, by whatever designation, appointed for imparting
instructions, teaching or conducting research in a University
for Research and Innovation and are designated as teachers
by the Ordinances;
(s) “University for Research and Innovation” means
University notified by the Central Government under sub-
section ( 1) of section 4 and the expression “University shall
be construed accordingly;
(t) “utilisation” means the manufacture of a composition
or product, the practice of a process or method, operation of
a machine or system, or commercialisation thereof.

86
CHAPTER II
UNIVERSITIES  FOR R ESEARCH AND I NNOVATION
4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification,
establish for the purposes of this Act, one or more Universities
for Research and Innovation each with such name as may be
specified therein and different notifications may be issued for
the establishment of different Universities for Innovation.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, specify
the name and headquarters of every such University for
Research and Innovation established by it under sub-
section ( 1).
(3) Every University for Research and Innovation
established under sub-section ( 1) shall be a body corporate by
the name as specified under sub-section ( 2) having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property,
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by
that name, sue or be sued.
(4) The jurisdiction of each University for Research and
Innovation shall extend to the whole of India:
Provided that each University for Research and
Innovation may, if it so deems fit, establish campuses and
study centres in foreign countries in accordance with the
provisions of the laws of such foreign country.
5. (1) Every University for Research and Innovation shall, at
the time of its establishment and in recognition of the fact that
knowledge created is not pure discipline based or propositional but
also emerges in response to problems of society, focus on an area
or areas with problems of significance and build an ecosystem of
research and teaching around different related disciplines and fields
of study which are relevant thereto, searching for solutions that are
globally valid and in the process develop education at undergraduate
and higher levels.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 1), the objects of every
University for Research and Innovation shall be to–
(a) constantly aspire for attainment of the pinnacle of
knowledge and learning by undertaking innovations in design,
development and delivery through research and learning;
(b) attempt, through research and application of
knowledge to provide a path for mankind free from
deprivation and want;
(c) seek to understand and appreciate nature and its
laws for the well-being and happiness of present and future
generations;
Establishment
and
Incorporation
Universities
for Research
and
Innovation.
Objects of
University for
Research and
innovation.

87
(d) seek and cultivate new knowledge, to engage
vigorously and fearlessly, and to interpret old knowledge and
beliefs in the light of new needs and discoveries;
(e) provide society with innovators and competent men
and women to meet knowledge needs of the society and
impart training to professionals, specialists, scientists and
researchers for the purpose, who will also be cultivated
individuals, imbued with a sense of social purpose performing
service to the nation and to humanity and cultivating the right
moral and intellectual values;
(f) develop competent and capable youth imbued with
the spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship with the social
and environmental orientation to provide global leadership for
the future;
(g) strive to promote equality and social justice and to
reduce social and cultural differences through diffusion of
quality education;
(h) provide an ambience of learning that celebrates
international and comparative perspectives;
(i) promote and provide transparency of highest order
in the matters related to admission, appointment at various
positions, academic evaluation, administration and finance;
(j) connect the learning and research in such University
with the community;
(k) facilitate dissemination of the fruits of research in
society through promotion of robust linkages with economy
and civil society and through practice;
(l) focus on problems of society or on an area or areas
with problems of significance, create knowledge clusters and
build an ecosystem of research and teaching in different
disciplines and fields of study;
(m) endeavour for solutions which are globally valid
and in the process to develop education at undergraduate and
higher levels; and
(n) build linkages with research institutions and industry
in order to synergise research and innovation efforts and to
create innovation clusters for maximum gains.
(3) Every University for Research and Innovation may, for the
purpose of achievement of the objects specified in this section,
provide facilities for instructions, teaching, research and innovation
experience of such standards that match or surpass the needs of
global competitiveness of the education system in various fields of
knowledge.

88
6. (1) Every University for Research and Innovation shall
exercise autonomy in financial administration, academic and other
matters in regard to the achievement of its objects.
(2) Every University for Research and Innovation shall
discharge its functions and exercise the following powers,
namely:—
(i) impart instructions in such branches of learning
consistent with its objects as such University may, from time
to time determine;
(ii) make provisions for research and innovations for
the advancement and dissemination of knowledge and
experiencing designing, developing and delivery of solutions;
(iii ) award degrees, diplomas and other academic
distinctions;
(iv) institute teaching including distance education
systems, research or other academic positions, required by
such university with such designations as it may deem fit;
(v) appoint officers and staff on such tenure, term or
otherwise to teaching, research and academic faculties as it
may deem fit;
(vi) organise, promote and conduct research in such
University or in collaboration or association with any other
University, institution of research or body corporate;
(vii) appoint persons working in any other University or
academic institution or involved in research of significance in
any industry or any practitioner as adjunct, guest or visiting
teacher of the University on such terms and for such duration
as the University may decide in consultation with the other
University or institution;
(viii) create administrative and other posts and to make
appointments thereto;
(ix) make provision for dissemination of knowledge
emerging from research and for that purpose to enter into
such arrangements, including consultancy and advisory
services, with other institutions, industry, civil society or
other organisations, as such University may deem necessary;
(x) to determine and receive payment of fees and other
charges, as such University may deem fit, from students and
any other person, institution or body corporate for
instructions and other services, including training, consultancy
and advisory services provided by such University;
(xi) establish chairs of studies through benefactions,
donations and collaborations for seminal research in areas of
knowledge;
Functions and
powers of
University for
Research and
Innovation.

89
(xii) establish campuses and study centres overseas in
accordance with the law of the host country applicable to
establishment and operation of such campuses and study
centres subject to the provisions of this Act;
(xiii) receive benefactions, bequests, grants, donations
and gifts from any person;
(xiv) acquire, hold, invest, manage or dispose of any
movable or immovable property for the purposes of such
University;
(xv) establish and maintain such infrastructure as may
be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of the
objects of the University;
(xvi) define standards of admission to the University,
including examination, evaluation or any other method as
determined by the University;
(xvii) provide consultancy and advisory services and
for that purpose to enter into such arrangements with other
institutions or bodies as it may deem necessary;
(xviii) to do all such other acts and things as may be
necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or
any of its objects;
(xix) to establish companies or incubation centres for
gainful applications of knowledge and innovations or engage in
partnerships with such agencies or entities, which shall
undertake research and innovations for value creation to
translate the results of research to products and processes
useful to society and industry.
(3) For the purposes of determination of standards in higher
education, every University for Research and Innovation shall
determine and declare, on its website, the standards of such
education sought to be provided in such University in its teaching,
learning and research:
Provided that the standards so determined and declared by
such University shall be higher than the minimum standards in the
relevant field of knowledge as specified by or under any other law:
Provided further that where no standards have been
determined by or under any law in the relevant field of knowledge,
the standards so determined and declared by the University shall aim
to maximize relative global scales in the relevant field of knowledge:
Provided also that where a dispute arises between such
University and a regulatory authority constituted by any law to
determine and coordinate standards of higher education in any
discipline or field of knowledge, such dispute shall be referred to a
committee of three persons of international eminence and standing
of whom—

90
(i) one person shall be nominated by the regulatory
body impugning the standards;
(ii) one person shall be nominated by such University
for Research and Innovation, which has determined the
standards so impugned;
(iii) one person shall be nominated by a University for
Research and Innovation, chosen in such manner as may be
prescribed, other than such University which has determined
the standards so impugned:
Provided also that the decision of such committee shall be
final and binding.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956 or any other law for the time being
in force, every University for Research and Innovation shall have
the power to determine the nomenclature of degrees, diplomas and
other academic distinctions awarded by it.
7. (1) Every University for Research and Innovation shall be
open to all persons of either sex, irrespective of religion, race,
caste, creed or class:
Provided that not less than one-half of the students admitted
during an academic year to pursue any programme of study in a
University for Research and Innovation shall be citizens of India.
(2) All admissions to every programme of study in a
University for Research and Innovation shall be based on merit
assessed through transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed
through its prospectus, prior to the commencement of the process
of admission, by such University:
Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
Act, 2006, every such University, not being a public funded
University for Research and Innovation, shall specify, by Statutes,
such criteria in the matter of admission as would account for
diversities in entry level benchmarks arising from the social or
educational background of any class or category of applicants for
admission:
Provided further that every such University, being a public
funded University for Research and Innovation, shall be a Central
Educational Institution for the purposes of the Central Educational
Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006:
Provided also that the provisions of the Central Educational
Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006 shall apply only to
the students who are citizens of India and, notwithstanding anything
contained in section 3 thereof, the percentage of reservation shall be
determined taking into account the total number of seats available
for such citizens only.
University for
Research and
Innovation to
be open to all.
3 of 1956.
5 of 2007.
5 of 2007.
5 of 2007.

91
8. (1) Every University for Research and Innovation shall
be a not for profit legal entity.
(2) No part of the surplus in revenue of any University
for Research and Innovation, after meeting all expenditure in
regard to its operations under this Act, shall be invested for
any purpose other than for the growth and development of
such University or for conducting research or promoting
design, development and delivery of solutions therein:
Provided that no part of such surplus revenue shall be
appropriated, distributed or transferred to its promoter or to
any other person.
9. No person shall be eligible for establishing a University
under this Act, unless such person is—
(a) an organisation, being a company registered under
section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 or a society formed
and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or a
trust formed under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or any other
law for the time being in force, which is recognised,—
(i) as an organisation of repute of its kind in
India and has demonstrated financial capability and
expertise for establishing a University for Research and
Innovation; and
(ii) has devoted itself to proven innovations in
research in unique or emerging areas of knowledge
bearing a relationship to the area of focus or problem
of significance referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section
5; or
(b) a University established or incorporated in India
which has been functioning as such for at least twenty-five
years and is recognised, through accreditation under any law
for the time being in force, as amongst the Universities of
repute in India; or
(c) a University established or incorporated outside
India which has been functioning as such for at least fifty
years in the country in which it had been established or
incorporated and recognised, through internationally accepted
standards, as amongst the Universities of repute amongst the
countries.
10. (1) The promoter or promoters of each University for
Research and Innovation proposed to be established under sub-
section ( 1) of section 4 shall submit to the Central Government a
vision plan and a memorandum of agreement proposed to be entered
into with the Central Government along with a project report
indicating therein—
University to
be a distinct
legal entity
not for profit.
Criteria for
establishing a
University for
Research and
Innovation.
Memorandum
of Agreement.
1 of 1956.
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.

92
(i) the vision for achievement of the objects of such
proposed University;
(ii) the name and location of such proposed University;
(iii) the focus on area or areas with problems of
significance referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 5;
(iv) the capital investment plan along with its phasing
over a reasonable period for the establishment of such
proposed University;
(v) the sources of financing the capital investment and
the financial contribution, if any, expected from the Central
Government;
(vi) information, along with audited accounts, regarding
financial resources of the promoters;
(vii) the availability of land and the expected support
from the Central Government in obtaining land for the
establishment of such proposed University;
(viii) the infrastructure expected to be provided in such
proposed University;
(ix) the standards of higher education proposed to be
maintained in such proposed University;
(x) the programmes of study that are expected to be
provided in such proposed University;
(xi) the plan for funding the operations and
management of such proposed University;
(xii) the constitution of the Board of Governors of such
proposed University;
(xiii ) the manner, qualifications and tenure of
appointment or nomination of members of the Board of
Governors;
(xiv) a clause stating therein that the memorandum of
agreement proposed to be entered into shall be subject to the
approval of both the Houses of Parliament with such
modifications as those Houses may deem fit:
Provided that if an existing institution, not being a University,
is proposed to be converted into a University for Research and
Innovation, the “promoter” for the purposes of this Act shall mean
such University of which the Institution is a constituent unit.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
Central Government shall ensure that an existing institution adopts
the new governance structure without any dislocation and for this
purpose, the Central Government shall prescribe, by rules, the
transition process to be followed while declaring an institution as a

93
University for Research and Innovation and the academic content
and concern of such existing institutions shall be reoriented towards
research and innovation and be aligned with the objects of a
University for Research and Innovation.
(3) On receipt of the vision plan and the project report under
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall display a public notice
on its website inviting suggestions or objections on the draft
memorandum of agreement along with the vision plan and other
documents received with the project report, for a period of sixty
days from the date of issue of such public notice to provide an
opportunity to the public for giving suggestions on or objections to,
such draft memorandum of agreement.
(4) The Central Government may require the applicant to
furnish such other document or information as may be required by
way of clarifications.
(5) The Central Government shall constitute, with such
composition as may be prescribed, a committee of experts to obtain
the advice for the purpose of evaluating the competency and
expertise of the promoter and vision plan.
(6) The promoter shall be afforded an opportunity to respond
to the comments and objections received under sub-section ( 2) or
the clarifications sought under sub-section ( 3).
(7) The Central Government shall, as far as practicable,
within a period of six months from the receipt of the project report
under sub-section ( 1) and after considering the suggestions or
objections or clarifications or recommendations,—
(i) prepare a Memorandum of Agreement, with or
without such modifications, as it may deem fit for reasons to
be recorded in writing, proposed to be entered into with the
promoter or promoters; or
(ii) reject, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
proposal for entering into a Memorandum of Agreement, for
one or more of the following reasons, namely:—
(a) not falling within the definition of “promoter”
under clause ( o) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2;
(b) lack of demonstrated financial capability or
expertise for establishment of a University;
(c) funds for capital investment being sought
from undisclosed or disreputable or dubious sources;
(d) lack of possibility of multi-disciplinary
approach or social relevance of the proposed focus on
area or areas with problems of significance for the
University for Research and Innovation;
(e) lack of focus on research and innovation and
creation of an innovation ecosystem;

94
(f ) being against national interests or interest of
the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of
the State or sensitivity of the proposed location;
(g) such other reasons as may be prescribed.
11. A copy of every draft memorandum of agreement
proposed to be entered into by the Central Government under
section 10 shall be laid in draft before each House of Parliament for
a period of not less than thirty days while it is in session; and if,
within that period, either House disapproves of the issue of the
Memorandum of Agreement or approves of such issue only with
any modification, the Memorandum of Agreement shall not be
entered into or, as the case may be, shall be entered into only with
such modifications as may be agreed to by the Houses of
Parliament.
12. (1) Every memorandum of agreement after having been
approved by both the Houses of Parliament, with or without
modifications, shall be entered into by the Central Government with
the promoter and be published in the Official Gazette to take effect
from such prospective date as may be fixed by the Central
Government in this regard.
(2) The Central Government shall maintain a register wherein
the details of the memorandum of agreement entered into by it
under sub-section ( 1) shall be entered and also be displayed on its
website.
CHAPTER III
G
OVERNANCE OF U NIVERSITIES  FOR R ESEARCH AND I NNOVATION
13. There shall be constituted a Board of Governors for each
University for Research and Innovation comprising of such number
of persons appointed or nominated or sponsored by the promoter or
promoters for being members of the Board of Governors in such
manner and having such qualifications and for such tenure, as may
be provided in the memorandum of agreement:
Provided that not less than one-third of the members of the
Board of Governors shall be appointed or nominated from teachers
or officers of the University for Research and Innovation:
Provided further that not less than one-half of the members
of the Board of Governors shall be independent persons of whom
as nearly as may be, one-half shall be women:
Provided also that the persons nominated to the Board of
Governors from independent persons shall be persons who are
innovators and industry leaders having experience of innovation.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the
expression “independent persons” shall mean such persons who are
not in the employment of, or possess pecuniary interest, otherwise
Laying of
memorandum
of agreement
before both
Houses of
Parliament.
Publication of
memorandum
of agreement
and its date of
effect.
Board of
Governors of
University for
Research and
Innovation.

95
than as a member of the Board of Governors, in the operations of
the University for Research and Innovation; or not in the
employment of, or possess pecuniary interest in any operation
directly or indirectly, of the promoter.
14. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of
Governors shall be responsible for all the policies and directions of
the University for Research and Innovation and management of its
affairs and shall exercise or provide for the exercise of all powers
and discharge all functions to achieve the objects of such
University.
(2) The Board of Governors of each University for Research
and Innovation shall make Statutes to provide for the administration,
management and operations of such University.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the
Board of Governors may, by order in writing and subject to such
conditions and limitations specified therein, delegate the exercise of
powers and discharge its functions to the Academic Board or to any
other authority or to the Vice-Chancellor or other officer or officers
of the University, as the Board of Governors may deem fit.
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provisions, the Board of Governors may, inter alia , provide for all
or any of the following matters, namely:—
(i) establish schools of studies;
(ii) approve the annual budget estimates of such
University providing for the budget outlays for each School of
Studies and the Research Council and for such other
operational and functional areas as it may deem fit; and
(iii) modify, revise or amend, from time to time, the
annual budget estimates during the course of the year.
15. (1) The Board of Governors of each University for
Research and Innovation shall constitute an Academic Board with
such composition and in such manner and for such tenure as may
be provided in the Statutes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of
Governors of each University for Research and Innovation shall
vest, the Academic Board with such powers and functions as may
be provided in the Statutes.
16. (1) Each University for Research and Innovation shall
establish such faculties or schools of studies, with a Board of
studies for each faculty or school comprising the Dean of such
school and such other members, as may be specified by the
Statutes.
(2) The Board of studies of the faculty or school shall have
such powers and exercise such functions as may be specified by
the Statutes.
Powers and
functions of
Board of
Governors.
Academic
Board.
Faculties or
schools of
studies.

96
(3) Every University for Research and Innovation shall
establish a faculty of knowledge manpower assessment to—
(i) study and assess, through research, trends in
emerging fields of knowledge of relevance of such University;
(ii) assess and project the requirement for knowledge,
manpower needs and define the competencies so required;
(iii) recommend, on the basis of the results of its
study, assessment and projections, revision of curricula and
syllabi to schools;
(iv) interface and interact with the alumni of such
University;
(v) exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be conferred and imposed on it by Ordinances
or by Statutes.
17. (1) Every University for Research and Innovation shall
constitute a Research Council consisting of a Director and such
other number of members as may be specified by the Board of
Governors.
(2) The Research Council shall—
(i) interface with research funding organisations,
industry and civil society to identify potential areas for
research in areas of enterprise of such University for
Research and Innovation;
(ii) or ganise and promote research in such University
or in any collaboration with any other university or institute;
(iii) assist teachers in such University in obtaining
funding from external sources for research projects prepared
by them;
(iv) provide, out of the funds placed at its disposal by
the Board of Governors, research resources and grant
assistance for research projects proposed to be undertaken by
teachers in such University;
(v) provide for incubation of applications emerging
from research undertaken in such University;
(vi) make provisions for research and advisory services
and for that purpose enter into arrangements with other
institutions, industry, civil society or other organisations and
enable the results and benefits of research to be disseminated
to the public through such arrangements as it may deem fit;
(vii) exercise such other powers and perform such
other duties as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances or the
Statutes.
Research
Council.

97
(3) The Research Council shall present its annual output on its
website three years after the establishment of the University for
Research and Innovation and each year thereafter.
18. (1) The Chancellor of every University for Research and
Innovation shall be an academician of international eminence and
standing and shall be appointed by the promoter in such manner as
may be provided by or under the Statutes.
(2) The Vice-Chancellor of every University for Research and
Innovation shall be an academician of international eminence and
standing, chosen and appointed by the Board of Governors on the
basis of recommendations of a search-cum-selection committee,
constituted in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.
(3) Every University for Research and Innovation shall have
the Deans of Schools and such other officers and employees as may
be specified by the Board of Governors to be officers and
employees of the University, by the Statutes:
Provided that the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply
to a public funded University for Research and Innovation.
19. (1) The Board of Governors shall lay down, by Statutes,
its own policies to attract highly qualified and talented academics
having sufficient teaching or research experience from any part of
India or abroad, and to offer them emoluments and perks
commensurate with their standing.
(2) The policies to attract the highly qualified and talented
academics referred to in sub-section ( 1) may include the following,
namely:—
(a) appointment by invitation of any person of high
academic distinction and professional attainments to accept
any post of Professor or Associate Professor in such
University for Research and Innovation on such terms and
conditions as it may specify, by Statutes;
(b) appointment by invitation of any graduating student
with high academic distinction demonstrating exceptional
talent for research as Assistant Professor in such University
on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.
CHAPTER IV
G
RANTS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
20. (1) The Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament, by law in this behalf,—
(a) make to each University for Research and
Innovation, grants of such sums of money as may be
required for supporting research and the promotion and
development of higher education, subject to the
provisions of the memorandum of  agreement;
The
Chancellor,
Vice-Chancellor
and other
officers of
University for
Research
and Innovation.
Grants by
Central
Government
for supporting
higher
education and
research.
Autonomy
over
appointments
of academic
staff.

98
(b) provide to each University for Research and
Innovation grants of such sums of money as are required
to meet the expenditure on scholarships or fellowships
instituted by it, including scholarships or fellowships for
students from socially and educationally backward classes
or categories of citizens enrolled in such University.
(2) The Board of Governors of each University for
Research and Innovation shall constitute, in such manner and
for such period as may be provided under its Statutes, an
Expert Group for Research Audit for conducting an assessment
and evaluation, on the basis of such parameters as may be
provided under the Statutes, of the research undertaken out of
public funds in each University for Research and Innovation.
(3) The Expert Group for Research Audit constituted
under sub-section ( 2) shall submit its assessment and
evaluation report of the research undertaken out of public
funds in each University for Research and Innovation to the
Board of Governors and the Vice-Chancellor shall cause such
report to be placed before the Board of Governors along with
an explanatory memorandum of the action taken thereon with
reasons for such action.
(4) The Board of Governors shall, on consideration of the
assessment and evaluation report referred to in sub-section ( 3)
and the explanatory memorandum thereof, take such action as
it deems fit; and the action taken thereof shall be reported to
the Central Government, which shall cause the same to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
21. (1) Each University for Research and Innovation shall
establish a University Endowment Fund with such initial corpus
as may be provided in the Memorandum of Agreement.
(2) Each University for Research and Innovation shall
have the power to receive donations, contributions from alumni
and other incomes including revenues from advisory, consulting
or training services, into the University Endowment Fund, and
invest such Fund for the growth and development of the
University and the furtherance of its objects, including
development of its research infrastructure, in such manner as
may be specified by the Statutes.
22. (1) Every University for Research and Innovation shall
keep proper books of account with respect to—
(a) all sums of money received and expended by such
University and the matters in respect of which the receipt and
expenditure take place;
(b) the assets and liabilities of such University;
(c) the properties, movable and immovable of such
University.
University
Endowment
Fund.
Books of
account to be
kept by
University for
Research and
Innovation.

99
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), proper books of
account shall not be deemed to be kept with respect to the matters
specified therein, if such books are not kept—
(a) as are necessary to give a true and fair view of the
state of affairs of such University and to explain its
transactions; and
(b) on accrual basis and according to the double entry
system of accounting.
23. (1) At every annual meeting of each University for
Research and Innovation, the Vice-Chancellor and the Chief Finance
and Investment Officer of such University shall lay before the Board
of Governors—
(a) a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year;
and
(b) a statement of income and expenditure for that
period.
(2) Every balance sheet and statement of income and
expenditure of such University shall give a true and fair view of the
state of affairs of such University as at the end of the financial year
and shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be in such form
and in accordance with such general instructions and accounting
standards as may be specified by the Statutes, or as nearly thereto
as circumstances admit.
(3) Where the statement of income and expenditure and the
balance sheet of such University for Research and Innovation do not
comply with the accounting standards, such University shall disclose
in its statement of income and expenditure and balance sheet, the
following, namely:—
(a) the deviation from the accounting standards;
(b) the reasons for such deviation; and
(c) the financial effect, if any, arising due to such
deviation.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the
expression “accounting standards” means the standards of
accounting recommended by the Institute of Chartered Accountants
of India constituted under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
24. (1) The Board of Governors of each University for
Research and Innovation shall, before the expiry of three months
prior to the end of the financial year, appoint one or more auditors,
on such remuneration as it thinks fit, to scrutinise the balance sheet
and the statement of income and expenditure of such University.
(2) No person appointed as auditor or persons in the
employment of such auditor shall have any direct or indirect
Annual
accounts and
balance
sheet.
Appointment,
powers and
duties of
auditors.
38 of 1949.

100
interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any matter concerning
or related to the administration or operations (except being enrolled
as students) of such University.
(3) The provisions of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956
on the qualifications and disqualifications of auditors shall apply
mutatis mutandis for appointment of auditors under this Act.
(4) Every auditor of each University for Research and
Innovation shall have such powers and perform such duties as the
auditors may have for the performance of their duties and as are
available to, or are required of, such auditors under the Companies
Act, 1956.
25. (1) There shall be attached to every statement of accounts
laid before the Board of Governors of each University for Research
and Innovation, a report by its Vice-Chancellor, with respect to—
(a) the state of affairs of such University;
(b) the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry to
any surplus reserves in its balance sheet;
(c) the extent to which understatement or overstatement
of any surplus of income over expenditure or any shortfall of
expenditure over income has been indicated in the auditor’s
report and the reasons for such understatement or
overstatement;
(d
 ) the productivity of research projects undertaken by
such University measured in accordance with such norms as
may be specified by the Commission;
(e) appointments of the officers and teachers of the
University;
(f
 ) benchmarks and internal standards set by the
University, including the nature of innovations in teaching,
research and application of knowledge.
(2) The report of the Vice-Chancellor shall also include a
statement showing the name of the five officers and other
employees of such University who received the highest remuneration
(including allowances and other payments made to such employees)
during the preceding financial year and the contributions made by
such employees during the financial year.
(3) The statement referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall indicate
whether any such employee is a relative of any member of the
Board of Governors or the Academic Board of such University and
if so, the name of such member and such other particulars as may
be prescribed.
(4) The Vice-Chancellor shall also be bound to give the fullest
information and explanations in his report on every reservation,
qualification or adverse remark contained in the auditors’ report.
Report of
Vice-
Chancellor.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.

101
26. (1) The statement of accounts, including the balance sheet
and the statement of income and expenditure, the auditors’ report,
the report of the Vice-Chancellor and other documents required to
be annexed or attached with such statement, shall be brought before
the Board of Governors of the University for Research and
Innovation in its meeting at such time immediately, but not later than
three months, from the conclusion of the financial year.
(2) A copy of every statement of accounts (including the
balance sheet, statement of income and expenditure, the auditor’s
report and every other document required to be annexed or attached
to the balance sheet) which is to be laid before the Board of
Governors of the concerned University for Research and Innovation
shall, not less than twenty-one days before the date of the meeting,
be sent to every member of the Board of Governors of such
University.
(3) After the statement of accounts referred to in sub-
section ( 1) has been laid before the Board of Governors of each
University for Research and Innovation, such balance sheet,
statement of income and expenditure and other documents shall be
published on the website of such University.
27. (1) The annual report of each University for Research and
Innovation shall be prepared under the directions of the Board of
Governors, which shall include, among other matters, the steps
taken by the University towards the fulfilment of its objects and an
outcome based assessment of the research being undertaken in such
University, and be submitted to the Board of Governors on or before
such date as may be specified by the Statutes and the Board of
Governors shall consider the report in its annual meeting.
(2) The annual report as approved by the Board of Governors
shall be published on the website of the University for Research and
Innovation.
CHAPTER V
P
ROTECTION  AND UTILISATION OF INTELLECTUAL  PROPERTY EMERGING
FROM PUBLIC  FUNDED  RESEARCH
28. (1) Where a University for Research and Innovation
creates new knowledge from research which is funded by the
Central Government, or by any body under the Central Government
and leading to an intellectual property, such University shall as soon
as the fact of actual realisation of the public funded intellectual
property comes to knowledge, make a disclosure thereof to the
Central Government or such authority designated, by notification, by
the Central Government.
(2) The University for Research and Innovation shall, within
the period required by any law for the time being in force for
protection of public funded intellectual property, intimate to the
Central Government, its intention to retain the title of the public
Annual report.
Disclosure of
intellectual
property
created out of
public funded
research and
vesting of
title of such
property.
Annual
Meeting of
Board of
Governors to
consider
statement of
accounts.

102
funded intellectual property and the Central Government shall,
subject to such law, allow the title of such public funded intellectual
property to vest in such University:
Provided that where such University fails to disclose the
public funded intellectual property under sub-section ( 1) or provide
the intimation of its intention under this section, the title of the
public funded intellectual property shall vest in the Central
Government:
Provided further that the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, refuse the title to such University
within ninety days of the receipt of the intimation on any of the
following grounds, namely:—
(a) that in the public interest and in exceptional
circumstances the Central Government deems it expedient so
to do;
(b) that it is necessary so to do in the interest of the
security of the nation;
Provided also that where the Central Government is satisfied
that such University has, for reasons beyond its control failed to
give intimation within the time specified in this sub-section, it may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the said period to such
limit as may be prescribed.
29. (1) The University for Research and Innovation retaining
the title to a public funded intellectual property shall protect and
utilise it in such manner as it may deem fit:
Provided that where the public funded intellectual property
has such immense public interest that it is necessary or expedient
for the Central Government to initiate the process for utilisation of
such intellectual property, then such University shall assist the
Central Government in providing for such utilisation, but the
royalties or income received, if any, from such intellectual property
shall be made over to such University.
(2) The income or royalties arising out of the public funded
intellectual property shall be shared by the University for Innovation
with the intellectual property creator in accordance with the
provisions of any agreement which may be entered into in this
regard between such intellectual property creator and such
University.
30. (1) The Central Government shall protect, maintain and
utilise the public funded intellectual property for which the title
vests with it in any country in such manner as it may deem fit.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in any other law for the time
being in force relating to intellectual property such as trade mark,
copyright, patent, design, domain names and brands (hereinafter
referred to as “intellectual property”), the Central Government may
Protection and
utilisation of
intellectual
property by
University for
Research and
Innovation.
Powers of
Central
Government
in relation to
public funded
property.

103
give directions for prohibiting or restricting the publication of
information with respect to any public funded intellectual property
or communication of such information to any person or entity
which it considers prejudicial to the interest of the security of India.
(3) The Central Government may acquire title to any
intellectual property emerging out of research in a University for
Research and Innovation which it considers necessary in the interest
of the security of India.
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the
expression “interest of the security of India” means any action for
the security of India that relates to the use of public funded
intellectual property for making a product which—
(i) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from
which they are derived; or
(ii) relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition and
implements of war and to such traffic in other goods and
materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose
of supplying to a defence establishment; or
(iii) is taken in time of war or other emergency; or
(iv) relates to the maintenance of law and order or can
cause a threat to life and liberty of citizens of India.
(4) The provisions of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force,
relating to intellectual property.
CHAPTER VI
S
PECIAL PROVISIONS  REGARDING  PUBLIC FUNDED UNIVERSITIES  FOR
RESEARCH AND INNOV ATION
31. (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to such
Universities for Research and Innovation as are wholly or
substantially funded by the Central Government (hereinafter referred
to as the public funded University for Research and Innovation).
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
other law, the Central Government may, by notification, declare a
University established by any law for the time being in force, other
than a privately funded University, having regard to the high
standards of and potential for research and innovation in higher
education, as may be assessed by the committee of experts referred
to in sub-section ( 4) of section 10, as a University for Research and
Innovation for the purposes of this Act and with effect from the
date of such notification the provisions of this Act shall apply to
such University:
Provided that where a University has been established by a
State Act, every such notification shall be made only on the
Provisions of
this Chapter
to apply to
Universities
for Research
and
Innovation
entirely
funded by
Central
Government.

104
recommendation of the Legislature of such State through a
resolution to the effect that the University for Research and
Innovation may be so notified.
32. (1) There shall be constituted a Board of Governors for
each public funded University for Research and Innovation.
(2) The Board of Governors shall consist of such number of
members not exceeding seven having such qualifications as may be
prescribed.
(3) The tenure and terms and conditions of appointment or
nomination of the members, shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The provisions of Chapter III shall, mutatis mutandis,
apply to all public funded Universities for Research and Innovation
and any reference to the Board of Governors shall mean the Board
constituted by the Central Government under this section.
33. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every
public funded University for Research and Innovation.
(2) The Visitor shall appoint, in such manner as may be
provided by the Statutes, an academic of international eminence and
standing as the Chancellor of each public funded University for
Research and Innovation.
(3) The Chancellor shall have such powers and perform such
other functions as may be provided by or under the Statutes and the
Ordinances.
34. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament, by law is this behalf, make, on the basis
of such norms and criteria as may be determined, by that
Government, grants of such sums of money, to each public
funded University for Research and Innovation, as are required
for its development and maintenance:
Provided that prior approval of the Central Government
shall be necessary for the University for Research and
Innovation to dispose of any immovable property created from
such grants.
35. (1) The statement of accounts of each public funded
University for Research and Innovation shall be audited by such
auditor as may be appointed in this behalf by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, such part of the grants provided by the
Central Government or by any organisation or agency to each public
funded University for Research and Innovation for research in such
University shall be subjected only to assessment and audit by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India on such outcome based
parameters as may be prescribed by the Central Government with
the concurrence of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Board of
Governors of
public funded
University
for Research
and
Innovation.
Statement of
accounts and
audit of
public funded
University
for Research
and
Innovation.
Visitor.
Grants by
Central
Government
for
development
and
maintenance
of public
funded
Universities
for Research
and
Innovation.

105
(3) A copy of the statement of accounts including the balance
sheet and the statement of income and expenditure, the report of the
auditor, the report of the Academic Board and other documents
required to be annexed or attached with such statement, shall be
submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may
be, cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(4) The Expert Group for Research Audit constituted under
sub-section ( 2) of section 20 shall submit its assessment and
evaluation of the research undertaken in each public funded
University for Research and Innovation to the Academic Board and
the Academic Board shall cause such report to be placed before the
Board of Governors along with an explanatory memorandum of the
action taken thereon with reasons for such action.
36. A copy of the annual report, as prepared under section 27,
shall be submitted by each public funded University for Research
and Innovation to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as
may be, cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
37. Every public funded University for Research and
Innovation shall furnish to the Central Government within such
period as may be specified by that Government such returns or
other information with respect to its property or activities as that
Government may, from time to time, require.
CHAPTER VII
R
EVIEW OF UNIVERSITIES  FOR RESEARCH AND I NNOVATION
38. (1) Every University for Research and Innovation shall,
within fifteen years from the establishment and incorporation of
such University under this Act and thereafter at the expiration of
every tenth year, constitute a committee of experts to evaluate and
review the performance in achievement of the objects of such
University during the said period of fifteen years or ten years, as the
case may be.
(2) The Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall
consist of such number of members of international repute in
academia recognised as amongst the foremost in the world in their
sphere of study not exceeding seven, nominated from different
fields of knowledge as may have relevance to the teaching, learning
and research in such University of Innovation and such member
shall be paid such fee or allowances as may be provided by the
Statutes.
(3) The Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall
assess the performance of such University for Research and
Innovation and make recommendations on–
(a) the extent of fulfilment of the objects of the
University for Research and Innovation specified in section 5,
Annual report
of each public
funded
University for
Research and
Innovation.
Returns and
information
to Central
Government.
Review of
Universities
for Research
and
Innovation.

106
as demonstrated by the state of teaching, learning and
research and its contribution to society;
(b) the promotion of transformational and multi-
disciplinary research requiring an integrated approach to
complex problems of society;
(c) the advancement of fundamental research beyond
the current frontiers of knowledge;
(d) the establishment of such University as amongst the
global leaders in higher education and research;
(e) the impact and contribution of alumni of such
University to institutions, industry or civil society;
(f) the extent of achievement of social equality through
education and research in such University;
(g) the connection established by such University
between innovation spurred through the efforts of the
University to its neighborhood and to society;
(h) the breadth of impact that education and research in
such University have had on society.
(4) The Committee constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall
conduct its evaluation and review of the performance of the
University for Research and Innovation on the basis of such metrics
as may be defined, prior to the commencement of such review, by
the Commission.
(5) The recommendations of the Committee shall be
submitted, along with the response of the University for Research
and Innovation, to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause such recommendations to be laid before
each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
39. No act or proceedings of any authority or any other body
of a University for Research and Innovation shall be invalid merely
by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its
members.
40. Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of
section 6, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, the provisions of any other law, including such law
on reservation in admission as applicable to the University for
Research and Innovation, for the time being in force.
41. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Proceedings of
authorities or
bodies not
invalidated by
vacancies.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

107
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:–
(a) the manner of choosing a person of international
eminence to be a member of the committee under clause ( iii)
of the third proviso to sub-section ( 3) of section 6;
(b) the composition of the committee of experts
constituted under in sub-section ( 4) of section 10;
(c) the other reasons for rejecting a proposal for
entering into a memorandum of agreement under sub-
clause ( f) of clause ( ii) of sub-section ( 6) of section 10;
(d) the other particulars of the report of the Vice-
Chancellor under sub-section ( 3) of section 25;
(e) period of limitation which may be extended under
the proviso to sub-section ( 2) of section 28;
(f) the number and qualifications of members of the
Board of Governors of a public funded University for
Research and Innovation under sub-section ( 2) of section 32;
(g) the tenure, terms and conditions of appointment or
nomination of members of the Board of Governor of a public
funded University for Research and Innovation under sub-
section ( 3) of section 32;
(h) the outcome based parameters for assessment and
audit by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India of the
part of the grants provided, by the Central Government or by
any other organisation or agency, to each public funded
University for Research and Innovation for research under
sub-section ( 2) of section 35;
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by rules or in respect of which provision is to be
made by rules.
42. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board of
Governors of every University for Research and Innovation shall, by
publication on its website make Statutes to carry out the provisions
of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such Statutes may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the objective criteria, to account for disparities in
educational attainments arising from the socio-educational
background of any class or category of applicants in the
matter of admission under the proviso to sub-section ( 2) of
section 7;
Statutes, how
made.

108
(b) to provide for the administration, management and
operations of a University for Research and Innovation by the
Board of Governors under sub-section ( 2) of section 14;
(c) the manner of composition of the Academic Board
and its tenure under sub-section ( 1) of section 15;
(d) the powers and functions which may be vested in
the Academic Board by the Board of Governors under sub-
section ( 2) of section 15;
(e) the establishment of faculties or schools of studies
under sub-section ( 1) of section 16;
(f) the powers and functions of the Board of Studies
under sub-section ( 2) of section 16;
(g) the powers and duties which may be conferred
upon a faculty of knowledge manpower assessment by a
University for Research and Innovation under clause ( v) of
sub-section ( 3) of section 16;
(h) the powers and duties which may be assigned to a
Research Council under clause ( vii) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 17;
(i) the manner of appointment of the Chancellor by the
promoter under sub-section ( 1) of section 18;
(j) the manner of constitution of a search-cum-selection
Committee for selection of a Vice-Chancellor of a University
for Research and Innovation, under sub-section ( 2) of
section 18;
(k) the deans of schools and other officers and
employees of a University for Research and Innovation to be
specified under sub-section ( 3) of section 18;
(l) policy to attract highly qualified and talented
academics having sufficient teaching or research experience
from any part of India or abroad, and to offer them
emoluments and perks commensurate with their standing
under sub-section ( 1) of section 19;
(m) the terms and conditions of appointment of
Professors and Associate Professors under clause ( a) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 19;
(n) the manner of constitution of an Expert Group for
Research Audit, the period for which such Group shall be
constituted and the parameters for conducting an assessment
and evaluation of the research undertaken out of public funds
in each University for Research and Innovation under sub-
section ( 2) of section 20;
(o) the manner of investment of the University
Endowment Fund under sub-section ( 2) of section 21;

109
(p) the form and the general instructions and
accounting standards in accordance with which the balance
sheet and the statement of income and expenditure of a
University for Research and Innovation is to be prepared
under sub-section ( 2) of section 23;
(q) the date by which an annual report may be
submitted to the Board of Governors, under sub-section ( 1)
of section 27;
(r) the manner of appointment of Chancellor under sub-
section ( 2) of section 33;
(s) the powers and functions of the Chancellor of a
public funded University for Research and Innovation under
sub-section ( 3) of section 33;
(t) the fee and allowances payable to the members of
the Committee of Experts under sub-section ( 2) of section 38;
(u) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by Statutes or in respect of which provision is
to be made by Statutes.
(3) The Board of Governors of each such University may,
from time to time, make or amend or repeal any Statutes, and each
such Statute, its amendment or repeal, as the case may be, shall
come into effect from the date of its publication on the website of
the University for Research and Innovation.
43. (1) The Academic Board may, by publication on
University’s website, make Ordinances to carry out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such Ordinances may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the designation of persons appointed for imparting
instruction or conducting research under sub-section ( 1) of
section 3;
(b) the powers and duties which may be conferred
upon a faculty of knowledge manpower assessment by a
University for Research and Innovation under clause ( v) of
sub-section ( 3) of section 16;
(c) the powers and duties which may be assigned to a
Research Council under clause ( vii) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 17;
(d) the powers and functions of the Chancellor under
sub-section ( 3) of section 33;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by Ordinances or in respect of which provision
is to be made by Ordinances.
Power to
make
Ordinances.

110
44. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
45. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Laying of
rules before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

111
111
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Innovation carries spin-off benefits and yields social dividends
for the society through reduction in poverty, improved health,
greater education, wealth creation, empowerment of women and
vulnerable groups. Universities are places where ideas germinate,
applications emerge from ideas, and innovation flourished in an
atmosphere of intellectual challenge and freedom. Universities where
the faculty and students constantly challenge existing boundaries of
knowledge, amidst a prevailing culture of creativity, are ideally
positioned to be the powerhouse of an innovation led knowledge
economy.
2. There is also a growing realization that if India has to
achieve a leadership role in the future global knowledge economy,
mere public expenditure on higher education is not going to be
sufficient and a substantial part of the funding must flow into the
education sector through not-for-profit private participation.
3. The “Universities for Research and Innovation Bill, 2012”
provides for establishment and incorporation of Universities for
Research and Innovation which would be at the fount of making
India the global knowledge hub and set benchmarks for excellence
for other institution of higher learning through path-breaking
research and promoting synergies between teaching and research to
create institutions universally recognized for quality in teaching,
learning and research. The Bill aims to lay down an enabling
legislative frame-work for establishment of Universities for Research
and Innovation. The Bill provides for setting up of Universities for
Research and Innovation both in the private sector, and the public
sector. Presently there is no central law which provides for this
framework, hence the need for a central legislation.
4. The proposed Universities for Research and Innovation
Bill, 2012, inter-alia provides for the follwing:—
(a) Each University for Research and Innovation would
provide for the knowledge needs of the country, in training
professionals, specialists, scientists and resarchers needed by
society and the economy and in generating new knowledge to
support national innovation systems.
(b) Each University would offer exposure to an
international classroom environment. However, a minimum of
50% students have to be Indian citizens.
(c) Each University would focus on one area or
problem of significance to India and build an ecosystem of
research and teaching around different related disciplines and

112
fields of study. Significant dividends in terms of Intellectual
Property Right creations are expected due to focused and
inter-disciplinary research in an area of study.
(d) These universities would have autonomy in matters
of academics, faculty, personnel, finances, administration and
in the development of a vision for the future.
(e) Different modes of establishment of these univer-
sities are contemplated. They can be either fully public funded
or fully private funded. The Bill also provides for public
private partnership.
(f) The President of India would be the Visitor of the
publicly funded Universities for Reseach and Innovation.
(g) The Chancellor would be appointed from amongst
eminent academicians who shall be the nominal head of the
University and preside over convocations and annual meetings
of the Board of Governors (BoG). The Chancellor for Publicly
funded Universities would be appointed by the Visitor while
for private Universities, the Chancellor would be appointed by
the Promoter.
(h) The Vice Chancellor shall be the principal academic
and executive officer responsible for day to day administration
and management of the University. The Vice-Chancellor too
shall be appointed by the BoG.
(i) The BoG is envisaged to be the principal executive
body of the University, and shall be responsible for all its
policies and directions with powers to frame Statutes of the
university. It would also decide the academic calendar,
structure the intake for research programmes, assign funding
to the Faculties and Schools of Studies, consider the
manpower needs assessment for the knowledge economy,
establish Chairs, consider proposals for undertaking research
funded by industry or Government, appoint Professors and
Associate Professors, Deans and Heads of Faculties and other
officers of the University and create new faculties or schools.
(j) Each publicly funded University for Research and
Innovation shall be subjected only to assessment and audit by
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. For private
funded Universities for Research and Innovation, account-
ability will be ensured through reviews by the Academic
Research Peer Group for research work and Academic Audit
of Teaching through a Peer Group.
(k) The Bill deals with the protection and utilization of
intellectual property emerging from public funded research. It
provides that the concerned University shall disclose the fact
of creation of intellectual property emerging out of public
funded research to the Central Government or such authority

113
as designated by the Government. It also provides for the
concerned University to retain the title of such intellectual
property, with previous approval of the Central Government.
It further provides for acquisition by the Central Government
of an intellectual property if it is so considered in the “interest
of the security of India”.
(l) Provisions of the Central Educational Institutions
(Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006 would be applicable to
publicly funded Universities for Research and Innovation in so
far as the Indian citizen students admitted in different courses
and programmes are concerned. A provision of self disclosure
of affirmative action towards members of socially and
economically disadvantaged groups by the Universities for
Research and Innovation set up by private promoters has also
been included.
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various
provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; KAPIL SIBAL
The 15 May, 2012.

114
114
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This clause relates to the short title, extent,
commencement and applicability of the proposed legislation. It
provides that the proposed legislation shall extend to the whole of
India and enables the Central Government to appoint a date with
respect to the commencement of the proposed legislation and
different dates of appointment for different provisions of the
proposed legislation.
It further provides that the proposed legislation shall apply to
the Universities for Research and Innovation, declared as such, and
so notified by the Central Government.
Clause 2.— This clause relates to declaration of Universities
for Research and Innovation as institutions of national importance.
This clause provides that whereas the objects of every University
for Research and Innovation as is established under this Act are of
national importance, it is hereby declared that every such University
for Research and Innovation is an institution of national importance.
Clause 3.—This clause defines certain expressions used in the
proposed legislation. These definitions, inter alia , include “Academic
Board”, “distance education systems”, “intellectual property”,
“intellectual property creator”, “knowledge clusters”, “memorandum
of agreement”, “programme of study”, “promoter”, “public funded
intellectual property”, “public funded University”, “utilisation”, etc.
Clause 4.—This clause relates to the establishment and
incorporation of Universities for Research and Innovation. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central Government
may, by notification, establish for the purposes of the proposed
legislation, one or more Universities for Research and Innovation
each with such name as may be specified therein and different
notifications may be issued for the establishment of different
Universities for Innovation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the Central Government may, by notification, specify
the name and headquarters of every such University for Research
and Innovation. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that
every University for Research and Innovation shall be a body
corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, with
power, subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and shall, by that name, sue or be sued. Sub-
clause (4) of the said clause provides that the jurisdiction of each
University for Research and Innovation shall extend to the whole of
India. However, each University for Research and Innovation may,
if it so deems fit, establish campuses and study centres in foreign

115
countries in accordance with the provisions of the laws of such
foreign country.
Clause 5.—This clause relates to the objects of the University
for Research and Innovation. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause
provides that every University for Research and Innovation shall, at
the time of its establishment and in recognition of the fact that
knowledge created is not pure discipline based or propositional but
also emerges in response to problems of society, focus on an area
or areas with problems of significance and build an ecosystem of
research and teaching around different related disciplines and fields
of study which are relevant thereto, searching for solutions that are
globally valid and in the process develop education at undergraduate
and higher levels. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
without prejudice to the measures referred in sub-section (1), inter
alia, provide for the following the objects of every University for
Research and Innovation, namely,- constantly aspire for attainment
of the pinnacle of knowledge and learning by undertaking
innovations in design, development and delivery through research
and learning; (b) attempt, through research and application of
knowledge to provide a path for mankind free from deprivation and
want; (c) seek and cultivate new knowledge, to engage vigorously
and fearlessly, and to interpret old knowledge and beliefs in the light
of new needs and discoveries; (d) provide society with innovators
and competent men and women to meet knowledge needs of the
society and impart training to professionals, specialists, scientists
and researchers for the purpose, who will also be cultivated
individuals, imbued with a sense of social purpose performing
service to the nation and to humanity and cultivating the right moral
and intellectual values; (e) strive to promote equality and social
justice and to reduce social and cultural differences through
diffusion of quality education; (f) develop competent and capable
youth imbued with the spirit of innovation and entrepreneurship with
the social and environmental orientation to provide global leadership
for the future; (g) facilitate dissemination of the fruits of research
in society through promotion of robust linkages with economy and
civil society and through practice; (h) build linkages with research
institutions and industry in order to synergise research and
innovation efforts and to create innovation clusters for maximum
gains; (i) focus on problems of society or on an area or areas with
problems of significance, create knowledge clusters and build an
ecosystem of research and teaching in different disciplines and
fields of study; and (j) endeavour for solutions which are globally
valid and in the process to develop education at undergraduate and
higher levels. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that every
University for Research and Innovation may, for the purpose of
achievement of the objects specified in this section, provide facilities
for instructions, teaching, research and innovation experience of
such standards that match or surpass the needs of global
competitiveness of the education system in various fields of
knowledge.

116
Clause 6.—This clause relates to functions and powers of the
university. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that every
University for Research and Innovation shall exercise autonomy in
financial administration, academic and other matters in regard to the
achievement of its objects. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the university shall discharge its functions and exercise
the powers which, inter alia, include, (i) impart instructions in such
branches of learning consistent with its objects as such University
may, from time to time determine; (ii) award degrees, diplomas and
other academic distinctions; (iii) institute teaching including distance
education systems, research or other academic positions, required
by such university with such designations as it may deem fit;
(iv) organise, promote and conduct research in such University or
in collaboration or association with any other University, institution
of research or body corporate; (v) make provision for dissemination
of knowledge emerging from research and for that purpose to enter
into such arrangements, including consultancy and advisory
services, with other institutions, industry, civil society or other
organisations, as such University may deem necessary; (vi) establish
campuses and study centres overseas in accordance with the law of
the host country applicable to establishment and operation of such
campuses and study centres subject to the provisions of the
proposed legislation; (vii) provide consultancy and advisory services
and for that purpose to enter into such arrangements with other
institutions or bodies as it may deem necessary; (viii) to establish
companies or incubation centres for gainful applications of
knowledge and innovations or engage in partnerships with such
agencies or entities, which shall undertake research and innovations
for value creation to translate the results of research to products
and processes useful to society and industry;
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that for the
purposes of determination of standards in higher education, every
University for Research and Innovation shall determine and declare,
on its website, the standards of such education sought to be
provided in such University in its teaching, learning and research.
However, the standards so determined and declared by such
University shall be higher than the minimum standards in the
relevant field of knowledge as specified by or under any other law
and where no standards have been determined by or under any law
in the relevant field of knowledge, the standards so determined and
declared by the University shall aim to maximize relative global
scales in the relevant field of knowledge and where a dispute arises
between such University and a regulatory authority constituted by
any law to determine and coordinate standards of higher education
in any discipline or field of knowledge, such dispute shall be
referred to a committee of three persons of international eminence
and standing of whom, one person each shall be nominated, (i) by
the regulatory body impugning the standards; (ii) by such University
for Research and Innovation, which has determined the standards so
impugned; (iii) by a University for Research and Innovation, chosen

117
in such manner as may be prescribed, other than such University
which has determined the standards so impugned and the decision
of such committee shall be final and binding. Sub-clause (4) of the
said clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 or any other law for the
time being in force, every University for Research and Innovation
shall have the power to determine the nomenclature of degrees,
diplomas and other academic distinctions awarded by it.
Clause 7.— This clause relates to University for Research and
Innovation to be open to all. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause
provides that every University for Research and Innovation shall be
open to all persons of either sex, irrespective of religion, race,
caste, creed or class. However, not less than one-half of the
students admitted during an academic year to pursue any
programme of study in a University for Research and Innovation
shall be citizens of India. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that all admissions to every programme of study in a University for
Research and Innovation shall be based on merit assessed through
transparent and reasonable criteria disclosed through its prospectus,
prior to the commencement of the process of admission, by such
University. However, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006,
every such University, not being a public funded University for
Research and Innovation, shall specify, by Statutes, such criteria in
the matter of admission as would account for diversities in entry
level benchmarks arising from the social or educational background
of any class or category of applicants for admission and every such
University, being a public funded University for Research and
Innovation, shall be a Central Educational Institution for the
purposes of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
Admission) Act, 2006 and the provisions of the said Act shall apply
only to the students who are citizens of India and, notwithstanding
anything contained in section 3 thereof, the percentage of
reservation shall be determined taking into account the total number
of seats available for such citizens only.
Clause 8.—This clause provides that university to be a
distinct legal entity not for profit. This clause states that every
University for Research and Innovation shall be a not for profit legal
entity and no part of the surplus in revenue of any University for
Research and Innovation, after meeting all expenditure in regard to
its operations under the proposed legislation, shall be invested for
any purpose other than for the growth and development of such
University or for conducting research or promoting design,
development and delivery of solutions therein. However, no part of
such surplus revenue shall be appropriated, distributed or transferred
to its promoter or to any other person.
Clause 9.—This clause relates to criteria for establishing a
University for Research and Innovation. This clause provides that no
person shall be eligible for establishing a university under the

118
proposed legislation, unless such person is an organisation, being a
company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 or
a society formed and registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 or a trust formed under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or
any other law for the time being in force, which is recognised as
an organisation of repute of its kind in India and has demonstrated
financial capability and expertise for establishing a University for
Research and Innovation; and has devoted itself to proven
innovations in research in unique or emerging areas of knowledge
bearing a relationship to the area of focus or problem of
significance referred to in sub-section (1) of section 5; or a
university established or incorporated in India which has been
functioning as such for at least twenty-five years and is recognised,
through accreditation under any law for the time being in force, as
amongst the universities of repute in India; or a university
established or incorporated outside India which has been functioning
as such for at least fifty years in the country in which it had been
established or incorporated and recognised, through internationally
accepted standards, as amongst the universities of repute amongst
the countries.
Clause 10.—This clause relates to memorandum of
agreement. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the
promoter or promoters of each University for Research and
Innovation proposed to be established under sub-section (1) of
section 4 shall submit to the Central Government a vision plan and
a memorandum of agreement proposed to be entered into with the
Central Government along with a project report indicating, inter
alia, therein, the vision for achievement of the objects of such
proposed University; the name and location of such proposed
University; the capital investment plan along with its phasing over a
reasonable period for the establishment of such proposed University;
the sources of financing the capital investment and the financial
contribution, if any, expected from the Central Government; the
infrastructure expected to be provided in such proposed University;
the programmes of study that are expected to be provided in such
proposed University; the constitution of the Board of Governors of
such proposed University; the manner, qualifications and tenure of
appointment or nomination of members of the Board of Governors;
and a clause stating therein that the memorandum of agreement
proposed to be entered into shall be subject to the approval of both
the Houses of Parliament with such modifications as those Houses
may deem fit. However, if an existing institution, not being a
University, is proposed to be converted into a University for
Research and Innovation, the “promoter” for the purposes of the
proposed legislation shall mean such University of which the
Institution is a constituent unit.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that notwith-
standing anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central
Government shall ensure that an existing institution adopts the new

119
governance structure without any dislocation and for this purpose,
the Central Government shall prescribe, by rules, the transition
process to be followed while declaring an institution as a University
for Research and Innovation and the academic content and concern
of such existing institutions shall be reoriented towards research and
innovation and be aligned with the objects of a University for
Research and Innovation. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides
that on receipt of the vision plan and the project report under sub-
section (1), the Central Government shall display a public notice on
its website inviting suggestions or objections on the draft
memorandum of agreement along with the vision plan and other
documents received with the project report, for a period of sixty
days from the date of issue of such public notice to provide an
opportunity to the public for giving suggestions on or objections to,
such draft memorandum of agreement and the Central Government
may require the applicant to furnish such other document or
information as may be required by way of clarifications. Sub-
clause (5) of the said clause provides that the Central Government
shall constitute, with such composition as may be prescribed, a
committee of experts to obtain the advice for the purpose of
evaluating the competency and expertise of the promoter and vision
plan and the promoter shall be afforded an opportunity to respond
to the comments and objections received under sub-section (2) or
the clarifications sought under sub-section (3).
Sub-clause (7) of the said clause provides that the Central
Government shall, as far as practicable, within a period of six
months from the receipt of the project report under sub-section (1)
and after considering the suggestions or objections or clarifications
or recommendations, prepare a memorandum of agreement, with or
without such modifications, as it may deem fit for reasons to be
recorded in writing, proposed to be entered into with the promoter
or promoters; or reject, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
proposal for entering into a Memorandum of Agreement, for one or
more of the reasons, such as, not falling within the definition of
“promoter” under clause (o) of sub-section (1) of section 2; lack of
demonstrated financial capability or expertise for establishment of a
University; funds for capital investment being sought from
undisclosed or disreputable or dubious sources; lack of possibility of
multi-disciplinary approach or social relevance of the proposed
focus on area or areas with problems of significance for the
University for Research and Innovation; lack of focus on research
and innovation and creation of an innovation ecosystem; being
against national interests or interest of the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security of the State or sensitivity of the proposed
location; and such other reasons as may be provided under rules.
Clause 11.— This clause relates to laying of memorandum of
agreement before both Houses of Parliament. It provides that a copy
of every draft memorandum of agreement proposed to be entered
into by the Central Government under section 10 shall be laid in

120
draft before each House of Parliament for a period of not less than
thirty days while it is in session; and if, within that period, either
House disapproves of the issue of the Memorandum of Agreement
or approves of such issue only with any modification, the
Memorandum of Agreement shall not be entered into or, as the case
may be, shall be entered into only with such modifications as may
be agreed to by the Houses of Parliament.
Clause 12.—This clause relates to publication of memo-
randum of agreement and its date of effect. It provides that every
memorandum of agreement after having been approved by both the
Houses of Parliament, with or without modifications, shall be
entered into by the Central Government with the promoter and be
published in the Official Gazette to take effect from such
prospective date as may be fixed by the Central Government in this
regard and the Central Government shall maintain a register wherein
the details of the memorandum of agreement entered into by it with
the promoter and display the same on its website.
Clause 13.— This clause relates to the Board of Governors of
University for Research and Innovation. It provides that there shall
be constituted a Board of Governors for each University for
Research and Innovation comprising of such number of persons
appointed or nominated or sponsored by the promoter or promoters
for being members of the Board of Governors in such manner and
having such qualifications and for such tenure, as may be provided
in the memorandum of agreement. However, not less than one-third
of the members of the Board of Governors shall be appointed or
nominated from teachers or officers of the University for Research
and Innovation and not less than one-half of the members of the
Board of Governors shall be independent persons of whom as nearly
as may be, one-half shall be women and the persons so nominated
to the Board of Governors from independent persons shall be
persons who are innovators and industry leaders having experience
of innovation. The Explanation to the said clause provides that the
expression “independent persons” shall mean such persons who are
not in the employment of, or possess pecuniary interest, otherwise
than as a member of the Board of Governors, in the operations of
the University for Research and Innovation; or not in the
employment of, or possess pecuniary interest in any operation
directly or indirectly, of the promoter.
Clause 14.— This clause relates to powers and functions of
Board of Governors. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that
subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, the Board of
Governors shall be responsible for all the policies and directions of
the University for Research and Innovation and management of its
affairs and shall exercise or provide for the exercise of all powers
and discharge all functions to achieve the objects of such
University. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Board
of Governors of each University for Research and Innovation shall
make Statutes to provide for the administration, management and

121
operations of such University. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause
provides that subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation
and the Statutes, the Board of Governors may, by order in writing
and subject to such conditions and limitations specified therein,
delegate the exercise of powers and discharge its functions to the
Academic Board or to any other authority or to the Vice- Chancellor
or other officer or officers of the University, as the Board of
Governors may deem fit and the Board of Governors may, inter
alia , establish schools of studies; approve the annual budget
estimates of such University providing for the budget outlays for
each School of Studies and the Research Council and for such other
operational and functional areas as it may deem fit; and modify,
revise or amend, from time to time, the annual budget estimates
during the course of the year.
Clause 15.— This clause contains provisions for Academic
Board. It provides that the Board of Governors of each University
for Research and Innovation shall constitute an Academic Board
with such composition and in such manner and for such tenure as
may be provided in the Statutes and subject to the provisions of the
proposed legislation, the Board of Governors of each University for
Research and Innovation shall vest, the Academic Board with such
powers and functions as may be provided in the Statutes.
Clause 16.— This clause deals with faculties or schools of
studies. It provides that each University for Research and
Innovation shall establish such faculties or schools of studies, with
a Board of studies for each faculty or school comprising the Dean
of such school and such other members, as may be specified by the
Statutes. It further provides that the Board of studies of the faculty
or school shall have such powers and exercise such functions as
may be specified by the Statutes. It also provides that every
University for Research and Innovation shall establish a faculty of
knowledge manpower assessment to, study and assess, through
research, trends in emerging fields of knowledge of relevance of
such University; assess and project the requirement for knowledge,
manpower needs and define the competencies so required;
recommend, on the basis of the results of its study, assessment and
projections, revision of curricula and syllabi to schools; interface
and interact with the alumni of such University; and exercise such
other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred
and imposed on it by Ordinances or by Statutes.
Clause 17.—This clause contains provisions for the
constitution of Research Council. It provides that every University
for Research and Innovation shall constitute a Research Council
consisting of a Director and such other number of members as may
be specified by the Board of Governors and it shall, interface with
research funding organisations, industry and civil society to identify
potential areas for research in areas of enterprise of such University
for Research and Innovation; organise and promote research in such
University or in any collaboration with any other university or

122
institute; assist teachers in such University in obtaining funding from
external sources for research projects prepared by them; provide,
out of the funds placed at its disposal by the Board of Governors,
research resources and grant assistance for research projects
proposed to be undertaken by teachers in such University; provide
for incubation of applications emerging from research undertaken in
such University; make provisions for research and advisory services
and for that purpose enter into arrangements with other institutions,
industry, civil society or other organisations and enable the results
and benefits of research to be disseminated to the public through
such arrangements as it may deem fit; exercise such other powers
and perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the
Ordinances or the Statutes; and the Research Council shall present
its annual output on its website three years after the establishment
of the University for Research and Innovation and each year
thereafter.
Clause 18.— This clause relates to the Chancellor, Vice-
Chancellor and other officers of the University for Research and
Innovation. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the
Chancellor of every University for Research and Innovation shall be
an academician of international eminence and standing and shall be
appointed by the promoter in such manner as may be provided by
or under the Statutes. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the Vice-Chancellor of every University for Research and
Innovation shall be an academician of international eminence and
standing, chosen and appointed by the Board of Governors on the
basis of recommendations of a search-cum-selection committee,
constituted in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that every University for
Research and Innovation shall have the Deans of Schools and such
other officers and employees as may be specified by the Board of
Governors to be officers and employees of the University, by the
Statutes. However, the provisions of sub-clause (1) shall not apply
to a public funded University for Research and Innovation.
Clause 19.— This clause relates to autonomy over
appointments of academic staff. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause
provides that the Board of Governors shall lay down, by Statutes,
its own policies to attract highly qualified and talented academics
having sufficient teaching or research experience from any part of
India or abroad, and to offer them emoluments and perks
commensurate with their standing. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the policies to attract the highly qualified and talented
academics referred to in sub-clause (1) may include, appointment by
invitation of any person of high academic distinction and
professional attainments to accept any post of Professor or
Associate Professor in such University for Research and Innovation
on such terms and conditions as it may specify, by Statutes; and
appointment by invitation of any graduating student with high
academic distinction demonstrating exceptional talent for research as

123
Assistant Professor in such University on such terms and conditions
as it deems fit.
Clause 20.— This clause contains provision for grants by the
Central Government for supporting higher education and research.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Central
Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by
law in this behalf, make to each University for Research and
Innovation, grants of such sums of money as may be required for
supporting research and the promotion and development of higher
education, subject to the provisions of the memorandum of
agreement; and provide to each University for Research and
Innovation grants of such sums of money as are required to meet
the expenditure on scholarships or fellowships instituted by it,
including scholarships or fellowships for students from socially and
educationally backward classes or categories of citizens enrolled in
such University. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the
Board of Governors of each University for Research and Innovation
shall constitute, in such manner and for such period as may be
provided under its Statutes, an Expert Group for Research Audit for
conducting an assessment and evaluation, on the basis of such
parameters as may be provided under the Statutes, of the research
undertaken out of public funds in each University for Research and
Innovation.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the expert
group for research audit constituted under sub-clause (2) shall
submit its assessment and evaluation report of the research
undertaken out of public funds in each University for Research and
Innovation to the Board of Governors and the Vice-Chancellor shall
cause such report to be placed before the Board of Governors along
with an explanatory memorandum of the action taken thereon with
reasons for such action. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides
that the Board of Governors shall, on consideration of the
assessment and evaluation report referred to in sub-clause (3) and
the explanatory memorandum thereof, take such action as it deems
fit; and the action taken thereof shall be reported to the Central
Government, which shall cause the same to be laid before each
House of Parliament.
Clause 21.—This clause relates to University Endowment
Fund. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that each
University for Research and Innovation shall establish a University
Endowment Fund with such initial corpus as may be provided in the
memorandum of agreement. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that each University for Research and Innovation shall have
the power to receive donations, contributions from alumni and other
incomes including revenues from advisory, consulting or training
services, into the University Endowment Fund, and invest such
Fund for the growth and development of the University and the
furtherance of its objects, including development of its research
infrastructure, in such manner as may be specified by the Statutes.

124
Clause 22.— This clause deals with the provisions relating to
books of account to be kept by University for Research and
Innovation. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that every
University for Research and Innovation shall keep proper books of
account with respect to all sums of money received and expended
by such University and the matters in respect of which the receipt
and expenditure take place, the assets and liabilities of such
University and the properties including movable and immovable of
such University. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
proper books of account shall not be deemed to be kept with
respect to the matters specified therein, if such books are not kept
as are necessary to give a true and fair view of the state of affairs
of such University and to explain its transactions; and on accrual
basis and according to the double entry system of accounting.
Clause 23.— This clause provides for annual accounts and
balance sheet. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that at
every annual meeting of each University for Research and
Innovation, the Vice-Chancellor and the Chief Finance and
Investment Officer of such University shall lay before the Board of
Governors a balance sheet as at the end of the financial year and
a statement of income and expenditure for that period. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that every balance sheet and
statement of income and expenditure of such University shall give a
true and fair view of the state of affairs of such University as at
the end of the financial year and shall, subject to the provisions of
this section, be in such form and in accordance with such general
instructions and accounting standards as may be specified by the
Statutes, or as nearly thereto as circumstances admit. Sub-
clause (3) of the said clause provides that where the statement of
income and expenditure and the balance sheet of such University for
Research and Innovation do not comply with the accounting
standards, such University shall disclose in its statement of income
and expenditure and balance sheet, the deviation from the
accounting standards; the reasons for such deviation; and the
financial effect, if any, arising due to such deviation. The
Explanation to the said sub-clause provides that the expression
“accounting standards” means the standards of accounting
recommended by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
constituted under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
Clause 24.— This clause relates to appointment, powers and
duties of auditors. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that
the Board of Governors of each University for Research and
Innovation shall, before the expiry of three months prior to the end
of the financial year, appoint one or more auditors, on such
remuneration as it thinks fit, to scrutinise the balance sheet and the
statement of income and expenditure of such University. Sub-
clause (2) of the said clause provides that no person appointed as
auditor or persons in the employment of such auditor shall have any
direct or indirect interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any

125
matter concerning or related to the administration or operations
(except being enrolled as students) of such University.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the provisions
of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 on the qualifications and
disqualifications of auditors shall apply mutatis mutandis for
appointment of auditors under the proposed legislation and sub-
clause (4) of the said clause provides that every auditor of each
University for Research and Innovation shall have such powers and
perform such duties as the auditors may have for the performance
of their duties and as are available to, or are required of, such
auditors under the Companies Act, 1956.
Clause 25.—This clause relates to the report of the Vice-
Chancellor. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that there
shall be attached to every statement of accounts laid before the
Board of Governors of each University for Research and Innovation,
a report by its Vice-Chancellor, with respect to, the state of affairs
of such University; the amounts, if any, which it proposes to carry
to any surplus reserves in its balance sheet; the extent to which
understatement or overstatement of any surplus of income over
expenditure or any shortfall of expenditure over income has been
indicated in the auditor’s report and the reasons for such
understatement or overstatement; the productivity of research
projects undertaken by such University measured in accordance with
such norms as may be specified by the Commission; appointments
of the officers and teachers of the University; and benchmarks and
internal standards set by the University, including the nature of
innovations in teaching, research and application of knowledge.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the report of
the Vice-Chancellor shall also include a statement showing the name
of the five officers and other employees of such University who
received the highest remuneration (including allowances and other
payments made to such employees) during the preceding financial
year and the contributions made by such employees during the
financial year. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the
statement shall also indicate whether any such employee is a relative
of any member of the Board of Governors or the Academic Board
of such University and if so, the name of such member and such
other particulars as may be prescribed. Sub-clause (4) of the said
clause provides that the Vice-Chancellor shall also be bound to give
the fullest information and explanations in his report on every
reservation, qualification or adverse remark contained in the
auditors’ report.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide for annual meeting
of Board of Governors’ to consider statement of accounts. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that the statement of
accounts, including the balance sheet and the statement of income
and expenditure, the auditor’s report, the report of the Vice-
Chancellor and other documents required to be annexed or attached

126
with such statement, shall be brought before the Board of
Governors of the University for Research and Innovation in its
meeting at such time immediately, but not later than three months,
from the conclusion of the financial year. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause provides that a copy of every statement of accounts
(including the balance sheet, statement of income and expenditure,
the auditors’ report and every other document required to be
annexed or attached to the balance sheet) which is to be laid before
the Board of Governors of the concerned University for Research
and Innovation shall, not less than twenty-one days before the date
of the meeting, be sent to every member of the Board of Governors
of such University. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that
after the statement of accounts has been laid before the Board of
Governors of each University for Research and Innovation, such
balance sheet, statement of income and expenditure and other
documents shall be published on the website of such University.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for the annual report. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that the annual report of each
University for Research and Innovation shall be prepared under the
directions of the Board of Governors, which shall include, among
other matters, the steps taken by the University towards the
fulfilment of its objects and an outcome based assessment of the
research being undertaken in such University, and be submitted to
the Board of Governors on or before such date as may be specified
by the Statutes and the Board of Governors shall consider the report
in its annual meeting. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
the annual report as approved by the Board of Governors shall be
published on the website of the University for Research and
Innovation.
Clause 28.—This clause relates to disclosure of intellectual
property created out of public funded research and vesting of title
of such property. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that,
where a University for Research and Innovation creates new
knowledge from research which is funded by the Central
Government, or by any body under the Central Government and
leading to an intellectual property, such University shall as soon as
the fact of actual realisation of the public funded intellectual
property comes to knowledge, make a disclosure thereof to the
Central Government or such authority designated, by notification, by
the Central Government. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides
that the University for Research and Innovation shall, within the
period required by any law for the time being in force for protection
of public funded intellectual property, intimate to the Central
Government, its intention to retain the title of the public funded
intellectual property and the Central Government shall, subject to
such law, allow the title of such public funded intellectual property
to vest in such University. However, where such University fails to
disclose the public funded intellectual property or provide the
intimation of its intention, the title of the public funded intellectual
property shall vest in the Central Government and the Central

127
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, refuse
the title to such University within ninety days of the receipt of the
intimation on any of the grounds that, in the public interest and in
exceptional circumstances the Central Government deems it
expedient so to do and it is necessary so to do in the interest of
the security of the nation and also where the Central Government is
satisfied that such University has, for reasons beyond its control
failed to give intimation within the time specified, it may, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the said period to such
limit as may be prescribed.
Clause 29.— This clause relates to protection and utilisation
of intellectual property by University for Research and Innovation.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the University for
Research and Innovation retaining the title to a public funded
intellectual property shall protect and utilise it in such manner as it
may deem fit. However, where the public funded intellectual
property has such immense public interest that it is necessary or
expedient for the Central Government to initiate the process for
utilisation of such intellectual property, then such University shall
assist the Central Government in providing for such utilisation, but
the royalties or income received, if any, from such intellectual
property shall be made over to such University. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause provides that the income or royalties arising out of
the public funded intellectual property shall be shared by the
University for Innovation with the intellectual property creator in
accordance with the provisions of any agreement which may be
entered into in this regard between such intellectual property creator
and such University.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for powers of Central
Government in relation to public funded property. Sub-clause (1) of
the said clause provides that the Central Government shall protect,
maintain and utilise the public funded intellectual property for which
the title vests with it in any country in such manner as it may deem
fit. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that save as otherwise
provided in any other law for the time being in force relating to
intellectual property such as trade mark, copyright, patent, design,
domain names and brands (hereinafter referred to as “intellectual
property”), the Central Government may give directions for
prohibiting or restricting the publication of information with respect
to any public funded intellectual property or communication of such
information to any person or entity which it considers prejudicial to
the interest of the security of India.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Central
Government may acquire title to any intellectual property emerging
out of research in a University for Research and Innovation which
it considers necessary in the interest of the security of India. The
Explanation to the said clause provides that the expression “interest
of the security of India” means any action for the security of India
that relates to the use of public funded intellectual property for

128
making a product which, relates to fissionable materials or the
materials from which they are derived; or relates to the traffic in
arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in
other goods and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for
the purpose of supplying to a defence establishment; or is taken in
time of war or other emergency; or relates to the maintenance of
law and order or can cause a threat to life and liberty of citizens
of India. Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the
provisions of the protection and utilisation of intellectual property
emerging from public funded research shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force,
relating to intellectual property.
Clause 31.—This clause relates to the application of
provisions of this Chapter to the Universities for Research and
Innovation entirely funded by Central Government. Sub-clause (1)
of the said clause provides that the provisions of the protection and
utilisation of intellectual property emerging from public funded
research shall apply to such Universities for Research and
Innovation as are wholly or substantially funded by the Central
Government (hereinafter referred to as the public funded University
for Research and Innovation). Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
any other law, the Central Government may, by notification, declare
a University established by any law for the time being in force,
other than a privately funded university, having regard to the high
standards of and potential for research and innovation in higher
education, as may be assessed by the committee of experts referred
to in sub-section (4) of section 10, as a University for Research and
Innovation for the purposes of the proposed legislation and with
effect from the date of such notification the provisions of the
proposed legislation shall apply to such University. However, where
a University has been established by a State Act, every such
notification shall be made only on the recommendation of the
Legislature of such State through a resolution to the effect that the
University for Research and Innovation may be so notified.
Clause 32.— This clause relates to Board of Governors of
public funded University for Research and Innovation. It provides
that there shall be constituted a Board of Governors for each public
funded University for Research and Innovation and such Board of
Governors shall consist of such number of members not exceeding
seven having such qualifications as may be prescribed and the
tenure and terms and conditions of appointment or nomination of
the members, shall be such as may be prescribed and the provisions
of Chapter III shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to all public funded
Universities for Research and Innovation and any reference to the
Board of Governors shall mean the Board constituted by the Central
Government under this section.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for the Visitor. It provides
that the President of India shall be the Visitor of every public funded

129
University for Research and Innovation. It further provides that the
Visitor shall appoint, in such manner as may be provided by the
Statutes, an academic of international eminence and standing as the
Chancellor of each public funded University for Research and
Innovation. It also provides that the Chancellor shall have such
powers and perform such other functions as may be provided by or
under the Statutes and the Ordinances.
Clause 34.—This clause relates to grants by the Central
Government for development and maintenance of public funded
Universities for Research and Innovation. It provides that the
Central Government may, after due appropriation made by
Parliament, by law is this behalf, make, on the basis of such norms
and criteria as may be determined, by that Government, grants of
such sums of money, to each public funded University for Research
and Innovation, as are required for its development and
maintenance. However, prior approval of the Central Government
shall be necessary for the University for Research and Innovation to
dispose of any immovable property created from such grants.
Clause 35.—This clause relates to Statement of accounts and
audit of public funded University for Research and Innovation. Sub-
clause (1) of the said clause provides that the statement of accounts
of each public funded University for Research and Innovation shall
be audited by such auditor as may be appointed in this behalf by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, such part of the grants provided by
the Central Government or by any organisation or agency to each
public funded University for Research and Innovation for research
in such University shall be subjected only to assessment and audit
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India on such outcome
based parameters as may be prescribed by the Central Government
with the concurrence of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that a copy of the
statement of accounts including the balance sheet and the statement
of income and expenditure, the report of the auditor, the report of the
Academic Board and other documents required to be annexed or
attached with such statement, shall be submitted to the Central
Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be
laid before each House of Parliament. Sub-clause (4) of the said
clause provides that the Expert Group for Research Audit constituted
under sub-section (2) of section 20 shall submit its assessment and
evaluation of the research undertaken in each public funded University
for Research and Innovation to the Academic Board and the Academic
Board shall cause such report to be placed before the Board of
Governors along with an explanatory memorandum of the action
taken thereon with reasons for such action.
Clause 36.— This clause relates to annual report of each
public funded University for Research and Innovation. It provides

130
that a copy of the annual report, as prepared under section 27, shall
be submitted by each public funded University for Research and
Innovation to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may
be, cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 37.— This clause relates to furnishing of returns and
information to the Central Government. It provides that every public
funded University for Research and Innovation shall furnish to the
Central Government within such period as may be specified by that
Government such returns or other information with respect to its
property or activities as that Government may, from time to time,
require.
Clause 38.— This clause relates to review of Universities for
Research and Innovation. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides
that every University for Research and Innovation shall, within
fifteen years from the establishment and incorporation of such
University under the proposed legislation and thereafter at the
expiration of every tenth year, constitute a committee of experts to
evaluate and review the performance in achievement of the objects
of such University during the said period of fifteen years or ten
years, as the case may be. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
provides that the committee of experts shall consist of such number
of members of international repute in academia recognised as
amongst the foremost in the world in their sphere of study not
exceeding seven, nominated from different fields of knowledge as
may have relevance to the teaching, learning and research in such
University of Innovation and such member shall be paid such fee or
allowances as may be provided by the Statutes.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the committee
of experts shall assess the performance of such University for
Research and Innovation and make recommendations on, the extent
of fulfilment of the objects of the University for Research and
Innovation specified in section 5, as demonstrated by the state of
teaching, learning and research and its contribution to society; the
promotion of transformational and multi-disciplinary research
requiring an integrated approach to complex problems of society;
the advancement of fundamental research beyond the current
frontiers of knowledge; the establishment of such University as
amongst the global leaders in higher education and research; the
impact and contribution of alumni of such University to institutions,
industry or civil society; the extent of achievement of social equality
through education and research in such University; the connection
established by such University between innovation spurred through
the efforts of the University to its neighborhood and to society; and
the breadth of impact that education and research in such University
have had on society.
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the committee
of experts shall conduct its evaluation and review of the
performance of the University for Research and Innovation on the

131
basis of such metrics as may be defined, prior to the
commencement of such review, by the Commission. Sub-clause (5)
of the said clause provides that the recommendations of the
Committee of experts shall be submitted, along with the response of
the University for Research and Innovation, to the Central
Government and the Central Government shall cause such
recommendations to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 39.—This clause relates to proceedings of the
authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. It provides that no
act or proceedings of any authority or any other body of a University
for Research and Innovation shall be invalid merely by reason of the
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for application of other
laws not barred. It provides that subject to the provisions of sub-
sections (2) and (3) of section 6, the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the
provisions of any other law, including such law on reservation in
admission as applicable to the University for Research and
Innovation, for the time being in force.
Clause 41.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
make rules. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the
Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out
the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause enumerates the matters for which such rules may be made
by the Central Government.
Clause 42.—This clause relates to making of Statutes. Sub-
clause (1) of said clause provides that subject to the provisions of
the proposed legislation, the Board of Governors of every University
for Research and Innovation shall, by publication on its website
make Statutes to carry out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the matters
for which such Statutes may be made by the Board of Governors
of every University for Research and Innovation and sub-clause (3)
of the said clause provides that the Board of Governors may, from
time to time, make or amend or repeal any Statutes, and each such
Statute, its amendment or repeal, as the case may be, shall come
into effect from the date of its publication on the website of the
University for Research and Innovation.
Clause 43.—This clause relates to power to make Ordinances.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the Academic Board
may, by publication on University’s website, make Ordinances to
carry out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of
the said clause specifies the matters for which such Ordinances
may be made by the Academic Board of every University for
Research and Innovation.
Clause 44.—This clause provides for laying of rules before
Parliament. It provides that every rule made under the proposed

132
legislation shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
Clause 45.—This clause relates to power to remove
difficulties. Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that if any
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed
legislation, the Central Government may, by order published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of the proposed legislation as appear to it to be necessary
or expedient for removing the difficulty. However, the said sub-
clause provides that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of the
proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that
every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after
it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.

133
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment and
incorporation of the Universities for Research and Innovation.
2. Clause 8 of the Bill provides that every University for
Research and Innovation shall be a not for profit legal entity. Clause
20 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf make to each
University for Research and Innovation, grants of such sums of
money as may be required for supporting research and the
promotion and development of higher education and expenditure on
scholarships or fellowships instituted by it, including scholarships or
fellowships for students from socially and educationally backward
classes or categories of citizens enrolled in such University.
3. Clause 21 of the Bill provides for each University for
Research and Innovation to establish a Endowment Fund with such
initial corpus as may be provided in the Memorandum of Agreement
and each University has been empowered to receive donations,
contributions from alumni and other incomes including revenues
from advisory, consulting or training services and invest such Fund
for the growth and development of the Universty.
4. Clause 34 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf, on the basis of such norms and criteria as may be
determined, grants of such sums of money to each public funded
University for Research and Innovation for its development and
maintenance.
5. At this stage it is difficult to make any estimate of the
expenditure which may be involved as it would depend upon the
number of public funded Universities for Research and Innovation
that the Government may decide to establish.
6. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of
recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
133

134
134
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 41 of the Bill empowers the Central
Government to make, by notification in the Official Gazette, rules
for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-
clause (2) enumerates the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made. These matters shall, inter alia , include—(a) the
manner of choosing a person of international eminence to be a
member of the committee under clause (iii) of the third proviso to
sub-section (3) of section 6; (b) the composition of the committee
of experts constituted under in sub-section (4) of section 10;
(c) the other reasons for rejecting a proposal for entering into a
memorandum of agreement under sub-clause (f
 ) of clause (ii) of
sub-section (6) of section 10; (d) the other particulars of the report
of the Vice-Chancellor under sub-section (3) of section 25; (e) the
period of limitation which may be extended under the proviso to
sub-section (2) of section 28; (f
 ) the number and qualifications of
members of the Board of Governors of a public funded University
for Research and Innovation under sub-section (2) of section 32;
(g) the tenure, terms and conditions of appointment or nomination
of members of the Board of Governor of a public funded University
for Research and Innovation under sub-section (3) of section 32;
(h) the outcome based parameters for assessment and audit by the
Comptroller and Auditor General of the part of the grants provided,
by the Central Government or by any other organisation or agency,
to each public funded University for Research and Innovation for
research under sub-section (2) of section 35; (i) any other matter
which is required to be, or may be, specified by rules or in respect
of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Board
of Governors to make, by publication on its website, Statutes to
carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2)
of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such
Statutes may be made. These matters shall, inter alia, include-
(a) the objective criteria, to account for disparities in educational
attainments arising from the socio-educational background of any
class or category of applicants in the matter of admission under the
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 7; (b) to provide for the
administration, management and operations of a University for
Research and Innovation by the Board of Governors under sub-
section (2) of section 14; (c) the manner of composition of the
Academic Board and its tenure under sub-section (1) of section 15;
(d) the powers and functions wh ich may be vested in the Academic
Board by the Board of Governors under sub-section (2) of section
15; (e) the establishment of faculties or schools of studies under
sub-section (1) of section 16; (f
 ) the powers and functions of the

135
Board of Studies under sub-section (2) of section 16; (g) the
powers and duties which may be conferred upon a faculty of
knowledge manpower assessment by a University for Research and
Innovation under clause (v) of sub-section (3) of section 16;
(h) the powers and duties which may be assigned to a Research
Council under clause (vii) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (i) the
manner of appointment of the Chancellor by the promoter under
sub-section (1) of section 18; (j) the manner of constitution of a
search-cum-selection Committee for selection of a Vice-Chancellor
of a University for Research and Innovation, under sub-section (2)
of section 18; (k) the deans of schools and other officers and
employees of a University for Research and Innovation to be
specified under sub-section (3) of section 18; (l) policy to attract
highly qualified and talented academics having sufficient teaching or
research experience from any part of India or abroad, and to offer
them emoluments and perks commensurate with their standing under
sub-section (1) of section 19; (m) the terms and conditions of
appointment of Professors and Associate Professors under clause
(a) of sub-section (2) of section 19; (n) the manner of constitution
of an Expert Group for Research Audit, the period for which such
Group shall be constituted and the parameters for conducting an
assessment and evaluation of the research undertaken out of public
funds in each University for Research and Innovation under sub-
section (2) of section 20; (o) the manner of investment of the
University Endowment Fund under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(p) the  form and the general instructions and accounting standards
in accordance with which the balance sheet and the statement of
income and expenditure of a University for Research and Innovation
is to be prepared under sub-section (2) of section 23; (q) the date
by which an annual report may be submitted to the Board of
Governors, under sub-section (1) of section 27; (r) the manner of
appointment of Chancellor under sub-section (2) of section 33;
(s) the powers and functions of the Chancellor of a public funded
University for Research and Innovation under sub-section (3) of
section 33; (t) the fee and allowances payable to the members of
the Committee of Experts under sub-section (2) of section 38;
(u) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified
by Statutes or in respect of which provision is to be made by
Statutes.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 43 of the Bill empowers the
Academic Board to make, by publication on its website, Ordinances
to carry out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2)
of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of which such
Ordinances may be made. These matters shall include-(a) the
designation of persons appointed for imparting instruction or
conducting research under sub-section (1) of section 3; (b) the
powers and duties which may be conferred upon a faculty of
knowledge manpower assessment by a University for Research and
Innovation under clause (v) of sub-section (3) of section 16; (c) the
powers and duties which may be assigned to a Research Council

136
under clause (vii) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (d) the powers
and functions of the Chancellor under sub-section (3) of section 33;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified
by Ordinances or in respect of which provision is to be made by
Ordinances.
4. Clause 44 of the Bill provides that every rule made by the
Central Government under the proposed legislation is required to be
laid before each House of Parliament.
5. The matters in respect of which the rules, the Statutes or
the Ordinances may by made are matters of administrative or
procedural detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.

137
137
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment and incorporation of Universities for Research and Innovation and
for enabling them to emerge as centres for ecosystems to develop as hubs of education,
research and innovation and to promote research and innovation in learning and design,
development and delivery of solutions and for matters connected therewith and incidental
thereto.
(Shri Kapil Sibal, Minister of Human Resource Development)

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.