~· 
;; 
; RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUl\1AN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
THIRD REPORT 
ON 
WORKING OF THE DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN & CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
(REGARDING CHILD DEVELOPMENT ) 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabhn on the 17th December, 1993) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 17th December, 1993) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRET ARlAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 1993 I AGRAHA Y ANA, 1915 (SAKA) 

·. 2. 
3. 
' 4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
CONTENTS 
Composi tion of the Committee ........................................................... . 
Introduc tion ................................................................................... . 
An Overview .................................................................................. . 
In tegrated Child Development Services (!CDS) ..................................... . 
The Cent ral Social Welfare Board (CSW B) .......................................... . 
National Institut e of Public Cooperation and Child Development 
(NIPCCD) ...................................................................................... . 
Role of Voluntary Organisations ........ : ... .... ............................ .. ........... . 
Role of foreign Agencies in various Welfare I Development Schemes for 
Children .......... .............................. ...................... ... ...... ............... ... . 
Evaluation and Monitoring ...................................................... ...... .... . 
Minutes of th e Meetings of the Committee .... ................ ... ................... .. 
(iii )-(iv) 
(v) 
1 
2 
5 
8 
9 
11 
17 

MPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMEN­
TARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE 
DEVELOPMENT 
(1993-94) 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Dr. Jinendra Kumar .lain 
5. Miss Saroj Khaparcle 
6. Shri V. Hanumantha Rau 
•7. Vacant 
8. Shri Mel. Sal im 
9. Slui Pravat Kumar Sa nwntaray 
10. Prof. 1. G. Sanadi 
11. Shri Ashokc Kurn:tr S<..: t ~ 
12. Shri Vishnu K~'!t t Sl::t'\lri 
13. Shri P. Upcn d r<~ 
14. Sh ri R anjan Pras::cl \'ad;n 
LOK SAUli A 
15. Dr. Viswanath :u1 K:11·,it!·· 
16. Dr. V. Rai esilw<iran 
17. l' ruL (Sm! ) Savith ri Lt ksllltl<tll<ll! 
18. Shri M:t!l; '>h . ·1!-:ar .r\ iva r 
19. f)r. Vasanl Ntwrutti P<tW;ir 
20. Prof. !). J. Kurien 
' 1 <) ht i Sul,as h Chand r:t Naya k 
"'') Shri Bapu ll ari Clwure 
D. :)hri z. M. Kahand ok 
., ' Silri D:t tl:t tvlcl!hc 
~) . '~hri lshw: trhl :tt Khodabha i Chavd a 
~(l . ·• '· .: K . l'hula -,uh Vandava r 
~ 7. Sl1ri · \ ~LII t l Sh..:r r,lii!: l 
2::>. Shri It ~t in .lit 
21). Dr. Ranh.:sh Ch:tnd To n1:11 
30. Shri Chinma yanand Sw;uni 
11. Sliri D :lll Da\'al ,h-,ili 
32 . Prof . K. Vt tl k : t '~ ' ~,i ri C!owda 
31. Dr. K. 1). Jc~\vdni 
34. Dr. Mahadc.;epak Singh Shak ya 
35. Or. G. L. Kanaujia 
(iii) 

!I j *36. Shri Anna Joshi 
I 37. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
38. Shri Rambadan 
39. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
40. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
41. Shri Brahma Nand Manda! 
42. Prof. Ummareddy Venkateswarlu 
43. Shri Suraj Mandai 
44. Shri Kanshi Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Vanaja N. Sarna, Director 
Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
, .. , 
•Nominated w.e.f. 26.8.1993 in the vacanc y caused by the resignation of Shri Chandrajeet Yad:w w.e..f. !3.4 . 1993. 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the report on its 
behu.Jf, do hereby present the Third Report of the Committee on the working of the Dcpmtment 
of Women & Child Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development (regarding Child 
Development). 
The Committee heard the Secretary and other off icials of the Department of Women & 
Child Development on 22nd & 23rd Septe mber , 1993 rega rding various Child Development/ 
Welfare Schemes such as Integrated Ch ild Developm ent Services (!CDS), Balwacli Nutrition 
Pro gram me , etc. run by the Department or throu gh various voluntary organisations. Items 
discussed also includ ed the working of the Central Social Welfare Board (CSWB) , National 
Insititute of Publi c Cooperation and Child Developmen t (NIPCCD), the Role of Voluntary 
Organisations and the financial assistance received (rom various sources including Int ernational 
Agencies in this regard. 
In orde r to get first hand information about Voluntary Organi sat ions engaged in Child 
Development activiti es, run under various schemes, thei r problems, the receipt and disbursement 
of funds they receive and their future plans, etc. The Committee heard the representatives of two 
such major voluntary organ isat ions namely the Bhartiya Adim jati Sevak Sangh and the Indian 
Council for Child Welfare on 22nd September, 1993. 
The Committee considered the Report at its sittings held on the 18th. 19th Octobe r and 
7th December and adopted on the 8th December, 1993. 
NEW DELHI; 
8th December, 1993 
17 Agrahayana, 1915 (Saka) 
RAM NARESH YADAV 
Chairman 
Deparfme ni-R elated Parliamentary Slanding 
Commitfee on Human Resource Development. 

~An Overview 
~ 1. Children are the greatest asset of any nation and they are also the most vulnerable section 
~ of the population .. Dev~lopment. of children is the most essent~al compon~nt i~ huma~ resource 
ft development and IS an mdex of 1ts future progress. Therefore, mvestment 111 children gtves many 
~ times higher returns than investment in physical assets. 
2. India is the second largest country, population-wise, in the world and has a population 
strufLUre with a broad base, signifying a high dependency ratio. According to the Expe rt 
Committee on Population Projects (1989), there were abo ut 301 million persons below 15 years of 
age _in 1990 of whom 22.5 million were less th~n one year (infants), 44 million were i1l the age 
group of 1 to 2 years (todd lers) and 63.7 million were in the age group of 3 to 5 years (pre­
schoolers). As per the latest figures available from the 1991 census, nearly 15% of the country's 
population is below the age of 6 years. According to the current demographic projects, the 
number of births in India is likely to reach its peack around the turn of the century. 
3. The enormity of the challenge the nation is facing in the field of child development will 
further aggravate if the growth of population living below the poverty line continues. It will 
become a herculean task for the Gov ernment to tackle the problem of child developm ent under 
such conditions. 
4. India is a Welfar e State and care of children has bee n one of the causes to which its policy 
has remained committed. Even in the constitution of India , under the Directive Principles of 
State Policy, it is provided that "the State shall, in partic ular direct its policy towards secu ring 
that the tender age of children, are not abused and that children are given opportunities and 
facilities to develop in a healthy mann er ancl in conditions of freedom and dignity and that 
childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral and material 
aba~1donment." As a follow up to this commitmen t, Gove rnment adopted a National Policy for 
Clillclren in 1974 which declared that it shall be the policy o( the State to provide adequate 
services to children, both before and after birth and through the period or growt h, to ensure their 
full physical, mental and social development. it is ag<tinst this backdrop that India joined the 
comity of nations in the successive reaffirmations of globa l commitment to the cause of children 
in 1989-90. India is also a signatory to the World Declarat ion (Septemb er, 1990) on the Survival, 
Protection and Development of children and the plan of action for its implementati on. 
5. ln spite of all these efforts, the condition of child ren continues to be pathetic and grim. 
Most of them <ire deprived of the basic amenities like health, educat ion and other facrors 
essential for all round development of their personality. A large numb er of children are suffer ing 
from malnutrition and are victims of exploitation such as beggary and labour. Ther e have been 
cases of children even being smuggled out to foreign coun tries for exploitation and atr ocities. 
6. It was with all the above mentioned points in view that the Departm ent of Women & Child 
Development was created within the Ministry of Human Resource Development in 1985 with a 
nodal role for providin g impetu s to the development of the most important segment of our 
population i.e. childr en. 
7. Government has initiated a number of Child Develop ment Schemes but the corner -sto ne of 
it<; efforts in this sphere is the Integrat ed Child Development Services (ICDS) Programm e which 
is the world's largest integrated nutriti on programme today. 
-8. Besides this, the Nutrition and Child Develo.pment Bureau of the Department looks afte r 
the nutrition and child development portfolio apart from implementati on and further extension of 
the lCDS and also attends to other duties relating to nutrition and child cle've!opment such as 

L. 
Infant Milk substitutes, Infant Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods alongwith Fo;d Aid from C~! 
and World Food Progran~me (relating specially to chi~dren, pregnant women. a~d. n~r~~~l 
mothers). The Central Socwl Welfare Board (CSWB) wluch also falls under the JUnsdtctton ·dr 
the Department of Women & Child Development, has continued its welfare activities for the\ 
benefit of children through voluntary organisations throughout the co untry. "!d~ 
9. Government is engaged in various efforts in child development schemes since Independence. 
It may be noted here that the inf ant mortality rate has fallen from 146 pe r 1000 live births in 1960 
to 80 per 1000 live births in 1990. The prevalence of severe and mode rate degrees of malnutrition ' 
among children has also declined during the period from 1974 to 1989. Enrolment rate in prima ry 
schools has also increased from 38 per cent in 1951 to 94 per cent in 1989. 
10. How ever, there remains much to be done by Government. For instance, about 30% of the 
children born each year have a low birth weight which is the major cause of infant mortality. 
Malnutrition aggravates diseases like diarrhoea, pneumonia , neonatal tetanus and measles. 
Deficiency in Vitamin A leads to an estimated 40,000 new cases of nutritional blindness every 
year. There are some of the areas which are still to be taken up seriously. 
11. Though in absolute terms, Government is utilising quite a sub stant ial portion of its 
resources on vari ous child development schemes but in terms of per cap ita expenditure incurred 
on children, Indi a is ranked very low. lt is against this background that the need for not only 
allocation of more resources has become inevitable but even better utilization of the exist ing 
resources has become more imperative. 
12. In view of the persistance of infant morbidity, malnutrition, lack of educat ional facilities, 
cases of drop-outs and child labour, the National Plan of Action for Children prepared by the 
Government assumes greater importance. This can only be implemented if a system of 
monitoring and a consistent mode of coordination of the Department of Child Development with 
Departments of Labour, Health, Education, etc. is arranged. 
I 
Integrated Child Development Services (I CDS) 
13. The ICDS Scheme, sta rted on 2nd October, 1975 as an innovative experiment, has 
developed into the most comprehensive programme for children for delivering an integrated 
package of services encompassing the main components of human resource development namely 
health , nutrition and education. The scheme has expanded considerably over the years. Under 
the Scheme, the work-force involved is predominantly in an honorary and voluntary capacity at 
the grass-root level . namely, th e Anganwadi workers and helpers working in 3.39 Jakh 
Anganwadis who are invariably the village women and they are the touchstone of th e success of 
the programme. As on 31st December, 1992, there were 2765 sanct ioned lCDS projects, 
including 194 projects in the State sector. The beneficiary coverage under the programme is 
progressiv ely increas ing. Out of 1.83 crore children and mothers receiving supplementary 
nutrition under the prog ramme, 90.67 Jakh children aged 3-6 years are receiving pre-school 
stimulation. In terms of its coverage, it is one of the largest such programmes in the world today. 
14. The ICDS has the specific objective of improving the nutritional and health status of 
children in the age group of 0-6 years and to reduce the incidence of mortality, malnutrition and 
school drop-o uts, besides enhanci ng the capacity of the mothers to look after the normal health 
and nutritional needs of the child ren. 
15. The strate gy adopted is to make a coor~inated effort through an integrated package off 
services under healt h , nutrition and educat ion for children, immunization aga inst poliomyelitis 
diptheria , tetanus, whooping cough, measles and tuberculosis to all children below 6 years of age , 

'and against tetanus to all pregnant women, health check-up including anti-natal care for the 
pregnant women, post-natal care of the nursing mothers and new born infants and care of 
1children under six years of age; referral services for pregnant women and children; non-fo rm al 
'education for the children of 3-5 years of age; health and nutrition educat ion for the pregnant 
=··women, nursing mothers and all women in the age group of 15-45 years from low income families 
l1and safe drinking water supp ly in the ICDS project areas. T his is based on th e assumption that 
~rtl1e integrated inputs of inter-related services would be greater than the sum total of individual 
inputs provided independently . 
i. 16. The administrative un it of ICDS project is the Community Development Block or a Taluk 
in ruraVtribal areas and wards in the urban slum s. The main unit of the ICDS service is an 
. Anganwacli (AW) i.e. the child care centre manned by honorary workers and assisted by a female 
· helper from the local area. One Anganwadi is proposed to cate r to the needs of one thousa nd 
, persons in rur aVurban areas and seven hundred in tribal areas . The number of Anganwadis in 
very project is adjusted according to the needs and depending upon the population, topography, 
number of villages and the inhab itants thereof, headed by a Supervisor who looks after 25 
; Anganwadis. The Child Development Project Officer (CDPO) is overall incharge of the 
~ programme who looks after the work of five Supervisors. 
~ 
17. A Spec ial Nutrition Programme was started in 1970-71 in the State sector for the benefit of 
children below the age of six years and expectant/nursing mothers residing in tribal and backward 
;, areus and urban slums under the ICDS projects. Under this programme, supplemen tary feed ing is 
given for 300 clays a year to the beneficiaries. Every child is provided 300 calories and 8-10 grams 
.~ of protein and every expectant/nursing mother 500 calories with 20-25 grams of protein. 
f 
·. _ 18. Due to th e rising cos t of foodgrains, the rate of per unit cost of nutrition supplementat ion 
; under the ICDS has been increased w.ef february, 1991 to 95 paise per child per clay and 135 
: (?aise per child per day in case of severely malnourished children; and 115 paise per day in the 
~ case of expectant/nursing mothers. · 
t- 19. Jn 1990, Governm en t proposed a co mprehensive review of the lCDS Scheme through one 
i of its own organisations namely the National Institut e of Public Cooperation and Child 
~ , Development (NIPCCD) which gave its Report in 1992. The revi ew was clone . to ascertain 
~ l~enefits of the scheme on selected outcome indicators, to find out the difference in 
~ implementati on and utilisation of services, to identify problems and bottlenecks in the 
•1 implementation and to find out the perception of the community towards !CDS. As per the said 
, ~eview, the ICDS has had a positive impact on beneficiaries and has the potential of enhancing 
~ the child surv ival rat e. Definite improvement has been reported on major indica tors of Hea lth 
~ and Nutrition like Infant Mortality Rate (lMR), nutritionul status morbidity pattern, 
immunization coverage and utilisation of . hea lth services. Improv ement in enrolment and 
· scholastic performance further indicated a positive impact of the pre-school educat ion.. component 
of ICDS. On the negative side, the evaluation hus emphasised the uneven occurrence of 
~. community part icipation in ! CDS and also problems like interruption s in food supply. 
Observatio ns/Reco mmend ations 
' 20. Gove rnment had the ICDS Scheme reviewed by N IPCCD to test its utility. Howe ver, si nce 
NIPCCD is an organisation of the depart ment itself , th e o bj ectivity of its review is unlikely to be 
graded as high in comparison to eva luation condu cted by an indep end ent agency. Moreover, th e 
:.review has provided piecemeal inform ation and has not take n syste matic stock of input s vis-a-vis 
'the ontptit, nor has it investigated .th e impact of services on the tar get groups in a compa·ehensive 
ntanner. 

21. It was observ ed by the Committee that while according to evidence, physical achievement 
sanctioning ICDS projects has been more than the target in 1989-90, 1990-91, 1991-92 & 199 
yet an enhancement of th e targ et i s required to cover many backward areas in the country hy t 
end of the Eighth Five Year Plan. It was also noted that an additional sum of Rs. 653 crores 
required in the Eighth Plan to cover the escalation of expen ses caused by increase in nutrit•n .. .-..-. 
norm s, etc. Unless this is provid ed by the Planning Commission, th ere will be a real dec1·ease 
th e fund s available for expansion of the scheme. 
22. The Committ ee is surprised to note that though the scheme was started in 1975 yet 
revi ew was don e as late as in 1990, that is after a gap of 15 years. Ther efor e, th e Commi 
reco mmend s that a comprehensive syste m of evaluati on by an ind ependent agency should 
evolved to ensure that at leas t one review of ICDS is done in eve ry three yea rs. 
23. The Committee also take s a serious view of the fact that though the Government is pro 
crores of rupee s for ICDS Scheme but there is no proper machin ery to monitor the same. 
Secretary, Departm ent of Wom en & Child Development, has stated in her oral evidenc e tender ed . 
befor e the Committee that since the Department is a very small one without field functionaries, it :~ ,, 
is not possible to spare the work force for· monitoring comprehensively. The Committee is '; 
constrained to hold this lame excuse and recommends that the organisational s truchu ·e of the 
Depa rtment should be strengthened by increasing the number of staff s ufficiently beca use 
monitodn g and evaluati on of the schemes, where fund s are poured in on such a larg e scale ar·e the ~ 
touchstone of th e s uccess of the scheme. :·1 ''\ 
24. The Committ ee also tak es a seriou s noie of th e fact that th ere is no devicP to verify as to i 
how man y ICDS centr es ar·e nmning actually and how many ar·e only on pap er and ther e fore, ~ 
recommend s to evolve a mechani sm t o ca rry out physical verifications of the centr es. ~ 
25. The diet prescribe d under ICDS for infants all over the country is th e sa me. The Committ ee 
feels that ke eping in view th e vastness and topographic chuacteristics of th e countr y, it is not ·" 
advisa ble to prescribe a single diet nonn for all th e ICDS centr es tlu·oughout th e counh·y. The , 
Committee recommends that di etin g preferences, availability of the nutriti onal foods, etc. sho uld ; 
be th e decid ing factors in determinin g the diet given to infants in different ICDS cen tres. It will ' 
redu ce not only th e cost of tran sp01·tin g the food item s from long distances but even b eneficiaries 
will prefer takin g the food items of their choice. Besides this, health check up of ICD S beneficiaries 
should be done regularl y thr ough Dispe nsari es, primar y health ce ntr es and mobile m edi cal teams. 
26. Ther·e is no provision to check the quality and nutritional value of the food items given to 
the beneficiari es und er the ICDS scheme . The Committ ee recommend s that th ere should be some 
watch-dog agency to ensure the quality of food items given to such centre s. A separate storage 
space for l<eeping food items should also be made available. 
i7. The ,Committ ee also recommends that coverage of ICDS services s hould be improved 
especJally .in tribal areas keeping in view the topographic factor s and with a view to bring more 
and more beneficiari es und er th e umbrella of ICDS. 
28. The Committee feels that even in some urban slum s, condition of childr en i s appalling and 
servic es for th em und er ICDS are minimal. Therefore, the Committ ee recommend s that adequate 
steps s hould be tak en urgentl y to impro ve the situation in such urb an slums also. 
29./fhe Committee also feels that there is lot of scope for improvem ent in the field of . 
supervision. It a·ecommend s that sup enision should be stt·engthen ed thr ough appropriate mea sures. 
The maximum ICDS centres that a supervisor can effectively supervi se should be fixed ; dou 
charge or additional charge of supervi so rs s hould be avoided. ' 
30. The Committee expresses its concem over the non -ava ilal>ility o f mat edal 

~; 
~l·tearning, which is one of th e major constraints in the popul a rit y of the !CDS scheme. The 
· comniittee fe els th at effort s s hould be mad e to provide a minimum set of appropriate educational 
aids m aterial at eve ry ICDS centr e for th e children. 
31. Another area where th e Committee feels that th ere is a trem endous scope for improvem ent, 
is community participation. The Committ ee recommend s that public representative s lik e M.Ps., 
M.L.As. and m embers of other local bodi es like Zila Pari shad s, 131ocks and Village Panchayats 
should be in volve d in th e impl ement ation and monit ori ng of the ICDS progra mme. Vi llage 
Committee heade d by a Panchayat Member {prefet·a bly a woman ) may be formed to see th at th e 
project works properly. Committee of 5-6 persons at th e cen tral l evel may al so be formed to close ly 
1ilonit or th e impl ementation of the I C DS. The Co mmitt ee feels th at public r ept·ese ntnti ves ha ve th e 
requ isite skill, aptitude and experie nce to involve loca l people in suc h progra mmes on a m assive 
scale. CDPO and Supet·viso rs sho·.ald take appropt·iate initi at ive at Sta te nnd Distri ct leve ls and the 
Centr a l Government at the ce ntral level in thi s r ega rd immediately. 
32. The Committee feels that hon or arium paid to A nga nwadi worl<ers a nd helper s e ngaged in 
this ta sk is ver y little and it shou ld be enh nnced approp ri ately forth" it h. As fa t· as possible women 
from l ocal and not from far of areas should be engage d as Anga nwa di worl{ers / help ers. The 
Committ ee al so recommends th a t so m e provision for spec ial in centives should be m ade for the 
outstanding performance of an ICDS ce ntr e in a particular di stri ct. 
33. The Co mmitt ee considers th at the n~sources ea nn nrkcd l'or ICDS so fnr have hccn 
insufficient a nd inncleq uate. The r efo r e, it recommends that allocation of fu nd s for the same shou ld 
be incr eased in o rd er to take it to a ll the hlocl\s throughout the coun try. The tar gets abou t the 
numb er of n ew blocl<s to be covere d uucler the sc hemes eac h yea r should be fixed. 
II 
The Ce ntral Social Welfa re Board (CSW B) 
34. To promote child development through the cooperation and assistance of vo lunwry 
organisations, Central Social Welfare Board was set up in 1953. 
35. The following are the various programmes/activities und e rtaken by the CSWB:-
1. Awareness Generation Projects for Rural and Poor Wome.n. 
2. Ba lwacli Nutrition Programme. 
3. Condensed Courses of Educati on for adult women and voca tional training courses. 
4. Creche Workers' Training. 
5. Socio-Economic Programme. 
6. General Grants-in-Aid Programm e. 
7. Balwadis in Demonstration Projects. 
8. Host e l for working women. 
9. Welfare extension project (Community Development). 
10. Welfare extens ion projects in Border Area. 
11. Holiday Camps. 
12. Mahila Manclals. 
13. Voluntary Action Bureaux and family Counselling Centres. 

36. Out of the above, the Balwadi Nutrition Programme. Creche Worker's Training 
Pro.gramme. General Grants -in-Aid Programm e. Holiday C~m1ps and Voluntary Action Bureaux ,. 
and Family Counselling Centres are being nm for the benefit of children. 
B~lwadi Nutrition Programme 
37. Started in 1970. Balwacli Nutrition Programme aims at providing supplementary food to 
chllclren in the age group of 3-5 yems belonging to the families of low income groups for solving 
the problem of malnutrition as it impairs health ancl clevelopment of the child. 
38. The Balwadi Nutrition Programme covers about 2.29 Jakh beneficiaries. Supplementar); 
Nutrition. consisting of 300 calories and about 12.15 grams of protein per clay per child is 
provided for nearly 270 days in a year. During the year 1993, a sum of Rs. 3.67 crores was 
released and for 1993-94, a sum of Rs. 10.12 crores has been allocated for this progr:unme. The 
proposed addition of Rs. 6.45 crores is on ,account of revision of norms ancl nutrition from 
existing 50 paise per beneficiary per clay (since October l. 1985) to Rs. 1.05 per beneficiary per 
dav with effect from 1.8.1993. 
39. The Balwacli Nutrition Programme is being implemented by the Central Social Welfare 
Bu:1rd through four national level voluntary organisations which received grants as indicated 
below:-
Bh£1rtiya Adimjati Scvak Sangh 
Hari.inn Scvak Sangh 
Indian Council for Child Welfare 
Kasrurba Gnndhi National Memoria l Trust 
(in lakhs) 
Grants received as on 
31.1.1993 
23.82 
18.83 
59.87 
15.90 
40. Another Scheme known as ·Balwaclis in Demonstration Projects' aims at providing 
recreational facilities alongwith nutrition ancl health education. Under Holiday Camp Scheme, 
Central Social Welfare Board gives grants to voluntary organisations to organ ise Holiday Camps 
for children in the age group of 10-16 years hailing from socially ancl economically backward 
sections of society and also for physically handicapped. The idea behind this programme is to 
imbibe in them a sense of group living and team spirit apart from exposure to new surroundings 
I' 
I. 
.!· 
and imparting necessary training to children in the field of discipline and character building. ~ 
¥ 
41. To provide preventive. curative and re.habilitation services to the children/victims of 
atrocities and exploitation, the programme of Voluntary Action Bureaux (V AB) and F:unily 
Counselling Centres (FCCA) were launched by Government in 1982. 
42. Child care is one of the most delicat e and scientific jobs. As more and more women are 
joining in working womens' bandwagon the clemancl of creches has increased manifold. To meet 
the demand of qualified creche organisers. Government started the programme of training of 
creche workers in 1986-87 in order to equip them with the requisite skill and art in organising 
creches in a better way. The programme was transferred to the Central Social Welfare Board 
during 1989-90 for implementation through voluntary organ isations. The following two n;1tional 
' , .. 
;~ 
i 
J 
-~ 
I ~ 

level organisations engaged 111 this task received grants from the Government during 1902-93 as 
under:-
Gr:1nts received 
(in lakhs) 
-~------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Indian Council for Child Welfare 
Bhartiya Adimjati Scvak Sangh 
Obsrrvat ions/Recommendations 
195.30 
143.63 
43. The Committee observed in the case of Balwadi Nutrition Programme, Early Childhood 
Education Programme and Creche Programme, that although there is an urgent need for 
expansion of these services, but the outlay is remaining more or less the same. During the course of 
oral evidence, the Secr·etary of the Department descrihed these as 'non-expanding programmes'. It 
was also submitted that expansion of these activities would henceforth tal<e place as a part of 
ICDS. However, it was pointed out that in many of these areas under the overall supervision of 
CSWB, funds have begun to dry up although ICDS projects are not yet in operation. Thus, people 
are hcing deprived of these services. 
44. The Committee, ther·efore, recommends that such programmes should not be curtailed. 
Many of these programmes are sponsored by the Stnte Social Welfare Boards. Just as in TCDS, 
some projects are in the State sector· also, therefore, State Social Welfare Boards should be given 
assistance within the State sectoL There should be proper· review and evaluation of the wod< heing 
done by CSWB. It has been stated that Bal\vadi Nutrition Programme and Early Childhood 
Education Pn>gramme will be taken over by ICDS. In some cnscs, Anganwadis arc to have creche 
set:vicc added to them. 'While the Committee approves of the proposal to bring these projects under 
one umbrella, it notes with concern that these pt·ogrammes are being curtailed even hcforc the 
areas have been covered by the ICDS projects. Particularly in the case of G:reches .and Day Care 
Centres the Committee was shocked to lmow that the Planning Commission did not clear the 
expansion of the Creche Programme last year. Creche service is essential not only for working 
women, but also for the girl child whose childhood is spent looking after siblings. 
45. Therefore, the Committee recommends strongly for the release of adequate funds for 
expansion of creche programme and endorses the proposal to set up a National Creche Fund for 
resource mobilisation. This should continue as a separate programme because ICDS cannot fully 
cover it. Involvement of accredited Non-Govemmental Ot·ganisntions (NGOs) in these 1)1"ognumnes 
should continue. 
46. The Committee is surprised to note that for almost all the programmes run by the Board 
upto 31.1.1993 only a fraction of the total allocation made for the year 1992-93, has been released 
and the major chunk was left to be released at the fag end of the year. The same is exemplified hy 
the following Table:--
Programme 
1. .Balwadi Nutrition Programme 
2. General Grants~in-aid Programme 
3. I3alwadis in Demonstration Projects 
4. Extension Prqjccts (Community Dc\'l:lopmcnt) 
S. Holiday Camps ' 
T 
Allocation made 
for the year 
1992·93 
230.50 
161.65 
60.00 
75.00 
73.55 
(in lakhs) 
Amount released 
up to 31.1.1993 
86.84 
84.51 
14.04 
22.53 
49.73 
I , 

47. Thi s s hows utt er negligence on the part of the Govemment whi ch ultimatel y result s in many 
•oidabl e in-egularitie s in th e utili sa tion of th e funds. 
48. The Committee recomme nds that the Board should evo lve some mech;mis m to ensure 
roportionate distributi on of fund s throughout th e year. 
49. Another point about which the Committ ee expresses its dissa tisfaction is regardin g 
'onstitution of th e Boards of th e Cent ra l Social Welfare Board (CSW B) both at the central and 
ate te·vels. Therefore, the Committ ee recommend s that th ese Board s s hould be constituted 
1mediate ly afte1· the exp iry of the tenure of the previous Boards . Acl-hocism in th e co nstit uti on of 
1ese Boards s hould be avoided at all costs so that th ese Boards cou ld fun ction in an effective 
wnner. H should also be e nsured that meetings of the se Boa1·ds arc held regulady. 
III 
National Institute of Public Coo peration and Child Developm ent (NIPCCD) 
50. The National Institute of Public Cooperation and Chile! Development (NlPCCD) is an 
utonomous organisation under the administrati ve jurisdic tion of the Department of 'Nomen & 
hilcl Development, Ministry of Human Resource Development, with its headquarters in New 
elhi. The Institute has three regional centres at Bangalore, Guwahati and Lucknow. 
51. The Institut e is an apex body for imparting regular training to functionaries of Integrated 
hild Development Services (ICDS). Its major object ives are to develop and promote volunta ry 
ction in social ckvclopment and also to promote programmes in pursuance of the National 
olicy Jor Children. During the year 1992-93, 45 training programmes were conducted in which 
387 functionari es participated. ln addition, 68 regular training programmes were conduc ted in 
•hich 23,191 person participated. During the year 1993-94, 18 training programmes arc proposed 
or 541 participants. For lCDS functionaries 21 training programmes are proposed further. 
52. In order to achieve its objectives, the Institute conducts research and evaluation studies; 
rganiscs training programmes and provides documentation ancl information services in the field 
f public coopcrution and child development. 
53. During the year 1992-93, the Institute conducted a National Survey on Int egrated child 1 
evelopment Services (ICDS) which provided very useful data for impl ementation of Integrated 
hild Development Services (lCDS). its beneficiaries and impact of services on target population. 
Observations I Recommend a I ions 
\ 
54. The Co mmitt ee feels thnt Gove rnm ent should consider th e recommendati on of NIPCC D · 
c~::ISJ~ 11:ud0:" ~~:. iu1•;,•:;::." I :.,;~·~~>n~':,~:l::.•::~s sl::" ~~ p~~~~~~:::: 1:•1~~11 .:~.:; i g :~ ~::: ~,: ~:·h e n 1 he t 
nfrastructure. On these r·eco mm end ations, Gove rnment has tak en seve ral step s which include 
llocati on of fund s for State Gove rnment s for the constt·uction of Anganwacli unit s (one-time .-:~1'­
ssistan ce); Rs 80,000/- given for the constn1ction of godown s or stora ge nt the c ircl e and block 
evels; development of pre-schoo l kits and constitution of a Committee of Ex perts to look int o the 
rob lems of m alnutriti on . 
56. As NIPCCD is spec ialised instituti on equipp ed for the job of eva luation Hnd resea rches, the "j; 
ommitt ce feels th at it ca n be used for physical vedfication of various programmes I Scheme t·un I '1 
upport ed thr oug h I l>y voluntm·y organisa tions/ l>y Gov enuncnt. The institute has done a sort of J 
ost mort em job so far. The refore, th e Committee recommends that its infr as tru ct ure and 
pecialisation etc. should be used for monitodng the activities of variou s volunt ary o•·ganisations :. 
und ed hy Gover nment and other bodies. ~ 

· IV 
Role of Voluntary Organisations 
57. In a-vast country like India, it is difficult to implement a1~y welfare I developmental scheme 
aH over the country by Government alone. Therefo re, the participation and cooperation of 
voluntary organ isat ions becomes vital to the success of social and developmental prog ram mes 
related to childr en . 
58. There are more than 100 voluntary organisations engaged in the welfare deve lopm ent 
activities which are receiving gran ts of Rs. one lakh and above . Some of the national level 
organi satio ns are even rece iving grants in crores. 
Bhnrtiya Adimjati Sevak Sangh 
59. Established in 1945, the Sang h is a national level organisat ion whose aim originally was to 
coordinat e various welfare activiti es for the tribal communiti es. But, with the expansion of its 
network it has started many other schemes for the uplii'tment of the weaker sections of society, 
particularly women and children. The Sangh received gra nts from Government for runnin g the 
following programmes during 1992-93:-
Name of the Programme 
Dalwadi Nutrition Programme 
O·cchcs I Day Care Centres for child ren of working I ailing mother 
Early Chi ldhood Education 
Short stay homes 
Observations I Recommendations 
(in lakhs) 
Amount of grant 
received 
23.82 
143.63 
22.20 
20.18 
60. The representatives of th e lllwrti ya Adimjati Scvak Sangh appeared befor e the Co mmitte e 
but th eir r eplies were ve1·y vague and they had little inform ation to sha re with th e Co mmittee 
about th e worl<ing of their o1·gani sa tion. 
61. Another sphere where th e CommiUee found this organisation wanting is that there is no 
compartmenta lisation of the g rant s as to how much is spent on th e child compon ent and how much 
on th e women component. 
62. The Co mmitt ee also tak es it seri ous ly that. the An nua l General Meeting (AGM) of the Sang h 
I~a s not tak en ph1ce for th e lnst two yea r s. 
63. The Co mmittee is surpri sed to find that the printed co pies of the. Annual Report (1991-92) of 
the Bharti ya Adimjati Sevak Sangh wa s incomplete and did not mention even the year. Thc1·e was 
no mention of the funds they received ft·om various sources and the cxpenditm·e incurred by them 
on different items. 
64. The Committee recommend s that Annual Report s a nd Aud ited Account s of all such 
organisations which receive hu ge fund s from various so urces shou ld be complete in all r espects 

mentioning therein the amount received and expenditure incurred on various items sepnratdy 
and also be laid on the Tables of both the Houses of Parliament invariahly. 
65. There is no gainsaying the fact that voluntary organisations play a crudal role in making 
welfare activities successful. However , the Committee recommends that Govcnmwnt shoulcl 
ensure that voluntary organisations which receive grant s, arc run properly. 
66. It is a matter of great concern that though the Department is contrihuting crores of 
rupees to the Sangh, hut its representative s are not on the Board of the Sangh. Thcrefon~, the 
Committee, recommends that thet·e should be at least one Government representative on th e 
Board of the Sangh and all other such hodies~ The Committee also recommends that an inquiry 
be instituted to look into the lnpses found in the working of the Bhnrtiya Adimj<lti Scval\ 
Sangh. 
Indian Co uncil for Child Welfare 
67. Indian Council for Child Welfare is a national leve l voluntary organisation e ng:tged in 
the task of welfare ancl deve lopment of chi ldren for the last about fo rt y yems. lt has irs Stare 
Councils all over the country. St:tte Councils in turn have district councils which further have 
their organ isations at the block level. The Council received grants from Government for the 
following programmes during 1992-93:-
Name of the Programme 
Truining of ICDS functionaries 
Training of Balscvikas 
Balwadi Nutrition Programme 
Creches I Day Care Cent res for Children of wroking I ailing mothers 
Early Childhood Education 
Observ ations I Recommendations 
(in lakhs) 
Amou nt of grant 
received 
270.01 
35.00 
59.87 
J C)).:\0 
7.03 
68. The Commiltee feels that there is greater scope for involvement of every citizen of this 
great country and people's representatives in the task of welfare of children nnd women. 
Therefore, the Committee urges upon the voluntary organisations also to work in close tnndom 
with the representatives of the people at various levels. 
69. Th ~ Committee was informed that G ~vernment representative s are incluclrcl in the 
managing Committee I Board of the Indian Council for Child Welfare at the national level and 
cecommends that it should be made mnndatory for the State Government s and loca l bodies also 
to aj>point their representatives on the State and District level Committe es I lloanl s of vnluntnry 
organisations recei ving Government assistance. 
70. The President, Indian Council for Child Welfare in her oral evidence tendered before the 
Committee, stated that there is an elaborate system for monitoring the various programmes run 
by the Council. Monitoring is done at National, . Stnte, .District and Block levels. At the District 
level, District Magistrate is the Chairman of th e monitoring Commitlee. It is ensured that the 
programmes arc implemented properly and the money is spent for th e benefit s of th e chilclr·cn. 

There is an Auditor a nd Accounts officer at the headquarters in Delhi and also at State Councils. 
Accounts are d oubl y c hecked both at the Central as well as th e State level. 
71. The Committee r eco mmend s that all other voluntary organi sa tions s hould follow similar 
system of m onit oring. The Com mitt ee also recomm ends that fund s I gra nts given to the voluntary 
organisatio ns s hould reach th em well in tim e in ord er to obviate th eir problems. 
72. The Committ ee also r ecommends that the Government should provif.le all sorts of assistance 
to the volu ntar y orga nisations in their monit oring efforts to ensure proper utili sation of fund s. 
73. The Committ ee feels th at there is greater need f or better co-o rdin ation amongst variou s 
Departments of the Gove nun cnt and the voluntary organisations engage d in var ious c hild welfare 
activities to achieve the common goa ls. Therefore, it r eco mm ends th a t concer ted effort s s hould be 
made towar ds the conce ntrati on of all the welfare ac tivities a t one place. 
74. The Pres ident, India n Co uncil for Child Welfare, expresse d h er concern a bout the slender 
salary paid to the instructors a t various centres despit e the y being highly qu alified. Most of them 
are Post-Graduates and some eve n D octor a tes. The Committee feels thnt as far as possible, their 
salary should be in(-rcasc d l<ceping in view the pr-ice ind ex. 
75. The Com mitt ee r eco mmend s that the Governm ent should tak e imm ediat e s teps to give wide 
publi city to th e programm es I schemes, function s and grants given t o th e organi sa tion s engaged in 
the welfare act ivities through electronic and print media by th e Gove rnm ent. It will help in 
ge_ner nling awa r eness abo ut th e prog•·ammes among th e people and th ey will l>c in a bett e•· position 
to avail of th e facilities/benefits mean t for them. 
v 
Role of For eign Agencies in Various We lfare/Develop ment Schl·mcs for C hilch·en 
76. With the development of fast means of transport and communications world has become a 
small unit today and all the countr ies have come closer to one ttnother. As a result thereof, there 
is greater interaction among them. One of the most important agencies thut foster International 
Cooperation is the United Nations Organisation. It not only brings various nations on one 
platform but also helps developing countries in their development and welfare activities. UNICEF 
beirig an arm of the United Nations Organis ation engaged in th e welfare of children is doing 
Woman's service th e world over. Besides this. some developed countries also help the developing 
countries in the ir e ndeavour to improve the lot of chi ldr en. 
77. lnclia being a deve loping country is tapping all the available sources for the implementa tion 
of its various child welfare prog ramme. The following four agencies me prov iding assistance for 
the impl ementat ion of th e Integrated Child Development Services (lCDS):-
(a) UNICEF 
78. The UNICEF provides both material and financial assistance. During the last two years 
funds have come for strengtheni ng pre-school education under the Integ rated Child Develo pment 
Services (!CDS), improvin g the food handling capabil ities, storage at the Anganwad i Centres and 
for developing the Instruction Booklets for use in the medicine kits. Financial assistance is also 
provided for meeting the entire expend iture on training of ICDS functionaries except for North ­
Eastern States. The material support to the l CDS Scheme flows in the form of ve hicles, 
typewriters and weighing scales, etc. 

(b) NORWEGIAN AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (NORAD) . ·~ 
79. The No rwegian Agency for In ternat ional Development (NORAD) Jws been providing ·;J 
assistance for Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Programme in 11 Districts of Uttar ·~ 
Pradesh since 1982, includin g Agra. Aligarh, Hamirpur , Jhansi, Kanpur. Lucknow. Mirzapur, ~ 
Rae Barelli, Unnao, Ferozabad and Sonbhadra. 
80. The assistance from the Norwegian Agency for International Development to 58 ICDS 
Projects in the aforesa id districts is limited to suppor t for training of Angan~vadi workers in 
Educational Toy Mak ing Workshops. const ruction of Anganwadi Centre Buildings :mel provision 
for hand-pumps in the Anganwacli Cent res. 
(c) SWEDISH INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (SID A) 
81. The Swedish In ternational Development A ge ncy (SIDA) has been providing assistance for 
the ICDS scheme iD the State of Tamil Nadu since January, 1989. Its assistance unde r Phase-! 
(from January. 1989 to Jun e. 1993) was limited only to 30 ICDS projects in the Che ngalpattu 
district of Tamil Nadu. The Swedish aut horities have agreed to ex tend their assistance under 
Phase -ll for a further period of four years in respect of 47 !CDS projects in the three districts of 
Tamil Naclu viz. Chengalpattu (30). Puclukottai (13) and Nilgiris (4). 
82. The tota l project cost under SIDA -II phase has been worked out to Rs. 150.07 crores and 
the project proposal has already been submitted to SlDA Autho riti es. The support to !CDS 
Project from SIDA flows for supplementary feeding and other itctivities includ ing pre-school 
ecluca tion, health, comm uni cation, income gene rating activities for women, trainin g. constr uctio n 
of buildings. transport, administration and tl1e adolescent girls scheme in respect of the itgreed 
project areas. 
83. The following are the details of external assistance received from foreign :tgenc ies du rin g 
the last three years viz. 1990-91 to 1992-93:-
Name of the Foreign Agency 
World Bank (Under Safety Net 
Adjustment Credit) 
UNICEF 
NORAD 
SIDA 
Observations/Recommendations 
1990-91 
Nil 
Nil 
648.58 
192.54 
(Rs. in Jakhs) 
1991·92 1992-93 
Nil 2990.00 
150.00 200.00 
70.00 
1299.98 333.89 
683.84 1406.96 
84. According to the Secretary, Departm ent of Women & Child Development, UNICEF has 
agreed in principl e to extend assistance for setting up a gender sensitization management system. 
The Committee •·ecommends that thi s proces s should be expedited. 
85. The Technic al Committee on Health and Population is e ngag ed in th e work of m onitoring the 
health aspects of th e girl child. The committee feels that the said Committee should he given more 
teeth to make monitoring effective. The assistance that the UNICEF has promi sed in this regard 
should be availed of. 
'86. The Department of Women & Child Development is the nodal agency for dealing with the 
UNICEF. UNICEF provided assistance for a number of activities relating to development of 
children. The Committee feels that the Department should cultivate more assistance from UNICEF 
by formulating or integrating more factor s into the !CDS. 

87. As th e Project of extending food aid under World Food Programme (WFP) Projt• (·t 22()() for 
supplem ent ary nutrition to pre-school t:hildren under ICDS project is expectNI to com e to nn end 
on 30th September, 1993, the Committ ee recommends th a t th e Government should make all out 
effort s to furth e r extend the said pro~ramme or devise some alternative schrme s. Similarl y, \\'orld 
Food Progr a mme assistance for constru ction of 660 Anganwadi Centre s in fi "e Sta tes should he 
taken up forthwith . 
88. The Committee feels that ther e is a lot of scope to tap more nssistance from CARE for Food 
and Non-Food Aid Projects. Suitable programmes, therefore, need to be devised and <•xplnitrcl to 
the hilt. Th e Committee also tal~ es it seriously that in th e Annual Action Plnn for the yenr 1993-94 
no tar get ha s been set as to how Government wou ld harne ss the resource s for diff erent child 
welfar e/dev elopment schem es h~HI fnuu various international ngende s. Th e C ommittee 
r ecomm ends that long as . well as s hort term plan s for taking international assistnnc e in vnriou s 
Child W elfa re/Development Schemes he formulat ed. 
VI . 
E valu a tion and Monitorin g 
89. The C ommittee lays special empha sis on the ·need for evaluation and monitoring of Hll the 
Child Development/Welfare Schem es and the amount of grant s given to the dcpartnH·nt:ll as well 
as to th e Voluntary Organi sation s. The Committee is con strain ed to observe that Vl'ry little hHs 
been done hy now in thi s dir ection . No attempVstudy has been made to know how mu,·h money 
has heen spent on the ben eficiarie s und er various scheme s and how much on th e apparatu s/official 
ma chin ery . The Committ ee is of th e v iew that there should be some stud y hy som e E xpert 
• Committ ee to determine th e idenl proportion of th e mone y to be spent on the offil'ial structur e/ 
apparatu s a nd the benefici a ries. 1 
90. The C ommittee is not happ y with the idea of havin g so many Child Devclopm cnt Scheme s/ 
Programm es, because multiplicit y of such schemes gives ground for duplicit y of work and 
expens es. Therefore, all the welfare schemes viz. Balwadi, Nutrition and Pre -School Training 
Programm es s hould be integrated into one comprehen sive programme und er IC OS . It can 
integrat e the components of all oth er sch emes as well. The Committee reconum••His that the 
integr ation should be don e expeditiou sly <HHI in a befitting nwnn er. Besides thi s, th ese programm es 
should be expand ed a nd fund s should also be increa sed <l ccordin gly . 
9J. The Secreta ry, Departm ent of W omen & Chi ld D evelopm ent, ha s stat ed in her oral 
evidenc e tender ed before the Committ ee that its own organi sati on i.e. National Institut e o f Public 
Cooperati on & Child Development (NIPCCD) is engaged in the work of evaluation of its various 
child deve lopment programmes. But, the committee feels that the work done hy th e NIP C CD is 
only to go into the nature of effect s of various programme s on the target groups and that too has 
not been done very frequentl y. Th e committee empha sises the need for regular ·monitoring i.e 
wheth er th e money granted by th e Gov ernment has been spend properly and wheth er various 
centre s of the schemes are runnin g actuall y. 

MINUTES 

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE. ON HU1'vfAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday. the 21st September. 1993 in Committee Rno111 
'A. Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav- C/1{/irmrm 
RA.JY A SABHA 
2. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
3. Shri Pravat Kunwr Samantaray 
4. Shri P. Upenclra 
5. Shri Ranj:tn Prasad Yad:tv 
LOK SAI3HA 
<1. Dr. Viswanathatt< K;tnithi 
7. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmall<ll~ 
8. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
9. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
10. Shri lswarbhai Khoclablwi Chavda 
11. Dr. Ramcsh Chand To mar 
12. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
13. Dr. Malwdeepak Singh Slwkya 
14. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
l5. Shri Anna .Joshi 
16. Shri Braja KishN e Tripa thy 
17. Shrimati l\·1alini Bhartacharya 
18. Shri Brahmanand lvtancl;tl 
19. Shri Suraj Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Vanaja N. Sarna. Director 
2. Slui Om Prakash , Under Secretary 
3. Slui Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
4. Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
5. Shri Rohtas, Committe e Offi<.:er 
2. At the outset. the Committee condoled the:.: death of Shri T. Chanclraseklwr Rcddv. l'vi.P. 
(Rajya Sabha) and Member of the Committee. 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman informed the Committee that the next subject to be taken up by 
the Committee would be the functioning of the Department of Women Hnd Child Development 
and invitee! suggestions from the Members regarding topics to be covered by the Comm ittee in its 
deliberations. 
----·-----·-·-··--- -• Minutes of I to XIII meetin gs relate to matters not lllCiudctl in this Report. 
1'7 

4. After detailed discussion, the Committee decided to divid e the sphere of discussinn into tw~· .: 
parts namel y-C hild Development and Women Development and also to present the reports;"'~ 
accordin gly. ;-,; 
5. The Committ ee then adjourned at 4.40 P.M. to meet again on Wednesdav. the 
September. 1993. 
XV 
FIFTEENTH 1\IEETING 
The Committee met at 11.20 A.M. on Wednesday. the 22nd September. 1993. in Committee • 
Room 'D'. Ground Floor. Parliament Hous e Annexe. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav-Cirnirmr111 
RA.JY A SAllHA 
2. Shri Mel. Salim 
3. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
4. Shri P. Upendra 
LOK SAUIIA 
5. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
6. Slui Subash Chandra Nayak 
7. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavcla 
8. Dr. Mahadeep<tk Singh Shakya 
9. Shri Anna Joshi 
10. Shri Bntja Kishore Tripathy 
11. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
12. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
13. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
14. Shri Suraj Ma ndal 
(i) Rcpr·csentatives of the Voluntary Organisations 
(Bharatiyn Adimjati Sevak Sangh) 
Shri J. H. Chinchalkar. President 
Shri R.K. Bansal, Senior Life Member 
(ii) Indian Council for Child Welfare 
Shrimati Yidyaben Shah. President 
Shrimati Humida Habibullah, Secretary-General 
(iii) Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Developm ent (Department of Women 
and Child Development) 
1. Smt. Lata Singh, Secretary 
2. Smt. Meenaxi Anand Chaudhry, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S.K. Guha, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri D. Thangaraj. Director 
5. Shri O.K. Gupta, Director 

~-
'
~ 
6. Shr~ R. K. Verma, Deputy Secretary 
7. Shn Rajesh Kishore, Deputy Secretary 
8 Smt. V. Ramachandran. Executive Director-CSWB ,, . 
~i'' 9. Shri Adarsh Sharma, Joint Dircctor-N lPCCl 
~~ 10. Shri P.D. Vaidya, Joint Director-FN13 
~ 11. Slui Kuldip Sing h-AFA, CSWB 
r•: 12. Shri R.S. Danger, Under Secretary (Pari.) D/0 WCD 
~ 13. Smt. C.R. Chibe r. Director-D/0 WCD 
14. Smt. T.K. Sarojini, Director-Research. 
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Vanaj:1 N. Sarna, Director 
Shri Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
Slui A.K. Singh, Committ ee Officer 
Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Comm ittee heard th(! President. 13haratiya Adimjati Scvak Sangh and the President. 
Indian Council for Child Welfare regarding working of their respect ive organisations. 
(The Commiflee adjourned at 2.00 P.M. to meet again at 3.30 P.M .) 
3. The Committee heard the Secretary. Department nf Women and Child Development. 
Ministry of Human Resource Development on the working of the Department of Women and 
Child Development. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 5.25 P.M. to meet again ar 11.00 A.M. on Thursday. the 23rcl 
September, 1993 . 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 23rd Septembe r, 1993. 111 Committee 
Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yacl:tv -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
3. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
4. Shri P. Upendra 
LOK SABHA 
5. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
6. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
7. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
8. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
9, Shri G .L. Kanaujia 
10. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
11. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 

12. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
13. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HUI'vfAN RESOURCE DEVELOPI\1 
(DEPAnTMENT OF WOMEN AND CHILD I>EVELOPl\lENT) 
1. Smt. Lata Singh. Secretary 
2. Smt. Meenaxi Anand Chaudhry. Joint Secretary 
3. Shri S.K. Gulla. Joiilt Secretary 
4. Shri D. Thangaraj, Direc .tor 
5. Shri D.K. Gupta, Director 
6. Shri R. K. Verma, Deputy Secretary 
7. Shri Rajesh Kishore, Deputy Senetmy 
8. Smt. V. Ramachandran. Executive Director - - CSWB 
9. Shri Adarsh Sharma, . Joint Dircctor-NIPCCl 
10. Shri P.D. Vaiclya, Joint Director- FNB 
11. Shri Kulclip Singh-AFA. CSWI3 
12. Shri R.S. Banger. Under Secretary (P;trl.) D I 0 WC.D 
13. Smt. C.R. Chiber, Dircctor -D I 0 WCD 
14. Smt. T.K. Sarojini, Director-- Research 
SECRETAR IAT 
Smt. V~111aja N. Sarna, Director 
Slui Om Parkash, Under Secretary 
Shri Ram Krishan. Under S<:crerary 
Shri A.K. Singh. Committee Officer 
Sh ri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee heard the Secretarv . Dep;trtmcnt ol Women and Child Development, 
Ministry of Human Resource Dcvclopm<:nt on the \\ 1.> rk:ing of the afores<tid Department. 
3. A verhatin1 record of the proceedings \vas ke pl. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.ivl. 
X\'JI 
SEVENTfo:ENTH !VJEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.;vJ. 011 Momby, the J ~th October, i~<J:>. 111 Room No. (i3, 
Parliament House, New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
I. Smt. Malini Bh;lltacharya 111 the Chair 
RAJYA SAUHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
~. Shri V. Hamui1antha Rao 
5. Shri Mel. Salim 

6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
7. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
8. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
10. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
11. Dr. Yasant Niwrutti Pawar 
12. Prof. P .J. Kurien 
13. Shri lshwarbh ai Khodabhai Chavda 
14. Dr. Mahad eepak Singh Shakya 
15. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
16. Shri Anna Joshi 
17. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
18. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
19. Shri Suraj Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ram Krishan. Under Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Commillee Officer 
2. ln the absence of the Chairman, Smt . Malini Blwt tachar ya presided over the meeting. 
3. The Committee considered the draft Third Report on the working of the Department of 
Women and Child Development (related to Child Development on ly). Ministry of Human 
Resource Development. The discussion was not concludccl. 
4. The Committee adjourned at 4.20 P.M. to meet again on the 19th October, 1993 at 11.00 
A.M. 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 19th October. 1993, tn Comm ittee 
Room 'D', Ground floor. Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
3. Slui Md. Salim 
4. Slui Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
5. Prof. l. G. Sanacli 
. 6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 

LOK SABHA 
7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
8. Dr. V. Rajcshwaran 
9. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
10. Shri Ishwarbhai Kh odabhai Chavda 
11. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
12. Dr. Mahad eepak Singh Shakya 
13. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
14. Shri Anna Joshi 
15. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
16. Smt. Malini Bhatt<tclwrya 
17. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ram Krishan. Under Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee further considered the draft Third Report on the working of the_ 
Department of Women and Child Development (related to Child Development only). 1\1 ini-.;~ ry of 
Human Resource Development and after some deliberations decided to reconsider the Report in. 
one of their next meeting~. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 7th December, 1993 in Committee Room ·A'. 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Narcsh Yacl<tv -- C!rairnwn 
RA.JY A SAI3HA 
2. Shri Md. Salim 
3. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
4. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
5. Shri P. Upendra 
LOK SABHA 
6. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
7. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
8. Shri Bapu Hari Clwure 
9. Shri K. Thulasiah Vandayat 
10. Shri Anna Joshi 
11. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
12. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 

13. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Committee Office r 
2. The Committ ee further considered the draft Third Report on the working of the 
~ 0 
Department of Wom en & Child Development, Minist ry of H uman Resource Developm ent 
(regarding C hild Development on ly) . The discussion was not conclud ed. 
3. The Committ ee adjourned at 4.00 P.M. to meet again on 8th December. 1993 at 3.00 
P.M. 
XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
The Department-reiated Pa rliam enta ry Standing Committee o n Human Resnurc:e 
Development met at 3.00 P.M . on Wednesday, the 8th D ecember, 1993 in Com mitt ee Rnnm ··A'. 
Ground Floor, Parliam ent House Anncxc. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Slui Ram Naresh Yadav -- Chairmt/11 
RA.JY A SABRA 
2. Prof. Suu rin Bhattacharya 
3. Smt. Rcnuka Chowdhury 
4. Shri Md. Salim 
5. Shri P. Upendra 
6. Shri Ranja n Prasad Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
7. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
8. Dr . Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
9. Shri K. T hul asiah Vandayar 
10. Shri Dau D aya l Joshi 
11. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
12. Shri Anna Joshi 
13. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
14. Shr i Ra m Chandra D ome 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ram Kri shan. Under Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Committee Office r 
If. 
2. The Committ ee further co nsidered and unanimously adopted the draft Third Report '~lith 
some modifications. The Committee decided to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and tn lay 
the same on the Table of ~ok Sabha on Friday, the 17th De(;ember, 1993 and authorised 1~ 1e 
Cha irman ancl in his absence Shri P. Upendra ancl Prof. Sau rin Blwunch;llyn to present rhe 
Repo rt in the Rajya Sab ha and also authorised Smt. Malini Blwtt:1chwya and Dr. G.L. Kanitujia 
to lay the repo rt on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
3. The Committ ee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M . to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Thu rsda y. the 
16th December , .1993 to consid e r and ad opt draft Fou rth Report on th e working of som e h e<~ lth 
programmes of th e Department of I lea lth , Min istry of Health and Fami ly Welfare. 