Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY NINTH REPORT
REPORT NO. 
269
Demands for Grants 2015-16 (Demand No. 109)
of the Department of Sports
(Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th April, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2015)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY NINTH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2015-16 (Demand No. 109)
of the Department of Sports
(Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th April, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-hrd@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A BBREVIATIONS ....................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—16
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ......................... 17—22
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 23—27

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2014)
#1. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda — Chairman
*2. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
RAJYA SABHA
3. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
4. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
5. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
6. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Shri Basawaraj Patil
9. Shri Sharad Pawar
10. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
11. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
12. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
13. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
14. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
15. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil
16. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
$17. Dr. Ramshankar Katheria
18. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
19. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
20. Shri Chand Nath
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N.K. Premachandran
24. Shri K.N. Ramachandran
25. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
26. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
27. Shri M.I. Shanavas
28. Dr. Nepal Singh
29. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
30. Shri P.R. Sundaram
31. Shri Ajay Tamta
32. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
@33. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
# Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda was elevated to Minister of Health and Family Welfare on 9.11.2014.
* Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya nominated as a member and Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 26.11.2014.
$ Dr. Ramshankar Katheria was elevated to Minister of State, Human Resource Development on 9.11.2014.
@ Shri Anant Kumar Hegde nominated as a member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.3.2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred Sixty-ninth Report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (Demand No. 109) of the Department of Sports for the year 2015-16.
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the
Department of Sports and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on the
said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 17
th April, 2015.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
the 27 th April, 2015.
NEW D ELHI; DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA
April 27, 2015 Chairman,
Vaisakha 7, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development

ABBREVIATIONS
NSS – National Service Scheme
NY AC – National Youth Advisory Council
NYC – National Youth Corps
NYKS – Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanghathan
NYLA – National Youth Leadership Awards
NYLP – National Young Leaders Programme
RGNIYD – Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
YFDP – Youth for Development Programme
Y H – Youth Hostel
(iv)

1
REPORT
1. INTRODUCTION
Department of Sports is a Department under the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.
Sports and Games have always been perceived as an integral component in the all-round
development of personality. Apart from being a means of entertainment and physical fitness, sports
have always played a greater role in generating spirit of healthy competition and bonding among
us. Today, sports emerge as an important component of socio-economic development of the
country and the Government plays a crucial role in promoting sports. The Government and
governmental organizations are responsible in making sports policies, allocating grants for
developing infrastructure, nurturing talents and designing specialized programmes for overall
development of sports.
2. Today, many types of sports are played across the country. Things apart, regional games
have also become a way of life. India first participated at the Summer Olympic Games in 1920,
and, since then, has participated in every Summer Olympic Games. India’s first achievement in
Gold Medal in Olympics dates back to the 1928 Summer Olympic Games, winning Men’s Field
Hockey. Abhinav Bindra became the first Indian to win an individual Gold Medal at the Olympic
Games.
3. India’s performance is disheartening among nations for having won very few Olympic
Medals, despite a population of over 1.2 billion. Several explanations, among others, have been
attributed for abysmal performance which inter alia includes poverty, mal-nutrition, neglected
infrastructure, lack of sponsorship, institutional disor ganization, etc. As regards Commonwealth
Games, India has competed in fourteen out of the eighteen previous Commonwealth Games. Since
the inception in 1934, India hosted the games once in 2010. India is fourth most successful
country with a total of 436 Medals including 156 Gold Medals.
4. The year 1982 is significant in the history of sports in India as India organized the IX Asian
Games in Delhi . Prior to that not much emphasis had been given towards sports in public policies.
National Sports Policy, 1984 was the first move towards developing an organized and systematic
framework for the development and promotion of sports in the country, and the precursor of the
present National Sports Policy, 2001. The twin planks of the National Sports Policy 2001 are
“Broad-basing of Sports” and “Achieving Excellence in Sports” at the national and international
levels. The salient features of the Policy are as:–
➢ Broad-basing of sports and achievement of excellence;
➢ Upgradation and development of infrastructure;
➢ Support to National Sports Federations and other sports bodies;
➢ Strengthening of scientific and coaching support to sports;
➢ Special incentives to promote sports;
➢ Enhanced participation of women, scheduled tribes and rural youth;
➢ Involvement of corporate sector in sports promotion; and
➢ Promote sports mindedness among the public at large.
5. With increased exposure to global sporting events, there is a growing market today for new
sports. The phenomenal rise in the youth population has made India youngest nation with a
demographic dividend appearing to be a reality. Undoubtedly, young Indians have found a whole

2
new set of sporting heroes. Adding to this, we find a slew of recent wins by Indian sporting icons
which have inspired youngsters to pursue their passion for sports. Based on these developments,
some evident and some latent, it is to be believed that the Indian sports is transcending through
significant changes.
6. The role of the government in the development of sports may be gauzed as threefold –
➢ The Government must allocate land and resources to develop sports facilities.
➢ The Government must create an environment that will allow the grassroot programmes
that are sprouting across the nation to flourish.
➢ All schools should support the initiatives taken by the Government and allocate sufficient
time and resources to physical fitness and sports activities.
Further the Department of Sports, inter alia deals with matters relating to broad-basing of
Sports, anti-doping, uses of sports stadia, etc.
7. The Secretary in his presentation before the Committee on the 17
th April, 2015 gave an
overview of the functioning and status of different schemes/programmes being executed by the
Department. He described that sports is a state subject and it is primarily the responsibility of the
State Governments to create adequate sports infrastructure within the States. Further, the Central
Government complements and supplements efforts of States in this regard. Nevertheless, the
Department of Sports, in the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, has two primary objectives. One
is broad-basing of sports, that is, of making sports available to all. So, in this context, there are
two major schemes running in the Department. First, which was earlier called as the Panchayat
Yuva Krida and Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), has now been restructured into the Rajiv Gandhi Khel
Abhiyan (RGKA). Another one is the Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme, which is for
development of sports infrastructure in the urban centres in the country. The issue regarding the
broad-basing of sports, strictly speaking is not with the Department, however, the efforts are to
encourage sports through the school system. Somehow, it is being transformed as a regular part
of the school curriculum because that is where the real identification, the development of sports
has to automatically come from. The other major objective of the department is in ‘achieving
excellence in sports’. And, in this context, there are two major areas. One is the National Sports
Federation (NSF), which has the responsibility of developing that particular game and also of
selecting the team at the national level, training, nominating the teams for participation in events
and tournaments abroad, and so on. NSFs are autonomous organizations and the Government has
no involvement in their day-to-day working. Second, of course, is the Sports Authority of India
(SAI). The Sports Authority of India has different schemes for identification and nurturing of talent
from the sub-junior level to the elite level. It is also responsible for the training of national teams.
8. The Committee was also apprised of some of the recent initiatives that have been
undertaken. The most important is that of setting of the Manipur Sports University in Manipur. This
was announced in the last year’s Union Budget. The Department is taking steps to get it
established. The site has been identified. The land is likely to be available soon. Second major
initiative, again announced in the last year’s Union Budget, was the National Sports Talent Search
Scheme (NSTSS), which basically deals with identification of sporting talent in the country in the
age group of 8-12 years. The scheme has been developed and notified and the initial selections
should be taking place in September-October this year. The third initiative is the setting up of
national academies in some of our major prominent sports, largely under the aegis of SAI in
collaboration with the National Sports Federations. The fourth is the development of sports
infrastructure in Jammu and Kashmir. This special initiative was announced by the Union Finance
Minister in the last year’s Budget. This basically involves remodeling and renewal of the two major
stadia in Srinagar and Jammu and also development of some sports facilities in district

3
headquarters. Moreover, the Department has two major initiatives which have been going on for
some time now, that is, the setting up of Indian Institute of Sports Science and Medicine and the
National Institute of Sports Coaching. These two projects are still at the formulation stage and will
take some more time for getting established.
9. The Committee was also informed that concerning the performance of individual nations in
medals tally at the Olympic Games, name of Cuba may be cited as an example. Considering that
Cuba’s population is only around 11 million (around half the size of New York metro area), Cuba
is the most successful Olympic team by total medals won. Cuba first participated at the Olympic
Games in 190 0, and had sent athletes to compete in 19 of 27 Summer Olympic Games overall.
Cuban athletes have won a total of 208 medals at the Summer Olympics. In modern Cuban society,
sports and physical education begin from childhood. Children are taught at a later age to play
games that resemble physical exercise. These ideas are the basis for the modern sports
programmes in Cuba, and clearly these are working.
Budgetary Allocation,
10. The Committee was apprised that there are budget constraints before the Department. The
scheme-wise plan and non-plan allocation of the Department for the B.E. 2015-16 with `1005.48
crores in plan side and `76.65 crores in the non-plan side is as given under:–
(Figures in crores )
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Plan Non-Plan
12 3 4
1. Sports Authority of India (SAI) 345.78 58.61
2. Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education 45.00 15.00
3. Special Cash Awards 30.00 –
4. Pension to Meritorious Sports Persons 2.00 –
5. Assistance to National Sports Federations 185.00 –
6. Human Resource Development in Sports 5.00 –
7. National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) 5.00 –
8. Urban Sports Infrastructure 25.00 –
9. National Dope Testing Laboratory 8.90 –
10. National Anti Doping Agency (NADA) 2.50 –
11. World Anti Doping Agency (W ADA) 0.60 –
12. Promotion of Sports among Disabled 4.00 –
13. SAI Stadia Renovation 0.10 –
14. National Institute of Sports Science and Sports Medicine 0.50 –
15. National Institute of Sports Coaching 0.50 –
16. National Physical Fitness Programme-Resource Centre 0.10 –
at LNIPE Gwalior

4
12 3 4
17. Scheme for Identification and Nurturing of Sporting Talent 0.50 –
in the Country (INSTALL)
18. Enhancement of Sports Facility at J&K 100.00 –
19. Sports University in North-East 50.00 –
20. National Sports Talent Search System Programme 100.00 0.00
21. Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan 95.00 –
22. Awards – 1.62
23. National Welfare Fund for Sports Persons – 1.00
24. Other Programmes – 0.42
TOTAL: 1005.48 76.65
11. The Committee notes that Department of Sports got about only half of its projected demand
for 2015-16. The Committee was informed that during previous years also, the allocation was far
less than the projected demand. These details alongwith % of expenditure with respect to RE and
% of under-utilisation both for Plan and Non-Plan are as given below:–
Plan: (` in crore )
Year Projected B.E. R.E. Expenditure % %
Demand expenditure underutilisation
w.r.t RE
2012-13 2073.00 741.00 600.00 598.00 99.71% 0.29%
2013-14 1258.43 809.00 809.00 753.03 93.08% 6.92%
2014-15 1417.30 1259.00 705.00 684.05 97.02% 3.98%
2015-16 1872.44 1005.48 — — — —
Non Plan:
Year Projected B.E. R.E. Expenditure % %
Demand expenditure underutilisation
w.r.t RE
2012-13 75.51 56.26 60.00 59.66 99.43% 0.57%
2013-14 88.33 65.00 57.59 56.93 98.85% 0.57%
2014-15 79.17 63.61 67.00 66.05 98.58% 1.42%
2015-16 745.32 76.65 — — — —
It has also been informed that all funds given under RE 2014-15 are likely to be utilized
by the 31
st March, 2015. The Committee notes convincingly that in the plan side the percentage
of utilization of expenditure for the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 has been very good. The
Committee notes with concern that there has been a gap between the projected demands

5
and the actual allocated funds during all these years. The Committee, therefore, keeping
in view the major emphasis of the Department during 2015-16 for preparation of sports
persons and teams for Rio Olympics 2016 feels that the Department should endeavour to
get enhancement of the fund at the RE stage so that the gap in allocation is set off
appropriately. The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Finance should release
more funds for the Department so that lack of funds should not come in the way of our
preparation as well as performance at the next Olympics and initiatives to be taken by the
Department also tap non-governmental sources.
12. In view of the winding up of the Planning Commission, which was an in intermediary
agency between the Centre and the States, and also acted as monitoring agency, it is not
clear what monitoring mechanism of the centrally sponsored or central sector schemes
would be put in place. The Committee shows its concern and desires the Department to
clarify this issue before it at the earliest.
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF  INDIA (SAI)
13. The Sports Authority of India (SAI) is the field arm of the Department and was set up in
1984 as a registered Society. SAI is engaged in spotting and nurturing talent at all levels by
providing the requisite infrastructure and equipment, coaching facilities, scientific back up,
nutritious diet, competition and exposure. It is also entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining
and utilizing, on behalf of the Department, the five Stadia in Delhi which were constructed/
renovated for the IX Asian Games held in New Delhi in 1982.
14. There are 9 Regional Centres of SAI, which are located at Bangalore, Gandhinagar, Delhi,
Lucknow, Chandigarh, Kolkata, Imphal, Bhopal and Sonepat. In addition, through the Netaji
Subhash National Institute of Sports (NIS) Patiala, its academic arm, SAI offers a variety of
courses in sports coaching and sports medicine; and graduate and post-graduate courses in physical
education are offered at the Lakshmibai National College of Physical Education (LNCPE),
Thiruvananthapuram.
15. There are total of around 3000 employees in SAI including around 1200 coaches deployed
all over the country; a brief outline of schemes implemented by SAI for spotting and nurturing of
sports talent and the promotion of sports in the country is as under:–
➢ National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC)
➢ Army Boys Sports Companies (ABSC)
➢ Specail Area Games (SAG)
➢ SAI Training Centres (STC)
➢ Centres of Excellence (COE)
16. The projected budget estimates for 2015-16 Sports Promotional Schemes are as given
below:
(Figures in ` Lakhs )
Sl. No. Schemes ROI NER TOTAL
12 3 4 5
1. National Sports Talent Contest (NSTC) 203.98 18.41 222.39
2. Army Boys Sports Companies (ABSC) 1307.81 98.00 1405.81

6
12 3 4 5
3. SAI Training Centre (STC) 3679.02 694.82 4373.84
4. Special Area Games (SAG) 705.48 885.32 1590.80
5. Extension of STC/SAG Centres 241.38 43.77 285.15
6. Centre of Excellence (COE) 567.71 49.09 616.80
TOTAL: 6705.38 1789.41 8494.79
17. The Committee came to know that in Commonwealth Games, India has bagged a total of
101 medals, wherein the contribution of SAI is of 42 medals, i.e., to say 41.58% of total medals.
International performance during 2010-14 and also SAI performance are as follows :
Sl. No. Name of the Event Performance by India
Gold Silver Bronze T otal Medals
1 Olympics London 0 2(Shooting; 4 6
2012 W restling) (Shooting;
Badminton;
Boxing;
Wrestling
2 CWG-Glasgow 15 30 19 64
2014
3 ASG-Incheon 11 10 36 57
2014
Performance by SAI Trainees
4 NG-Kerala 2015 32 35 21 88
The Committee notes that although of late there has been slight improvement in the
performance of India’s sportspersons at international events but it is incomparable with the
performance of other developing/developed nations for which a lot needs to be done. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI should come up with more concerted efforts
so as to increase its medals tally substantially during Olympic Games, 2016. Improvement
of nation’s performance in sports is the need of the time as it would not only bring national
pride and glory but also instills some of confidence amongst the people.
18. The allocation of funds for SAI is for `345.78 crore in the BE of current fiscal. Further,
in BE 2014-15 the plan allocation for SAI was `392 crores, however, in RE stage it got reduced
to `335.30 crore. The Committee came to know that the decrease in RE is based upon progress
of expenditure.
19. In regard to status of SAI coaches, the Committee was informed that the sanctioned strength
of Coaches in Sports Authority of India (SAI) is 1524. 174 Coaches were appointed in SAI during
2013-14. At present SAI have 1111 regular coaches and 32 contract coaches on its roll. 409 posts
are vacant, out of which 166 posts are vacant at the entry level which are to be filled through direct
recruitment. Immediate steps are being taken to fill up the vacancies. The Committee notes with
concern the reduced allocation for the SAI as compared to the last year.

7
SAI is the agency mainly responsible for maintaining and development of sports in the
country. Reducing its allocation instead of increasing over the years does not augur well for
the development of sports in our country.
20. The Committee recommends that initiatives should be taken to fill up vacant posts
of Coaches urgently, required for every sports discipline and they get international training
and exposure regularly. The need for various levels of Coaches Education and Certification
System (CECS) structure, procedure for getting International Federations Certification, etc.
have to be adequately taken care of besides the initiatives required for filling up the
vacancy of Coaches at the earliest. The existence of large-scale vacancies in respect of
Coaches should be serious cause for concern and the Committee fails to understand as to
how we are preparing our sportspersons in the absence of Coaches to compete with the
other nations at international sports events.
21. The Committee was given to understand that in Andhra Pradesh there is no dearth
of sports talents in archery, particularly in interior tribal areas. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that if the Budget allocation gets enhanced at the RE stage, the Department
may consider developing an archery training centre for Andhra Pradesh so as to tap the
potential of exemplary talents that have been lying in the rural tribal areas who would
contribute to the national sports talent.
ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
22. The Committee came to know that SAI through its Training of Elite Athletes and
Management Support (TEAMS) Division, provides support to National Sports Federations (NSFs)
by way of coordinating their Long Term Development Plans (LTDPs), and providing logistic and
training support. In this role, a number of activities are being carried out by SAI out of funds
provided to them by the Ministry.
23. The Department recognizes only one federation of each sport discipline at the national level.
The recognized National Sports Federation (NSF), in turn, is responsible for the promotion and
development of the sport. The NSF has to discharge the responsibilities in accordance with the
principles laid down in the Olympic Charter or in the Charter of Indian Olympic Association (IOA),
or the relevant International Federation. The Government only supplements the efforts of National
Sports Federation (NSFs) by providing financial assistance for participation in international events
abroad, conducting national/international tournaments and training/coaching of national teams under
Indian and Foreign Coaches/Experts, etc., under the Scheme of ‘Assistance to national Sports
Federations’. In all these matters, Sports Authority of India (SAI) closely coordinates with NSFs.
24. The Department regularly consults NSFs in major decision making, e.g., the NSFs were
consulted while formulating criteria for Sports Awards, revision of Schemes of the Department,
etc. The Department also either directly or through Sports Authority of India (SAI) consults the
NSFs while implementing its various schemes. The Ministry has evolved an evaluation/performance
monitoring mechanism of the NSFs. Government has also issued instructions to NSFs to
mandatorily declare information on their website pertaining to their audited accounts, balance sheet,
selection criteria for athletes, etc. by 1.4.2015.
25. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that there is a distinct lack of proper
coordination and control mechanism among the NSFs on the one hand between the Ministry/
SAI and the NSFs on the other hand. The NSFs in the name of their autonomy, the
Committee feels, that they are not accountable to anybody even though they receive
Government funds for their activities. The NSFs, the Committee, feels have a definite role
to play in promoting different sports disciplines in the country. But their working leaves

8
much to be desired. These bodies, unfortunately, devote much of their time and resources
in the non-sporting activities. Most of them have not been able to live upto the
expectations. No doubt, some of them done or doing very good work in the promotion of
sports in the country. The Committee has been expressing its concern over this issue from
time to time and calls upon the Ministry and the representatives of the NSFs to find out
collectively a most efficient and workable solution that can bring our sports sector out of
the present situations. We may perhaps try to learn/adopt the best practices in this respect
from the other countries such as China, Korea, Taiwan, etc.
26. As regards non-compliance of the guidelines, by the NSFs, the Committee was apprised that
the Archery Association of India has been de-recognised since it refused to accept the Government
guidelines; the recognition of Indian Amateur Boxing Federation was suspended and subsequently
the same was not renewed. Recognition to Korfball Football Federation of India has not been
accorded recognition since 2012 for not accepting Government Guidelines. Gymnastics Federation
of India and Athletics Federation of India were asked to hold fresh elections which they have
complied with.
27. The Committee finds it very disheartening on the issue of non-compliance of the
guidelines of the Department by the NSFs and recommends to evolve a suitable mechanism
in this regard so that the preparation as well as participation of the sportspersons in
important national and international events is not affected adversely.
AUDIT PARAS
28. The Committee is at a loss to see that the audit observations made in the
Commonwealth Games, 2010 by the CAG have not been cleared so far. The Committee finds
it objectionable and desires the Department to get this process completed at the very
earliest.
LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION (LNIPE)
29. LNIPE, Gwalior is an autonomous body under the control of the Department of Sports.
LNIPE, is the national apex institution for Physical Education (PE) teachers training, National
Physical Fitness Plan and PE in school curriculum. The objectives of LNIPE are as follows:–
➢ To prepare highly qualified leaders in the field of Physical Education,
➢ Sports/Games and other inter-disciplinary subjects.
➢ To serve as a centre of excellence and innovation in Physical Education, and to
undertake, promote and disseminate research and also publish literature in this field.
➢ To provide professional and academic leadership to other institutions in the field of
Physical Education
➢ To provide vocational guidance and placement service to the people in this field.
➢ To promote mass participation in Physical Education activities.
30. Presently, LNIPE has 863 students. The Committee came to know that the Plan allocation
amounting to `40 crores stagnated during the BE 2014-15 and also at RE 2014-15. However, it has
increased to `45 crores in BE 2015-16. The Committee has noted that a normal increase in BE
2015-16 is to meet establishment expenditure. The Committee notes that the budget allocations
have been sufficiently utilized but feels that the allocations will not be enough for meeting
the projected activities and requirement of the Institute such as laying of squash court,

9
tennis court, gymnasium, swimming pool, astro turf, boys hostels, girls hostels, etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommends for the enhanced budget allocation to accomplish the
proposed activities/works within the stipulated time frame.
SPECIAL CASH AWARDS
31. Special cash awards are being provided to winners in International Sporting events and their
coaches to encourage and motivate outstanding sportspersons for higher achievements and to
attract the younger generation to take sports as a career. Cash Awards are given to coaches who
have trained the medal winners for at least 240 days immediately preceding the tournament. Award
money to a coach is 50% of the award money given to the sportsperson coached. In case, there
is more than one coach the award money is distributed among them equally.
32. The Committee has noted that `13.20 crores in Plan allocation of BE 2014-15 remained
unchanged during the RE 2014-15. Moreover, this amount has substantially gone up to `30 crore
in Plan allocation during the 2015-16. The Committee has been given to understand that this
increase in BE 2015-16 is on account of grant of awards to more sportspersons and to clear
backlog. The Committee while appreciating the enhanced allocation for cash awards for
sportspersons hopes that the enhanced allocation made during the BE 2015-16 would be fully
utilized to encourage and motivate outstanding sportspersons for higher achievements and
all backlogs are cleared in this regard. The Committee also observes that complete
transparency should be maintained while giving cash awards and that the criteria be
followed strictly in this regard.
URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE
33. A scheme titled Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme has been introduced on pilot basis in
2010-11 with a view to addressing the entire ‘sports eco-system’ holistically, i.e. , players’
academies, coaching and infrastructure (hockey turf/multipurpose hall/athletic track). The Scheme
envisages development of playfields by the State Governments through Playfield Associations,
coach training programme through Central and State Governments, setting up players’ academies
catering to premier sports in each State.
34. The Scheme focuses on promoting and supporting a mechanism at national and state level
to encourage, assist and preserve community playfields, incentivizing utilization of infrastructure
already available in the State at all levels by filling up critical gaps, creating need-based
infrastructure and creating capacity building among coaches, including community coaches. Under
the Scheme, State Governments, local civic bodies, schools, colleges, universities of Central/State
Governments and sports control boards are eligible for assistance.
35. The Committee came to know that `40 crores was allocated for the purpose in BE
2014-15 and it was reduced to `25 crores in RE 2014-15. The Committee shows its concern
that the reduction in RE was on account of nonreceipt of Utilisation Certificates by the
implementing agencies. The actual expenditure is amounting to `23.14 crores till February
2015. The Committee finds this as a very good scheme which is for providing sports
infrastructure in urban areas. But the allocation and expenditure pattern in respect of this
Scheme has been very discouraging. `40 crores BE is reduced to `25 crores RE and even
that could not be utilized fully. It was perhaps on account of such a poor pattern that the
allocation for BE 2015-16 has also been reduced to `25 crores. The Committee, accordingly
recommends that Department should take initiatives to expedite the submission of
utilization certificates by the implementing agencies in time so that the allocation pattern
is not affected adversely in future.

10
RAJIV GANDHI KHEL ABHIYAN (RGKA)
36. The Committee was informed that the RGKA, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme introduced in
2014-15 in place of erstwhile Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA), aims at achieving
the objectives of broad-basing of sports facilities and mass participation in sports by providing
basic sports infrastructure and equipment at the ‘Panchayat level’ and encouraging sports and
games in ‘rural areas’ through annual competitions at the block and district levels. RGKA will help
the States in promoting sport at the grassroots level, which they have not been able to achieve on
their own so far due to severe resource constraints. It will also deepen and widen the seedbed of
sporting talent, leading to better performances by our sportspersons in national and international
events.
37. RGKA envisages to be an important foundation of the grand strategy for development of
sports facilities; identification and nurturing of sporting talent in the country as against the creation
of sports facilities in Village Panchayats and Block Panchayats as per the existing scheme. RGKA
will be the building block and foundation for the long term framework to create a sports ecosystem
in the Country and also to make sports as a way of life and an industry in the country and to
achieve the goal of becoming one of the first 10 sporting nations in the world by 2020. The RGKA
scheme has been implemented with effect from 1
st April, 2014. In the Budget Estimate 2015-16,
`95 crores have been allocated for RGKA. During BE 2014-15 the fund allocation was for
`200 crores, however, during the RE stage it was reduced to `85 crores.
38. The Committee was also informed that in the RGKA scheme, it is proposed to construct
a sports complex in each block both for outdoor and indoor sports disciplines on land measuring
about six - seven acres at a cost of `80 lakh each (Total `1.60 crore). There is also provision
of `15 lakh for sports equipment to be provided by Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. It is
proposed to have sporting facilities for the following disciplines compulsorily at the Block level
sports complex:
➢ Outdoor disciplines: Athletic, Badminton, Football/Hockey (any one) Kabbadi/ Kho-Kho
(any one) and V olley ball/Basketball,
➢ Indoor disciplines: Boxing, Wrestling, Table Tennis and Weightlifting /Multi-gym
39. The Committee came to know that all the 6545 blocks in 634 districts will be covered in
a phased manner over a period of 5 years. Funds for construction of the block level sports
complex will be converged from different schemes such as Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA), Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF), Non Lapsable
Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR - Central), Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for the Left
Wing Extremism (LWE) af fected districts, of the Ministries of Rural Development, Panchayati Raj,
Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) respectively with RGKA.
Since construction of playfields is one of the approved activities under the MGNREGA, it
is proposed to develop/construct playfields at village panchayat level by the Ministry of Rural
Development under MGNREGA.
40. The Committee also noted that a number of Sports competitions are organized annually
under the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan (RGKA) Scheme. Following types of sports competitions are
organized under RGKA Scheme:
➢ Rural sports competitions at block, district, state and national level
➢ North-East Games at district, state and national level
➢ Women championships at district, state and national level.

11
41. The Committee appreciates the launching of RGKA a centrally sponsored scheme in
place of earlier PYKKA scheme for its novel objectives of expanding and developing sports
specifically in the rural areas. This is a major Scheme to provide sports complexes for both
outdoor and indoor disciplines in all the 6545 blocks 634 districts in phased manner over
a period of five years. But in view of such humongous objectives of the scheme, the
performance both physical and financial during the last year does not inspire any confidence
that we will be able to achieve the objectives within the five years. The problem of pending
UCs should not be taken as an excuse in implementing such a flagship scheme.
42. Secondly, this Scheme has to work in convergence with different other schemes
implemented by different Ministries, the Committee feels that there may be possibility of lack
of adequate co-ordination and synergy in pooling the resources and the efforts for implementing
this Scheme effectively. The committee, therefore, is of the view that a coordination mechanism
especially for this scheme should be put in place to obviate any such possibility.
43. Thirdly, the Committee is intrigued to note that `200 crore in the Plan allocation for
RGKA during BE 2014-15 was reduced to `85 crores in RE and even the reduced allocation
could not be utilized fully. The reason being given non-receipt of Utilization Certificates by
the implementing agencies. The Committee finds this disheartening. Interestingly, in BE
2015-16, the Plan allocation for this scheme which was `200 crore in BE 2014-15 has been
reduced to Rs.95 crores. The Committee fails to understand with this meagre allocation how
the objectives of the Department are going to achieved in time. We have more than 50%
reduced allocation for this Scheme and we are not able to spend even the highly reduced
allocation that too on technical procedural grounds as UCs. The Committee finds that if this
is the state of affairs in respect of this Scheme then future of this scheme remains highly
bleak. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to make all out efforts to
implement this scheme with the required zeal and dedication.
SPORTS UNIVERSITY IN NORTH-EAST
44. Finance Minister has, in his Budget Speech for 2014-15, announced setting up of a Sports
University in Manipur and budgetary provision of `100 crore was made in the Budget of 2014-15
for establishment of National Sports University, Manipur. However, it got reduced to `50 crores
in BE 2015-16. The Committee came to know that the draft National Sports University Bill has
been prepared. Land for setting up the university has been identified. In terms of the selection of
the agency for executing the work, the development of Detailed Project Report (DPR), etc., they
are all progressing.
45. It has come to the notice of the Committee that till date no expenditure has been
incurred on account of National Sports University. The Committee recommends that setting
up of the proposed National Sports University is accomplished within the stipulated time and
the Department will go all out in this endeavour and make it a novel scheme.
NATIONAL SPORTS TALENT SEARCH SCHEME (NSTSS)
46. A new Scheme National Sports Talent Search Scheme (NSTSS) is under formulation. In the
Budget 2014-15, a provision of `50 crore has been made for NSTSS. This has increased to
`100 crores in the plan fund of budget estimate of the current fiscal.
Salient features of the proposed Scheme are as under:–
➢ Identification of Sporting Talent amongst children (both Boys and Girls) in the age
group of 8-12 in Schools all over the country by conducting a battery of 6 tests at each
selection level in each School of a block.

12
➢ 4 boys and 4 girls securing the total highest marks will be shortlisted from each school
for block level tests.
➢ 16 boys and 16 girls securing the highest total marks in the Block level tests will be
shortlisted for the District level tests.
➢ The total marks obtained in the District level tests by each of these 32 students per
block will be compiled and a common merit list prepared.
➢ Out of this combined merit list, the top 1000 boys and 1000 girls from different
districts securing the highest total marks will be shortlisted from each state.
➢ Admission in the State sports schools/Central Sports Schools/Junior Sports Academies/
State Sports Academies/State Sports Hostels etc., and benefit under various other state
sports schemes will be based on this list of boys and girls having sports talent/potential
and identified through the NSTSS.
➢ Besides, high performing candidates of 8-12 age group in RGKA Rural Competitions will
also be eligible for admission in the State Sports Schools etc., mentioned above.
Standing Finance Committee (SFC) considered the proposal at its meeting held on
24.11.2014 and, therefore, recommended the proposal.
47. The Committee recommends that the requisite initiatives should be taken by the
Department to accomplish NSTSS within the stipulated time frame and all hurdles coming
in the way of the execution of the scheme are taken care of effectively so as to make it
a note-worthy scheme.
ENHANCEMENT IN SPORTS FACILITY OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
48. The Committee came to know that Finance Minister has, in his Budget Speech, 2014-15
provided a sum of `200 crore for upgrading the indoor and outdoor sports stadiums to international
standards in Jammu and in the Kashmir Valley. For implementation of this Budget announcement,
the Department of Sports is working in consultation with the Sports Department of the Government
of Jammu and Kashmir. In the current fiscal, a provision of `100 crores has been made in the
plan fund for this scheme.
It has been decided to develop Sports Infrastructure in Jammu and Kashmir with the
following objectives:
➢ Creation of ultra modern and high tech facilities in existing Stadia in Srinagar and Jammu.
➢ Maximum operational efficiency of each sports complex.
➢ Phasing of construction programmes.
➢ Efficient management of movement of spectators, dignitaries and players.
➢ Sports complex to be a landmark and pride of the city.
A proposal has been submitted by the J & K Government for Rs. 200 crore with the
following features:
➢ Reconstruction of the entire existing stadia on international specification with RCC
frame structure, ten lane athletic track, sports hostel for 500 inmates both at Srinagar
and Jammu at an estimated cost of `70 crores each.
➢ Upgradation of indoor stadium both at Srinagar and Jammu.

13
➢ Creation of water sports centre at Manasbal, Srinagar at a cost of `2 crore.
➢ Construction of multipurpose indoor sports halls at an estimated cost of `4 crore
each at 8 places in the State.
➢ The Proposal involves an estimated expenditure of `100 crores each for Srinagar and
Jammu region with a total cost of `200 crores.
49. The Committee appreciates the allocations of funds for expanding and development of
sports in Jammu and Kashmir which has been ridden with terror and insurgency for quite a
long time. The Committee hopes that improved sports culture in the region would provide
better channels to the youth to show their talent. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department will work to get the proposed scheme implemented within the required
time and all impediments are overcome adequately, making this a worth-while scheme.
PROMOTION OF SPOR TS AMONG DISABLED
50. The Committee was informed that the Ministry has formulated a scheme for promotion of
sports and games among disabled during 2009 . The objective of the Scheme is broad-basing
participative sports among the disabled. The Scheme of Sports and Games for the Disabled has the
following components:–
(a) Grant for sports coaching and purchase of consumables and non-consumable sports
equipment for Schools
(b) Grant for Training of Coaches
(c) Grant for holding District, State and National level competitions for the disabled.
51. During 2014-15, grants to 35 schools were provided under the Scheme. 42350 persons with
disabilities participated in competitions conducted at district and state levels during 2014-15 (as on
31.12.2014) under the Scheme. 148 Master Trainers were imparted training during 2014-15 at
Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior. During the budget estimate 2014-15,
`7 crores was allocated in the plan fund for this scheme. However, it was reduced to `4 crores
during the RE stage. Further the same amount, i.e., `4 crores has been allocated in the current
fiscal.
52. The Committee gathered that a three days 15
th National Para-Athletics Meet was held
at Ghaziabad (U.P.) in March 2015. The Committee is surprised that the complete apathy
and negligence was shown towards the para-athletes during this 15
th National Para-Athletics
Championship. The last Para-Olympic national Championship was held in 2013 at Bengaluru.
A win at this event of Ghaziabad would have ensured that athletes qualify to participate in
upcoming Para-games to be held in May in Delhi and then make a bid to Para-Olympic
Games in 2016. The Committee strongly recommends that a thorough inquiry may be made
to identify the persons responsible for this kind of fiasco and for taking appropriate action
against the persons concerned and to ensure that this does not recur in future. The
Committee desires to have a status note on it at the earliest.
53. The Committee has also gathered that the Paralympics Committee of India (PCI),
owing to lackadaisical attitude and apathy towards its athletes, has been suspended by the
International Paralympics Committee (IPC). The Committee also shows its concern for
chaotic condition prevailing in PCI for several years mostly due to individual conflicts and
proper management, etc.

14
PENSION TO MERITORIOUS SPORTS PERSONS
54. The Plan fund allocation is for `2 crore in the current fiscal. The Committee notes the feel
that there are no targets fixed and the amount was same in BE 2014-15 and reduced to
`1.50 crore in RE 2014-15 . The Committee fails to get any reason for this reduction in RE
from the Department. The Committee doubts whether this scheme of the Department will
achieve the desired result in the current fiscal. The Committee, therefore, feels that a
review may be made of the scheme to include necessary ingredients in it to make it more
comprehensive.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT IN SPORTS
55. The Plan fund allocation is for `5.00 crore in the current fiscal. However, the Committee
is surprised to find that `10 crore was allocated in BE 2014-15 and it got reduced to `0.35
crore in RE stage of year 2014-15 owing to receipt of less number of viable names. The
Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department will achieve the desired result in the
current fiscal for what it has been meant for.
NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF)
56. The Committee finds that the plan fund allocation is for `5.00 crore in current fiscal. The
amount was same in BE 2014-15. The Committee finds it disheartening that the budgetary
allocation was reduced to `3.75 crore at RE stage of year 2014-15 due to non-receipt of U.Cs
by implementing agencies and reiterates its earlier observations that U.Cs may be liquidated
at the earliest for the better utilization of funds.
NATIONAL DOPE TESTING LABORATORY
57. The Committee finds that the budgetary allocation is for `8.90 crore in the plan fund of
the current fiscal. This was almost same, i.e., `9 crore both in BE as well as in RE stages of
year 2014-15. The Committee notes with satisfaction for the projected outcomes of achieving
drug free sports environment to the extent possible.
NATIONAL ANTI DOPING AGENCY (NADA)
58. The plan fund allocation for this scheme in BE 2015-16 is for `2.50 crore. However, during
the BE as well as RE 2014-15, the budgetary provision was for `2 crore. The Committee finds
that under the Scheme of Assistance for antidoping activities, financial assistance is extended to the
National Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) and National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) to carry out
their respective activities. NADA is the national organization responsible for promoting,
coordinating, and monitoring the doping control programme in sports in the country. The Anti
Doping rules of NADA are compliant with the Anti Doping Code of World Anti Doping Agency
(WADA). Various Committees as required under these Rules, i.e., Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel,
the Anti-Doping Appeal Panel and the Therapeutic Use Exemption Committee have come into effect
from 2009. During 2014-15, 3027 samples (2972 urine and 55 blood) were collected till
31.12.2014. NADA has taken up, in a major way, the sample collection process and wide
dissemination of information as well as education of athletes and coaches about the ill-effects of
doping. The Committee appreciates that functioning of NADA and hopes that our
sportspersons get complete information on the guidance regarding banned drugs in sports
so that they are not misled in this regard. The Committee also hopes that this scheme of
the Department will achieve the desired result in the current fiscal only if it gets gull
support as the by way of providing sufficient funds and required expertise.

15
WORLD DOPING AGENCY (WDA)
59. The Committee finds that the plan Budgetary allocation is for `0.6 crores in the current
fiscal and this budgetary allocation was same in BE 2014-15 as well as in RE 2014-15. The
Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department will achieve the desired result in the
current fiscal for what it has been meant for.
SAI STADIA RENOV ATION
60. The Committee was informed that Rs. .10 crore has been allocated in the plan fund of
current fiscal for this scheme. However, this amount was same during BE 2014-15 and Committee
is surprised that in RE 2014-15 this amount was reduced to nil. Such a meagre allocation for
renovation, major and minor, of the SAI stadia does not inspire confidence that it will be
sufficient for our huge stadia spread all over. The Committee hopes that this scheme of the
Department will achieve the desired result in the current fiscal for what it has been meant
for.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SPORTS SCIENCE AND SPORTS MEDICINE
61. In order to promote manpower in the field of Sports Science and Sports medicine to
support Indian Athletes, a draft EFC note was circulated for interministerial consultation seeking
comments on setting up faculties of Sports Science and Sports Medicine in the existing Institutes.
The Committee finds that `0.5 crore has been allocated in plan fund of BE 2015-16 for this scheme
and `1 crore was allocated during BE 2014-15. Since the scheme was not functional the amount
was reduced to nil in RE 2014-15. The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department
will become functional during the current fiscal.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF COACHING EDUCATION
62. The Committee finds that 0.5 crore has been allocated in the plan fund during the BE 2015-
16 for this scheme. `1 crore was allocated during the BE 2014-15, however, this was reduced to
nil during RE 2014-15 on account of nonfinalization of this scheme. The Committee is surprised
to see that such a significant scheme which is highly needed in the country could not be
finalized for the last two years. It is not clear why the provisions are being made for this
scheme in the Budget when scheme is under finalization; why not make allocation in the
year when the scheme has been finalized. Blocking funds in such a way and then
surrendering, is not a healthy fiscal practice at all. The Committee does not understand why
this scheme could not be finalized. The Committee recommends that finalization of this
scheme should be expedited.
NATIONAL PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAMME- RESOURCE CENTRE AT LNIPE GWALIOR
63. The Committee finds that 0.1 crore has been allocated in the plan fund during the BE 2015-
16 for this scheme. `0.1 crore was also allocated during the BE 2014-15, however, this was
reduced to nil during RE 2014-15 on account of nonfinalization of this scheme. The Committee
hopes that this scheme of the Department will become functional during the current fiscal.
SCHEME FOR IDENTIFICATION AND NURTURING OF SPORTS TALENT
64. The Committee finds that 0.5 crore has been allocated in the plan fund during the BE 2015-
16 for this scheme. `1 crore was also allocated during the BE 2014-15, however, this was reduced
to nil during RE 2014-15 on account of nonfinalization of this scheme. The Committee hopes
that this scheme of the Department will become functional during the current fiscal.

16
NATIONAL WELFARE FUNDS FOR SPORTS PERSONS
65. The Committee notes that the non plan fund amounting to `1 crore is allocated in BE
2015-16 for this scheme. During the BE as well as RE of 2014-15, the fund allocation was same,
i.e., for `1 crore. The Committee came to know that the National Welfare Fund for sportspersons
was set up in March, 1982 with a view to assisting outstanding sportspersons of the past, living in
indigent circumstances, who had brought glory for the country in sports. The Scheme has been
reviewed in July, 2009 to provide for lump sum ex-gratia assistance to outstanding sportspersons.
The provision of pension under this Scheme has been done away with as there is already a Scheme
of Pension for Meritorious Sportspersons. Now, a lump sum ex-gratia assistance is given to the
sportspersons or their families for medical treatment and for those living in indigent circumstances.
During 2014-15, financial assistance worth Rs. 82 lakh was sanctioned from National Welfare Fund
for Sportspersons . The Committee feels that this Scheme is a novel scheme but the allocation
of `1 crore appears to be ridiculous in view of the large number of eminent sportspersons,
having brought laurels to the country, are languishing in penury selling tea, vegetables, etc.
in the street. This is highly unbecoming to their status as well as to the country’s prestige.
This also demotivates our budding sportspersons and their parents to allow their children to
take up sports. Therefore, the Committee is of the considered opinion that all possible help
should be extended to our eminent former sportspersons in all possible manner and the
allocation should be increased at least ten times to begin with.
CONCLUSION
66. The execution of a mega sporting event helps in developing infrastructure, generating
employment, securing inflow of foreign capital and thus contributes significantly to the economic
development of a country. Therefore, if can be said that the impact of sports on the society is
multi-dimensional.
65. Despite varied and concerted efforts, the performance of Indian sports at the International
level is not very convincing. Therefore, a few steps may be recommended to make these initiatives
more comprehensive, like
➢ The allocation of funds, as the percentage of budget, should be increased rationally to
broad-base sports in the country.
➢ Sports should be made as an integral part of the education system to inculcate sports
culture from the school level.
➢ The effectiveness of the developmental projects should be evaluated periodically.
➢ Uniformity should be maintained in sports specific activities of various States of India
to provide equal participation opportunity to its citizens.
➢ A structure of good management, control and exercise should be incorporated to make
the system transparent and accountable.
66. The Committee feels that to revive sports culture, the Government should revisit the
sporting framework of India. This is also the need of the hour as India is reaping benefits
of demographic dividend in the form of young population which can easily be channelized
to sports and games for achieving better results. Otherwise, achievement of goals by
utilizing the available immense potential of the country in sports would be difficult to
realize. For achieving improved performance in sports internationally the government needs
to play a proactive role in promoting sports in India to establish the country as a sporting
nation. The Committee hopes that with improved sporting infrastructure and infusion of
latest technology in training of sportpersons India would show better results at the next
Olympics to be held at Rio in Brazil.

17
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee notes with concern that there has been a gap between the projected
demands and the actual allocated funds during all these years. The Committee, therefore,
keeping in view the major emphasis of the Department during 2015-16 for preparation of
sports persons and teams for Rio Olympics 2016 feels that the Department should
endeavour to get enhancement of the fund at the RE stage so that the gap in allocation is
set off appropriately. The Committee also recommends that Ministry of Finance should
release more funds for the Department so that lack of funds should not come in the way
of our preparation as well as performance at the next Olympics and initiatives to be taken
by the Department also to tap non-governmental sources. (Para 11)
In view of the winding up of the Planning Commission, which was an in intermediary
agency between the Centre and the States, and also acted as monitoring agency, it is not
clear what monitoring mechanism of the centrally sponsored or central sector schemes
would be put in place. The Committee shows its concern and desires the Department to
clarify this issue before it at the earliest. (Para 12)
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF  INDIA (SAI)
The Committee notes that although of late there has been slight improvement in the
performance of India’s sportspersons at international events but it is incomparable with the
performance of other developing/developed nations for which a lot needs to be done. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that SAI should come up with more concerted efforts
so as to increase its medals tally substantially during Olympic Games, 2016. Improvement
of nation’s performance in sports is the need of the time as it would not only bring national
pride and glory but also instills some of confidence amongst the people. (Para 17)
The Committee notes with concern the reduced allocation for the SAI as compared
to BE of the last year. SAI is the agency mainly responsible for maintaining and
development of sports in the country. Reducing its allocation instead of increasing over the
years does not augur well for the development of sports in our country. (Para 19)
The Committee recommends that initiatives should be taken to fill up vacant posts
of Coaches urgently, required for every sports discipline and they get international training
and exposure regularly. The need for various levels of Coaches Education and Certification
System (CECS) structure, procedure for getting International Federations-Certification, etc.
have to be adequately taken care of besides the initiatives required for filling up the
vacancy of Coaches at the earliest. The existence of large-scale vacancies in respect of
Coaches should be serious cause for concern and the Committee fails to understand as to
how we are preparing our sportspersons in the absence of Coaches to compete with the
other nations at international sports events. (Para 20)
The Committee was given to understand that in Andhra Pradesh there is no dearth
of sports talents in archery, particularly in interior tribal areas. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that if the Budget allocation gets enhanced at the RE stage, the Department
may consider developing an archery training centre for Andhra Pradesh so as to tap the
17

18
potential of exemplary talents that have been lying in the rural tribal areas who would
contribute to the national sports talent. (Para 21)
ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that there is a distinct lack of proper
coordination and control mechanism among the NSFs on the one hand, between, the
Ministry/SAI and the NSFs on the other hand. The NSFs in the name of their autonomy,
the Committee feels, that they are not accountable to anybody even though they receive
Government funds for their activities. The NSFs, the Committee, feels have a definite role
to play in promoting different sports disciplines in the country. But their working leaves
much to be desired. These bodies, unfortunately, devote much of their time and resources
in the non-sporting activities. Most of them have not been able to live upto the
expectations. No doubt, some of them done or doing very good work in the promotion of
sports in the country. The Committee has been expressing its concern over this issue from
time to time and calls upon the Ministry and the representatives of the NSFs to find out
collectively a most efficient and workable solution that can bring our sports sector out of
the present situations. We may perhaps try to learn/adopt the best practices in this respect
from the other countries such as China, Korea, Taiwan, etc. (Para 25)
The Committee finds it very disheartening on the issue of non-compliance of the
guidelines of the Department by the NSFs and recommends to evolve a suitable mechanism
in this regard so that the preparation as well as participation of the sportspersons in
important national and international events is not affected adversely. (Para 27)
AUDIT PARAS
The Committee is at a loss to see that the audit observations made in the
Commonwealth Games, 2010 by the CAG have not been cleared so far. The Committee finds
it objectionable and desires the Department to get this process completed at the very
earliest. (Para 28)
LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION (LNIPE)
Presently, LNIPE has 863 students. The Committee came to know that the
Plan allocation amounting to `40 crores stagnated during the BE 2014-15 and also at RE
2014-15. However, it has increased to `45 crores in BE 2015-16. The Committee has noted
that a normal increase in BE 2015-16 is to meet establishment expenditure. The Committee
notes that the budget allocations have been sufficiently utilized but feels that the allocations
will not be enough for meeting the projected activities and requirement of the Institute
such as laying of squash court, tennis court, gymnasium, swimming pool, astro turf, boys
hostels, girls hostels, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends for the enhanced budget
allocation to accomplish the proposed activities/works within the stipulated time frame.
(Para 30)
SPECIAL CASH AWARDS
The Committee while appreciating the enhanced allocation for cash awards for
sportspersons hopes that the enhanced allocation made during the BE 2015-16 would be fully
utilized to encourage and motivate outstanding sportspersons for higher achievements and
all backlogs are cleared in this regard. The Committee also observes that complete
transparency should be maintained while giving cash awards and that the criteria be
followed strictly in this regard. (Para 32)

19
URBAN SPORTS INFRASTRUCTURE
The Committee came to know that `40 crores was allocated for the purpose in BE
2014-15 and it was reduced to `25 crores in RE 2014-15. The Committee shows its concern
that the reduction in RE was on account of non-receipt of Utilisation Certificates by the
implementing agencies. The actual expenditure is amounting to `23.14 crores till February
2015. The Committee finds this as a very good scheme which is for providing sports
infrastructure in urban areas. But the allocation and expenditure pattern in respect of this
Scheme has been very discouraging. `40 crores BE is reduced to `25 crores RE and even
that could not be utilized fully. It was perhaps on account of such a poor pattern that the
allocation for BE 2015-16 has also been reduced to `25 crores. The Committee, accordingly
recommends that Department should take initiatives to expedite the submission of
utilization certificates by the implementing agencies in time so that the allocation pattern
is not affected adversely in future. (Para 35)
RAJIV GANDHI KHEL ABHIYAN (RGKA)
The Committee appreciates the launching of RGKA a centrally sponsored scheme in
place of earlier PYKKA scheme for its novel objectives of expanding and developing sports
specifically in the rural areas. This is a major Scheme to provide sports complexes for both
outdoor and I indoor disciplines in all the 6545 blocks 634 districts in phased manner over
a period of five years. Out in view of such humongous objectives of the scheme, the
performance both physical and financial during the last year does not inspire any confidence
that we will be able to achieve the objectives within the five years. The problem of pending
UCs should not be taken as an excuse in implementing such a flagship scheme.
(Para 41)
This Scheme has to work in convergence with different other schemes implemented by
different Ministries, the Committee feels that there may be possibility of lack of adequate co-
ordination and synergy in pooling the resources and the efforts for implementing this Scheme
effectively. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that a coordination mechanism especially
for this scheme should be put in place to obviate any such possibility. (Para 42)
Thirdly, the Committee is intrigued to note that `200 crore in the Plan allocation for
RGKA during BE 2014-15 was reduced to `85 crores in RE and even the reduced allocation
could not be utilized fully. The reason being given non-receipt of Utilization Certificates by
the implementing agencies. The Committee finds this disheartening. Interestingly, in BE
2015-16, the Plan allocation for this scheme which was `200 crore in BE 2014-15 has been
reduced to `95 crores. The Committee fails to understand with this meager allocation how
the objectives of the Department are going to achieved in time. We have more than 50%
reduced allocation for this Scheme and we are not able to spend even the highly reduced
allocation that too on technical procedural grounds as UCs. The Committee finds that if this
is the state of affairs in respect of this Scheme then future of this scheme remains highly
bleak. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to make all out efforts to
implement this scheme with the required zeal and dedication. (Para 43)
SPORTS UNIVERSITY IN NORTH-EAST
It has come to the notice of the Committee that till date no expenditure has been
incurred on account of National Sports University. The Committee recommends that setting
up of the proposed National Sports University is accomplished within the stipulated time and
the Department will go all out in this endeavour and make it a novel scheme. (Para 45)

20
NATIONAL SPORTS TALENT SERARCH SCHEME (NSTSS)
The Committee recommends that the requisite initiatives should be taken by the
Department to accomplish NSTSS within the stipulated time frame and all hurdles coming
in the way of the execution of the scheme are taken care of effectively so as to make it
a note-worthy scheme. (Para 47)
ENHANCEMENT IN SPORTS FACILITY OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
The Committee appreciates the allocations of funds for expanding and development
of sports in Jammu and Kashmir which has been ridden with terror and insurgency for
quite a long time. The Committee hopes that improved sports culture in the region would
provide better channels to the youth to show their talent. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department will work to get the proposed scheme implemented within
the required time and all impediments are overcome adequately, making this a worth-while
scheme. (Para 49)
PROMOTION OF SPOR TS AMONG DISABLED
The Committee gathered that a three days 15 th National Para-Athletics Meet was held
at Ghaziabad (U.P.) in March, 2015. The Committee is surprised that the complete apathy
and negligence was shown towards the para-athletes during this 15 th National Para-Athletics
Championship. The last Para-Olympic national Championship was held in 2013 at Bengaluru.
A win at this event of Ghaziabad would have ensured that athletes qualify to participate in
upcoming Para-games to be held in May in Delhi and then make a bid to Para-Olympic
Games in 2016. The Committee strongly recommends that a thorough inquiry may be made
to identify the persons responsible for this kind of fiasco and for taking appropriate action
against the persons concerned and to ensure that this does not recur in future. The
Committee desires to have a status note on it at the earliest. (Para 52)
The Committee has also gathered that the Paralympics Committee of India (PCI),
owing to lackadaisical attitude and apathy towards its athletes, has been suspended by the
International Paralympics Committee (IPC). The Committee also shows its concern for
chaotic condition prevailing in PCI for several years mostly due to individual conflicts and
proper management, etc. (Para 53)
PENSION TO MERITORIOUS SPORTS PERSONS
The Committee fails to get any reason for this reduction in RE from the
Department. The Committee doubts whether this scheme of the Department will achieve the
desired result in the current fiscal. The Committee, therefore, feels that a review may be
made of the scheme to include necessary ingredients in it to make it more comprehensive.
(Para 54)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT IN SPORTS
The Committee is surprised to find that `10 crore was allocated in BE 2014-15 and
it got reduced to `0.35 crore in RE stage of year 2014-15 owing to receipt of less number
of viable names. The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department will achieve the
desired result in the current fiscal for what it has been meant for. (Para 55)

21
NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF)
The Committee finds it disheartening that the budgetary allocation was reduced to
`3.75 crores at RE stage of year 2014-15 due to non-receipt of U.Cs by implementing
agencies and reiterates its earlier observations that U.Cs may be liquidated at the earliest
for the better utilization of funds. (Para 56)
NATIONAL DOPE TESTING LABORATORY
The Committee notes with satisfaction for the projected outcomes of achieving drug
free sports environment to the extent possible. (Para 57)
NATIONAL ANTI DOPING AGENCY (NADA)
The Committee appreciates that functioning of NADA and hopes that our
sportspersons get complete information on the guidance regarding banned drugs in sports
so that they are not misled in this regard. The Committee also hopes that this scheme of
the Department will achieve the desired result in the current fiscal only if it gets full
support as the by way of providing sufficient funds and required expertise. (Para 58)
WORLD DOPING AGENCY (WDA)
The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department will achieve the desired
result in the current fiscal for what it has been meant for. (Para 59)
SAI STADIA RENOV ATION
Such a meagre allocation for renovation, major and minor, of the SAI Stadia does not
inspire confidence that it will be sufficient for our huge stadia spread all over. The
Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department will achieve the desired result in the
current fiscal for what it has been meant for. (Para 60)
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SPORTS SCIENCE AND SPORTS MEDICINE
The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department will become functional
during the current fiscal. (Para 61)
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF COACHING EDUCATION
The Committee is surprised to see that such a significant scheme which is highly
needed in the country could not be finalized for the last two years. It is not clear why the
provisions are being made for this scheme in the Budget when scheme is under finalization;
why not make allocation in the year when the scheme has been finalized. Blocking funds
in such a way and then surrendering, is not a healthy fiscal practice at all. The Committee
does not understand why this scheme could not be finalized. The Committee recommends
that finalization of this scheme should be expedited. (Para 62)
NATIONAL PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAMME-RESOURCE CENTRE AT LNIPE GWALIOR
The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department will become functional
during the current fiscal. (Para 63)

22
SCHEME FOR IDENTIFICATION AND NURTURING OF SPORTS TALENT
The Committee hopes that this scheme of the Department will become functional
during the current fiscal. (Para 64)
NATIONAL WELFARE FUNDS FOR SPORTS PERSONS
The Committee feels that this Scheme is a novel scheme but the allocation of
`1 crore appears to be ridiculous in view of the large number of eminent sportspersons,
having brought laurels to the country, are languishing in penury selling tea, vegetables, etc.
in the street. This is highly unbecoming to their status as well as to the country’s prestige.
This also demotivates our budding sportspersons and their parents to allow their children
to take up sports. Therefore, the Committee is of the considered opinion that all possible
help should be extended to our eminent former sportspersons in all possible manner and the
allocation should be increased at least ten times to begin with. (Para 65)
CONCLUSION
The Committee feels that to revive sports culture, the government should revisit the
sporting framework of India. This is also the need of the hour as India is reaping benefits
of demographic dividend in the form of young population which can easily be channelized
to sports and games for achieving better results. Otherwise, achievement of goals by
utilizing the available immense potential of the country in sports would be difficult to
realize. For achieving improved performance in sports internationally the government needs
to play a proactive role in promoting sports in India to establish the country as a sporting
nation. The Committee hopes that with improved sporting infrastructure and infusion of
latest technology in training of sportspersons India would show better results at the next
Olympics to be held at Rio in Brazil. (Para 68)

23
MINUTES

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the
17th April, 2015 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Bhalchandra Mungekar
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Basawaraj Patil
5. Shri Sharad Pawar
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
9. Shri Chand Nath
10. Shri Hari Om Pandey
11. Shri N.K. Premachandran
12. Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran
13. Dr. Nepal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Department of Sports
(i) Shri Ajit Mohan Sharan, Secretary (Sports)
(ii) Dr. G.S.G. A yyangar, Joint Secretary (Development)
(iii) Ms. Sujata Prasad, Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser
(iv) Shri Vivek Narayan, Director (Sports)
(v) Shri R.D. Chouhan, Director (Schemes)
25

26
(vi) Shri Injeti Srinivas, Director General, Sports Authority of India
(vii) Shrimati Meena Bora, Regional Director (Coordination), SAI
(viii) Shrimati Radhica Sreeman, Regional Director (Coaching Development), SAI
(ix) Shri S.S. Roy, Regional Director (Academics), NIS, Patiala
(x) Shri Sanjay Baranwal, Director (Infra), SAI
(xi) Shri Kartik, Programmer, SAI
(xii) Dr. Shila Jain, Principal Scientific Director
(xiii) Dr. Alka Beotra, Scientific Director, (NDTL)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to hear the presentation by the Secretary, Department of Sports on the Demands for
Grants 2015-16.
3. The Secretary, Department of Sports, briefed the Committee on the Demands for Grants
2015-16 of the Department, budgetary allocations for various schemes/programmes; problems
encountered in the implementation of schemes/programmes; and remedial measures taken by the
Department. The Committee was also informed about the achievements and the new initiatives
taken by the Department in promoting sports in the country. The Chairman and Members raised
a number of queries which were replied to by the Secretary and other officials of the Department.
4. The Committee, then, considered the draft 265
th Report on the Demands for Grants
2015-16 of the Department of Higher Education and the draft 266 th Report on Demands for Grants
2015-16 of the Department of Youth Affairs and adopted the two Reports after some discussion.
The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of
Parliament on 23
rd April, 2015.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 
P.M.

27
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the
27th April, 2015 in Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
  1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
3. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
5. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
8. Shri C.R. Chaudhary
9. Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha
10. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
11. Shri P.R. Sundaram
12. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.S. Walia, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee
convened to consider and adopt the draft 269
th Report on Demands for Grants 2015-16 of the
Department of Sports.
3. The Committee considered the draft 269 th Report on the Demands for Grants 2015-16 and
adopted the same after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decided to present/lay the above mentioned Report in both the Houses
of Parliament on 28 th April, 2015. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence,
Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar, M.P., Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both, Shrimati Sasikala
Pushpa, M.P., Rajya Sabha to present the Report in the Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat,
M.P., Lok Sabha and in her absence, Shri C.R. Chaudhary, M.P., Lok Sabha and in the absence
of both, Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati to lay the Report in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 
A.M.
27

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.