PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eighty Seventh Report on the Demands
for Grants 2017-18 Demand No. 100 of the Ministry of
Y outh Affairs and Sports
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
296
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-hrd@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eighty Seventh Report on the Demands
for Grants 2017-18 Demand No. 100 of the Ministry of
Y outh Affairs and Sports
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 5th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-29
Chapter-I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government............................................................................... 2-5
Chapter -II Observations/Recommendations which  the  Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply ..................... 6-21
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee................ 22-28
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in  respect  of  which reply of the
Government is still awaited......................................................... 29
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  — AT A G LANCE .................................................... 30-31
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 33-36
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 37-62

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f.  1 st September, 2017)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
5. Prof. M.V . Rajeev Gowda
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13. Shri Nihal Chand
14. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
17. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
18. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
19. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
20. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N. K. Premachandran
24. Shri K. N. Ramachandran
25. Shri M. I. Shanavas
26. Dr. Nepal Singh

(ii)
27. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
28. Shri Satyapal Singh
29. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
30. Shri P . R. Sundaram
31. Shrimati P . K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Mishra, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Two Hundred Ninety Sixth Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by Government
on the observation/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty Seventh Report on the
Demands For Grants 2017-18 (Demand No. 100) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.
2. Two Hundred Eighty Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 15th December, 2017 and
simultaneously laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 15th December, 2017. Replies of the Government to
the observation/recommendations/contained in the Report were considered by the Committee at its
meeting held on the 4th January, 2018.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 4th
January, 2018.
N
EW D ELHI; DR. SA TYANARAYAN JA TIYA
4 January, 2016 Chairman,
Pausa 15, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
AICF : All India Carrom Federation
AAI : Archery Association of India
CPFI : Cycle Polo Federation of India
VFI : V olleyball Federation of India
NFI : Netball Federation of India
SBFI : Shooting Ball Federation of India
BFI : Basketball Federation of India
JFI : Judo Federation of India
TFI : Taekwondo Federation of India
AITA : All India Tennis Association
IC : International Cooperation
INSTAL : Scheme for Identification and Nurturing of Sports Talent
LNIPE : Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education
NYKS : Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan
NYLP : National Young Leadership Programme
NSS : National Service Scheme
NPY AD : National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development
NDS : National Discipline Scheme
NSS : National Service Scheme
NSDF : National Sports Development Fund
NYC : National Youth Corps
NADA : National Anti-Doping Agency
RGNIYD : Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
R YSK : Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram
SAI : Sports Authority of India
SFC : Standing Finance Committee
W ADA : World Anti-Doping Agency
Y H : Youth Hostel
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in its Two Hundred Eighty-Seventh Report on the Demands for Grants 2017-18 (Demand No.
100) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. The 287th Report was presented to both the Houses
of Parliament on 21st March, 2017. The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports vide their communications
dated 4th July, 2017 (Department of Youth Affairs) and 30th August, 2017 (Department of Sports)
furnished their Action Taken replies to the Committee.
2. The Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the observations/
recommendations contained in the 287th Report have been categorized as follows:
(i) Chapter-I: Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government
Paras - 14, 23, 28, 32, 38, 46, 49, 59, 63, 71, 80, 167 and 168 Total - 13
(ii) Chapter-II: Observations/Recommendations/which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government's reply -
Paras - 16, 58, 84, 86, 90, 98, 99, 102, 106, 109, 114, 120, 121, 122, 132, 138, 139, 142,
149, 150, 152, 154, 159, 163 and 165 Total - 25
(iii) Chapter-III: Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee -
Paras - 24, 44, 52, 75, 124, 131, 133 and 148 Total - 8
(iv) Chapter-IV: Observation/Recommendation in respect of which reply of the Government is still
awaited.
Paras - Nil Total - Nil

2
CHAPTER-I
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Finance reduced the allocation for the Department
from ` 596 crore at BE 2016-17 stage to ` 529.75 crore at RE 2016-17 stage. The BE 2017-18 has been
kept at ` 550 crore only, which is even lower than BE 2016-17. The Committee underlines the satisfactory
performance of the Department in terms of trends for utilization of funds. The Committee, therefore,
observes, had the allocations been higher in line with projected demands, the utilization and achievements
also would have been much better. The Committee recommends that endeavour should be made so that
the financial outlay is compensated at the RE stage and proposed objectives and key results of projects/
schemes are achieved on time. (Para 14)
Action Taken
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilisation of the available funds for
achieving the objectives for which funds have been allocated. The matter will be taken up at RE stage
for increase in allocations.
Observations/Recommendations
NEHRU YUV A KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS):
The Committee notes that the projected demand for B.E. 2016-17 for NYKS was 
` 867.98 crore and
it included an amount of ` 413.70 crore required on account of one-time contribution to build corpus
for retirement benefits, on the basis of actuarial valuation. Against the total demand, the proposed B.E.
2017-18 is much lower as compared to the projected demand. The Committee, therefore, recommends to
the Department to pursue the enhancement of fund allocation at the revised stage. (Para 23)
Action Taken
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilisation of the allocated funds. The
matter will be taken up at RE stage for increase in allocations.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL YOUTH CORPS (NYC):
The Committee notes that for NYC, 
` 35.00 crore was provided in B.E. 2016-17 and this was
enhanced to ` 40.00 crore in R.E. 2016-17. The financial outlay has been stepped up to ` 60.00 crore
in 2017-18 owing to increase in the honorarium for NYVs from ` 2500/- to ` 5000/- per month. The
Committee recommends that concerted efforts be initiated by the Department so that the allocated fund
is not reduced at the RE stage for want of less number of registered volunteers which was witnessed
during financial years 2014-15 and 2015-16. (Para 28)
2

3
Action Taken
Necessary steps have been taken by NYKS for timely selection and deployment of National Youth
V olunteers (NYVs) under the NYC Scheme, so that the programmes of NYKS are implemented in a
smooth manner and the allocated funds under NYC Scheme are fully utilised. The number of NYVs has
already increased from 9,891 as on 31.03.2017 to 10,960 as on 22.06.2017.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR YOUTH AND ADOLESCENT DEVELOPMENT (NPYAD)
The Committee observes that owing to comprehensive review of grants released to NGOs with respect
to execution of NPYAD, the expenditure has slowed down. Ultimately, the provision of funds for the BE
2017-18 has been reduced to 
`18.00 crore only. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the scheme
should be reviewed at the stage of revised estimate of the financial year 2017-18 for the enhancement
of allocation of fund, if required, and this would give a fillip to the NPYAD Scheme. (Para 32)
Action Taken
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilisation of the available funds for
achieving the objectives for which funds have been allocated. The matter will be taken up at RE stage
for increase in allocations.
Observations/Recommendations
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION:
The Committee observes that for International Cooperation, 
`13.40 crore was allocated in BE
2016-17 and `15.80 crore in RE 2016-17. The allocation has been marginally enhanced to `16.00 crore
in BE 2017-18. The increase of `2.40 crore in RE 2016-17 over BE 2016-17 is in respect of externally-
aided project on "Strengthening of NYKS and NSS" being implemented jointly with UNV/ UNDP. This
is basically in the nature of accounting adjustment, in respect of funds being contributed by UNV/ UNDP
for the Project, as per instructions of the Ministry of Finance. Increase in BE 2017-18 over RE
2016-17 is very nominal to take care of increase in expenditure on international youth exchange programmes.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the projected activities of International Cooperation with
marginally enhanced financial outlay in the financial year 2017-18 are accomplished on time with
focused pro-active steps of the Department of Youth Affairs. (Para 36)
Action Taken
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilisation of the available funds for
achieving the objectives for which funds have been allocated.
Observations/Recommendations
ASSISTANCE TO SCOUTING AND GUIDING ORGANIZATIONS:
The Committee desires that this scheme of the Department achieves the targeted result during the
financial year 2017-18 and the Department goes ahead to make it a novel scheme. (Para 46)

4
Action Taken
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilisation of the available funds for
achieving the objectives for which funds have been allocated.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME:
The Committee recommends to the Government that this liability need not continue and if it is so
essential, one-time provision be made to settle the liability forever . The Committee believes if the
Department of Youth Affairs proactively takes up the issue with the State Governments, they may agree
even for its waiver. (Para 49)
Action Taken
Action has been initiated to take up the matter with the Ministry of finance for one-time settlement
of the liability. The concerned States have been requested to provide a fresh statement of expenditure
incurred on pay and allowances of the NDS Instructors to facilitate the one-time settlement process.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS):
The Committee shows its concern in the perspective of on-going activities of this scheme and
recommends to the Department to make efforts for enhancement of budget outlay at the RE stage so that
all intended activities are fulfilled on time with optimal utilisation of expenditure available making it
a laudable scheme. (Para 59)
Action Taken
Efforts will be made for enhancement of the budget allocation at RE stage, so that NSS can be
expanded further to cover more educational institutions and the quality of implementation of the progammes
may also be improved.
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH DEVELOPMENT (RGNIYD):
The Committee observes that there is a huge gap between the projected demand and the actual
allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should endeavor with requisite
zest and fervor for enhancement of allocation of fund for RGNIYD as to what has been proposed in BE
2017-18, so that all intended work for strengthening of infrastructure/activities are covered to a greater
extent and also in the context of the basic proposal to make RGNIYD a Centre of Excellence in the field
of youth development. (Para 63)
Action Taken
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilisation of the available funds for
achieving the objectives for which funds have been allocated. The matter will be taken up at RE stage
for increase in allocations.

5
Observations/Recommendations
BUDGET ALLOCATION
The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Department of Sports addressing the issue of
covering of the deficit by supplementing it through internal revenue generation. The Committee hopes
that such measures will provide some relief to the Department. However, the Committee is constrained
to note the delay on account of preparation of feasibility reports and procedural hassles. The Committee
feels that such hassles should have been taken care of as it is reflected on the functioning of the
Department. The Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the Department to rectify this expeditiously
before it is too late. The Committee further insists that the Department should ensure effective monitoring
of these schemes/programmes and the optimum utilisation of allocated funds. (Para 71)
Action Taken
Recommendations have been noted for strict compliance. Department would make all efforts to
ensure effective monitoring of schemes/programmes and the optimum utilisation of allocated funds.
Observations/Recommendations
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI)
The Committee finds that the fund allocation for SAI was for 
`416.30 crore in B.E. 2016-17 which
was enhanced at the stage of Revised Estimate to `438.20 crore. In B.E. 2017-18, the provision has been
made for `481.00 crore. The increase in B.E. is due to increase in the cost of infrastructure, food
supplements, training activities, establishment expenses, etc. This is also on account of revision of
financial norms with respect to boarding charges for SAI Training Centres and meeting essential requirements
towards strengthening of sports and other allied infrastructures. The Committee recommends that SAI
performs with concerted efforts for improving the nation's performance in sports at the world level.
(Para 80)
Action Taken
Continuous efforts are being made to provide best of training and facilities to elite athletes.
Observations/Recommendations
OTHER PROGRAMMES
The Committee recommends to the Department that all components of this scheme are fulfilled as
per schedule. (Para 167)
Action Taken
Direction noted for compliance.
Observations/Recommendations
As regards the impact of the umbrella scheme 'Khelo India’ the Committee is yet to get the detailed
feedback from the department and other stakeholders. The Committee therefore desires the department
to submit a detailed note of the progress made of the different components of this scheme. (Para 68)
Action Taken
EFC has been held and Scheme has been recommended. The draft Cabinet Note has been sent to
Cabinet Secretariat for approval.

6
CHAPTER-II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
Observations/Recommendations
RASHTRIYA YUVA SASHAKTIKARAN KARYAKRAM (RYSK):
The Committee notes that the total financial outlay in 2017-18 for RYSK is of 
`127 crore. The
actual figure for the year 2015-16 is `111.72 crore which got enhanced to `191.40 crore in 2016-17 at
BE stage. However, at the RE stage in 2016-17, it was reduced to `115.60 crore. Visualising the trend
of budget allocation, the Committee observes that the overall budget allocation for RYSK has shown a
declining trend at RE stage during the financial year 2016-17 affecting the sizeable expansion of on-
going activities falling under its purview. Further, the fund allocation in BE 2017-18 has gone up by
` 11.4 crore in comparison to RE stage of 2016-17 and this is not much encouraging. The Committee
recommends the Department to take all requisite initiatives so that it would not be reduced at the revised
budget stage in 2017-18 and the Department shall take the pro-active role to make RYSK a better
scheme. (Para 16)
Action Taken
The position regarding allocations for RYSK is slightly different. Actually, the Scheme came into
existence w.e.f. 01.04.2016 only after merger of 8 Schemes. Hence, allocation under RYSK as such
started in 2016-17 only. In 2016-17, the total allocation at BE stage (Plan and Non-Plan combined) was
`396.50 crores, which was reduced to `330.45 crores at RE stage. The allocation in BE 2017-18 is `342
crores. These figures are also mentioned in Para-12 of the Report of the Committee.
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilisation funds allocated for RYSK and
to make is a better Scheme. The matter will be taken up at RE stage not only to protect the allocations,
but for seeking further increase in the same.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS):
The Committee notes that for this Scheme, the increase in BE 2017-18 over BE and RE 2016-17
is very nominal, amounting to 4.7% only. This is only for meeting the additional expenditure on account
of increase in salaries and establishment expenses of NSS officials as also normal increase in expenditure
on organising various programmes. The Committee observes that in view of the present allocation, it will
not be possible to enhance the target for NSS volunteers or to add any new component to NSS. In fact,
this allocation is inadequate even to meet the current target of 36 lakh NSS volunteers. (Para 58)
Action Taken
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilisation of the available funds for
achieving the objectives for which funds have been allocated.
6

7
Observations/Recommendations
LAKSHMIBAI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION (LNIPE)
The Committee recommends the Department to take full scale efforts to complete all approved
projects under LNIPE on time and there is no denying the fact that the lapse of approved outlay for want
of delay in execution of approved projects is a cause of serious concern. The Committee further recommends
that tenacious efforts are made for improving the quality of academic level of the Institute and strengthening
the training skills and administrative support to the students. (Para 84)
Action Taken
LNIPE, Gwalior, is making sincere efforts for improving the quality of academic level of the
Institute and strengthening the training skills and administrative support to the students. It has resulted
in getting the highest A++ Grade to the LNIPE, Gwalior by the National Assessment and Accreditation
Council (NAAC). With a view to provide the administrative support to the students, there is one specific
post of Dean, Students Welfare in the Institute. Efforts are underway to further enhance the quality of
academic level of the Institute and strengthening the training skills and administrative support to the
students.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes the initiatives being taken by both the LNIPE, Gwalior and Guwahati and
is keen to know the road map for completing these schemes. The Committee, therefore, asks the Department
to apprise the Committee of progress made while submitting the action taken replies. The Committee also
desires that both the Department and the institutes to closely monitor the progress and ensure its timely
completion. (Para 86)
Action Taken
As already mentioned above, the VC, LNIPE has been advised to ensure completion of all approved
infrastructure/construction projects in time. Many infrastructure/construction projects of the LNIPE,
Gwalior (including LNIPE-NERC, Guwahati) have been approved in February, 2017 by the Finance
Committee and the Board of Management of the Institute. In respect of certain works, the construction
agencies have also been identified and mobilization advance has also been paid to them. In respect of
remaining works, the process of identification of the construction agencies in accordance with the
provisions of the General Financial Rules is in progress. As soon as the construction agencies are
finalised, the mobilisation advance would be paid and the progress of work at every stage would
scrupulously be monitored and timely completion of the works would be ensured with close co-
ordination with the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Department of Sports.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL DOPE TESTING LABORATORY (NDTL)
The Committee desires that equipments are procured on time and ensure that expansion of its
intended activities are accomplished concerning all quantifiable deliverables/physical targets of samples
to be tested as well as publication of research papers. (Para 90)

8
Action Taken
1. During 2017-18 a Budget Estimate of ` 3.00 crore has been allocated to NDTL under the head
"Capital Assets". This is mainly intended for procurement of one IRMS system for which the procurement
process has been initiated. Continuous efforts will be made for timely procurement.
2. Achievement of NDTL during 1st Quarter of 2017-18 (from April, 2017 to June, 2017):
i. Testing of Human Doping and Horse Doping Samples - 2477 nos.
ii. Publication of Research Papers - 1 no.
iii. Dope Testing Receipts - 1.52 crore
iv. Expenditure of NDTL - 1.47 crore
3. Further, it is expected that, all quantifiable deliverables/physical targets fixed for the financial year
2017-18 will be achieved in full.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING AGENCY (NADA) WORLD ANTI-DOPING AGENCY (WADA)
The Committee desires that the Department should ensure that the projected target is achieved on
time and targeted number of workshops and seminars concerning enhancement of awareness about
harmful effects of prohibited substances required for promoting clean sports are also held/organized
successfully. (Para 98)
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee takes note of the decline in the number of doping cases, but also cautions the agency
that more efforts are needed towards the elimination of such incidences. The awareness programmes need
to be intensified so as to reach all the stakeholders, namely, players, coaches and the respective institutions/
centres/academies, the Committee suggests. (Para 99)
Action Taken (Paras 98 and 99)
NADA is committed to take stringent measures in conjunction with sports stakeholders to rid the
menace of doping and create a clean and healthy environment for sport in India by way of robust dope
testing on sportspersons and conducting anti doping awareness program all across the country. During
the current year 2017, the following initiatives will taken by NADA to create awareness on harmful
effects of prohibited substances and doping. (Annexure X)
Observations/Recommendations
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SPORTS SCIENCE AND RESEARCH (IISSR)
The Committee is intrigued to note that procedural formalities for getting approval of man-power
requirement of this scheme have not been completed since 2015. The Committee, therefore, hopes that
all requirements are completed concerning the man-power requirement of IISSR without loosing any

9
further time and concerted efforts are taken by the Department to make fully operational the proposed
faculty of Sports science and Sports medicine in time-bound manner. The progress report with measurable
outcome in this regard should be made available to the Committee in the action taken replies.
(Para 102)
Action Taken
In this context, it is submitted that in the earlier scheme of things when a new Institution, IISSR,
was to be set up, a planned and phase-wise creation/filling up of posts was envisaged during the review
of Autonomous Bodies by NITI Aayog, it was emphasised to Strengthen existing institutions and downsize
creation of new Institutions. Accordingly, on review; it has now been decided to integrate the proposed
institute with the existing sports science set up under National Institute of Sports, Patiala. It would aim
to support high level research, education and innovation with respect to high performance of elite
athletes. The matter is to be considered by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC). The proposal also
includes manpower component for the consideration of the Committee. SFC note has been widely
circulated to relevant Ministries. Efforts are underway for foreign collaboration in research and to make
these centres fully functional at Patiala with international standards in a time-bound manner.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF SPORTS COACHING (NISC), PATIALA
The Committee observes that the fund provision amounting to 
` 0.50 crore for this scheme has
stagnated during the BE and RE 2016-17, however, it has been enhanced to `5 crore in BE 2017-18.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that requisite steps including the availability of adequate funds
should be initiated within the stipulated time-frame and the Committee should be apprised of the progress
made in its action taken replies. (Para 106)
Action Taken
In this case also, it has been decided to drop the earlier proposal of setting up of an independent
coaching institute, NISC and instead integrate it with the existing sports coaching set up under National
Institute of Sports, Patiala. It would aim to enhance sports coaching education in the country and to
create a comprehensive coaching development framework of the country and to conduct the research
in technical, tactical and skill development aspects of coaching and training of athletes. Total cost of the
proposed scheme is ` 81.00 cr. The matter is to be considered by the Standing Finance Committee
(SFC). A Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri P. Gopichand, Chief National Coach (Badminton)
has been working on development of a National coaching framework.
Observations/Recommendations
SPORTS UNIVERSITY IN NORTH-EAST
The Committee notes from the above that except the acquisition of land, not much progress has been
made in this project although three years have already gone. It is still not clear how much time it will
take to materialize. Moreover , the National Sports University Bill, 2017 is yet to be enacted. The
Committee urges upon the Government to prioritize the passage of the above Bill. Besides, the Department
of Sports should keep on pursuing with Ministry of Finance that setting up of this University is not

10
affected by paucity of funds. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the status by the Department
comprising output indicators in its action taken replies. (Para 109)
Action Taken
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development has
expressed concern that except the acquisition of land, not much progress has been made towards setting
up of National Sports University (NSU) despite the lapse of three years. The progress made with regards
to setting up of NSU is enumerated below.
2. With regard to acquisition of land it is stated that initially land was handed over by the Government
of Manipur at Thoubal District. However, construction work could not start as a patch of land was under
litigation. It also came to light that the site is in a low-lying area susceptible to flood and would require
extensive drainage arrangements for diverting water flowing from the hills. The quality of soil has poor
Safe Bearing Capacity (SBC) would require earth filling and pile foundation adding towards the cost of
construction. An alternative site at Koutruk was explored and found better suited for construction being
free from the foregoing problems. On request the Government of Manipur provided Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports with land measuring 325.90 acres at Koutruk, in the West Imphal District of Manipur,
for the proposed University on 29.12.2016. Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL), the
Project Management Consultant appointed for setting up the proposed University, has already started
works relating to soil testing and survey there, and barbed wire fencing of the site at Koutruk.
3. Pending completion of construction work at Koutruk, it has been decided to temporarily start the
proposed university from the Khuman Lampak Sports Complex at Imphal which has been identified and
developed for the purpose. Immediately after the National Sports University Bill, 2017, becomes Law,
it is intended to start BPES and B.Sc. (Sports Coaching) courses from the aforementioned complex.
4. The Note for the Cabinet, accompanied by the National Sports University Bill, 2017, has been
approved by the Cabinet on 26.07.2017. The Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge) Youth
Affairs and Sports has already given notice to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha Secretariat, on 28.07.2017
to introduce the National Sports University Bill, 2017, during the current session of the Lok Sabha and
the Bill has been introduced in the Lok Sabha.
5. In the while, Memorandums of Understanding with the Universities of Victoria and Canberra have
been signed. These Universities would render expert advice and help in setting up NSU. A similar MoU
is also under conceptualisation to be signed with University of Tsukuba and University of NITTADAI
of Japan, for technical partnership with NSU. Paucity of funds is not anticipated as the Department of
Expenditure while permitting this Ministry to spend ` 50 crore for pre-investment activities assured that
after availability of land and after designs/specifications/estimates have been firmed up, the detailed
proposal may be posed for EFC approval. However, as per advice of the Committee, Ministry of Finance
would be pursued to ensure that there is no paucity of funds.
Observations/Recommendations
ENCOURAGEMENT AND AW ARDS TO SPORTSPERSONS
The Committee feels that the schemes of Encouragement and Awards to Sportspersons are an
ongoing activity and it should be the endeavour of the Department that backlog situation is completely

11
avoided as it affects the morale of the sportspersons. The Committee, therefore, also urges the Department
to appraise it of the measures taken by the Department in this regard. (Para 114)
Action Taken
The Department of Sports had started a special drive in the month of December, 2016 through
newspaper advertisement and general circular to all the National Sports Federations to clear the pendency
in disbursing of Special Cash Award to medal winners. Department of Sports has already cleared most
of the pendency cases of the cash award. The Dept. will prepare a Standard Operating Procedure for
disbursement of cash awards within a month of Medal winning performance.
Observations/Recommendations
ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATION
As informed by the Department, the Committee notes that the fund allocation in BE 2016-17 for
this scheme was for `185.00 crore which was stepped up to `359.93 crore at the stage of RE keeping
in view the provision for conduct of South Asian Games. The Committee hopes that the allocation for
`302.18 crore in BE 2017-18 will take care of the increase in costs under various deliverables of this
scheme. (Para 120)
Besides, the Committee suggests to the Department to ensure that the funds allocated to the
federations are spent only for the purposes it is meant that these funds are also able to fill up the critical
infrastructural gaps at SAI regional centres which host National Camps for preparation of National teams
for participation in international events. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to
update it with all quantifiable indicators concerning the outcome of this scheme.
Action Taken
Financial assistance is given to recognized National Sports Federations for preparation of national
teams, training abroad, participating in international events, conducting international events in India,
national championship events, and for procuring sports equipment etc. Financial assistance is also
extended through SAI for organizing coaching camps, for preparing national teams and for engaging the
services of foreign coaches. The increase in BE is to meet expenses due to increase in costs under
various components. Sufficient provision has been kept in order to meet critical infrastructure gaps at
SAI regional centres which host National camps for preparation of National teams for participation in
international events. Further, there is no curtailment of budget provisions for regular activities relating
to training and participation of Indian athletes in various events held in India and abroad.
A standard checklist has been prepared for holding National Camps to ensure the athletes the state-
of-art, sports facilities, scientific supports, supports staff Food supplements etc., at par with International
Standard and requirement.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee gathers an impression that there are still some erring federations which are not
complying with the Government's guidelines. The Committee is deeply concerned that preparation together

12
with participation and also performance of sportsperson are not adversely affected on account of erring
sports federations. The Committee strongly feels that close coordination and effective monitoring mechanism
between the Government on one hand and sports federations on the other is the need of the hour. The
Committee accordingly impresses upon the Department to ensure the same. The Committee would like to
know the details of such federations, the action taken by Government against them for correcting the
errors; and the impact on the sportspersons and other stakeholders. The Committee, accordingly, desires
that a detailed note be furnished to it. (Para 121)
Action Taken
The Department recognizes only one federation of each sport discipline at the national level. NSFs
are fully responsible and accountable for the overall management, direction, control, regulation, promotion,
development and sponsorship of the discipline for which they are recognized by the concerned International
Federation. They are expected to discharge these responsibilities in consonance with the principles laid
down in the Olympic Charter or in the charter of the Indian Olympic Association or the relevant
International Federation, as the case may be while being compliant with Government guidelines applicable
to NSFs.
The Ministry regularly consults NSFs in major decision making, e.g., the NSFs were consulted
while formulating their Annual Calendar of Training and Competitions (ACTC), selection of athletes for
Sports Awards, revision of Schemes of the Ministry, etc. The Ministry also either directly or through
Sports Authority of India (SAI) consults the NSFs while implementing its various schemes.
This Ministry has evolved an evaluation/performance monitoring mechanism of the NSFs. Release
of grants would be, inter alia, based on the evaluation of NSFs. Government has also issued instructions
to NSFs to mandatorily declare information on their website pertaining to their audited accounts, balance
sheet, selection criteria for athletes, etc. The NSFs receiving grant of ` 10 lakhs or more has been
declared as Public Authority within purview of the RTI Act.
Also, Government has issued guidelines imposing age and tenure limits in respect of office bearers
of National Sports Federations, including those of the Indian Olympic Association; these have further
been reiterated in the National Sports Development Code of India, 2011, which has been made effective
from 31.1.2011. As per the guidelines, the Government has, inter alia, provided the following age and
tenure limits in respect of office bearers of the NSFs:
(i) The President of any recognized National Sports Federation, including the Indian Olympic
Association can hold the office for a maximum period of twelve years with or without break.
(ii) The Secretary (or by whatever other designation such as Secretary General or General Secretary
by which he is referred to) and the Treasurer of any recognized National Sports Federation,
including the IOA, may serve a maximum of two successive terms of four years each after
which a minimum cooling off period of four years is required to seek fresh election to either
post.
(iii) The President, the Secretary and the Treasurer of any recognized National Sports Federation,
including the Indian Olympic Association, shall cease to hold that post on attaining the age of
70 years.

13
Compliance to the directions of the Government by the NSFs has been made mandatory to receive
Government recognition and thereby become eligible to receive financial as well as other forms of
assistance from the Government of India such as railway concessions, income tax exemption, custom
duty exemption, etc. and to derive the authority to perform the public functions of selecting and deputing
the national teams for participation in recognized international sports competitions which involve
representation of member countries and to represent the country in international associations, events,
meets, conferences, etc. No National Sports Federation which has not adhered to these instructions for
the elections held after the issue of these Guidelines of 1-5-2010 has been given annual recognition by
the Government.
The Federations are required to intimate Government well in advance about its General Body
Meeting and other Meetings where election of office bearers and other important decisions are to be
taken. Wherever considered necessary, the Government will have the right to send its observer to the
above meetings. The election guidelines notified by the Government will apply.
Although these bodies may be registered in different States under the Societies Registration Act or
Trusts Act or the Companies Act, their authority to function as the NOC or NSF will be dependent on
compliance with the Government guidelines.
NSFs are required to submit Utilisation Certificates in respect of the grants released to them. Fresh
release of grants is not made unless the UCs which have become due are settled. They are required to
have their accounts audited by the Chartered Accountants in the CAG panel. NSFs receiving grants of
` 1.00 crore or more in a year are subject to audit by CAG.
From the year 2010, a new system of annual recognition was notified under which NSFs are
required to submit detailed documentation for grant of recognition, which would get automatically
renewed in the subsequent years subject to submission of prescribed documents such as annual report,
audited accounts, details of national championships held, Utilisation Certificate in respect of Government
grants. No National Sports Federation has been given annual recognition by the Government which has
not adhered to these instructions.
New NSFs seeking recognition will have to apply as per Guidelines given and the Ministry, inter
alia, will be guided by the following:
• The current legal status of the Organization.
• Recognition by the International Federation and the Asian Federation.
• Recognition by the IOA in respect of Olympic Sports.
• Undisputed status as an Apex Body in India.
• All India spread.
• The role and contribution of the organization in promoting and developing Sports in India.
• Conduct of national championships across age groups and gender.

14
• Financial and managerial accountability.
• Fair, transparent and democratic elections.
• Compliance with age and tenure limit guidelines.
• Protection and promotion of players’ interests and welfare.
The Ministry reserves the right to suspend or withdraw the recognition of NSF, in the event of
serious irregularities being detected in their internal functioning.
Upon withdrawal of recognition the NSF will cease to exercise the functions of the NSF for the
concerned sport discipline. It shall forego the right to regulate and control the sport in India and select
the national teams and represent India in international sports events and forums. It will also become
ineligible to use India in its name or receive any benefit or concession meant for an NSF as detailed in
clause 3.6 of the National Sports Development Code, 2011.
The National Sports Federations are required to comply with all conditions laid down in the Code,
including anti-doping code, prevention of age fraud code, citizenship criteria for selection of national
team, prevention of sexual harassment, etc.
Further in order to be eligible for assistance and continuing the recognition of Government the
national sporting organizations must meet the following criteria/provisions:
• Follow proper, democratic and healthy management practices which provide for greater
accountability and transparency at all levels.
• Maintain the recognition of the International Federation, Asian Federation, and IOA wherever
applicable.
• Follow Guidelines on Good governance in the context of Basic Universal Principle of Good
Governance of Olympic and Sports Movement
• Adopt proper accounting procedures at all levels and produce annual financial statements.
• Adopt impartial and transparent selection procedures.
• Provide a positive exposure to the Department of Youth Affairs and Sports as a major sponsor
of sport in India.
• Ensure that the dope tests of all its players are conducted regularly as per norms/standards
laid by the International Federation of the concerned discipline.
• Take measures against age fraud in Sports.
• Comply with the provisions of Right to Information Act.
• Hold of regular national championships in all categories both for men and women.
• Adhere to Limits on duration of tenure of office bearers.
• Hold the elections as per Model election guidelines.

15
• Mechanism for sports dispute settlement and establishment of a Dispute Settlement and Appellate
Tribunal.
Disputes resolutions and elections:
All the National level sports federations are registered bodies and the election of their office-bearers
is guided by their own Constitution. The Federations are required to intimate Government well in advance
about its General Body Meeting and other Meetings where election of office bearers and other important
decisions are to be taken. Wherever considered necessary, the Government will have the right to send
its observer to the above meetings. Government has prescribed model election guidelines for conduct of
elections of NSFs. As per the guidelines President of the concerned NSF is authorised to nominate a
person as Returning Officer for conduct of election of office bearers and member of the managing
committee. The election report submitted by the Returning Officer of the newly elected office bearers
is examined in this Ministry along with various other documents related to the election and upon found
fair, transparent and as per the procedure prescribed under the constitution of the concerned NSF, the
Government confirms the election and the names of the newly elected office bearers are noted in the
records.
In the event of failure to hold elections as prescribed in the Constitution of the NSF or in accordance
with the Government guidelines or gross irregularities in election procedures, the recognition of that
Federation is suspended/withdrawn.
At times disputes in NSFs crop up mainly due to factionalism in NSFs. While Government has very
little role in resolution of such disputes, it is generally guided by the decision of the international
federations in the matter of grant of recognition to the concerned NSF. Further, decisions are also taken
on case to case basis such as directing NSFs to hold fresh elections, withholding of annual recognition,
etc. Recently, Government has recognized Boxing Federation of India for promotion and development of
boxing sport in the country. Wherever the NSFs are under dispute, assistance to the athletes under the
Scheme of Assistance NSFs is given through Sports Authority of India.
In the past, a few NSFs were found to have violated the Government guidelines. Violations of age
and tenure restrictions, irregularities in elections, etc. were noticed. Action has been taken against such
NSFs, which is given below:
(i) Gymnastics Federation of India : Election of GFI was held on 28/1/2015 was not accepted
as valid by Hon'ble High Court of Delhi as international federation did not recognize the
election. Hon'ble High Court of Delhi directed to conduct fresh election of GFI before
31/7/2015 under the supervision of Justice (Retd.) P .K. Bhasin appointed as Returning Officer.
Election was conducted on 22/8/2015 wherein Shri Sudhakar Shetty was elected as President
and Dr. S. Shanti Kumar Singh was elected as General Secretary. Soon after the election
dispute cropped up between the President and General Secretary. In view of dispute in the
management of the Federation, Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana vide order dated
26/8/2016 directed IOA to place the matter before the Arbitrator as per the provisions of IOA's
Constitution.

16
(ii) All India Carrom Federation (AICF) : AICF conducted the election on 29/11/2015 at
Guwahati in which Shri Rakibul Hussain and Shri V .D. Narayan were elected as President and
Secretary General respectively. Shri S. Uday Kumar and Shri S.K. Sharma complained about
the irregularities in the election conducted in Guwahati. They formed a separate group and
conducted election on 15/5/2016 at Hyderabad. Both the elections were not considered as valid
and accordingly, the Ministry directed the Federation to conduct the election afresh. Shri V .D.
Narayan of AICF filed a writ petition in the High Court of Delhi against the decision of the
Government The matter is sub-judice before Hon'ble High Court of Delhi.
(iii) Archery Association of India (AAI) : AAI was de-recognized by the Ministry on 11/12/13
for not adhering to the age and tenure clause of the Sports Code. Election for the post of
President is due on account of resignation of earlier President of the Federation. The matter
of amending the Constitution of AAI to bring it in line with the Sports Code and to hold fresh
election is pending before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi.
(iv) Cycle Polo Federation of India (CPFI) : For not conducting the elections on time and as
per the guidelines of the Government CPFI has not been granted annual recognition since the
year 2016.
(v) Volleyball Federation of India (VFI): International Federation for V olleyball suspended VFI
due to dispute and mismanagement in the Federation. The Ministry has also suspended VFI
because of its suspension by the International Federation. Accordingly, annual recognition for
2017 was not granted to the Federation.
(vi) Netball Federation of India (NFI): Due to non conduct of the elections within the stipulated
time period as per the guidelines of the Government the Federation has not been granted annual
recognition since 2016.
(vii) Shooting Ball Federation of India (SBFI): Two elections were conducted by two factions
of the Federation on different dates and venues. The federation was directed to conduct
elections afresh under the supervision of Justice (Retd.) C.K. Mahajan appointed as Returning
Officer. One faction of SBFI has challenged the election conducted by Justice (Retd) C.K.
Mahajan in Delhi High Court which is pending before court. Hence, annual recognition for
2017 has not been granted to the Federation.
(viii) Basketball Federation of India (BFI)- Two factions of the federation held elections on
separate dates and venues. While IOA gave recognition to one faction, the Federation of
International Basketball Association. (FIBA) granted recognition to the other group. In view of
unclear position of the federation, annual recognition for 2017 has not been granted to the
Federation.
(ix) Judo Federation of India (JFI) - President was elected President, JFI did not fulfill the
criteria of tenure clause of Sports Code. JFI did not abide by the orders of the Government
to conduct the elections for the post of President. Therefore, annual recognition for the year
2017 has not been granted to JFI.

17
(x) Taekwondo Federation of India(TFI) -Registration of TFI was valid till 2014. In spite of
repeated reminder, TFI did not produce renewed/revalidated registration Certificate. Hence,
annual recognition was not granted to TFI since 2015.
(xi) All India Tennis Association (AITA) - Ministry did not grant Annual Recognition to AITA
for the year 2017 due to non-compliance of Sports Code relating to tenure clause for the post
of President. AITA has since conducted the election on 3/2/2017 afresh in which the earlier
President is not there. The election report received in the Ministry is under examination.
Presently, Sports Authority of India is looking after the selection, preparation/coaching and
participation of athletes of the aforesaid sports disciplines for participation in international events whenever
applicable.
Observations/Recommendations
Besides, the Committee suggests to the Department to ensure that the funds allocated to the
federations are spent only for the purposes it is meant that these funds are also able to fill up the critical
infrastructural gaps at SAI regional centres which host National Camps for preparation of National teams
for participation in International events. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to
update it with all quantifiable indicators concerning the outcome of this scheme.   (Para 122)
Action Taken
The Scheme of Assistance to the National Sports Federations (NSFs) is given to promote and
develop various disciplines of sports. Under the Scheme, Government provides assistance to NSFs for
conducting National championship and International Tournaments in India, participation in international
tournaments abroad, organizing coaching camps, procuring sports equipment, engagement of foreign
coaches, etc. The main aims and objectives under the Scheme are to ensure that NSFs organize
important national and international sports events in the country and to ensure that sportspersons receive
desired support through NSFs for training, competition exposure, sports science and sports medicine
support, etc., which are required to achieve excellence. The standard quantifiable indicators for measuring
outcomes of the Scheme are as under:
Quantifiable indicator Achievement in 2016-17
(i) Number of camp trainees in coaching camps; 4493
(ii) Holding of National tournaments; 147
(iii) Holding of International tournaments in India; and 46
(iv) Inte rnational exposures abroad to Indian athletes. 344
(v) Medals won at International Events 647
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF)
The Committee suggests that a detailed plan be chalked out with target to be achieved in a time
frame. A team of dedicated officials should be assigned exclusively for NSDF who will be carrying out

18
the responsibilities to generate awareness about NSDF; aggressively approach corporate, banks, individuals
and organizations for contribution to NSDF; answer their queries and remove their doubts; offer suitable
products to them; customize products as per their requirement; sign MOUs with them; consult them
regarding utilization of their contribution; ensure quick release of funds to beneficiaries; monitor progress
of athletes and projects; arrange athlete appearances for contributors and take care of all aspects of
client servicing; tackle misinformation about NSDF in media; and get accounts of NSDF audited timely.
If required, the department be strengthened further. (Para 132)
Action Taken
Department has already initiated proactive approach for generous contribution to the National Sports
Development Fund (NSDF). Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Youth Affairs and Sports
held a Meeting with stakeholders on 24th November, 2016 urging them to make contributions to NSDF.
Thereafter, a letter was addressed to 62 Public Sector Undertakings on 7th December, 2016. Department
of Public Enterprises in collaboration with PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry organized CSR Fair
from 4th to 6th May, 2017 in which NSDF/Department of Sports displayed its activities. In this
connection, a D.O. letter dated 18th May, 2017 from Secretary (Sports) has been issued to the heads
of 74 PSUs informing about the role and activity of NSDF and urging them to contribute to NSDF for
promotion and excellence of sports in the country.
As advised by the Committee, Department recently recruited 4- Research Officers for NSDF cell
to generate awareness about NSDF. In SAI, a special project cell has been created with Executive
Director as head with a dedicated team of Officials for mobilising CSR.
Observations/Recommendations
PROMOTION OF SPORTS AMONG DISABLED
The Committee recommends to the Department to make concerted efforts to ensure that the financial
support are released to Gandhi Nagar Centre of SAI from the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
for preparing Centre of Excellence for Paralympics. The Committee also recommends to the Department
to press for funding upto 
` 5.00 crore per annum from the Department of Empowerment of persons with
disabilities from the financial year 2017-18 which has been agreed upon by that Department.
(Para 138)
Action Taken
To promote sports among the Para Athletes, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports sanctioned
in the first instance financial assistance of ` 112.00 lakhs to establish a specialized training centre for
Paralympic sports at SAI Regional Centre Gandhinagar, Gujarat. Accordingly, a proposal is under process
to create disabled friendly sports infrastructure at SAI RC Gandhinagar which will become nodal centre
for Para Athletes. The work related to the boundary wall for the proposed nodal centre is already in
progress. Department of Empowerment of persons with Disabilities has sanctioned ` 20 crore for the
specialized coaches at Gandhinagar.
Separately, it has also been decided to establish a SAI Training Centre for Para Athletes at SAI RC
Gandhinagar in the sports discipline of Athletics, Power Lifting and Swimming with strength of 50-Para

19
Athletes. Selection trials were conducted in February 2017 and the selection committee has recommended
induction of 28 Para Athletes (20 Boys and 8 Girls) for regular training in the above sports discipline.
The centre will become operational soon.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee shows its serious concern that only a token provision of ` 0.01 crore has been made
for this scheme in the financial year 2017-18, whereas in the BE as well RE 2016-17, the allocation
was made for 
` 4.00 crore. For this, the Department has given justification that this scheme is proposed
to be merged under Khelo India. This is disheartening, the Committee feels. In the present scenario, the
Committee urges the Department to furnish a comprehensive set of quantifiable indicators and measurable
outcomes with regard to Promotion of Sports among Disabled, achieved upto the first supplementary
stage in action taken replies. (Para 139)
Action Taken
In the proposed revamped Khelo India Scheme the subject "Promotion of sports among persons
with disabilities" has been included.
Support will be provided under the Khelo India Scheme to States/UTs, SAI and other organizations
to make existing sports infrastructure disabled friendly. Further, financial assistance will also be provided
to States/UTs and SAI for creation of barrier-free sports infrastructure for person with disabilities.
An annual grant of `15 crore is proposed to be earmarked to provide world class facilities to the
sportspersons who are differently abled. This will be utilized for supporting existing stadia to make them
barrier free, Classification of Athletes, training of India classifiers, and setting up/supporting Specialized
Sports Training Centres for people with disabilities, coaching development, scholarships for coaching
diploma both by differently abled persons and able-bodied persons seeking coaching for training para-
athletes.
This component will be implemented through the SAI/States/UTs in association with beneficiary
organization.
Observations/Recommendations
KHELO INDIA: NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF SPORTS
Taking into account the individual objectives of this scheme, for example in the National Playing
Field Development Programme, the Committee hopes that the target would be achieved by vigorous
efforts of the Department and desires that a status note concerning the quantifiable progress made in
this regard till first supplementary stage should be made available to the Committee for consideration
(Para 149)
Action Taken
Action is on hand to pursue the National Playing Field Development Programme as directed. This
component is being included in the proposed revamped the Khelo India Scheme.

20
Observations/Recommendations
150. The Committee finds it rather surprising that Department has not provided the details of 10 priority
sports discipline as contemplated under this scheme. The Committee recommends to the Department to
apprise the Committee of the outcomes on this front in its action taken replies. (Para 150)
Action Taken
The department identified the following 9 - high priority disciplines which are having probable medal
prospects at 2020, 2024 and 2028 Olympics. The 9 priority sports disciplines are:
(i) Athletics
(ii) Archery
(iii) Badminton
(iv) Boxing
(v) Hockey
(vi) Shooting
(vii) Tennis
(viii) Wrestling
(ix) W eight lifting
Observations/Recommendations
STADIA RENOV ATION
The Committee recommends to the Department to take adequate initiatives for this scheme so that
all disputes get resolved expeditiously and the fund demarcated for establishment and miscellaneous
expenditure gets utilized for some other constructive and fruitful targets. (Para 152)
Action Taken
The Committee was apprised that the Budget Head in question was operated for renovation of Stadia
for organizing the CWG 2010 and the same is being carried with a token provision so that the liabilities
arising out of pending disputes in arbitration could be provided for. Department of Sports will try to settle
the pending disputes expeditiously as advised by the Committee. Sports Authority of India (SAI) which
is concerned with these cases is also being advised accordingly.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL PHYSICAL FITNESS PROGRAMME RESOURCE CENTRE OF LNIPE, GWALIOR
The Committee recommends to the Department that endeavour should be made to get the desired
result in regard to setting up a Resource Centre at LNUPE Gwalior enabling it to act as a knowledge
hub and expert centre in the field of physical fitness in the financial year 2017-18 for which the budget
has been allocated under this scheme. (Para 154)

21
Action Taken
The efforts are underway to make Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, Gwalior to
functions as a knowledge hub and expert centre in the field of physical fitness. The National Physical
Fitness Programme (NPFP) has been included as a component in the revamped Khelo India Scheme with
a view to promote development of health and physical well-being of the youth in order to function
effectively in the society. The work of collection of relevant data has been completed. The work of
preparation of norms in progress. LNIPE has been designated as a nodal organisation for implementation
of this programme.
Further, the LNIPE has been entrusted to provide technical support to NCERT for preparation of
curriculum for integration of sports and physical education as compulsory subject in the schools.
Observations/Recommendations
SCHEME FOR IDENTIFICATION AND NURTURING OF SPORTS TALENT
The Committee recommends to the Department to ensure that under this scheme, financial assistance
is released on time for use of sports science in talent identification and nurturing of sports talent in the
country by way of various tests such as biochemistry analysis, genetic tests, etc. (Para 159)
Action Taken
Recently, with help of Sports Science, physiological profiling of sports persons have been created
at the time of Induction and is being monitored periodically to enhance performance level.
Observations/Recommendations
ENHANCEMENT OF SPORTS FACILITY IN J&K
The Committee recommends that all requisite initiatives are taken by the Department for the
execution of this scheme by upgrading the existing stadiums and construction of new sports infrastructure
and augmentation of sports facilities in trouble stricken State of J&K within the required time and
making this a laudable scheme, overcoming all inadequacies. The Committee further hopes that this
scheme succeeds in providing an important tool for promotion of peace and development in the valley.
(Para 163)
Action Taken
Sports for peace and development has been included as a component under revamped Khelo India
Scheme. Under this, 6-week certificate courses in community coaching programme for 180 PETs of
J&K has been organized at NIS in 3-batches of 60-coaches per batch. NPCC, a central PSU has been
assigned the construction / renovation of sports facilities at J&K. Further, it has been decided to create
synthetic football field; 6 - a side at each block of J&K under the special package.
Observations/Recommendations
HIMALAYAN REGION SPORTS FESTIV AL
The Committee  r ecommends that concerted initiatives should be taken by the Department to
accomplish the execution of this scheme within the stipulated time frame and hopes that this scheme
becomes successful in promoting indigenous games in the Himalayan Region. (Para 165)
Action Taken
This has since been renamed as Himalayan Region Games (HRG). It is proposed to hold the first
edition in November, 2017

22
CHAPTER-III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Observations/Recommendations
NEHRU YUV A KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
The Committee further observes that the major constraint in the achievement of desired result by
NYKS is shortage of staff. The shortage of staff together with inadequate funds adversely affects the
execution of magnitude of task involved. The total sanctioned strength of NYKS is of 2273 posts, of
which 1412 posts are filled up at present (including 24 posts filled up temporarily by taking officers on
deputation and 25 posts filled up temporarily through UNV-DYCs under the UNV/UNDP). The remaining
861 posts are vacant. A major proportion of vacancies are in the category of DYCs (Distt. Youth
Coordinators) and ACTs (Accounts Clerk-cum-Typists). This, the Committee views, is adversely affecting
the work. As most of the posts have remained vacant for over a year, the same have lapsed. During the
examination of DFG 2016-17 of the Department, it was brought to the notice of the Committee that 810
posts are vacant in NYKS and the Committee, accordingly, recommended to make vigorous initiatives to
get the approval of posts. However, the situation has not improved. Hence the Committee reiterates its
recommendation for the Department to expedite the revival of posts in mission mode from the Ministry
of Finance, Department of Expenditure and make formidable time barred efforts for getting the vacant
posts filled up. (Para 24)
Action Taken
Proactive efforts are being made for revival of the posts. The matter was taken up with Ministry
of Finance (through IFD) in October, 2016. M/o Finance returned the file in Nov. 2016 seeking a number
of clarifications and additional information. A comprehensive revised proposal for revival of 825 posts,
incorporating the information sought by M/o Finance, has been furnished to IFD of the Department for
examination and further taking up with M/o Finance.
Meanwhile, NYKS has initiated steps to fill up 41 posts of DYCs (Distt. Youth Coordinators) and
ACTs (Accounts Clerk-cum-Typists), that have not yet lapsed. Process of filling up of vacant posts for
Persons with Disabilities (15 posts) and against 'compassionate appointment quota' (11 posts) is also
underway. To tide over the staff shortage, 27 officers have been appointed as District Youth Coordinators
on deputation basis.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that the stated proactive efforts by the Ministry have not yielded
the desired results as against the 810 vacant posts less than 100 posts have been field up so far.
This can not be a matter of satisfaction. The Committee feels that the procedure for the filling
up of posts need substantial improvement so that posts are filled up on time. The Committee
22

23
recommends to the Ministry to take up appropriate steps in this regard and apprise the progress
there of.
Observations/Recommendations
YOUTH HOSTELS:
The Committee observes that some major constraints faced by the Department are (a) encroachment
of youth hostels by State Government Departments and their use for non-designated purposes, (b) the
meetings of Hostel Management Committee (HMC) not being held regularly, thereby adversely affecting
smooth running of Hostels, and (c) delay in appointment of Managers due to late furnishing of list of
candidates by the State Governments/ District Administrations. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Department must initiate appropriate measures to get all 14 Youth Hostels vacated
from the unauthorized occupants and extraneous activities running thereat are stopped henceforth. Further,
all requisite steps should be taken by the Department to regularize the meeting of HMC and without
indulging in a long-drawn affair, the appointment of Managers should be streamlined by resorting to all
out efforts. The Committee would like to get a status note separately containing the action initiated by
the Ministry in this regard. The Committee also advocates for increase in the financial outlay for this
scheme at the R.E. stage of 2017-18, if the overall fund allocation of the Department goes up at the
R.E. stage. (Para 44)
Action Taken
Secretary, Youth Affairs has taken up the matter with the Chief Secretary of the Concerned States/
UTs for removing encroachment in the Youth Hostels and seeking their cooperation and support for the
appointment of Managers of the Hostels in a timely manner. The Chairpersons of the Hostel Management
Committees (HMCs) have been requested to hold meetings of HMCs regularly for addressing the hostel
issues in timely and effective manner.
A meeting of the Central Policy Committee of Youth Hostels was held on 26.04.2017 under
chairmanship of Secretary, Youth Affairs, for threadbare discussion on various aspects of functioning of
the Youth Hostels, with a view to improve the same. The meeting was attended by representative of State
Governments.
All possible efforts are being made for optimum and timely utilization of the allocated funds. The
matter will be taken up at RE stage for increase in allocations.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee had asked for a separate status note containing the action initiated by the
Department in removing the encroachment in Youth Hostels and appointment of Managers. The
reply of the Ministry does not mention the result of its taking up the matter with the Chief
Secretaries and the Chairpersons of the HMCs as to whether any encroachment have been
removed. The Committee finds Ministry's reply incomplete and even evasive. The Committee,
while reiterating the above recommendation, would like the Department to state specifically
whether all encroachment in Youth Hostels have been removed. The latest status of appointment
of managers in Youth Hostels may also be provided.

24
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL YOUNG LEADERS PROGRAMME (NYLP):
The Committee recommends to the Department to take pro-active approach to get rid of all
operational difficulties in implementing this scheme at field level and make this scheme a worthwhile
scheme. Besides, outright efforts be made to mobilize contributions to NYLP. Committee further recommends
that a feasible target for augmenting this Fund should also be set and the progress made for such
achievement be apprised to the Committee. (Para 52)
Action Taken
Based on feedback from field officials, the guidelines for 'Neighbourhood Youth Parliament' component
of NYLP have been revised. The financial assistance to youth clubs for organizing village-level programmes
has been doubled from `1,200/- to `2,400/- per club per annum and other parameters have also been
made more flexible. Efforts are also being made for mobilization of contributions to the NYLP.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Department. The Committee did
not find any concrete action or even proposal to achieve the objectives recommended by the
Committee earlier. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation with the direction that
it should furnish the action taken by them for augmenting the funds to NYLP and also the
various steps taken to address all operational difficulties at field level.
Observations/Recommendations
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI)
The Committee expresses its concern over the shortage of coaches and consequently more than 37%
vacancies exist. Certainly, the mode and pace of recruitment is not at all satisfactory. That needs major
improvement. Moreover, the engagement on contract or deputation basis also reflects the lackadaisical
attitude of the SAI to address this issue. The Committee desires that not only all the positions be filled
up quickly but also there should not be left any scope for contract basis appointments. (Para 75)
Action Taken
The Sports Authority of India is already addressing the concern of the Committee regarding
shortage of coaches in SAI. The recruitment process has already been started to appoint 176 Assistant
Coaches in the 16 priority disciplines. Based on written examination, physical/skill test and credentials
verification of approximately 493 eligible candidates have been short listed. The interview/personality test
for eligible candidates is on way and likely to be completed by mid of September, 2017. Immediately after
the completion of interview process, 176 coaches will be appointed in SAI under the various schemes
in operation across the country.

25
We are also taking coaches on deputation/contract basis. It is pertinent to mention here that at
present 1524 sanctioned posts of coaches in SAI as per the following details:
(i) Chief Coaches - 10% Grade Pay `7600/- [as per 6th CPC]
(ii) Senior Coaches - 20% Grade Pay `6600/-
(iii) Coaches - 30% Grade Pay `5400/-
(iv) Assistant Coaches - 40% Grade Pay `4200/-
It is further to inform that as per the Recruitment Rules of SAI, the regular appointment is given only
in the cadre of Assistant Coaches, whereas in other cadres, i.e., Coach, Senior Coach and Chief Coach,
the eligible candidates may also be taken on deputation if they fulfil the criteria. Further, the vacancies
are filled-up keeping in view the requirement of coaches in the schemes and the capability of the coaches,
i.e., high performance coaches are being taken in the academies and centre of excellence scheme etc.
The Senior Coaches and Coaches are deployed in the different STCs/SAG/ABSC/NSTC schemes across
the country. The Assistant Coaches are deployed in the Come and Play Schemes and Extension Centre
Scheme.
It is further to clarify that Central Government has the responsibility to develop the sports in union
territories across the country; therefore, we also take the coaches on deputation particularly in the
difficult areas/remote areas and union territories. Recently, to develop sports in J&K - on the part of PM's
special package 2014, we have identified highly qualified coaches in J&K. Accordingly, 3 - Coaches have
been taken on deputation in SAI and are working in J&K.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee acknowledges the steps taken by the Department to tackle the problem of
vacancies in coaches, which is around 37% at present. The Committee however, recommends to
the Department of Sports to furnish the latest vacancy positions of coaches in various disciplines
and also vacancy position in other posts in its next replies to the Committee.
Observations/Recommendations
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT IN SPORTS
The Committee observes that the budget provision for this scheme was for 5 crore in BE 2016-17
and remained same at the RE stage. However, this has been doubled in BE 2017-18. The Committee
recommends to the Department to make endeavour to make this scheme more outcomes oriented and the
Committee be apprised in this regard. (Para 24)
Action Taken
The department is making continuous effort to make the Scheme of Human Resource Development
in Sports more outcomes oriented. The Scheme has its components manifold viz. fellowship for advanced/
specialized courses in sports, assistance to match officials, coaches and supporting personnel, organization
as well as attending the seminar, workshop, conference, publications etc. The Department is looking

26
forward to next Olympics and decided to develop a module for training course under experienced Indian/
foreign coaches/ technical experts in each discipline with the active participation of Sports Authority of
India and National Sports Federations. It is also planned to make best of our Physiotherapists and
masseurs world standard. The State and UT Governments are also encouraged for active participation
to build a constructive and structured framework in human resource development in sports.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee would like
to reiterate that scheme of Human Resource Development in sports is a very important scheme
which would provide specialized coaches, officers and supporting personal to the Sportspersons.
The Committee recommends that the Department should coordinate with State/UT administrations/
Governments for providing facilities at the ground level to build the human resource personnel
for the sports.
Observations/Recommendations
NATIONAL  SPORTS  DEVELOPMENT  FUND (NSDF)
The Committee observes that both the Department and the SAI have critical role to play so far as
the promotion of NSDF is concerned. The fund has great potential that needs to be tapped. The approach
has to be proactive, rather with a missionary zeal. The department has reached out to all the possible
donors who have capacity to contribute. It should not merely be confined to the public sector companies
or banks but also reach out to entire corporate sector. The Committee in its numerous interactions with
the stakeholders emphasized this fact and reiterates the same. As suggested in its previous reports that
the scheme needs wider publicity and to motivate the donors the help of celebrities may be sought.
(Para 131)
Action Taken
Department has already initiated proactive approach for generous contribution to the National Sports
Development Fund (NSDF). Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Youth Affairs and Sports
held a Meeting with stakeholders on 24th November, 2016 urging them to make contributions to NSDF.
Thereafter, a letter was addressed to 62 Public Sector Undertakings on 7th December, 2016. Department
of Public Enterprises in collaboration with PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry organized CSR Fair
from 4th to 6th May, 2017 in which NSDF/Department of Sports displayed its activities. In this
connection, a D.O. letter dated 18th May, 2017 from Secretary (Sports) has been issued to the heads
of 74 PSUs informing about the role and activity of NSDF and urging them to contribute to NSDF for
promotion and excellence of sports in the country. As a result, the department received encouraging
responses from various PSUs/Corporate.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee would like to reiterate that contribution to the National Sports Development
Fund (NSDF) needs to be tapped with a missionary zeal. The Committee would like to point out
that the scheme needs wider publicity and motivation to the donors to attract contribution to
National Sports Development Fund (NSDF).

27
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee further recommends that the Department of Sports should take up the issues with
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and Department of Public Enterprises so that necessary instructions
are issued to PSBs/PSUs for spending a minimum percentage of CSR funds on sports including, of
course, NSDF . The instructions should also be got issued afresh to ensure that those recruited under sports
quota are given sports related work to the possible extent. (Para 133)
Action Taken
The matter has been continuously pursued with M/o Corporate Affairs and Department of Public
Enterprise. As a result, besides training component, creation of Sports Infrastructure has been covered
under CSR-contribution.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee would like to again reiterate that the Department would make efforts to
publicize this fund and also reach out to corporate sector for contribution to the NSDF. The
Ministry should also approach the Ministry of Finance and ask them to provide incentives for
contribution to the NSDF.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee is aware of the fact that the Khelo India - National Programme for Development
of Sports was introduced w.e.f. 22.04.2016 and in BE 2016-17, the provision was made for 
`140 crore
for this scheme. However, this amount was slashed to ` 118.10 crore in RE 2016-17 on account of slow
progress of expenditure for this scheme, which failed to pick up as envisaged. The Committee is at loss
to find the delay being caused in the implementation of all three requisite components of this scheme
viz., competitions, talent and sports infrastructure. For BE 2017-18, the outlay is for ` 350 crore against
projected requirement of ` 500 crore. The Committee would like to emphasize on the Department to take
the concrete action so that the fund does not get slashed at the RE stage owing to slow progress of work
with regard to this scheme. (Para 148)
Action Taken
The Khelo India Scheme was launched in April, 2016 with three component creation of Infrastructure
at block-level, promoting annual corporation at block level - upward and talent identification. Being a new
Scheme, there were a few issues which were to be sorted out after discussion with the stakeholders.
After taking into account the various inputs received from the stakeholders, the scheme was revised in
November, 2016. As a consequence of this, the expenditure under the scheme during the first two
quarters of the year 2016-17 could not pick up as envisaged. Meanwhile, the time arrived for deciding
Revised Estimates 2016-17. Based on the pace of expenditure till that time, Budget Estimates 2016-17
of `140 crore was reduced to `118.10 crore in Revised Estimates 2016-17. Had the budget not been
reduced, the BE 2016-17 figure of `140 crore could have been spent by the Department. The Khelo India
Scheme is being revamped by enlarging its scope with twelve components to provide sports infrastructure
all over the country. As per the proposed revamped scheme, it is expected that `350 crore sanctioned

28
as BE 2017-18 will be spent in full without any surrender. EFC approved the revamped Khelo India
Scheme with Budget outlays of ` 1756 crore from 2017-18 to 2019-20.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee would like to point out that Indian National Programme for Development
of Sports is an important scheme for finding new talent and promoting sports culture among the
youth of the country. The Committee would recommend that the Department should just not
only strive to spend the fund on this scheme, but also make sure that this scheme is successfully
implemented to provide infrastructure and other facilities to the sportspersons.

29
CHAPTER-IV
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
29

30
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A  GLANCE
NEHRU YUV A KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
The Committee observes that the stated proactive efforts by the Ministry have not yielded
the desired results as against the 810 vacant posts less than 100 posts have been field up so far.
This can not be a matter of satisfaction. The Committee feels that the procedure for the filling
up of posts need substantial improvement so that posts are filled up on time. The Committee
recommends to the Ministry to take up appropriate steps in this regard and apprise the progress
there of. (Para 24)
YOUTH HOSTELS:
The Committee had asked for a separate status note containing the action initiated by the
Department in removing the encroachment in Youth Hostels and appointment of Managers. The
reply of the Ministry does not mention the result of its taking up the matter with the Chief
Secretaries and the Chairpersons of the HMCs as to whether any encroachment have been
removed. The Committee finds Ministry's reply incomplete and even evasive. The Committee,
while reiterating the above recommendation, would like the Department to state specifically
whether all encroachment in Youth Hostels have been removed. The latest status of appointment
of managers in Y outh Hostels may also be provided. (Para 44)
NATIONAL YOUNG LEADERS PROGRAMME (NYLP):
The Committee is not satisfied with the response of the Department. The Committee did
not find any concrete action or even proposal to achieve the objectives recommended by the
Committee earlier. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation with the direction that
it should furnish the action taken by them for augmenting the funds to NYLP and also the
various steps taken to address all operational difficulties at field level. (Para 52)
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (SAI)
The Committee acknowledges the steps taken by the Department to tackle the problem of
vacancies in coaches, which is around 37% at present. The Committee however, recommends to
the Department of Sports to furnish the latest vacancy positions of coaches in various disciplines
and also vacancy position in other posts in its next replies to the Committee. (Para 75)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT IN SPORTS
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Department. The Committee would like
to reiterate that scheme of Human Resource Development in sports is a very important scheme
which would provide specialized coaches, officers and supporting personal to the Sportspersons.
The Committee recommends that the Department should coordinate with State/UT administrations/
Governments for providing facilities at the ground level to build the human resource personnel
for the sports. (Para 124)
30

31
NATIONAL SPORTS DEVELOPMENT FUND (NSDF)
The Committee would like to reiterate that contribution to the National Sports Development
Fund (NSDF) needs to be tapped with a missionary zeal. The Committee would like to point out
that the scheme needs wider publicity and motivation to the donors to attract contribution to
National Sports Development Fund (NSDF). (Para 131)
The Committee would like to again reiterate that the Department would make efforts to
publicize this fund and also reach out to corporate sector for contribution to the NSDF. The
Ministry should also approach the Ministry of Finance and ask them to provide incentives for
contribution to the NSDF. (Para 133)
The Committee would like to point out that Indian National Programme for Development
of Sports is an important scheme for finding new talent and promoting sports culture among the
youth of the country. The Committee would recommend that the Department should just not
only strive to spend the fund on this scheme, but also make sure that this scheme is successfully
implemented to provide infrastructure and other facilities to the sportspersons. (Para 148)

MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 4th January,
2018 in Committee Room No. '62', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
4. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
6. Shri Nihal Chand
7. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
8. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
9. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
10. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
11. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
12. Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the draft (i) 294th Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations /
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty third Report on "Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and
Mid-Day-Meal Scheme", (ii) 295th Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations /
35

36
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty-fourth Report on "Issues and Challenges
before Higher Education Sector in India", (iii) 296th Report on Action Taken by Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty seventh Report on Demands
for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, (iv) 297th Report on Action Taken
by Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Higher Education, (v) 298th Report on
Action Taken by Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and
Eighty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development
and (vi) 299th Report on the National Sports University Bill, 2017.
3. The Committee considered the draft 294th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th and 299th Reports and
adopted them after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decide to present/lay the 294th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th and 299th Reports
to both the Houses of the Parliament on 5th January, 2018. The Committee authorized the Chairman and
in his absence, Shri Partap Singh Bajwa, M.P., Rajya Sabha to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha
and Shari Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P ., Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati,
M.P., Lok Sabha to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 
A.M.

37
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-X
Play Fair
Monthly e-News Letter
National Anti Doping Agency
Aug., 2017 (Issue - VIII)
Dope Testing
During the month of July, 2017, dope tests were carried out at the following main events/places
in addition to out of competition tests:
Date                    Events Competition
6th-9th July, 2017 Senior Asian Athletics Championship 2017, International
Bhubaneswar
15th-19th July, 2017 U-19 Football Tournament 2017, New Delhi National
15th-18th July, 2017 57th National Inter State Senior Athletics National
Championship 2017, Guntur
27th-29th July, 2017 FIBA Asia Women Basketball Championship, Bangalore International
28th-30th July, 2017 Pro-Kabaddi league, Season 5, Hyderabad National
Provisional Suspensions
The following sportsperson stand provisionally suspended for Anti-Doping Rule Violation:
Sl. Name and Sports Name of Competition Date of
No. Discipline Provisional
Suspension
1. Mr. Sreekanth D. 3rd Indian Grand Prix, New Delhi 07/06/2017
(Athletics)
2. Mr. Jagtar singh Federation Cup National Senior Athletics 28/06/2017
(Athletics) Championship 2017, Patiala
3. Mr. Rohit (Athletics) Federation Cup National Junior Athletics 12/07/2017
Championship 2017, Lucknow
4. Mr. Ashish Lathwal Federation Cup National Junior Athletics 12/07/2017
(Athletics) Championship 2017, Lucknow
5. Ms. Manpreet Kaur Federation Cup National Senior Athletics 20/07/2017
(Athletics) Championship 2017, Patiala
39

40
The Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel (ADDP)
Athletes found guilty of violating Anti-Doping Rules of NADA were given opportunity to present
themselves before the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel and explain their cases on the date and time fixed
by the Panel for hearing. The Panel held 08 sittings during the month of July, 2017 and imposed
sanctions in 08 cases as per the following details:
Sl. Name of Sports Sanction imposed, if any Date of Order
No. Sportsperson
1. Mr. Subrata Paul Football Reprimand with noperiod of ineligibility. 05/07/2017
2. Mr. Kulwinder Singh Kabaddi 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 02/11/2016. 10/07/2017
3. Mr. Murali Mohanti Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f. 20/09/2016. 10/07/2017
4. Mr. Jithin Paul Athl etics Hearing was held on 10/07/2017 and –
20/07/2017 and further listed for
10/08/2017
5. Ms. Tahamina Khatun Athl etics 4 Y ears ineligibility w .e.f. 25/07/2016. 10/07/2017
6. Mr. Shamsher Singh Kabaddi 4 Y ears ineligibility w .e.f. 25/10/2016. 10/07/2017
7. Mr. A. Krishna W eightlifting 4 Y ears ineligibility w .e.f. 17/08/2016. 10/07/2017
Moorthy
8. Mr. V . Santhosh W eightlifting 4 Y ears ineligibility w .e.f. 17/08/2016. 10/07/2017
9. Ms. Priyanka Panwar Athl etics Hearing was held on 10/07/2017 and –
further adjourned.
10. Mr. Yugant Shekhar Athl etics Hearing was held on 20/07/2017 and –
Singh further listed for 10/08/2017.
11. Mr. Arjun Athl etics Hearing was held on 28/07/2017 and –
further listed for 10/08/2017.
12. Mr. Mahesh Kale Athl etics 4 Y ears ineligibility w .e.f. 27/09/2016. 28/07/2017
The Anti-Doping Appeal Panel (ADAP)
As per the Anti Doping Rules of NADA, an appeal can be filed by the athlete and other
parties against the order of the ADDP. The Anti-Doping Appeal Panel held no sitting during the month
of June.
Mass Athlete Awareness Programmes Against Doping
NADA has been conducting anti-doping workshops, educational and awareness programs about the
prohibited drugs/substances and methods in sports across the country for sportspersons, young athletes,

41
coaches and supporting staff. In the month of July, 2017, 05 nos. of such Awareness-cum-Education
Workshop on Anti-Doping conducted by NADA at following places:
Sl. No. Name of Event and Place Date of Programme
1. Sports and Yout h Dept., Panchkula, Haryana 13/07/2017
2. JLN Stadium Complex, New Delhi 14/07/2017
3. SAI National Boxing Academy, Rohtak 14/07/2017
4. Netaji Subhash National Institute of Sports, Patiala 26/07/2017
5. SAI STC, Hisar Agricultural University, Hisar 29/07/2017
One day Anti-Doping Awareness Workshop at Panchkula, Haryana
A one day Anti-Doping awareness workshop was conducted by NADA at Panchkula on July 13,
2017 to educate the athletes and support staff about ill effects of doping. The workshop was jointly
organized by NADA and Dept. of Youth Services and Sports, Government of Haryana, which was
inaugurated by Sh. Anil Viz, Hon’ble Sports Minister of Haryana. Sh. K. K. Khandelwal, Addl. Chief
Secretary, Haryana Government and Sh. Navin Aagarwal, DG, NADA was also present during the
workshop and decided to organize such Anti-Doping awareness workshop in each district of Haryana
State.
Surveillance audit for ISO 9001:2008 certification of NADA
One day surveillance audit was conducted by lead auditor on July 12, 2017. The lead auditor visited
office of NADA and gone through the process and procedures w.r.t. dope testing, result management,
accounts and stores, anti-doping panels and education/awareness in detail.
Training on various modules of Public Finance Management System (PFMS)
One day training session on various modules of PFMS was organized by Ministry of Human
Resource Development on July 18, 2017 at Institute of Government Accounts And Finance (InGAF),
New Delhi. NADA officials attended the training session held on July 18, 2017 on PFMS module.

42
Play Fair
Monthly e-News Letter
National Anti Doping Agency
July, 2017 (Issue-VII)
Dope Testing
During the month of June, 2017, dope tests were carried out at the following main events/places
in addition to out of competition tests:
Date Events Competition
1st-4th June, 2017 21st Federation Cup National Athletics National
Championship 2017, Patiala
11th-14th June, 2017 U-19 Football Tournament 2017, Chandigarh National
16th and17th June, 2017 U-19 Football Tournament 2017, Jammu National
21st and 22nd June, 2017 U-19 Football Tournament 2017, Bangalore National
20th and 22nd June, 2017 U-19 Football Tournament 2017, Ranchi National
25th June, 2017 IFSC World Cup Bouldering 2017, Mumbai International
Provisional Suspensions
The following sportsperson stand provisionally suspended for Anti Doping Rule Violation:
Sl. Name and Sports Name of Competition Date of Provisional
No. Discipline Suspension
1. Mr. Sandeep Kumar North Zone Powerlifting Championship, 04/05/2017
(Powerlifting) Jammu
2. Mr. Pradeep Verma Federation Cup 2017, National Bodybuilding and 19/05/2017
(Bodybuilding) Physique Sports Championship, Goa
3. Mr. Sandeep Federation Cup 2017, National Bodybuilding and 22/05/2017
(Bodybuilding) Physique Sports Championship, Goa
4. Mr. Rohit Yadav 14th National Youth Athletics Championship 22/05/2017
(Athletics) 2017, Hyderabad
5. Mr. Prashant Malik 3rd Indian Grand Prix, New Delhi 05/06/2017
(Athletics)
The Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel (ADDP)
Athletes found guilty of violating Anti-Doping Rules of NADA were given opportunity to present
themselves before the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel and explain their cases on the date and time fixed

43
by the Panel for hearing. The Panel held 06 sittings during the month of May, 2017 and imposed
sanctions in 03 cases as per the following details:
Sl. Name of Sports Sanction imposed, if any Date of Order
No. Sportsperson
1. Mr. Aman Tyagi Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f. 04/10/2016. 12/06/2017
2. Mr. Kulwinder Singh Kabaddi Hearing was held on 12/06/2017 and –
order reserved.
3. Mr. Murali Mohanti Powerlifting Hearing was held on 12/06/2017 and –
order reserved.
4. Ms. Priyanka Panwar Athl etics Hearing was held on 30/06/2017 and –
further listed for 10/07/2017.
5. Mr. V. Santosh W eightlifting Hearing was held on 19/06/2017 and –
order reserved.
6. Mr. A. Krishna W eightlifting Hearing was held on 19/06/2017 and –
Moorthy order reserved.
7. Ms. Tahamina Khatun Powerlifter Hearing was held on 19/06/2017 and –
further listed for 10/07/2017.
8. Mr. Shamsher Singh Kabaddi Hearing was held on 19/06/2017 and –
further listed for 10/07/2017.
9. Mr. Jithin Paul Athl etics Hearing was held on 19/06/2017 and –
further listed for 10/07/2017.
The Anti-Doping Appeal Panel (ADAP)
As per the Anti-Doping Rules of NADA, an appeal can be filed by the athlete and other parties
against the order of the ADDP. The Anti-Doping Appeal Panel held no sitting during the month of June.
Mass Athlete Awareness Programms Against Doping
NADA has been conducting anti-doping workshops, educational and awareness programs about the
prohibited drugs/substances and methods in sports across the country for sportspersons, young athletes,
coaches and supporting staff. In the month of June, 2017, 05 nos. of such Awareness-cum-Education
Workshop on Anti-Doping conducted by NADA at following places:
Sl. No. Name of Event and Place Date of Programme
1. Rowing Academy , Hyderabad 12/06/2017
2. U-19 Football T ournament 2017, Chandigarh 13/06/2017
3. U-19 Football Tournament 2017, Jam mu 17/06/2017
4. U-19 Football T ournament, Ranchi 20/06/2017
5. Peace Taekwondo Academy, Delhi 30/06/2017

44
Conclave on Nutritional Supplements in Sports: A Dope Free Model
Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Youth Affairs and Sports Shri Vijay Goel has said that
the Government is committed to take tough Anti-Doping measures to provide a healthy eco-system for
development of sports in the country. Inaugurating a Conclave on Nutritional Supplements for sports here
today to work out a doping free model, Shri Goel said, time has now come to provide safe and quality
nutrition to the athletes in the wake of increasing international competition and high incidences of dope.
Shri Goel said tackling the causes of doping is a priority for his Ministry. He said import and sale of
sub-standard and dope-laced nutritional supplement is a cause to worry as an unsuspected athlete gets
banned under the Anti-Doping Code because of use of these supplements. He said to protect the clean
athlete and meet his requirement for quality supplements the convergence of various Regulatory Authorities
to work out a Dope Free Model for nutritional products is a good initiative and a welcome step. He said
a collaboration of NADA with FSSAI and other agencies will have far reaching impact in improving
physical fitness standards in the country and help athletes in making informed choices formed which is
about with cause doping free system.
Shri Vijay Goel called upon the stakeholders to create mass awareness about doping and its vicious
effects on the career of athletes. He said he will personally understand the level of awareness among
athletes by meeting them in different States and training camps during his visits there.
The Minister further stated that while collaboration with Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority has
enabled them to adopt international practices in dope testing, resulting in a high detection rate, there also
is need for strengthening preventive aspects to reduce the incidence of doping in the country. Supplements
laced with prohibited substances have been found to be major cause of doping in India. NADA has taken
up the matter with Food Safety and Standards Authority due to which an advisory stand issued by them
to the Food Safety Commissioners. He said, the deliberations during the conclave will provide a road map
of regulatory mechanism for dope free nutritional supplements which can be consumed by athletes
without fear of inadvertent doping.
Chief Executive Officer, Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) Shri Pawan Kumar
Aggarwal, Eminent scientists, nutritionists, sportspersons, office bearers of sports federations, laboratory
directors and regulatory authorities from various parts of the country attended the day long conclave.
Result Management Interaction Meeting-cum-Training
In continuing with its efforts to streamline the Anti-Doping structure and processes in the country
to bring it at par with world standards, the National Anti-Doping Agency held a review with the Anti-
Doping Disciplinary Panel and the Anti-Doping Appeal Panel members. The Director-Legal Services from
Australian Sports Anti-Doping Authority, Mr. Darren Mullaly was also invited for the deliberations as part
of the ongoing NADA India and Australia collaboration. Briefing the participants NADA Director General
Mr. Navin Agarwal emphasized about the need for speedy disposal of Anti-Doping rule violations cases
in accordance with the code, as also the need for preparing a proper evidence matrix, to be put up before
the panel for proper adjudication.
Mr. Darren Mullaly quoted examples from the Australian legislation on anti-doping including the
ability to lawfully access information on phones and other devices as a useful tool in detecting potential
violations; gathering evidence; and discovering who else might be involved in anti-doping violations.
Some case studies of anti-doping in Australia and India were also discussed in an effort to sensitise the
members with regard to desirable procedures and outcomes.

45
Play Fair
Monthly e-News Letter
National Anti-Doping Agency
May, 2017 (Issue - V)
Dope Testing
During the month of April, 2017, dope tests were carried out at the following main events/places
in addition to out of competition tests:
Sl. No. Sports Discipline     Competition
1. 6th Federation cup Sr. National bodybuilding and Best Physique National
championship 2017, Goa on 12 and 13th April, 2017
2. National Coaching camp of Equestrian at Bangalore on 14 April, 2017 National
3. National Coaching camp of Athletics at Bangalore on 14 April, 2017 National
4. National Coaching camp of Swimming at New Delhi on 18 April, 2017 National
5. 14th National Youth Athletics Championship 2017, Hyderabad from National
21-23 April, 2017
Provisional Suspensions
The following sportsperson stand provisionally suspended for Anti-Doping Rule Violation:
Sl. No. Name and Sports Name of Competition Date of Provisional
Discipline Suspension
1. Ms. Sushila Panwar Out-of-Competition 20/04/2017
(Weightlifting)
The Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel (ADDP)
Athletes found guilty of violating Anti-Doping Rules of NADA were given opportunity to present
themselves before the anti-doping disciplinary panel and explain their cases on the date and time fixed
by the Panel for hearing. The Panel held 06 hearings during the month of April, 2017 and imposed
sanctions in 14 cases as per the following details:
Sl. No. Name of Sports Sanction imposed
Sportsperson
12 3 4
1. Mr. Bharat Bhushan Tiwari Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f. 01/09/2016
2. Mr. Robi K.K. W eightlifting 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 15/12/2016
3. Ms. Baljit Kaur Kabaddi 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 25/10/2016

46
12 3 4
4. Mr. Manoj Joshi Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f. 29/09/2016
5. Mr. Salim Athletics 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 13/12/2016
6. Mr. Nithin T.V W eightlifting 4 Y ears ineligibility, w.e.f. 01/12/2016
7. Mr. Vandana Dubey Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f 26/08/2016
8. Mr. Shiju S.M. W eightlifting 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 07/09/2016
9. Mr. Manoranjan Sharma W eightlifting 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 27/08/2016
10. Mr. Mantu Naik W eightlifting 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 11/08/2016
11. Mr. Mohan Nadarajan Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f. 30/08/2016
12. Ms. Sarita Rani Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f. 20/09/2016
13. Ms. Harshada Sakpal Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f. 20/09/2016
14. Mr. S. Nageshwaran Powerlifting 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f. 20/09/2016
15. Mr. Injderjeet Singh Athletics Hearing was held on 19/04/2017 and adjourned
further.
16. Mr. N. Jankiraman Powerlifting Hearing was held on 24/04/2016 and order
reserved.
The Anti-Doping Appeal Panel (ADAP)
As per the Anti-Doping Rules of NADA, an appeal can be filed by the athlete and other parties
against the order of the ADDP. The Anti-Doping Appeal Panel held 02 sittings during the month of April,
2017 and issued 01 order. The present status of cases heard/decided is as follows:
Sl. No. Name of Sports Discipline Decision of ADAP
Sportsperson
1. Mr. Jameer Hussain W eightlifting 4 years ineligibility vide  order dated
18.04.2017 decision of ADDP upheld.
2. Mr. Vikas Singh Boxing Hearing concluded on 17.04.2017 and order
reserved.
3. Mrs. Geeta Rani W eightlifting Hearing concluded on 18.04.2017 and order
reserved.
Mass Athlete Awareness Programms Against Doping
NADA has been conducting anti-doping workshops, educational and awareness programs about the
prohibited drugs/substances and methods in sports across the country for sportspersons, young athletes,

47
coaches and supporting staff. In the month of April 2017, 05 nos. of such Awareness-cum-Education
Workshop on Anti Doping conducted by NADA at following places:
Sl. No. Name of Event and Place Date of Programme
1. Sports Science Workshop or ganized by Uttarakhand Police 04/04/2017
Sports Control Board, Dehradun
2. 28th Sub Jr. Kabaddi Championship, Coimbatore, T.  N. 16/04/2017
3. Godwin Public School, Meerut, U.P. 21/04/2017
4. National Shooting Camp, JLN Stadium, New Delhi 21/04/2017
5. P. Gopichand Badminton, Academy , Hyderabad, A.P . 29/04/2017
WADA Audit for Anti-Doping Program of NADA
A high level delegation of W ADA was invited to improve NADA's code compliance with the anti-
doping programme. The WADA team which visited India on 6 and 7 April, 2017 was lead by Mr. Tom
May, Dy. Director, WADA and comprised of Ms. Ilaria Baudo, Manager, Mr. Adam klevinas, Manager
and Mrs. Michele Mercier, Manager. NADA's responses to W ADA's code compliance questionnaire were
discussed and strategies worked out to implement the anti-doping programme more effectively in line
with international standards.
Consultation meeting for Anti-Doping Legislation
A consultation meeting for drafting "Anti-Doping legislation: Doping as a criminal offence" was
organized by NADA on April 27th, 2017 at Vigyan Bhawan Annexe, New Delhi. The inaugural address
was delivered by Shri Vijay Goel, Hon'ble Sports Minister while the key-note address was delivered by
Shri Injeti Srinivas, Secretary, Sports. Legal Experts from Anti-Doping Panels and various stakeholders
were also present during the meeting to discuss the issues in details.

48
Play Fair
Monthly e-News letter
National Anti-Doping Agency
April, 2017 (Issue-4)
Dope Testing
During the month of March 2017, dope tests were carried out at the following main events/places
in addition to out of competition tests:—
Date Events/Coaching Camp Competition
3rd March, 2017 CM Trophy State level Boxing Championship, Chennai State
9th March, 2017 National Coaching camp of Sr. Boxing (Women), National
New Delhi
17th-18th March, 2017 National Coaching camp of Sr. Hockey (Women), Bhopal National
18th March, 2017 National Coaching camp of Sr. Football (Men), Mumbai National
25th-28th March, 2017 National Coaching camp of Sr. Athletics, Weightlifting and National
Boxing, Patiala
17th-21st March, 2017 All India Inter University Taekwondo Championship 2017, National
Rohtak
21st-23st March, 2017 Bharat Kesari Dangal, Ambala National
27th-29th March, 2017 National Ju-Jitsu Championship 2017, New Delhi National
29th-31st March, 2017 Yonex Sunrise India Open 2017 International
Provisional Suspensions
The following sportsperson stand provisionally suspended and his dope rule violations stands referred
to the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel during the month of March, 2017:—
Sl. No. Name Sp. Discipline Place of Samples Collected
1. Mr. Robi Meitei Bodybuilding 41st Inter Services Best Physique Championship
Moirangthem 2016-2017
The Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel (ADDP)
The Athletes found guilty of violating Anti-Doping Rules of NADA were given opportunity to present
themselves before the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel and explain their cases to the hearing panel on the

49
date and time fixed by the Panel. The Panel held 02 hearings during the month of March, 2017 and heard
10 ADRV cases are as follows:–
Sl. Name of Sp. Discipline Present Status
No. sportspersons
1. Mr. Bharat Bhushan Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
Tiwari
2. Mr. Robi K.K. Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
3. Ms. Baljit Kaur Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
4. Mr. Nithin T.V. Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
5. Mr. Balinder Singh Powerlifting Hearing completed on 06.03.2017 and order
reserved.
6. Mr. Gurde ep Singh Powerlifting Hearing completed on 06.03.2017 and order
reserved.
7. Mr. Manjobanjeet Singh Kabaddi Hearing completed on 06.03.2017 and order
reserved.
8. Mr. Akshita Poojary Powerlifting Hearing held on. 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
9. Mr. M. D. Raja Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
10. Mr. Joginder Chauhan Bodybuilding 4 Y ears Ineligibility w.e.f. 27.09.2016.
The Anti-Doping Appeal Panel (ADAP)
As per the Anti-Doping Rules of NADA, an appeal can be filed by the athlete and other parties
against the order of the ADDP. The Appeal Panel held 02 sitting during, the month of March, 2017 as
per following details:–
Sl. No. Name of Sp. Discipline Decision of ADAP
Sportsperson
1. Mr. Jaswant Singh W eightliflting Hearing held on 07.03.2017 and adjourned.
2. Mr. Jameer Hussain W eightlifting Hearing held on 07.03.2017 and order reserved.
Mass Athlete Awareness Programmes Against Doping
With the increase in need for awareness amongst youth and budding athletes, NADA has started
conducting anti-doping workshops, educational and awareness programs about the prohibited drugs/
substances and methods in sports across the country for sportspersons, young athletes, coaches and
supporting staff. In the month of March 2017, 07 nos. of such Awareness cum Education Workshop
on anti-doping conducted by NADA at following places:–
Sl. No. Name of Event and Place Date of Program
1. SAI Regional Centre, Lucknow 15/03/2017
2. Mizoram State Sports Council, Aizawl 15/03/2017

50
Sl. No.  Name of Event and Place Date of Program
3. Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium, New Delhi 17/03/2017
4. Indian Navy Sports Control Board, New Delhi 24/03/2016
5. SAISTC Centre, Ludhiana, Punjab 27/03/2017
6. SAI STC Centre, Mastuana Sahib, Punjab 28/03/2017
7. SAI STC Centre, Badal, Punjab 28/03/2017
International Cooperation
Director General, NADA attended the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) Anti-Doping Organization
(ADO) Symposium 2017 held at Lausanne from 13-15 March, 2017. The symposium focused on the
theme 'Tackling our Challenges and Strengthening the Future of Clean Sport'. It included three days of
presentations, panel discussions and practical workshops, during which topical subjects such as the
future of the fight against doping in sport, World Anti-Doping Code compliance monitoring, the protection
of whistleblowers and the integrity of anti-doping processes was covered.

51
Monthly Report
National Anti-Doping Agency
(March, 2017)
Dope Testing
During the month of March 2017, dope tests were carried out at the following main events/places
in addition to out of competition tests:–
Date Events/Coaching Camp Competition
3rd March, 2017 CM Trophy State level Boxing Championship, Chennai State
9th March, 2017 National Coaching camp of Sr. Boxing (Women), National
New Delhi
17th-8th March, 2017 National Coaching camp of Sr. Hockey (Women), Bhopal National
18th March, 2017 National Coaching camp of Sr. Football (Men), Mumbai National
25th-28th March, 2017 National Coaching camp of Sr. Athletics, Weightlifting and National
Boxing, Patiala
17th-21st March, 2017 All India Inter University Taekwondo Championship 2017, National
Rohtak
21st-23rd March, 2017 Bharat Kesari Dangal, Ambala National
27th-29th March, 2017 National Ju-Jitsu Championship 2017, New Delhi National
29th-31st March, 2017 Yonex Sunrise India Open 2017 International
Provisional Suspensions
The following sportsperson stand provisionally suspended and his dope rule violations stands referred
to the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel during the month of March, 2017:–
Sl. No. Name Sp. Discipline Place of Samples Collected
1. Mr. Robi Meitei Bodybuilding 41st Inter Services Best Physique Championship
Moirangthem 2016-2017
The Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel (ADDP)
The athletes found guilty of violating Anti-Doping Rules of NADA were given opportunity to present
themselves before the Anti Doping Disciplinary Panel and explain their cases to the hearing panel on the
date and time fixed by the Panel. The Panel held 02 hearings during the month of March, 2017 and heard
09 ADRV cases are as follows:—
Sl. No. Name of Sp. Discipline Present Status
Sportspersons
12 3 4
1. Mr. Bharat Bhushan Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
Tiwari
2. Mr. Robi K.K. Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.

52
12 3 4
3. Ms. Baljit Ram- Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
4. Mr. Nithin T.V. Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
5. Mr. Balinder Singh Powerlifting Hearing completed on  06.03.2017 and order
reserved.
6. Mr. Gurde ep Singh Powerlifting Hearing completed on 06.03.2017 and order
reserved.
7. Mr. Manjobanjeet Singh Kabaddi Hearing completed on 06.03.2017 and order
reserved.
8. Mr. Akshita Poojary Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
9. Mr. M. D. Raja Powerlifting Hearing held on 06.03.2017 and adjourned.
The Anti-Doping Appeal Panel (ADAP)
As per the Anti-Doping Rules of NADA, an appeal can be filed by the athlete and other parties
against the order of the ADDP. The Appeal Panel held 02 sitting during the month of March, 2017 as
per following details:–
Sl. Name of Sports- Sp. Discipline Decision of ADAP
No. person
1 Mr. Jaswant Singh W eightliflting Hearing held on 07.03.2017 and adjourned.
2 Mr. Jameer Hussain W eightlifting Hearing held on 07.03.2017 and order reserved.
Mass Athlete Awareness Programmes Against Doping
With the increase in need for awareness amongst youth and budding athletes, NADA has started
conducting anti-doping workshops, educational and awareness programs about the prohibited drugs/
substances and methods in sports across the country for sportspersons, young athletes, coaches and
supporting staff. In the month of March 2017, 07 nos. of such Awareness cum Education Workshop
on anti-doping conducted by NADA at following places:–
Sl. No.  Name of Event and Place Date of Program
1. SAI Regional Centre, Lucknow 15/03/2017
2. Mizoram State Sports Council, Aizawl 15/03/2017
3. Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium, New Delhi 17/03/2017
4. Indian Navy Sports Control Board, New Delhi 24/03/2016
5. SAI STC Centre, Ludhiana, Punjab 27/03/2017
6. SAI STC Centre, Mastuana Sahib, Punjab 28/03/2017
7. SAI STC Centre, Badal, Pu njab 28/03/2017

53
International Cooperation
Director General, NADA attended the W orld Anti-Doping Agency (W ADA) Anti-Doping Organization
(ADO) Symposium 2017 held at Lausanne from 13-15 March, 2017. The symposium focused on the
theme 'Tackling our Challenges and Strengthening the Future of Clean Sport'. It included three days of
presentations, panel discussions and practical workshops, during which topical subjects such as the
future of the fight against doping in sport, World Anti-Doping Code compliance monitoring, the protection
of whistleblowers and the integrity of anti-doping processes was covered.

54
Play Fair
Monthly e-Newsletter
National Anti-Doping Agency
March, 2017 (Issue-3)
Dope Testing
During the month of February 2017, dope tests were carried out at the following main events/places
in addition to out of competition tests:–
Date Events Competition
7th-21st Feb., 2017 Coal India Hockey India League 2017, New Delhi International
11th &12th Feb., 2017 Inter Services Wrestling Championship 2017, Pune National
18th Feb., 2017 ITTF World T our India Open 2017, New Delhi International
18th & 19th Feb., 2017 4th National Race Walking Championship, New Delhi National
18th & 19th Feb., 2017 Chief Minister's State Level Athletics Championship, State
Madurai (TN)
19th Feb., 2017 35th Senior National Taekwondo Championship 2017 National
24th Feb., 2017 41st Inter Services Best Physique Championship 2017 National
24th Feb., - 2nd ISSF World cup for Rifle/Pistol/Shotgun, New Delhi International
March, 2017
Provisional Suspensions
The following sportspersons stand provisionally suspended and their dope rule violations stands
referred to the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel during the month of February, 2017:–
Sl. No. Name Sp. Discipline Place of Samples Collected
1. Mr. Lok Chand S W eightlifting SDAT State Level Weightlifting Men and Women
Championship
2. Mr. Mohit W eightlifting Delhi University Inter College Powerlifting and
Weightlifting Championship 2016-2017
Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel (ADDP)
Athletes found guilty of violating Anti-Doping Rules of NADA were given opportunity to present
themselves before the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel and explain their cases to the hearing panel on the

55
date and time fixed by the Panel. The Panel held 05 hearings during February, 2017 and heard 17 ADRV
cases as per following details:–
Sl. No. Name of Sp. Discipline Present Status
Sportspersons
1. Ms. Sarita Rani Powerlifting Hearing completed on 01.02.2017 and order reserved.
2. Mr. N. Jankiraman Powerlifting Hearing held on 01.02.2017 and adjourned.
3. Mr. N. Mohan Powerlifting Hearing completed on 01.02.2017 and order reserved.
4. Mr. S. Nageshwaran Powerlifting Hearing completed on 01.02.2017 and order reserved.
5. Ms. Harshala Milind Powerlifting Hearing completed on 01.02.2017 and order reserved.
Sakpal
6. Ms. Priyanka Panwar Athletics Hearing held on 05.02.2017 and adjourned.
7. Ms. Vandana Dubey Powerlifting Hearing completed on 14.02.2017 and order reserved.
8. Mr. Mantu Naik W eightlifting Hearing completed on 14.02.2017 and order reserved.
9. Mr. Shiju S.M. W eightlifting Hearing completed on 14.02.2017 and order reserved.
10. Mr. Manoranjan W eightlifting Hearing completed on 14.02.2017 and order reserved.
Sharma
11. Mr. Manoj Joshi Powerlifting Hearing completed on 14.02.2017 and order reserved.
12. Mr. Balinder Singh Powerlifting Hearing held on 23.02.2017 and adjourned.
13. Mr. Gurdeep Singh Powerlifting Hearing held on 23.02.2017 and adjourned.
14. Mr. Joginder Chauhan Bodybuilding Hearing completed on 23.02.2017 and order reserved.
15. Mr. Manjobanjeet Kabaddi Hearing held on 23.02.2017 and adjourned.
Singh
16. Mr. Akshita Poojary Powerlifting Hearing held on 23.02.2017 and adjourned.
17. Mr. M.D. Raja Powerlifting Hearing held on 23.02.2017 and adjourned.
Anti-Doping Appeal Panel (ADAP)
As per the Anti-Doping Rules of NADA, an appeal can be filed by the athlete and other parties
against the order of the ADDP. The Appeal Panel held 01 sittings and issued order in 02 appeal cases
during the month of February, 2017 as per below details:–
Sl. No. Name of Sp. Discipline Decision of ADAP
Sportsperson
1. Mr. Binu Aquito A thletics 2 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 09.12.2015.
2. Mr. B. Suresh W eightlifting 4 years ineligibility decision of ADDP upheld.

56
Mass Athlete Awareness Programmes Against Doping
With the increase in need for awareness amongst youth and budding athletes, NADA has started
conducting anti-doping workshops, educational and awareness programs about the prohibited drugs/
substances and methods in sports across the country for sportspersons, young athletes, coaches and
supporting staff. In the month of February 2017, 02 nos. of such Awareness cum Education Workshop
on Anti-Doping conducted by NADA  at following places:–
Sl. No. Name of Event and Place Date of Program
1. Jawaharlal Nehru University , New Delhi 10/02/2017
2. SPM Swimming Sports Complex, New Delhi 28/02/2017
One day Training programme for newly empanelled Doping Control Officers (DCOs)
One day Training program was organised by NADA for newly empanelled Doping Control Officers
at NADA Office, Delhi on 15.02.2017. The applicants were first interviewed by Technical Officials of
NADA followed by training. They are now being deputed for sample collection work as and when
required.
Participation in 2017 Asian Winter Games, Sapporo, Japan
Mr. Jay Singh, Assistant Project Officer, NADA participated in 2017 Asian Winter Games, held in
Sapporo, Japan from 18-26th Feb., 2107 as an International Doping Control Officer (IDCO). During this
exposure as IDCO in International Games, Mr. Jay Singh was deputed at different game venues at
Sapporo for the sample collection work of the participating sportspersons.

57
Monthly Report
National Anti-Doping Agency
(January, 2017)
Dope Testing
During the month of January 2017, dope tests were carried out at the following main events/places
in addition to out of competition tests:–
Date Events Competition
5th-6th Jan., 2017 62nd National School Games Athletics U-19 Boys and National
Girls Championship, Pune
12th Jan., 2017 64th Inter Services Hockey Championship 2016-17,
New Delhi National
15th Jan., 2017 Standard Chartered Mumbai Marathon 2017, Mumbai International
17th Jan., 2017 Chief Minister's State Level Weightlifting Championship, State
Thanjavur (TN)
17th Jan., 2017 77th All India Inter University Athletics Championship, Inter
Coimbatore University
20th -21st Jan., 2017 Shooting Rifle/Pistol Selection Trial, Pune National
21st Jan., 2017 Delhi University Inter College Powerlifting, Weightlifting Inter college
and Best Physique Championship, New Delhi
25th-26th Jan., 2017 Syed Modi International Grand Prix Gold Badminton International
Championship 2017, Lucknow
27th-31sth Jan., 2017 65th All India Wrestling Cluster 2017, Patna National
Provisional Suspensions
The following sportspersons stand provisionally suspended and their dope rule violations stands
referred to the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel during the month of January, 2017:–
Sl. No. Name Sp. Discipline Place of Samples Collected
1. Mr. Mangesh Bhagat Kabaddi 64th Sr. National Kabaddi Championship, Jodhpur
2. Mr. Inderjeet Singh Athletics 56th Sr. National Inter State Athletics Championship,
Hyderabad
3. Mr. Bharat Bhushan Powerlifting 13th Men and 7th Women All India Railway Powerlifting
Tiwari Championship, Raebareli
4. Mr. Mahesh Kale Athletics 65th All India Police Athletics Championship, Hyderabad

58
Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel (ADDP)
Athletes found guilty of violating Anti-Doping Rules of NADA were given opportunity to present
themselves before the Anti-Doping Disciplinary Panel and explain their cases to the hearing panel on the
date and time fixed by the Panel. The Panel held 03 hearings during January, 2017 and imposed sanctions
in 04 cases as per following details:—
Sl. No. Name of Sp. Discipline Sanction issued
Sportsperson
1. Mr. Gaurav Yadav Athletics 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f. 12/07/2016.
2. Mr. Jagseer Singh Para Athlete 4 Years ineligibility w.e.f 17/08/2016.
(Long Jump)
3. Mr. Tejvir Singh Handball 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f 22/06/2016.
4. Mr. Subrata Nandi Swimming 4 Y ears ineligibility w.e.f 17/08/2016.
Anti-doping Appeal Panel (ADAP)
As per the Anti-Doping Rules of NADA, an appeal can be filed by the athlete and other parties
against the order of the ADDP. The Appeal Panel held 03 sittings and heard 04 appeal cases during the
month of January, 2017 as per below details:–
Sl. No. Name of Sp. Discipline Decision of ADAP
Sportsperson
1. Mr. Binu Aquito Athletics Hearing completed on 06/01/2017 and decision reserved.
2. Mr. Yogesh W restling Hearing completed on 06/01/2017 and decision
reserved.
3. Mrs. Geeta Rani W eightlifting Hearing held on 13/01/2017 and adjourned for want of
certain information from NDTL.
4. Mr. B. Suresh W eightlifting Hearing completed on 31/01/2017 and decision
reserved.
5. Ms. Jashanpreet Kaur Athletics 2 years ineligibility, decision of ADDP was upheld.
6. Ms. Smritikana Manna Athletics 4 years ineligibility, decision of ADDP was upheld.
7. Mr. Yogesh W restling 4 years ineligibility, decision of ADDP was upheld.
One day Training programme for newly empanelled Doping Control Officers (DCOs)
One day Training program was organized by NADA for newly empanelled Doping Control Officers
at SAI Southern Centre, Bangalore on 08.01.2017. The applicants were first interviewed by Technical
Officials of NADA on 07.01.2017 followed by training on next day. They are now being deputed for
sample collection work as and when required.

59
Mass Athlete Awareness Programs Against Doping
With the increase in need for awareness amongst youth and budding athletes, NADA has started
conducting anti-doping workshops, educational and awareness programs about the prohibited drugs/
substances and methods in sports across the country for sportspersons, young athletes, coaches and
supporting staff. In the month of January, 2017, 05 nos. of such Awareness cum Education Workshop
on Anti-Doping conducted by NADA  at following places:–
Sl. No. Name of Event and Place Date of Program
1. SAI Southern Center , Bangalore 07/01/2017
2. National Cycling Championship under Khelo India, IG Stadium, New Delhi 15/01/2017
3. National Swimming Championship under Khelo India, SPM Sports 15/01/2017
Complex, New Delhi
4. National Wrestling (Boys) Championship under Khelo India, IG Stadium, 20/01/2017
New Delhi
5. National Wrestling (Girls) Championship under Khelo India, IG Stadium, 21/01/2017
New Delhi
Participation in 104th Indian Science Congress held at SV University, Tirupati
As approved by Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports a Plenary Session on Sports Science and
Sports. Medicine was jointly organized by NADA and SAI during 104th Indian Sciences. Congress held
in SV University, Tirupati on 06.01.2017. This was the first time ever that such Plenary Session on
Sports Science and Sports Medicine was organized during this prestigious forum being attended by top
scientists. DG, NADA acted as Coordinator for this successful program and also delivered a lecture on
Status of Anti-Doping Sciences and NADA.
Review Meeting of NADA held in the Office of Secretary (Sports) on 25.01.2017
A review meeting for the NADA was held on 25.01.2017 in the office of Secretary (Sports) to
discuss the issues pertaining to the department. During the meeting, Secretary (Sports) emphasized on
the need to increase the anti-doping awareness amongst the sportspersons/support staff and also suggested
to increase the dope testing of sportspersons. To further strengthen the outreaching activities for anti-
doping awareness, the program officers of National Service Scheme (NSS) may also be involved.

60
ANNEXURE-Y
Contributions to National Sports Development Fund from various sources,
during the last three year
Y ear Name of Donor Amount
(` in lakh)
12 3
2014-15 India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) 1000.00
Total (2014-15) 1000.00
2015-16 The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. 5.82
Bank of Baroda 100.00
Bank of Maharashtra 10.00
Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) 15.00
Total (2015-16) 130.82
2016-17 National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited (NBCC) 10.00
Syndicate Bank 1.00
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited 50.00
Metals and Minerals Trading Corporation of India Limited (MMTC) 10.00
Antrix Corporation Limited 5.00
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited 5.00
Container Corporation of India Limited 10.00
Power Finance Corporation Limited 10.00
Allahabad Bank 2.00
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) 1000.00
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur 25.00
Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. 10.00
National Seeds Corporation Limited 7.72
IDBI Bank Ltd. 50.00
Northern Coalfields Limited 10.00
The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. 21.00

61
12 3
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Ltd. 10.00
State Bank of India 100.00
FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Ltd. 5.00
Coal India Ltd. 2500.00
Bharat Dynamics Ltd. 225.00
The New India Assurance Co. Ltd. 100.00
Mazagon Dock Shipbuilder Ltd. 50.00
Shri Mohit Malik 1.50
Andhra Bank 10.00
Total (2016-17) 4228.22
2017-18 Shri Jitendra Kumar Lohar 0.05
UCO Bank 10.00
Total (2017-18) 10.05
Grand Total 5369.09
The Department is continuously making efforts to encourage major companies and corporate to
adopt specific sports discipline. As a result we have received encouraging responses from the PSUs/
Corporate. The details of which are mentioned below:-
(i) Glenmark which is a major pharmaceutical company has agreed to adopt the discipline of
swimming. They have entered into a partnership through their CSR arm Glenmark Aquatic
Foundation for setting up a National Swimming Academy in Delhi. This has been a very
successful project with bulk of the model within the Eye-Restricted-Category. Based on the
model, they also agreed to start another academy at SAI NSSC Bengaluru which has also been
accepted in Principle.
(ii) C oal India Ltd. (CIL) has committed ` 75 crore to NSDF @ ` 25 crore per annum over a
period of three years. They have agreed to focus on specific disciplines such as Hockey and
Table Tennis besides other sports initiatives in Coal bearing States of the country.
(iii) Procam International which is a major event management company has entered into a partnership
with SAI to establish middle and long distance athletic academy at Bhopal. The trainees of the
academy have also been given foreign exposure for grooming their sporting excellence.
(iv) The Bharat Dynamic Ltd. (BDL) which is Defence PSU operating in Hyderabad has pledged
a support of ` 2.25 crore for adopting SAI STC at Gachibowli which is a multi-discipline

62
sports training centre catering to training of around 100 residential sportspersons in the
discipline of badminton, hockey, kabaddi, swimming and athletics.
(v) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. (HAL) Management has approached SAI for adopting the discipline
of Football in a big way. They have already adopted Football development centre in Koraput
which is a tribal belt of Odisha.
(vi) Recently an agreement has been signed with YONEX which is a reputed shuttle cock
Manufacturing Company to provide equipment support to regional badminton academy at
Bhubaneswar. The five years agreement involves a financial support of ` 2.6 crore.
1.1. Continuous efforts on these lines shall be made by the department.