 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
  December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
REPORT NO. 
371 
THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-ONE REPORT  
ON  
 
Review of Autonomous Bodies and Institutions- NTA, NAAC, Draft UGC 
Regulations, ICHR, ICPR, ICSSR, IIAS(Shimla) and Auroville Foundation 
under the Department of Higher Education.  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2025) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY- ONE REPORT  
ON 
 
“Review of Autonomous Bodies and Institutions - NTA, NAAC, Draft UGC 
Regulations, ICHR, ICPR, ICSSR, IIAS (Shimla) and Auroville Foundation under 
the Department of Higher Education.” 
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
  December, 2025/ Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 


 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
   PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION (ii)  
3. ACRONYMS (iii) - (iv) 
   4. REPORT 1-44 
  5. OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 
 COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
45-57 
6. MINUTES     58-59 
   
 
  
 

(i) 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025) 
 
1. Shri Digvijaya Singh   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
4. Shri C. Sadanandan Master 
5. Shrimati Mausam B Noor 
6. Shrimati Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
7. Shrimati Rekha Sharma 
8. Dr.Bhim Singh 
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Vacant 
LOK SABHA 
11.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
12 Dr.Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
13. Shrimati Rachna Banerjee 
14. Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
15. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
16. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
17. Prof.Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
18. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
19. Dr.Hemang Joshi 
20. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
21. Shri Kalipada Saren Kherwal 
22. Adv Dean Kuriakose 
23. Dr.Sambit Patra 
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
25. Dr. D. Purandeswari 
26. Shri Rajeev Rai 
27. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
28. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
29. Ms.Bansuri Swaraj 
30. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
31. Dr. T Sumathy alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri J. K. Mallick, Director  
Shri Devashish Sen, Deputy Secretary  
 
   
     
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
1. I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports having been authorize d by the Committee 
to present the report on the subject “Review of Autonomous Bodies and Institutions - NTA, 
NAAC, Draft UGC Regulations, ICHR, ICPR, ICSSR, IIAS (Sh imla) and Auroville 
Foundation under the Department of Higher Education.” 
2.  The Committee at its meetings held on 20 th May, 2025 & 25 th July, 2025 heard the 
Secretary along with the officials of the Department of Higher Education and the 
representatives of UGC, NTA, NAAC,  ICSSR, IC HR & ICPR . The Committee also 
undertook study visits to IIAS (Shimla) on 18th May, 2025 and Auroville Foundation on 23rd 
August, 2025. 
3.  While drafting the Report, the Committee relied on the Detailed background note on 
the subject and the deposition made by the Secretary along with the officials of the 
Department of Higher Education and the representatives of UGC, NTA, NAAC,  ICSSR, 
ICHR & ICPR  on 20 th May, 2025 & 25 th July, 2025 .  The Committee also relied on the 
deposition before the Committee during its study visits to Bhubaneswar, Varanasi, Shimla, 
Laddakh and Chennai during the last few months.  
4.  For the facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the  
Committee have been presented in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
5.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held  
on the 13th October, 2025.  
 
 
 
  
 
NEW DELHI 
13th October, 2025 
Ashwin 21, 1947(Saka) 
                                 Shri Digvijaya Singh  
           Chairman, Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth 
and Sports 
(ii) 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AC Appeals Committee 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
BAF Basic Accreditation Framework 
BoGs Boards of Governance 
CBP Capacity Building Programme 
CBT Computer Based Test 
CEP Cultural Exchange Programme 
CGPA Cumulative Grade Point Average 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CUET Common University Entrance Test 
DVV     Data Validation and Verification 
GF Gurukul Fellowship 
GoI Government of India 
HEIs Higher Education Institutions 
HLCE High-Level Committee of Experts 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
ICHR Indian Council for Historical Research 
ICPR Indian Council of Philosophical Research 
ICSSR  Indian Council for Social Science Research 
IIQA Institutional Information for Quality Assurance 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IKS Indian Knowledge System 
IMS Institute Of Management Studies  
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
JEE Joint Entrance Examination 
JJM Jal Jeevan Mission 
JRF Junior Research Fellowship 
MBGL Maturity Based Graded Level 
M. Phil Master of Philosophy 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NASSDOC National Social Science Documentation Centre 
NEET National Eligibility Cum Entrance Test 
NEP  National Educational Policy  
NET National Eligibility Test 
NF National Fellowship 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NTA National Testing Agency 
PDF Post Doctoral Fellowship 
Ph.D Doctor of Philosophy 
PG Postgraduate 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
PT Peer Team 
PPT Pen and Paper Test 
PTR Peer Team Review 
PTV Peer Team Visit 
PVTGs Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups 
QIF Quality Indicator Framework 
QnM Quantitative Metrics 
RAF Revised Accreditation Framework 
RMC Research Methodology Course 
RP Research Projects Grant 
RPC Research Projects Committee 
SAF Senior Academic Fellowship 
SC Standing Committee 
SDG Sustainability Development Goal 
SOP    Standard Operating Procedure 
SRC    Southern Regional Centre 
SSR    Self-Study Report 
SSS    Student Satisfaction survey  
SWAYAM    Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds 
UG    Undergraduate 
UGC                            University Grants Commission 
UK  United Kingdom 
WPC    Writ Petition (Civil) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
Autonomous bodies are organizations established by the government of India to carry out 
specific functions with a degree of independence and flexibility. They are often set up either 
through a specific Act of Parliament or as societies under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 
and play a vital role in diverse sectors such as education, research, culture, health, science and 
technology, and governance. While they receive full or partial funding from the government, 
they operate with their own governing coun cils and are entrusted with diverse activities, 
including policy formulation, research, and cultural preservation. Examples include the 
University Grants Commission (UGC), the National Testing Agency (NTA), the National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council  (NAAC), The Indian Council of Historical Research 
(ICHR), Indian Council of Philosophical Research (ICPR), Indian Council of Social Science 
Research (ICSSR), Indian Institute of Advanced Studies (IIAS), Shimla  and the Auroville 
Foundation. The purpose of these bodies is to allow for specialized work with greater autonomy 
while still being subject to government oversight. By combining administrative flexibility with 
accountability, these bodies help the government achieve its developmental goals more 
efficiently and effectively. 
National Testing Agency(NTA) 
2. The National Testing Agency (NTA) was established as a Society on 15 th May 2018  
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. It is a as a self-sustained Autonomous Body of 
Government of India having the following objectives: 
i. To conduct efficient, transparent and international standard tests in order to 
assess the competency of candidates for admission. 
ii. To undertake research on educational, professional and testing systems to 
identify gaps in knowledge systems and take steps for bridging them. 
iii. To identify experts and institutions in setting examination questions. 
iv. To produce and disseminate information and research on education and 
professional development standards. 
3. Some of the major examinations conduc ted by NTA include JEE (Main) which besides 
being an eligibility test for JEE (Advanced),  is used for admission to undergraduate engineering 
programs in the NITs and other prestigious engineering institutions , the National Eligibility cum 
Entrance Test (Un dergraduate) (NEET-UG) for undergraduate medical college admissions, the 

2 
 
University Grants Commission’s National Eligibility Test ( UGC NET ), a qualifying test for 
university-level teaching and research, and the Common University Entrance Test (CUET) UG 
& PG for admissions to undergraduate and post graduate programs in Central Universities.  NTA 
conducts examination in both Pen and Paper Mode and Computer Based Test (CBT) mode. 
4. In order to suggest effective meas ures for transparent, smooth and fair conduct of 
examinations by NTA, the Ministry of Education constituted a High-Level Committee of Experts 
(HLCE) on 22.06.2024 under the Chairmanship of Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Former Chairman, 
ISRO and Chairman BoG, IIT Ka npur for making recommendations on Reforms in mechanism 
of examination process, improvement in data security protocols and structure and functioning of 
National Testing Agency.  
5. The Supreme Court in WPC 335/2024 and connected matters , vide Judgement dated 2nd 
August, 2024 expanded the remit of the aforesaid Committee and assigned additional tasks in the 
fields of Examination Security and Administration, Data Security and Technological 
Enhancements, Policy and Stakeholder engagement and Support and Tra ining. The Committee 
after wide consultation with the stakeholders, submitted is Report to Ministry of Education on 
21stOctober, 2024. 
6. The HLCE has recommended reformation of National Common Entrance Testing 
including strengthening of NTA, institutional linkage with States, involvement of Test Indenting 
Agencies as Knowledge and Examinations partner  etc.  It has also laid out measures and 
recommended Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to prevent breaches in both Pen and Paper 
Test (PPT) and Computer Ba sed Test (CBT) examinations.  Guidelines for Question Paper 
Setting and Vetting as per defined protocols have also been recommended.  Government has also 
constituted a High-Powered Steering Committee on 14th November, 2024  to monitor the 
implementation of recommendations of HLCE 
7. As per the recommendations of the Committee to strengthen the NTA structure, 16 new 
posts have been created in NTA. Further a district level  Coordination Committee under the 
District-Collector h as been established to conduct the NEET Examination and a also decision 
was taken that all examination centres shall be State Government or Government -owned 
buildings. The Ministry has been able to achieve this to the extent of 94 per cent.  
RECOMMENDATIONS 
8. The Committee reiterates that the NTA’s performance in the last year has not 
inspired much confidence.   It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that i n the 

3 
 
year 2024 alone, of the 14 competitive examinations conducted by the NTA, at least five 
faced major issues and as result, three  examinations viz. UGC-NET, CSIR -NET and  
NEET-PG had to be  postponed, one examination viz. NEET-UG  saw instances of paper 
leaks, and one examination  i.e CUET ( UG/PG) saw its results postponed. In JEE Main 
2025 held in January 2025, a t least 12 questions had to be withdrawn due to errors noted  
in the final answer key of the engineering entrance exam.  The Committee observe d that 
such instances doesnot inspire confidance of the examinees in the syst em. The Committee 
therefore recommends that NTA need to quickly get their act together so that such 
instances, which otherwise are fully avoidable, do not occur in future.  
9. The Committee notes that several firms involved in paper setting, administration, 
and correction have been blacklisted by one organisation/state government but that this 
however, is not impeding their securing of contracts from other states or organisations. The 
Committee is of the view that s uch blacklisted firms must not be engaged for any entrance 
test by the NTA or the State Governments. The Committee therefore recommends that the 
Department should compile a nationwide list of blacklisted firms along with the persons or 
entities that constitute such firms so as to prevent such firms/persons/ entities from 
securing future contracts and bring further clarity in this regard.  
10. The Committee notes that the NTA collected an estimated ₹3,512.98 Crores while  it 
has spent ₹3,064.77 Crores on the conduct of examinations  thereby creating a surplus of 
Rs. 448 Crores in the last six years. The Committee recommends that this corpus should be 
used to build the agency’s capabilities to conduct tests itself, or to str engthen regulatory 
and monitoring capabilities for its vendors.  
11. The Committee has recommended in its 364th Report that the NTA should produce 
not just an audited statement but also an Annual Report clearly outlining its activities in 
detail and submit the same to the Parliament annually.  The Committee reiterates the same 
recommendation.  
12. The Committee notes that in the last few years the results of CUET exams were not 
declared in time by the NTA. Such a delay is a cause of major concern  as it not only delays 
the admission process but also delays the start of the academic session by the on boarded 
Universities which ultimately puts unnecessary pressure on the students. The Committee 
emphasises th at NTA should not only conduct the examinat ions within time but also 
declare the results in a time bound manner.   

4 
 
13. The Committee expresses concern at the rapid expansion of private -sector coaching 
centers for competitive examinations in the country. The Committee recommends the 
Department to wo rk with the NTA to ensure that the papers are set to more closely 
reinforce the curriculum of school examinations, so as to avoid the introduction of a 
parallel curriculum and the accompanying coaching center  indsutry. The Commiittee 
recommends that the Department should set up a hi gh-level committee to address the 
proliferation of coaching centers and suggest methods to regulate the same.  
14. The Committee was informed that with regards to securing the examination 
process, the tradeoffs are as follows. Pe n and paper exams offer more opportunities for 
paper leaks, while computer-based tests (CBT) can be hacked in a manner that is difficult 
to detect. Between the two, the Committee supported a greater focus on pen -and-paper 
examinations given that there are several models of such examinations which have been 
leak-proof for several years – including the CBSE exams and the UPSC exams. The 
Committee recommends that the NTA closely study these models and implement the same.  
Further in the case of computer based tests (CBT), the Committee recommends that these 
exams be hosted only in government or government-controlled centers and never in private 
centers.  
  

5 
 
NATIONAL ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION COUNCIL (NAAC) 
15. The National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) was established in 1994 as 
an autonomous Institution of the UGC with the vision of making quality assurance an integral 
part of the functioning of Higher Educational Institutions. Its Headquarters is in Bangaluru. 
NAAC conducts the assessment and accreditation of Higher Educational Institutions (HEI) such 
as colleges, universities or other recognised institutions to derive an understanding of the 
‘Quality Status’ of the institution. NAAC evaluates the institutions for its conformance to the 
standards of quality in terms of its performance related to the educational processes and 
outcomes, curriculum coverage, teaching -learning processes, faculty, research, infrastructure, 
learning resources, organisation, governance, financial well being and student  services. Its 
guiding philosophy is  “Right Grade for Right Institution” 
16. Following are the  Objectives of Assessment & Accreditation: 
a) Encourage innovations, self-evaluation and accountability in higher education.  
b) Grade Institutions of higher education and their programmes;  
c) Stimulate the academic environment and quality of teaching and research in these 
Institutions; 
d) HelpInstitutions realize their academic objectives; 
e) Promote necessary changes, innovations and reforms in all aspects of Ihe institutions 
working for the above purpose;  
17. The Mission of NAAC is as under:- 
 To arrange for periodic assessment and accreditation of institutions of higher education 
or units thereof, or specific academic programmes or projects; 
 To stimulate the academic environment for promotion of quality of teaching -learning and 
research in higher education institutions; 
 To encourage self -evaluation, accountability, autonomy and innovations in higher 
education; 
 To undertake quality-related research studies, consultancy and training programmes,and 
 To collaborate with other stakeholders of higher education for quality evaluation, 
promotion and sustenance. 
18. NAAC also aims topromote some core values among the HEIs which are as under:- 
 Contributing to National Development 
 Fostering Global Competencies among Students 
 Inculcating a Value System among Students 
 Promoting the Use of Technology 
 Quest for Excellence 

6 
 
19. The process of assessment and accreditation of the HEIs is governed by the following 
Committes of NAAC :- 
 General Council  for Vision setting and high -level alignment of national priorities of 
education with accreditation 
 Executive Committee  for policy making and implantation, and setting goals and 
monitoring, responsible for design and implementation of accreditation framework, etc. 
 Academic Committee for providing inputs for design, development and implementation 
of accreditation framework, improving the accreditation system, etc. 
 Standing Committee  of the Executive Committee reviews the o utcomes of the 
assessment and accreditation of the HEIs; ensure the defined process are followed; 
suggest required corrective actions in the process.  
 Appeals Committee for accepting and reviewing the application for re-evaluation by the 
HEIs and offer its recommendations. This committee reports to the Executive 
Committee.  
These committees meet periodically and ensure that the NAAC processes are aligned 
with the national priorities, fair and transparent with no scope for discretion. 
20. The Ministry has informed that b efore the introduction of Revised Accreditation 
Framework (RAF) in 2017, the accreditation was completely driven by peer team visits, more 
based on qualitative analysis.  RAF as a quantitative assessment was introduced as a measure of 
improvement in the accreditation process, to bring objectivity, to distinguish the score in a way 
that helps institutions for specific areas of improvement and benchmark at national level. NAAC 
has accredited 8853 HEIs as detailed below since 2018 under the Revised Accreditation 
Framework (RAF): 
Sl. No. Financial 
Year 
Universities Colleges Total Number of Institutions 
accredited 
1 2018-19 45 779 824 
2 2019-20 29 705 734 
3 2020-21 19 300 319 
4 2021-22 78 623 701 
5 2022-23 105 1683 1788 
6 2023-24 119 1873 1992 
7 2024-25 101 2394 2495 
  Total 496 8357 8853 

7 
 
21. NAAC Accreditation Process :-The entire process of assessment is carried out through 
an IT-based portal. The Revised Accreditation Framework (RAF) has the following steps: 
 Registration in NAAC portal by providing basic details and they are provided with log -in 
credentials. 
 Institution volunteers to NAAC accreditation from Institutional Information for Quality 
Assurance (IIQA) thereby provide all documents to support the legality of institutions as 
an entity of Higher Education with compliance to all statuary norms.  Upon the scrutiny 
of the documents provided, the IIQA is accepted. 
 After the acceptance of IIQA, the institution submits a Self -Study Report (SSR).  SSR is 
a document prepared by the institution briefing the institutional assessment during their 
assessment period (5 years).  This report consists of profile of the institution, with the 
achievements and activities of the institution in all pursuits of Higher Education within 
the accreditation period.   
 SSR submitted by the HEIs are placed in the NAAC website and as per the requ irements 
HEIs are required to place the copy in the institute website for public disclosure.     
 The evaluation of the same is captured in Quality Indicator Framework (QIF) in the RAF 
system.  The QIF consist of Qualitative and Quantitative Metric.  Quanti tative Metrics 
(QnM) add up to about 70% and the remaining about 30% are Qualitative Metrics (Q lM).  
The Student Satisfaction survey (SSS) is also conducted through an automated system 
based on the list of students provided to NAAC. 
 The philosophy behind t his is that 70% of the quality of institution is through tangible 
sources that explicitly reflect the quality in performance of the institution.  But not all 
measures of quality are numerically expressive.  Hence those intangible measures of 
quality are ex pressed through a brief document by the institution that is evaluated by 
Professors, Principals, Vice-Chancellors as peers who are part of the Peer Team. 
 Data Validation and Verification (DVV) partners are empaneled as third -party agencies 
to check, verify and validate the claim of institutions in Quantitative Metrics.  The Third -
party agencies were chosen through a tendering process. In order to close the gaps in the 
validation of data, one time clarification window is provisioned, where the DVV raise 
issues related to gaps found in substantiating the claim of HEIs. NAAC reviews and 
approve the validation of data carried out by the DVV partners.  The Studen t Satisfaction 
survey (SSS) score is part of the quantitative assessment.   
 The institution is considered pre -qualified if it scores at least 25% in the Quantitative 
Metrics. The HEIs that are pre -qualified after DVV process go through the Peer Team 
Review (PTR). Once this report is accepted by NAAC, the institution is asked for dates 
for the visit of Peer Team and nearest airport and railway station. The travel and 
accommodation arrangements are outsourced to Blamer Lawrie & Co. Ltd. (Government 
of India Company).   
 The evaluation of Qualitative Metric happens to Peer Team Visit.  For this Peers from 
academic fraternity are empaneled in NAAC portal. Peer Team based qualitative 
assessment is in alignment with international practices of Quality Assurance. The  PT 
carry out the onsite visit activities as per the protocol and SoPs provide to them. 
 NAAC uses a large pool of members and the PTs are formed through a random selection 
process enabled through an automated system.  The Chairman and members are selected 
based on set rules, such as not from the home State, no two members from the same 
State, women members for women’s institutions and not more than 6 visits in a year.  

8 
 
 No conflict of interest is submitted by the institution and the Peer Team members. In 
addition, both HEI and PT the submit Core of Conduct including declaration that no gifts 
or privileges are provided by the HEI and not accepted by the Peer Team.  
 The assessments are done against benchmarks for various types of institutions, and based 
on the DVV, SSS and PTV. The combined score from DVV, Peer Team Visit and SSS is 
used to arrive at the Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) and grades are assigned as 
per the following scheme: 
 
Range of Institutional 
Cumulative Grade 
Point Average (CGPA) 
Letter 
Grade 
Status  
 
  
  
   
3.51-4.00 
 
 
 
A++ Accredited  
    
3.26-3.50 A+ Accredited  
    
3.01-3.25 A Accredited  
    
2.76-3.00 B++ Accredited  
    
2.51-2.75 B+ Accredited  
    
2.01-2.50 B Accredited  
   
   
1.51-2.00 C Accredited  
   
    
≤ 1.50 D Not Accredited  
   
    
 The results are placed in the Standing Committee (SC) of NAAC before for a detailed 
review before it is released to the HEI and the same is disclosed through the NAAC 
website.  
 In case of HEIs not satisfied with the outcome, they may represent to the Appeals 
Committee (AC) for a review. Based on the recommendations AC, the HEI may undergo 
Re-DVV or Re-visit or both. Based on the re-evaluation, the Grades are declared. 
 NAAC portal has Issue Management System (IMS) through which the HEIs, Peer Team 
members, DVV partners may raise if any and the same is closed on a timely manner.    
 In addition, NAAC has placed an issue escalation system for making representations on 
any of the issues faced by them.  Such issues are h andled with utmost care to ensure that 
the process is fair and not based on any other considerations. 
 Assessment and Accreditation is purely based on well -defined and transparent processes. 
The entities and individuals are expected to work as per the SoPs and established ethical 
practices. Therefore, there is no scope for any discretion in the system.  
 
22. As part of reforms through NEP -2020, the GOI constituted high power overarching 
committee on “Transformative Reforms for Accreditation of Higher Educati on Institutions in 

9 
 
India”, under the Chairmanship of Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Former Secretary Department of 
Space,  former Chairman of ISRO, Chairman, Board of Governors, IIT Kanpur, and Chairperson, 
Standing Committee of IIT Council as Chairman. This high -power committee considered the 
recommendation of three other committees constituted by UGC earler in this regard. 
23. In pursuance of the recommendations of Dr. K. Radhakrishnan Committee, NAAC is in 
the process of carrying over the following reforms: 
24. NAAC is in all preparation and ready to launch Basic Accreditation Framework (BAF) 
which is proposed to do away with grades and the HEI will be accredited in Binary (Accredited 
or Not Accredited) mode as per NEP-2020. 
25. The assessment under Basic Accredi tation is purely based on quantitative evaluation 
carried through an IT -based issuing advanced technologies, with no scope for any manipulation 
of data.  
26. In Basic Accreditation, the data submitted the HEIs will be evaluated through Peer Data 
Validation (replacing third parties), meaning academics will be involved to verify and validate 
the institutional data.    
27. NAAC is also preparing Maturity Based Graded Levels (MBGL) Accreditation where the 
institutions are provided with ladder of growth in quali ty as a pathway to achieve National and 
Global Excellence.  
RECOMMENDATIONS 
28. The Committee notes that t he current process of accreditation/re -accreditation is 
long and bureaucratic, with five yearly re -accreditation and yearly reports that demand 
considerable time from University administrators. The process also involves site visits by 
the accreditation team, which is cumbersome. The Committee therefore reite rates its 
earlier recommendation from 364th Report that the NAAC’s accreditation process for HEIs 
needs to be streamlined so that the whole process is quick and without unnecessary 
bureaucratic hurdles.  
29. The Committee notes that there is an investigati on ongoing into a recent case of 
bribery in the NAAC. The Committee is of the view that a through internal investigation 
should be initiated in the matter and findings of the investigation may be shared with the 
committee. 

10 
 
30. The Committee appreciates that the NAAC has taken some steps in the last few 
months to enhance transparency – such as the revision in the grading of about 200 
institutions and the removal of about 900 peer assessors. The Committee is of the view that 
the restoration of the NAAC’s c redibility is of the utmost urgency. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the NAAC  to issue full details that clearly outline the results 
of the investigations so far, the measures undertaken as a response, and the reasons why 
these measures were necessary.   
31. The Committee notes that the Department of Higher Education has evolved the 
National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) to rank institutions as per a variety of 
metrics. In this context, the NAAC’s grading of institutions is extraneous. The  Committee 
also observed that the scope for discretion in the accreditation process is largely in the 
grading rather than the accreditation itself. A binary accreditation model, as recommended 
by the Radhakrishnan Committee, would be simpler to implement, ease the bureaucratic  
process, and limit the scope for discretion in the NAAC’s grading. The Commmittee notes 
that the binary accreditation model was scheduled to be implemented in July 2024 but has 
been delayed. The Committee urges the early implementation of the same.  
32. The Commmittee recommends that NAAC should allow flexibility for institutes in 
tribal and rural areas  which cannot be considered on the same scale as institutes in 
metropolitan cities, etc.  
  

11 
 
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION(UGC) 
Draft UGC (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment and Promotion of Teachers and 
Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of 
Standards in Higher Education) Regulations, 2025 
 
33. The University Grants Commission is a statutory organization under the Ministry of 
Education, Government of India. It has been established by an Act of Parliament in 1956 for the 
promotion and co-ordination of University education and for the determination and maintenance 
of standards of teaching, exami nation and research in Universities, and for the purpose of 
performing its functions under this Act. In addition to providing grants to eligible universities 
and colleges, the Commission also advises the Central and State Governments on the measures 
which are necessary for the development of Higher Education. The UGC has the unique 
distinction of being the only grant -giving agency in the country which has been vested with two 
responsibilities: that of providing funds and that of coordination, determination and maintenance 
of standards in institutions of higher education.The mandate of UGC includes: 
 Promoting and coordinating university education. 
 Determining and maintaining standards of teaching, examination and research in 
universities. 
 Framing regulations on minimum standards of education. 
 Monitoring developments in the field of collegiate and university education; disbursing 
grants to the universities and colleges. 
 Serving as a vital link between the Union and state governments and institutions of 
higher learning. 
 Advising the Central and State governments on the measures necessary for improvement 
of university education. 
 
34. The UGC Act 1956 mandates the Commission to define the qualifications that should 
ordinarily be required of any person to be appointed to the teaching staff of the University, 
having regard to the branch of education in which he is expected to give instruction .In adherence 
to the provisions of UGC Act, the UGC has been notifying regulations specifying the minimum 
qualifications for the appointment and promotion of teachers in universities and colleges, from 
time to time.  The current regulations which are in operation were notified on 18 th July 2018.  In 
the year 2020, the Government of India announced the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020.   
The reforms promoted in the NEP 2020, which merit a review of UGC Regulations 
notified in 2018, are as below: 
 Multidisciplinary education,  

12 
 
 Changes in the duration of degree programmes,  
 Promotion of Indian languages and the Indian Knowledge System,  
 Promotion of Research and Innovation, 
 A simple and uncomplicated regulation in line with the “light but tight” 
regulations promoted in the NEP 2020 
 Qualities of leadership, etc.   
 
35. Keeping the reforms of the NEP 2020 into consideration, the UGC developed the draft 
UGC Regulations 2025.  The draft regulations 2025 were uploaded on public domain on 6 th 
January 2025 f or public feedback. All stakeholders were given time till28 thFebruary 2025 to 
submit feedback/suggestion on the draft regulations.  The key reforms proposed to be  introduced 
in the draft UGC regulations are as under: 
 The regulations allow candidates to be  appointed in disciplines different from 
their undergraduate or postgraduate degrees, provided they have a Ph.D. in the 
relevant subject. This flexibility encourages interdisciplinary scholars and 
faculty who can contribute across multiple domains. 
 It mode rnizes faculty recruitment to promote interdisciplinary teaching, 
research, and holistic education, ensuring that Indian higher education 
institutions (HEIs) are equipped to deliver broad -based, flexible, and integrated 
learning. 
 Faculty promotion criteria  include contributions to multidisciplinary and 
interdisciplinary research. Faculty with expertise in multiple fields, including 
Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS), are encouraged. 
 Faculty recruitment includes criteria for student internship supervision, start up 
mentoring, and consultancy projects, fostering real -world, problem -solving 
education.  
 Universities and colleges have the flexibility to hire faculty who can teach 
across multiple disciplines, aligning with their unique academic vision and 
programs. The  regulations ensure that multidisciplinary education is not 
restricted to elite institutions, but rather available across all HEIs, in line with 
NEP 2020. 
 Aligning academic standards with international best practices to improve 
India’s global ranking. 
 The Draft UGC Regulations 2025 aim to ensure quality, inclusivity, innovation, 
and global competitiveness and propel the country towards Viksit Bharat 2047.  
36. The Department has informed that UGC received a total of 15066 feedback on the draft 
regulations 2025 which includes 10 State Governments, 92 Association/Federation/Society, 52 
Universities/Colleges, National Commission for Minorities, AICTE and ICAR which are being 
analysed, and all relevant suggestions will be considered by UGC before finalising the 
regulations.  

13 
 
37. They have further informed that t hough the feedback received from the general public 
was largely positive, the provision of the draft regulations 2025 concerning the selection 
committee and selection process for selecting Vice Chancellors was reportedly seen as a factor 
weakening the federal structure by some states.The y have however stated that the UGC Draft 
Regulations 2025, strongly uphold and reinforce India’s federal structure by balancing national 
standards and state autonomy in highe r education. These regulations are also designed to ensure 
academic excellence while respectingthediverse educational frameworks of different states. 
38. The Department has argued that t he draft UGC regulations 2025 provide more autonomy 
to the States and Higher Education Institutions (HEIs).  Accordingly, the direct recruitment to the 
post of Assistant Professor, Associate Professor and Professor in colleges coming under their 
purview, State governments/Union Territories, shall be either as per the UGC reg ulations or as 
per the rules of the State Government by following the minimum qualifications as given in the 
UGC draft regulations.  It has further argued that t he regulations set minimum standards but 
allow state universities to frame their own additional criteria over and above the minimum 
standards for faculty appointments and promotions, preserving the autonomy of state 
universities.Provisions in the draft regulations for promoting regional languages, Indian 
Knowledge Systems, and community engagement st ructures ensure that state -specific priorities 
are protected. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
39. The Committee notes that the position of the Chairperson, UGC, has been vacant 
since April 2025. The Committee notes that the NEP 2020 states that “ [L]eadership 
positions shall not remain vacant, but rather an overlapping time period during transitions 
in leadership shall be the norm to ensure the smooth running of institutions.” The 
Committee in view thereof  recommends that a new Chairperson  should be appointed for 
the UGC as soon as possible.   
40. The Committee notes that the Draft UGC (Minimum Qualifications for 
Appointment and Promotion of Teachers and Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges 
and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher  Education) Regulations, 2025, 
are currently still in review stage and have not been finalized. The Committee was 
informed that at least 10 state governments have written to the UGC raising concerns and  
giving suggestions about the draft regulations. In this context, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation from Report 36 4 that the UGC should discuss the draft regulations with 

14 
 
the CABE (Central Advisory Board of Education) to ensure all stakeholders are involved 
in the consultation process.  
41. The Committee at its meeing held on 5th May, 2025 has examined the recently issued 
draft UGC (Promotion of Equity in Higher Education Institutions) Regulations 2025 which 
replace regulatio ns from 2012. The Committee notes  that the re has been a considerable 
delay in finalising these draft regulations.  It was only lately that these draft regulations 
have been issued after the intervention of the Supreme Court. The Commmittee in this 
regard recommends the following  –  
i. The draft Regulations must explicitly include the harassment of students and other 
stakeholders from the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) in its definition of caste -
based harassment, keeping with the Constitutional recognition of OBCs as Socially 
and Educational Backward Classes (SEBCs) under Articles 15 (4) and 15(5) of the 
Indian Constitution; 
ii. The draft regulations must explicitly include disability as an axis of discrimination; 
iii. The Equity Committee envisioned by the draft Regulations has provisions for only 
one mandatory woman member and one mandatory m ember each from the SC 
and ST communities out of a strength of 10. This should be raised to correspond 
with the provision of 50% reservations for SCs, STs, and OBCs in faculty and 
student positions. Accordingly, the Equity Committee must also draw more tha n 
half of its composition from the SC, ST, and OBC communities to ensure fair 
representation and effective decision-making; 
iv. The draft Regulations, unlike the 2012 Regulations, must  positively identify 
instances of discrimination. Without such detail, it wi ll be left to the discretion of 
the institute to decide whether a complaint is genuine or false. Accordingly, the 
Regulations must explicitly include a comprehensive list of discriminatory 
practices  
v. The draft Regulations must require an annual public disc losure of caste -based 
discrimination cases, mandatory sensitization programs for faculty and 
administrative staff, and adequate mental health support and legal aid in all HEIs. 
42. The Committee recommends that annual admissions reports outlining gender, caste, 
social, ethnic, rural-urban, national, and class background of students be submitted by all 
centrally funded institutions  to the respective University’s Academic and Executive 
Council.  
43. The Committee notes the ambitious goals of the NEP, both wi th regards to 
expansion of higher education to reach 50% GER by 2030, and the intensification of higher 
education with the move from a three -year-undergraduate program to a four -year-
undergraduate program. The Committee notes that considerable infrastructu re 
enhancement and faculty recruitment is required to meet these targets . In this context, the 
UGC and the Department’s recent measures to restrict funding for capital projects in HEIs 

15 
 
poses a challenge to achieving the goals of the NEP. The Committee is also concerned about 
the ability of the degree colleges to meet the requirements of the NEP  and it feels that there 
exists mismatch between the current status of these colleges and the vision of the NEP 
which needs a comprehensive evaluation and a concrete response. 
44. The Committee notes that Universities need greater support in implementing 
Multiple Entry Multiple Exit because its implementation at a wide scale will be very 
difficult. The Committee also notes that Universities need greater support in draf ting their 
curriculum to ensure that the one -year certificates and two -year diplomas issued under 
Multiple Entry Multiple Exit provide students with marketable skills  within these 
timeframes.  
45. The Committee notes that the NEP encourages distance learni ng and online 
learning which is currently regulated by the UGC ’s Distance Education Bureau. However 
it notes that Universities not having A+ NAAC accreditation are not allowed to offer new 
online courses or science courses. The Committee recommends that the UGC re -evaluate 
this decision in consultation with the Universities and NAAC, since NAAC ratings dont 
exclusively check for the ability of an institute to offer distance and online education. 
46. During its study visit to Ladakh,  the Committee was impr essed with the academic, 
research, and entrepreneurship ecosystem at the Himalayan Institute of Alternatives , 
Laddakh (HIAL), especially its success in implementing experiential education and 
learning rooted in local socio -cultural and ecological contexts.  The Committee was 
concerned to learn that the UGC has not yet granted recognition to the Himalayan Institute 
of Alternatives (HIAL) and that the matter has been pending for many years now. The 
Committee observed that HIAL has achieved tremendous impact on  the local community 
and received international fame through its ice stupas and other community engagement 
activities. Further, HIAL is rather exemplary in its implementation of the NEP 2020 which 
calls for such experiential and project -based learning, com munity engagement, and 
integration of Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS). The Committee  recommends that the 
UGC should consider granting recognition to HIAL. Moreover, the Committee encourages 
the UGC and the Department to closely study the HIAL model and consider how it can be 
replicated elsewhere through Centres of Innovation in Education or other interventions.  
47. The Committee notes that there are several institutions of education situated within 
other Ministries – the Ministry of Culture, External Af fairs, Railways, Textiles, Law, etc. 

16 
 
The Committee notes that the effective implementation of the NEP 2020 requires close 
coordination with these Ministries and their institutes. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the UGC designate an official for cl ose coordination with these 
institutions to support their take-up of the NEP 2020.  
48. The Committee notes that the UGC’s Inter -University Center for Teacher 
Education in Varanasi has a building that has not yet been handed over to the institution 
by CPWD . The Committee recommends that the Department  and UGC  take steps to 
ensure smooth and early transition of the building. The Committee also recommends that 
the Inter-University Center work with BHU and other local educational institutions to offer 
degrees to its students. 
49. During its study visit to Varanasi, the Committee learnt that the filling of EWS 
positions in faculty is nearly -impossible for Associate Professor and Professor levels. The 
criteria for becoming a Professor is typically to be serving as  Associate Professor and the 
criteria for an Associate Professor typically includes tenure as an Assistant Professor. In 
both cases, UGC payscales mean that the candidates serving as Assistant or Associate 
Professors will be earning more than Rs 8 lakhs, a nd therefore cannot qualify as EWS. 
Universities spend a lot of time and resources seeking applicants for such positions despite 
knowing that candidates will be impossible to find. In such a situation, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry re -evaluate the implementation of EWS at  the level of  
Associate Professor and Professor.  
50. The Committee notes that unlike the IIT and NIT faculty, the newly recruited 
faculty at Central Universities and other UGC -funded institutions do not receive seed 
grants at the beginning of their tenure for establishment and research expenditures. The 
Committee notes that such a facility is critical to enabling top performance for new faculty 
members since they would otherwise be reliant on project and research grants for the same 
which may take long periods of time to reach. 
51. The Committee notes that faculty and non -teaching positions at Central universities 
and other UGC -funded institutions are not eligible to receive benefits under the Unifi ed 
Pension Scheme (UPS). The Committee would recommend for their inclusion under the 
UPS scheme.  
 

17 
 
The Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR) 
52. The Indian Council of Historical Research (ICHR) is an autonomous organization under 
Ministry of Education, Government of India, registered1972 under Societies Registration Act 
(Act.xxi of 1860) .Following arethe aims and objectives of ICHR:-  
 to promote and give direction to historical research and to encourage and foster 
objective and scientific writing of history.  
 to bring historians together and provide a forum for exchange of views between them;  
 to give a national direction to an objectiv e and scientific writing of history and to have 
rational presentation and interpretation of history;  
 to promote, accelerate and coordinate research in history with special emphasis on 
areas which have not received adequate attention so far;  
 to promote, a ccelerate and coordinate research in history with special emphasis on 
areas which have not received adequate attention so far;  
 The ICHR is mandated to encourage and foster objective and scientific writing of the 
history.  
 to promote a coordinated and bala nced distribution of research efforts over different 
areas;  
 to elicit support and recognition for historical research from all concerned and ensure 
the necessary dissemination and use of results.  
 Responsibilities, functions and conduct or business of suc h Committees or Advisory 
Panels as may be constituted from time to time;  
 Terms and conditions governing scholarships, fellowships and deputations, grant -in-aid, 
research schemes and projects, and establishment of data library and documentation 
centre.  
 Appointments of all categories of officers and staff for conducting the affairs of the 
Council and define their duties;  
 Such other matters as may be necessary for the furtherance of the objectives and proper 
administration of the affairs of the Council.  
With a view to reaching out to far -flung areas of the country, the Council runs three 
regional centres – Southern Regional Centre (SRC), Bengaluru; North -Eastern Regional Centre, 
Guwahati & Western Regional Centre, Pune.  
53. Function of ICHR(Schemes & Grant-in-Aids):- 
 (A) Fellowships:- The following categories of Fellowships are awarded in each 
financial year for undertaking research in History within India:  
(i) Junior Research Fellowship (JRF) 80  
(ii) Post Doctoral Fellowship (PDF) 10  

18 
 
(iii) Senior Academic Fellowship (SAF) 10  
(iv) National Fellowship (NF) 03  
(v) Gurukul Fellowship (GF) 02 Guru & 02 Disciple  
(B) The tabular details of the above mentioned fellowships/grants are as under:- 
Sl.No. Grant/Scheme Number of Fellowships/ 
Grants in FY 
Duration 
1 Junior Research Fellowship (JRF)  80 Two Years 
2 Post Doctoral Fellowship (PDF)  10 Two Years 
3 Senior Academic Fellowship (SAF)  10 Two Years 
4 National Fellowship (NF)  3 Two Years 
5 Gurukul Fellowship  02 Two Years 
6 Research Projects Grant (RP)  - Two Years 
At any point of time, the number of total Fellowships should not be more than double of the 
upper number ceiling of Fellowship indicated above. No new category of Fellowships other than 
those mentioned above can  be introduced without the prior approval of the Government of India.  
54. Junior Research Fellowship :  Candidates who are registered in recognized Universities 
in Ph.D. programme in History or its allied subjects are eligible to apply for the Fellowship. The 
Fellowship  carr ies an amount of Rupees Seventeen Thousand Six Hundred only (Rs.17,600/) 
per month with a contingency grant of Rupees Sixteen Thousand Five Hundred only 
(Rs.16,500/-) per annum for a period of two years extendable up to one more year without any 
financial commitment under special circumstances.  
55. Post Doctoral Fellowship: Post Doctoral Fellowships are awarded to scholars who have 
shown significant competence in research work, having been awarded their Ph.D. or have done 
equivalent research work of merit in History or its allied  subjects, and desire to work on 
approved research themes at institutions of excellence under the guidance of a senior scholar. 
The applicants for the Fellowship should be affiliated with a University or a research institute of 
repute.  The Fellowship carr ies an amount of Rupees Thirty Thousand Eight Hundred only 
(Rs.30,800/-) per month with a contingency grant of Rupees Twenty Two Thousand only 
(Rs.22,000/-) per annum for a period of two years extendable up to a maximum of one more year 
without any financial commitment under special circumstances.  

19 
 
56. Senior Academic Fellowship: Senior Fellowships are awarded to the senior scholars 
who have done quality work and have publications in the form of books and papers in 
professional journals to their credit. The  Fellowship carr ies an amount of Rupees Forty Four 
Thousand only (Rs. 44,000/ -) per month with a contingency grant of Rupees Forty Four 
Thousand only (Rs. 44,000/ -) per annum for a period of two years extendable up to a maximum 
of one more year without any financial commitment under special circumstances.  
57. National Fellowship: National Fellowships are offered by the Chairman, ICHR in 
consultation with Research Project Committee members to eminent scholars in history who have 
made outstanding contributio n to research in their respective fields, to enable them to continue 
their academic work and research. The Fellowship is awarded by the Council to eminent scholars 
on the recommendations of the Research Projects Committee for a period of two years. Direct 
applications from scholars are not entertained. The Fellowship shall carry an amount of Rupees 
Sixty Thousand Five Hundred only (Rs.60,500/ -) per month with a contingency grant of Rupees 
Sixty Six Thousand only (Rs.66,000/-) per annum.  
58. Gurukul Fellowship:     In view of the Indian traditional education system i.e. Gurukul 
Shiksha Paddhati , the ICHR introduced a new fellowship namely ‘Gurukul Fellowship’ for 
veteran Historians and their disciples. This fellowship is given in two components - Guru 
(Teacher) and his/her Shisya(Disciple) The Guru is given Rs. 55000/ - Per Month Honorarium, 
Plus Rs. 60000/- per annum as Contingency Grant. The Shisya gets Rs. 28,000/- Per Month and 
Rs. 20000/- per annum as Contingency grant.  
59. Research Projects :  The Research Projects Committee (RPC) award s a grant for a 
project of research in History or on a theme substantively including an aspect or aspects of 
History, undertaken within India, to a scholar as Project Director, who has shown significant 
competence in research work, having been awarded his/her Ph.D. or equivalent research work, 
upon an application made by or on behalf of the said scholar.  The objective of such grants is to 
enable institutions to improve the state of research collections. Bona fide Institutions with a well 
established and respected record of historical research can apply for funding its projects. Such 
applications shall be treated in the same manner as standard applicat ions for Project funding.  
The RPC may on its own or at the recommend ations of a ‘Committee of Experts’ assign or 
award a project to a scholar and fix his honorarium.  

20 
 
60. Contingency (Study -Cum-Travel) Grant:  The ICHR award s Contingency (Study -
cum-Travel) grant to an Indian citizen, or to a non -Indian, to assist him in pu rsuing research on 
History within India.  The following are eligible for award of grant:  
(a) Scholars who are engaged in M.Phil., Ph.D. or Post Doctoral work or carrying 
on independent research in History and are not currently receiving any travel or 
contingency grant for the proposed work from any other source.  
(b)  University and college teachers and members of staff of research institutions and 
others who are engaged in research work in History.  
61. Foreign Travel Grant:  Under thisGrant, cost of travel and of maintenance abroad may 
be provided to a citizen of India wishing to study at archives, museums, libraries or private 
collections abroad for collection of source material, or to take part in a workshop, seminar or 
conference abroad for presenting a paper related to History, or to receive training in a specialized 
branch of History.  
62. Publication Grants : The Research Projects Committee of ICHR awards grants for 
publication of the following categories of works relating to History:  
(a) doctoral thesis  
(b) monograph and other research work  
(c) proceedings of seminar/symposium/conference  
(d) critically edited/ translated source material  
(e) bibliographical and documentation work  
(f) periodical publication  
(g) any other research-oriented work  
(h) translation into any Indian language or into English of an important work on History. 
63. Seminars/Workshops/Conferences:   The Research Projects Committee awards grants 
for seminars, workshops or academic conferences concerned with specific themes of History to 
individual scholars as coordinators. The amount of grant in each case not to exceed Rupees 
Three lakh fifty thousand (Rs.3,50,000/-) and to be paid through the host institution deemed to be 
the institution of affiliation. Besides, that the RPC m ay award grant not exceeding Rs. 5,00,000/ - 
preferably to registered academic and professional organization of historians.  
64. Cultural Exchange Programme (CEP) :-  The ICHR  is one of the implementing 
agencies of the Cultural Exchange Agreements, signed by the Government of India, with other 
countries. It  maintains international links and strives with different countries for widening the 

21 
 
horizons of historical research in India through its Cultural Exchange Programme. The ICHR 
sponsors Indian historians to visit foreign countries and also receives foreign scholars under the 
Programme. The purpose of such visits is to enable historians to undertake collaborative research 
projects, to organise joint seminars/ workshops, to collect research material, deliver  lectures, 
participate in seminars, consult libraries and interact with scholars. Presently, the ICHR has 
active exchange programmes with Germany, Japan, UK, and others.  
65. Journals : The ICHR publishes the following journals 
(i) Indian Historical Review :- Since  its inception in 1972,  t he ICHR regularly brings 
out its Bi -annual journal namely the Indian Historical Review . The journal has now 
become subvention free and also now listed under Arts & Humanities Citation Index 
coverage of Thomson Reuters.  
(ii) Itihas (Shodh-Patrika) :- At its meeting held on 13 May 2015, the Editorial Board of 
Itihas (Shodh -Patrika) resolved to revive Itihas, which was originally started in 1992.  
The scholars have been requested to send their origina l articles written in Hindi only. 
Thereafter, the Council is regularly bringing out Bi -annual issues of Itihas(Shodh-
Patrika).  
RECOMMENDATIONS 
66. The Committee reiterates its observation from Report 364 regarding the inadequacy 
of the current budget for the ICHR. The Committee re -emphasises the need to increase the 
budget for the Council given the critical functions it conducts.  
67. The Committee notes that the Junior Research Fellowship issued by the I CHR is 
limited to 80 students across the country. Further, the stipend is only Rs 17,600 – a figure 
which has not been revised in many years and which is inadequate given that the UGC ’s 
JRF is Rs 37,000 per month. Therefore, the Committee recommends a n increase in the 
fellowship amount as well as to the number of students who receive the fellowship.  
68. The Committee notes that the ICHR is the only Research Counil without a 
permanent campus of its own. Further, the current building where the ICHR is operat ing 
is tied up in ownership issues. The Committee recommends a speedy resolution of the 
matter and the establishment of a permanent campus for the ICHR.  
69. The Committee was informed of the proposal for additional regional centers of 
ICHR in Jammu and Ka shmir, Varanasi, and the Northeast. The Committee notes that 
dedicated staff members and a physical office can help bring additional focus to the 
ICHR’s efforts in these regions. At the same time, the Committee has previously observed 
that the current regi onal centers need to be better leveraged, with dedicated building, 

22 
 
library, multi-media, and conference hall facilities. The Committee recommends that the 
Council and the Department consider the proposal for these new regional centers and in 
close consultation with local historians, students, and faculty members.  
70. The Committee was informed that the current Member Secretary of the ICHR is 
holding additional charge  of Director ( Research& Adminstration) in ICHR . The 
Committee is of the view that the pract ice of assigning additional charges needs to be 
avoided, especially for long periods of time. The Committee notes the need for the ICHR to 
support research which takes a subcontinent -wide view of history, given our inter -
connected history.   
 
  

23 
 
Indian Council of Philosophical Research (ICPR) 
71. Indian Council of Philosophical Research (ICPR) came into existence in July, 1977 as an 
autonomous organization under Ministry of Education, Government of India with an objective to  
provide impetus to Philosoph ical discourse by promoting Philosophical research in the country. 
This organization functions from its head office in New Delhi and Regional Centre and Library 
in Lucknow.  The function al thrust areas of ICPR are many such as Indian as well  as World 
Philosophy, Theories of Truth and Knowledge, Normative Inquiries, Comparative and Critical 
Study, Logic and philosophy of Logic, Philosophy of Mathematics, Language, Science and 
Technology, Philosophy of Man and Environment, Social and Political Philosophy, Philosophy 
of Law, Metaphysics Philosophy of Education, Social Sciences and Feminism etc.  
72. ICPR is mandated to realize its objectives through the following activities:  
• Reviewing the progress of research in Philosophy from time to time  
• Giving financial support to institutions and organisations engaged in the conduct of 
research in Philosophy  
• Providing technical assistance or guidance for the formulation of research projects and 
programmes in philosophy, by individuals or institutions, and / or organize and support 
institutional or other arrangements for training in research methodology  
• Indicating periodically, areas in and topics on which research in Philosophy should be 
promoted and to adopt special measures for the development of researc h in neglected or 
developing areas in Philosophy.  
• Coordinating research activities in Philosophy and to encourage programme of 
interdisciplinary research  
• Organising sponsoring and assisting seminars, special courses, study circles, working 
groups/ parties, and conferences for promoting research in Philosophy, and to establish 
institutes for the same purpose  
• Providing grants for publication of digests, journals, periodicals and scholarly works 
devoted to research in Philosophy and also to undertake their publication  
• Instituting and administering fellowships, scholarships and awards for research in 
Philosophy by students, teachers and others  
• Developing and supporting documentation services, including maintenance and supply of 
data, preparing of an invento ry of current research in Philosophy and compilation of a 
national register of Philosophers  
• Promoting collaboration in research between Indian Philosophers and philosophical 
institutions and those from other countries  
• Taking special steps to develop a group of talented young Philosophers and to encourage 
research by young Philosophers working in universities and other institutions  

24 
 
• Advising the Government of India on all such matters pertaining to teaching and 
research in Philosophy as may be referred to it by the Government of India from time to 
time  
• Entering into collaboration o mutually agreed terms, with other institutions, 
organisations and agencies for the promotion of research in Philosophy  
• Promoting teaching and research in Philosophy  
73. The Ministry has informed that until 2014, a substantial number of fellowships and 
research projects were awarded for research on Western Philosophy and a large number of 
seminars, conferences, workshops and lecture programmes, etc. organized or supported by ICPR 
were on the topics related to Western Philosophy. However, p ost-2014, emphasis has been 
shifted to study of Indian Philosophy  that too in Indian la nguages and on adopting Indian 
Research Methodology in the field of Philosophical Research. In the last five year period, of the 
webinars, seminars, workshops and conferences organized or supported by ICPR, almost all 
were on topics related to Indian Philo sophy and very few were on Western Philosophy.  Under 
recently initiated Five Year Action Plan, ICPR is planning to undertake the initiative of 
developing and offering SWAYAM courses on Philosophy of Research for all the students of 
higher education with in terest in research. It aims at a systematic promotion of research in 
decolonizing the philosophical narrative on ‘nation and nationalism’. The Ministry has further 
informed that for the purpose of c ultivating and propagating India’s Wisdom and Indian Way of  
Thinking as reflected in Indian Philosophy ICPR has organized seminars and awarded research 
projects on the teachings of Shankaracharya, Shri Bhima Bhoi, Shri Aurobindo, Swami 
Vivekananda, Rishi Bankim Chandra, and many other such thinkers and philosophers . The 
objective is to cultivate and propagate India’s wisdom and Indian way of thinking as reflected in 
Indian Philosophy.  
74. The Ministry has further informed that since 2015 focus has shifted from research on 
topics which were neglected earlier. Till 2 015, Philosophical research was confined to topics 
which were popularized by Western scholars or Indian scholars having Western perspective. As 
a result, certain topics were repeatedly considered for research neglecting others as mundane or 
irrelevant. That drawback has been overcome and now research topics are selected judiciously 
and hitherto unexplored fields are given due priority. The Ministry has also informed that Indian 
Philosophy was always problem -centric and it served the society by providing ans wers to the 
questions and challenges faced by individual and society. Keeping this age -old principle of 
Indian Philosophy in perspective, certain research projects are being supported by ICPR which 
are related to challenges faced by modern world.  For exam ple, in 2021 – 22, ICPR awarded 

25 
 
General Fellowships for the research on the topics like, ‘Essentials of E-commerce Model and its 
limitations in business ethics’, ‘Moral permissibility of capital punishment: a philosophical 
scrutiny’, ‘The good of trees: an  ethical defence of environment’, ‘Religious Faith and 
Challenges of Medical Ethics’, ‘A Study on Relationship of Quantum Mechanics with Indian 
Spiritual Writings (With Special Reference to Shrimad Bhagavadgeeta)’ etc. 
75. The Committee has been informed t hat for Popularising Philosophy among 
Youngsters,ICPR is exploring prospects of introducing Indian Philosophy in school/ college 
level. Under the Five Year Action Plan, ICPR is in the process of creating content on logic and 
ethics for school children in a udio, video and printed forms. Besides this, monthly Study Circle 
programs are organized in colleges to popularize Philosophy among the students. During the 
programme, renowned scholars and teachers are invited to interact with students, share ideas and 
deliver lectures.  
76. As a measure of emphasis on north -east region, d uring the last five years, ICPR has 
organized a number of seminars on the topics related to North-East. National Seminar on ‘Bhakti 
Tradition in North-East India: Social and Philosophical Implications’ was organized in 2022. 
77. In the same period, another seminar on ‘Philosophical Debate on Nationalism in 
Contemporary India’ was organised in Shillong. Two other seminars on North -East India are in 
pipeline. Seminar on ‘Social Impact of the  Vaishnava Philosophy Spread by Santa Das Gosai 
and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in North East’ is going to be held in Imphal and ‘Philosophy of 
Religion and Nature Worship with special reference to North East Bharat’ is to be held in 
Guwahati. ICPR awarded a numb er of research projects on the topics directly related to North -
East. Research projects, such as ‘Philosophical Thoughts of Deori Community and their Customs 
and Rituals: A Case Study in Dhemaji District of Assam’, ’Religious Beliefs and Practices of 
Missing Community of Assam: An Analytical Study’ were among them. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
78. The Committee notes that the stipend under the Junior Research Fellowship (JRF) 
issued by the ICPR is only Rs 17,500 – a figure which has not been revised in many years 
and which is inadequate given that the UGC ’s JRF is Rs 37,000 per month. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends a n increase in the fellowship amount as well as the number of 
fellowship.  

26 
 
79. The Committee was informed that a high -powered committee was set up in 201 6-18 
to examine the current func tinoing of the ICPR and suggest ways in which it can be 
improved. The Committee recommends that the Department should review the report of 
the Committee and evaluate the status of the report’s implementation.  
80. The Committee notes that the Lucknow campus of the ICPR holds one of the largest 
libraries of philosophy in Asia but that it is currently severely under -utilised. The 
Committee recommends that the Council and the Department work together to enhance 
the lib rary’s utilization, including possibly creating residential fellowships to facilitate 
scholars seeking dedicated access to the library. 
81. The Committee recommends that the Council take up more projects which 
investigate traditions of philosophy in vernac ular language, which has largely remained 
untapped.  
82. The Committee notes that there was no Council constituted between 2022 and 2024, 
and no accompanying Chairperson for the Committee. The Committee emphasises that 
such a situation should be avoided in the future. 
  

27 
 
Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) 
83. After Independence, our country sought to regain its indigenous model of social and 
human sciences research that required decolonization of the education and research. As the 
country’s development process threw up numerous and diverse challenges that required 
extensive research and analysis, the Government of India established a Committee for Social 
Science Research under the Chairmanship of Professor V.K.R.V. Rao in 1965 to review the 
social science research scenario in the country and make recommendations to accelerate its 
progress. This led to the establishment of the Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) 
in 1969 to encourage, promote and fund social science research in the country. 
84. ICSSR is mandated to provide policy advice to the Government on vital socio -economic 
issues as and when required and also to review progress of Social Science Research in the 
country. It supports early, mid -career and senior researchers in fulfilling their  research 
endeavours through Research Projects and Research Fellowships in various priority areas. For 
dissemination of ideas, knowledge and research findings, ICSSR sponsors National, International 
and Collaborative Seminars, supports publication of journ als and books and provides library, 
documentation, data and online services through National Social Science Documentation Centre 
(NASSDOC). ICSSR also promotes national and international collaboration in social science 
research through its various schemes and initiatives. The data collection and research findings 
emerging out of the research outcomes of projects and programmes sponsored by the ICSSR has 
contributed in drafting of government policies in the past decades. The 24 Research Institutes all 
over the country and covered under the Grant-in-Aid scheme of the ICSSR serv e as critical hubs 
of knowledge creation and its dissemination. 
85. As per the information given to the Committee, ICSSR has so far granted 9243 Major, 
Minor, Collaborative and Special C all Projects and 543 Research Programmes. It has so far 
awarded 8470 full-term Doctoral Fellowships, 3,547 Post-Doctoral Fellowships, 921 Senior 
Fellowships and 174 National Fellowships. ICSSR has sponsored 5,659 National and 1,557 
International seminars/conferences and funded 2,707 scholars for attending seminars and 499 
scholars for data collection abroad. The ICSSR has sponsored 1367 Research Methodology 
Courses and Capacity Building Programmes for young faculties and researchers , provided 
financial assistance to 1897 scholars for publication of their Doctoral Theses/ Projects/ 
Fellowship Reports/ Conference Proceedings, and financially supported 1212 social science 
journals, including 442 Research Associations involved in social science researc h activities. It 
has also conducted Six Rounds of Surveys on the current status of research in crucial social 

28 
 
science disciplines, namely, Economics, Political Science, Sociology, Social Anthropology, 
Geography and Psychology, in the country. Apart from th is, the ICSSR provides research 
services such as library, documentation, data and e -resources to several thousand social science 
scholars and faculties across the country through its National Social Science Documentation 
Centre (NASSDOC). ICSSR is promotin g and supporting research culture across the country, 
which is testified by addition of 693 new institutions since January 2023. 
86. The  Department has informed that some of the key initiatives and research activities 
undertaken by the Indian Council of S ocial Science Research (ICSSR) during the Financial 
Years 2022 -23, 2023 -24 and 2024 -25 with a focus on fostering socially impactful, 
interdisciplinary, collaborative and policy -relevant research in social and human sciences are 
summarized as under: 
a. Research Projects and Programmes:  ICSSR has awarded a total of 2339 Research 
Projects and Programmes in the Financial Years 2022 -23, 2023 -24 and 2024 -25. In 
addition to regular calls for Major and Minor Research Projects in social and human 
sciences, ICSSR promo tes interdisciplinary, multidisciplinary and collaborative 
research at the national level with special focus on thrust areas of national importance, 
including attainment of Sustainability Development Goals (SDGs). The following 
initiatives have been taken in the last three years in this direction:  
i. Research Programme on History and Sociology of Art, Craft, Culture, and Folk 
Traditions of India  
ii. Research Programme on Culture, History and Geography of the Scheduled Tribes of 
India  
iii. Evidence based Short -term Empirical Research on Impact Assessment of 31 
Government schemes  
iv. Research Project on Vision Viksit Bharat @ 2047  
v. Research Projects on Longitudinal Studies  
vi. Projects on Impact Assessment of Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM)  
vii. Projects on Solar Energy and Sustainability  
viii. Research Projects on Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs)  
b. Research Fellowships: Under its Research Fellowship Scheme, the ICSSR provides 
various categories of fellowships in order to provide research opportunities to young, 
senior and established social scientists and to engage them in full -time research on 
important themes. A total of 2284 researchers have benefitted under the different 
fellowship schemes of ICSSR in the last three years. These researchers are prom oted 

29 
 
to pursue cutting edge research in thrust areas of national importance identified by the 
ICSSR. The number of fellowships granted in each year is as under: 
Scheme 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
Doctoral Fellowship  492 483 483 
Post-Doctoral 
Fellowship  
185 272 273 
Senior Fellowship  29 34 33 
Total  706 789 789 
c. International Collaboration : ICSSR provides financial assistance to scholars for 
presenting papers at International Conferences and collecting data in connection with 
their ongoing research work. I n the last three years i.e. 2022 -23, 2023-24 & 2024-25, 
ICSSR has provided grants to 582 scholars to participate in International Conferences 
and Data Collection abroad. A total of 104 scholars have benefitted under the 
Scholar’s Exchange Programme of ICSS R. Under these schemes, preference is given 
to the younger scholars, scholars attending conference for the first time & scholars 
from remote and backward areas besides persons with benchmark disabilities. Under 
the international collaboration programme, th e ICSSR has signed bilateral 
collaborative agreements with 14 countries and 3 international organizations. 
d. National and International Seminars : ICSSR supports National and International 
Seminars to enable researchers, academicians, policy -makers, industry partners and 
other stakeholders with an opportunity for the dissemination of research findings and 
ideas. During the financial year 2022 -23, 2023-24, and 2024-25, ICSSRreceived 3621 
proposals for organising International and National Seminars/Conferences from all 
across India, out of which 1696 proposals were selected for funding by ICSSR.  
e. Training and Capacity Building: ICSSR supports capacity building courses aimed at 
improving research quality, fostering innovation and addressing complex social issues. 
During the financial years 2022-23, 2023-24, and 2024-25, a total of 513 proposals for 
both Research Methodology Course and Capacity Building Programme (RMC -144 
and CBP-91) were received and 268 grants were approved by ICSSR, which included 
155 under the Research Methodology Course and 113 under Capacity Building 
Programme. 

30 
 
f. Research Publications: During the financial years 2022 -23, 2023-24 and 2024–2025, 
ICSSR has taken significant steps in promoting, disseminating, and supporting social 
science research across Indiawhich  reflect a wide -ranging engagement with diverse 
domains addressing both foundational inquiries and contemporary challenges. Th e 
major publications in the period under consideration are: Understanding India and Its 
Problems (Vol I and II), Cultural Heritage: Implications for Development, Distributed 
Renewable Energy Systems, Knowledge Management in Academic Libraries in India , 
Tantrayuktis, Indian Thinkers (Vol I & II), Lord Shiva in India & Abroad , Narratives 
of COVID -19, Public Service Delivery , Consumer Behaviour in Digital Markets , 
Integral Humanism a Distinct Paradigm of Development , Landscape and the Bengali 
Diaspora, Deccan in Transition : 1600 to 1800 , Nature and Dynamics of Social 
Influence. 
g. Research Internship Programme : ICSSR launched its Research Internship 
Programme for postgraduate degree holders in 2024 to encourage emerging scholars 
and provide them with valuable r esearch experience. A total of 40 young scholars 
benefitted under this scheme in 2024 -25. ICSSR is in the process of expanding the 
scope of this scheme in the current Financial Year by including Undergraduate 
students as well. 
Recommendations 
87. The Committee reiterates its observation made in its 36 4th Report that  the 
recommendations of the Seventh Pay Commission ha ve still not been implemented in 
ICSSR research institutes and regional centers. TheCommittee notes that the dimished pay 
scale makes  recruitment of faculty members at the research institutes very challenging .  
The Committee therefore recommends the immediate implementation of the Seventh Pay 
Commission in the ICSSR research institutes and regional centers, and the implementation 
of the Eight Pay Commission at the appropriate time as well.  
88. The Commmittee notes that several State Governments – including but not limited 
to the Governments of Tamil Nadu, Odisha, and Bihar – are implementing the Seventh Pay 
Commission for their share of funding for ICSSR Research Institutes. At a time when State 
Governments are rising to support these institutions, the Committee feels it becomes all the 
more pressing for the Union Ministry of Education to do the same.  
89. The Committee expresses its con cern ove r the staffing of the ICSSR Research 
Institutes. At the Center for Research in Rural and Industrial Development ( CRRID) 

31 
 
Chandigarh, only 7 of the 14 faculy positions are currently filled. At the Giri Institute of 
Development Studies (GIDS) in Lucknow, only 9 of the 18 faculty positions have currently 
been filled  and o f the 11 sanctioned research staff, only 1 position has been filled. No 
recruitments have reportedly taken place in the Giri institute since 2016. At Nabakrushna 
Choudhury Cent re for Development Studies (NCCDS) in Bhubaneshwar, there are only 
two serving faculty of 14 sanctioned positions. At the Sardar Patel Institute of Economic 
and Social Research (SPIESR) in Ahmedabad, there are only 5 faculty appointed against a 
sanctioned strength of 14 positions. Similarly, there are reports of promotions in ICSSR 
research institutions not happening on time.  
90. The Committee notes that the ICSSR’s research institutes are typical funded by 
both ICSSR and the State Governments. The coordin ation between these two bodies needs 
to be strengthened. For instance, the Giri Institute of Development Studies in Lucknow is 
reportedly facing a 1.5-year time lag in the funds received from the State Government.  
91. The Committee expresses its concern o ver the non-appointment to leadership 
positions in ICSSR Research Institutes.  For instance, NCCDS in Bhubaneshwar has not 
had a full -time Director in 5 years. CRRID in Chandigarh too has only had a n Acting  
Director since 2018, in additing to having a n Acting Secretary and and Acting Financial 
Advisor. SPIESR in Ahmedabad has reportedly had only an Acting Director for 15 years 
now. The Committee recommends that the ICSSR take all possible measures to encourage 
the appointment of full-time, fully empowered leaders to all research institutes.  
92. The Committee notes that in the recent past, grants for salary payments have been 
halted by the ICSSR for multiple research institutes. While funding has now resumed for 
all institutes, the Committee strongly emphasises that such non-payment of grants must be 
discouraged and if necessary, must come only after  a thorough investigation and the issue 
of a notice to the institute.  
93. The Committee notes that ICSSR’s research institutes have the potential to support 
high-quality teaching and research in universities and colleges. While some research 
institutes are offering PhDs in partnership with local universities, the I CSSR must 
encourage all institutes to do the same. Furthermore,  the research institute’s faculty can 
also be encouraged to teach courses in local Central and State Universities.  
94. The Committee notes that since December 2019, the position of the Chairpe rson for 
ICSSR has largely been vacant – with only one Chairperson appointed briefly between 
April 2022 and August 2023. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry look 

32 
 
into the appointment of a full -time, fully empowered Chairman at the earliest and avoid 
such delays in appointments to the Chairperson role in the future.  
95. The Committee notes that the ICSSR has been entrusted with a very broad mandate 
to support social sciences research across the country. At a time when the NEP has set the 
ambitious target of 50% GER in higher educational institutions by 2030, it is critica l that 
ICSSR expand in consonance with the same. Accordingly, the Ministry should seek to 
expand funding for the Council.  
96. The Committee notes that the ICSSR Doctoral Fellows get only Rs 20,000 per 
month, which is rather inadequate given that the UGC J unior Research Fellowship itself 
pays Rs 37,000 per month. The Committee therefore recommends an increase in the 
amount paid as stipend under the Doctoral Fellowships.  
97. The Committee notes that given its focus on social sciences research, the ICSSR has  
the capacity to work more closely with the NITI Aayog and other Government 
policymaking institutions. The Committee recommends that the Council look into setting 
up collaborations with such organisations to leverage the research undertaken by its 
scholars and research institutes into policy decisions.  
98. The Committee notes that the decision to conduct a caste census nationally, 
alongside the caste surveys in Bihar, Telangana, and other states , creates an opportunity to 
study unique and new data relating  to the country’s demographics and socio —economic 
conditions. The Committee notes that the Center for Economic and Social Studies (CESS) 
Hyderabad, an ICSSR research institute, has worked with the Government of Telangana 
on the Socio -economic, Education, E mployment, Political Caste Survey 2024 (SEEEPC). 
The ICSSR must seek more such opportunities for collaboration with the Government to 
assist with the analysis of such census and survey-related data.  
99. The Committee notes that in 2022, the Ministry had set up a committee to look into 
the implementation of Pay Commission for the ICSSR’s research isntitutions and regional 
centers. The Committee  has been informed that as of June 2025 no report in this matter 
has been issued. The C ommittee expresses its concern  for this inordianate delay. The 
Committee recommends that the report should submitted as soon as possible given that this 
matter has been pending for several years.  
100. The Commmittee notes that the Directors of the IC SSR Reearch Institutes used to 
be convened to meet regularly in the past. The Commmittee recommends that the practice 

33 
 
be revived to enable greater collaboration and dissemination of best practices, etc among 
the institutes. 
 
 
 

34 
 
Indian Institute of Advanced Studies (IIAS), Shimla 
101. The Indian Institute of Advanced Study  (IIAS) is a research institute located in  Shimla, 
India. It was set up by the  Ministry of Education , Government of India  in 1964 and started 
functioning from 20 October 1965.  The building that houses the institute was originally called 
the Viceregal Lodge as it housed the viceroys and governors -general of India. After India gained 
independence, the building was renamed as  Rashtrapati Niwas and was used as a summer retreat 
for the president of India. Subsquently,  Dr. S Radhakrishnan, former Presdient decided to turn it 
into a centre of higher learning  in the year 1965. The institute is administered by a Society and a 
Governing Body, the members of which come f rom varied backgrounds. A statutory Finance 
Committee advises the Governing Body in financial matters. 
102.  During its study visit to Shimla in May 2025, the Committee found that the position 
of the Director, IIAS Shimla had been vacant since August 2021 – an issue that the 
Committee had raised in its 364 th Report on the Demand for Grants (2025 -2026) of the 
Department of Higher Education as well. The position has just been filled in August 2025. 
The committee underscores the need to fill up such vacancies expeditiously in future. 
103. In the same study visit, the Committee also found that the three -year tenure of the 
IIAS Society and the IIAS Governing Body had lapsed in December 2024. The Committee 
emphasises that the IIAS Society and the Governing Body mu st be reconstituted as soon as 
possible.  
104.  The Committee noted that the IIAS currently has only 2 of the 5 National Fellows 
sanctioned. The Committee notes that to fulfill the vision of the institute’s founding 
inspiration Shri Sarvepalli Radhakrishna n, the Institue needs to consistently attract and 
retain top faculty. The Institute’s inability to fill the sanctioned number of National Fellows 
- the most prestigious position at the Institute - compromises the ability of the institute to 
meet its potential.  
105. The Committee was informed that the Institute had been granted the Tagore Center 
as part of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore’s  150th birth anniversary. However, only one of 
the four Tagore Fellows sanctioned was in office as of May 2025. Between 2020  and May 
2025, only two Tagore Fellows had been designated whereas there should have been at least 
four Tagore Fellows every year. The annual international seminars envisioned as part of 
the IIAS’s Tagore Center had not been held even once. The Committee n oted that IIAS’s 
inaugural Director Niharranjay Ray himself was a biographer of Rabindranath Tagore. 

35 
 
The Institute’s inability to fully realise the vision and mission of the Tagore Center is 
therefore disappointing.  
  

36 
 
 
Auroville Foundation 
106. Auroville was founded by the ‘Mother’ on the 28th day of February, 1968 as an 
international cultural township. In view of the serious difficulties which had arisen with regard to 
the management of Auroville, the management thereof was initially vested in t he Central 
Government for a limited period by the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980.  
Subsequently, the Auroville Emergency Provisions Act 1980, was promulgated to take over the 
affairs and management of Auroville and all its undertakings pursuant  to the order of the 
Supreme Court of India. The office of the Auroville Foundation at Auroville, Tamil Nadu. It  has 
been functioning under the administrative control of Ministry of Education as a statutory 
(autonomous) body under Government of India.  
107.  Under the provisions of the Act, all undertakings of the Sri Aurobindo Society relating to 
Auroville were vested in the Foundation, which was declared a body corporate with perpetual 
succession and a common seal, having power to acquire, hold and dispo se of property, to enter 
into contracts, and to sue and be sued in its own name. 
108.  The Act provides for the establishment of three authorities of the Foundation, namely: 
i. A Governing Board, appointed by the Central Government, entrusted with the overall  
review of activities, approval of programmes, ensuring adherence to the Auroville 
Charter, and coordination with Government; 
ii. A Resident’s Assembly, comprising all adult residents of Auroville, empowered to 
deliberate on matters of Auroville’s cultural and  community life and to make proposals 
and recommendations; and 
iii. An International Advisory Council, consisting of eminent persons in the fields of 
education, culture, environment, and spirituality, to advise the Governing Board and the 
Foundation. 
109.  It h as been explained that the Act empowers the Foundation to establish and maintain 
educational, cultural, scientific and research institutions, to coordinate the activities of its 
constituent units and services, to foster international cooperation and unders tanding in pursuit of 
human unity, and to manage and develop Auroville in conformity with the Charter of the 
Mother. 
110.  The Central Government exercises oversight under the Act, including approval of all 
rules and regulations made by the Governing Board , audit of accounts by the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India, power to issue binding directions, and power to dissolve or reconstitute 
authorities in case of non-performance. 

37 
 
111.  The Act provides for the establishment of a Fund of the Foundation t o which grants, 
donations, and contributions are credited, including those from international sources. The 
Foundation’s accounts and annual reports are required to be laid before Parliament. The Act also 
provides exemptions from certain taxes, duties, and fees in recognition of the Foundation’s 
objectives. 
112.  The Foundation functions as a centre for educational innovation, ecological stewardship, 
and community-led transformation, operating through a network of over 700 units and services. 
Nearly one thou sand learners from India and abroad participate annually in its informal 
education programmes. 
113.  The Ministry has stated that Auroville provides opportunities for youth empowerment, 
including leadership training and alternative educational pathways which have enabled students 
to pursue higher education globally even without following the conventional 12th -standard 
equivalence. It has been submitted that the Foundation has pioneered ecological restoration and 
sustainability practices through the Aurov ille Botanical Gardens, RAMCo projects, and waste -
management initiatives such as Wasteless, EcoService, and Garbology 101. In addition, 
Auroville units are engaged in consulting, design, and advanced technical work, including 
semiconductor innovation. 
114.  The Committee was informed that Auroville’s pedagogical approach is based on 
principles of freedom, respect, and beauty, encouraging self -paced learning, reflective 
assessment, and holistic development of physical, emotional, mental, and spiritual facult ies. The 
model is aligned with the provisions of the National Education Policy 2020 and the Integral 
Education Policy 2025. 
115.  It has been explained that the Foundation offers teacher -training, volunteer, internship, 
and apprenticeship programmes, as we ll as lifelong learning opportunities. Research and 
curriculum development are anchored in the Sri Aurobindo International Institute of Educational 
Research (SAIIER). 
116.  The Ministry has further submitted that the Auroville Foundation aspires to promote  
Asian resurgence through research and collaboration, enhance the representation of the Global 
South, draw upon Indic knowledge traditions in addressing contemporary challenges, and embed 
Sri Aurobindo’s vision in the national education discourse. 

38 
 
117.  The Committee has been informed of a Memorandum of Understanding signed between 
the Auroville Foundation and IIT Madras for the establishment of a Sustainability Campus on 
100 acres of land allocated by Auroville. The campus will serve as a model of regenera tive 
design, zero-carbon infrastructure, and climate-resilient urban development, functioning as a hub 
for interdisciplinary research in clean energy, circular economy, water conservation, sustainable 
urbanisation, and community well-being. 
118.  The Committee was informed that in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 32 
of the Auroville Foundation Act, 1988, and with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, the Auroville Foundation notified the Admission and Termination Regulations, 
2023. These regulations govern the criteria and process of admission in all educational 
institutions administered by the Foundation, as well as the grounds and procedures for 
termination of admission. 
119.  The Ministry has informed that termination of admission  may take place in cases of 
misconduct, persistent academic non -performance, or violation of institutional rules, but only 
after observance of due process, including notice and an opportunity to be heard. Institutions are 
required to maintain proper records of all admissions and terminations. 
120.  Auroville Foundation (Constitution of Town Development Council) Regulations, 2024  
The Ministry has stated that the Governing Board of the Auroville Foundation, with the approval 
of the Central Government, notifie d the Auroville Foundation (Constitution of Town 
Development Council) Regulations, 2024, in pursuance of Section 16 of the Act and Appendix V 
of the Master Plan. 
121.  It has been explained that under these regulations, the Governing Board constituted the 
Auroville Town Development Council (ATDC) as the Prescribed Authority for the 
implementation and enforcement of the Auroville Universal Township Master Plan and related 
regulations. 
122.  The Ministry has informed that the ATDC shall consist of not more th an ten members 
appointed by the Governing Board, including a Chairperson, a Member -Secretary, and a 
Member-Finance & Accounts. Members are required to possess skills in administration, 
coordination, and management, with some having technical expertise in p lanning, architecture, 
engineering, horticulture, or survey. 

39 
 
123.  It has been stated that the Council structure is based on Appendix V of the Master Plan 
and requires the establishment of departments with adequate staffing under designated 
Department Heads. In addition, a Green Belt Development & Enforcement Department has been 
created under the Planning Group for the specific task of implementing the Green Belt 
regulations. 
124. The Ministry has explained that this department is responsible for preparing an Integrated 
Green Belt Zone Layout Map in consultation with concerned authorities, processing Green Belt 
Development Schemes from private landowners, issuing permissions, and enforcing compliance 
including demolition of unauthorised constructions. The de partment is to be staffed by planners, 
architects, engineers, and surveyors, and is supported by a multi -disciplinary enforcement team 
comprising Legal, Revenue, Horticulture, Survey, and Police officers. 
125.  It has further been informed that the term of  office of a Council member is four years. 
Members may be re -appointed once consecutively, after which a break of one term is required 
before further nomination. Provisions have been made for induction and transition of new 
members six months before the expiry of a term. 
126.  The Ministry has clarified that a member ceases to hold office if absent for more than 
three months, if resigning with Governing Board acceptance, if reported as non -performing by 
the Council, or if removed by the Governing Board for sufficient cause. Casual vacancies may be 
filled by the Secretary with the approval of the Governing Board. 
127.  It has been stated that the ATDC functions include: 
i. Acting as Prescribed Authority for implementation of the Master Plan; 
ii. Ensuring that the township is developed according to the Master Plan; 
iii. Issuing building permissions and completion certificates; 
iv. Preparing five -year and annual plans, budgets, and schedules for Governing Board 
approval; 
v. Raising funds for township development and land consoli dation with Governing Board 
approval; 
vi. Securing services of planners, architects, engineers, consultants, and contractors; 
vii. Constituting technical and project teams; 
viii. Coordinating with central, state, and local authorities; and 
ix. Enforcing compliance with the Green Belt regulations including demolitions. 
128.  The ATDC is accountable to the Governing Board and is required to submit accounts, 
income and expenditure statements, and progress reports periodically. 
129.  It has been explained that the ATDC must also prepare a manual of processes and 
procedures with Governing Board approval, and may utilise an Advisory Group of up to five 

40 
 
members appointed for four years, to provide expert support for planning and development 
review. 
130.  Any ambiguity in interpretati on of these Regulations shall be settled by the Governing 
Board of the Auroville Foundation. 
131.  The Committee was informed that in exercise of powers under Section 32 of the Act, the 
Auroville Foundation, with the approval of the Central Government, not ified the Development 
Control in Green Belt Zone of Auroville Universal Township Regulations, 2025.  It has been 
explained that these regulations apply to all lands, constructions, and development activities in 
the Green Belt Zone of the Auroville Universal Township, and override any inconsistent plans or 
schemes of other authorities. 
132.  The Ministry has informed that no land transaction in the Master Plan area can be 
registered without a No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the Auroville Foundation. 
133.  The regulations require all development in the Green Belt Zone to conform to an 
Integrated Green Belt Zone Plan to be prepared and notified by the Foundation. Development 
may only be undertaken with prior approval of a Green Belt Development Scheme submit ted to 
the Prescribed Authority.  It has been stated that the regulations lay down norms mandating 
renewable energy systems, decentralized wastewater treatment and reuse, on -site solid waste 
processing, rainwater harvesting, stormwater management, and protection of ecological zones. 
134.  The Ministry has further explained that landowners must provide land for Master Plan 
roads and infrastructure, bear costs of trunk infrastructure, and remove non -conforming 
structures. State revenue and police departments are to support enforcement. 
135.  The regulations provide that the Auroville Town Development Council, as the 
Prescribed Authority, shall enforce the provisions, prepare the Integrated Green Belt Zone Plan, 
process proposals, and undertake demolition of un authorised structures. A multidisciplinary 
enforcement team comprising legal, survey, revenue, police, and horticulture officials is to be 
constituted. 
Recommendations 
136.  The Committee expresses its appreciation for the contributions made by past 
Chairmen of the Foundation’s Governing Board, Dr Karan Singh and DrKireet Joshi, 
whose stewardship and steadfast commitment has led to the  preservation and nurturing of 
the character and vision of Auroville.   

41 
 
137. The Committee notes with satisfaction the  many achievements of Auroville since its 
inceptions and since the passage of the Auroville Act, 1988.  The Committee notes that the 
UNESCO has passed at least six resolutions since 1966 to celebrate Auroville’s ideals. The 
very first resolution, passed at  the UNESCO’s General Conference held in Paris in 
October-November 1966, notes that “ the project will contribute to international 
understanding and promotion of peace ” and “commends it [the project] to those interested in 
UNESCO’s ideals.”  The sixth resolu tion, adopted at the 18 th plenary meeting on 13 th 
November 2017, recognizes that “Auroville is a successful and unique model project, proving 
the capacity of an international community, after almost 50 years of existence, to continue to 
live up to its init ial founding ideas of peace and international harmony .” It also notes that 
“Auroville has developed into a centre of expertise in a wide range of fields, benefiting India”  
and notes “ its success in sharing its experience and helping the development of its 
neighbouring rural population.” 
138. The Committee notes that the Auroville Act (1988) is unique in that it governs a 
community, not just an institution. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the sixth 
UNESCO resolution explicitly appreciates the Gove rnment of India for passing the 
Auroville Foundation Act (1988) for the “ purpose of protecting and encouraging the 
development of Auroville.” 
139. The Committee notes that the Act sets up three bodies for the governance and 
smooth functioning of Auroville – the Governing Board, the Residents’ Assembly, and the 
International Advisory Council. While the Committee acknowledges the recent Court 
verdict t hat the Governing Board is supreme, the Committee emphases that the three 
institutions must work together in close coordination and harmony. The Governing Board 
should continue the practice of consultation and collaboration with the international 
Advisory Council and the Residents’ Assembly before making any key decisions. The 
Committee observes that the objectives of the Auroville Foundation and the ideals of 
human unity enshrined in the Charter of Auroville can only be pursued with such an 
environment of constructive engagement.  
140. The Committee emphasises the distinctive nature of Auroville as a community and 
the critical importance of the Governing Board as the administrative body that oversees 
the community. The Committee notes that the mandate of th e incumbment Governing 
Board has expired as of 5 th October 2025.  The Committee emphasises the importance of 
reconstituting the Governing Board with immediacy upon the expiration of the Governing 

42 
 
Board. It further notes that the Auroville Act specifically stipulates that members of the 
Board must have distinguished themselves by rendering “valuable service to Auroville” 
and “contributed significantly in activities that are being pursued or are envisaged to be 
promoted in Auroville, including activities rela ting to environment, afforestation, arts and 
crafts, industry, agriculture, humanities, sciences and integral yoga.” 
 
141. The Committee notes that Auroville is meant to have an autonomous character and 
that an empowered Residents’ Assembly is critical to the same since it is the only statutory 
body capable of representing the residents of Auroville. The Residents’ Assembly therefore 
must hold elections to the Working Committee regularly. To settle disputes and act as a 
check on the Residents’ Assembly and ensure its continued representativeness, the 
Foundation may consider setting up a standing panel composed of former members of the 
Working Committee. This panel can decide on complaints against the Working Committee 
and make recommendations to the Governing Body about the action that is necessary. 
142. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not designated an official as full -time 
Secretary of the Auroville Foundation, and that for over a year, the position is being held 
as an additional charge. The Committee’s general stance has been that the practice of  
assigning additional charges needs to be avoided, especially for long periods of time. 
143. The Committee welcomes the Auroville Foundation’s MoU with IIT Madras which 
paves the way for setting up a sustainability campus. However, the Committee notes that  
the land for the campus is supposed to come at the expense of the Annapurna Farms 
currently existing at the location. Food sustainability is an integral part of the vision of 
Auroville and the loss of farmland will certainly impact the long -term ability o f Auroville 
to sustain itself. Further, Annapurna Farms is currently engaging in organic farming, 
which was central to The Mother’s vision for thecommunity. The Committee recommends 
that Annapurna farms should not be disturbed and that alternative sites ne arby should be 
found to situate the sustainability campus. 
144. In the same vein, the Committee is of the view that all land transfers in service of the 
Master Plan should be implemented in full transparency and consultation with all 
stakeholders, including the Resident’s Assembly and the International Advisory Council.  
145. The Committee notes that the Auroville Master Plan 2025 was approved in 2001 by 
the Ministry of Human Resources Development and notified in the Gazette in 2010. In view 
of the time that has passed in the interim, the Committee recommends that the Master Plan 

43 
 
be implemented in close consultation with the Resident’s Assembly and other stakeholders 
in Auroville, with changes as may be required. The Committee also notes that as per 
current regulations, all urban development master plans in the state of Tamil Na du are to 
be submitted to the State Urban Planning Department. The Committee recommends that 
the Foundation do so as well in compliance with these regulations.  
146. The Committee recommends that any amendments to the Auroville Act or the 
Auroville Foundation Rules 1997 should be developed through a consensual process, with 
the unanimous support of all three statutory bodies – the Governing Board, the 
International Advisory Council, and the Resident’s Assembly.  
147. The Committee notes that the Auroville c ommunity has achieved many successes in 
its goals of achieving self -sufficiency. The Matrimandir at the center of Auroville is a 
testament to the ability of the community to self -finance and self -direct very ambitious 
projects.  The Committee recommends th at the Foundation continue this spirit of self -
sustenance and minimize the involvement of the Central Public Works Department and 
other bodies in the conduct of its works.  
148. The Committee recommends that the Government may consider amending the 
Auroville Foundation Act, 1988  to provide for recognition of Auroville as an Institution of 
National Importance, keeping in view that UNESCO has already adopted multiple 
resolutions since 1966 endorsing the project and acknowledging its contribution towards 
international understanding and the promotion of peace. 
149. The Committee recommends that the term of office of the Secretary to the Auroville 
Foundation should be made co -terminous with that of the Governing Board (i.e. four 
years). This will ensure better institutional continuity and coordination between the 
Governing Board and the administrative machinery of the Foundation. 
150. The Committee notes that Auroville Foundation receives partial funding from the 
Central Government in the form of annual grants, as stipulated by the  Auroville 
Foundation Act, 1988 . These grants are provided by the  Ministry of Education  to support 
the establishment, maintenance, and development of Auroville, the international cultural 
township. The Foundation also generates its own income, but government grants still 
remain a significant source of funding for its operations and projects.  The Committee feels 
that instead of an anuual grant, the foundation should be gran ted sufficient amount to 
sustain itself in future.   

44 
 
151.  The Committee notes that the international character of Auroville is not just a 
matter of pride but the very intent of Auroville, as evident in the founding Charter’s 
declaration that “Auroville belongs to nobody in particular.” The Committee notes that the 
Ministry of External Affairs has set up a special procedure for visa disbursal to Au roville 
residents, which is a necessary safeguard to preserve the international character of the 
community. The Committee emphasizes that the Auroville Foundation’s role in the visa 
process must be speedy and independent of any considerations, and that the  Foundation 
should continue to keep the five -year visa as the norm for all residents. As the Honourable 
Prime Minister has noted in his visit to Auroville, “[A]nyone who is willingly in service of 
the Divine Consciousness is entitled to live in Auroville.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE AT A GLANCE 
 
1. The Committee reiterates that the NTA’s performance in the last year has not 
inspired much confidence.   It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that in the 
year 2024 alone, of the 14 competitive examinations conducted by the NTA, at least five 
faced major issues and as result, three  examinations viz. UGC -NET, CSIR -NET and  
NEET-PG had to be  postponed, one examination viz. NEET -UG  saw instances of paper 
leaks, and one examination  i.e CUET ( UG/PG) saw its results postponed. In JEE Main 
2025 held in January 2025, at least 12 questions had to be withdrawn due to errors noted  
in the final answer key of the engineering entrance exam.  The Committee observed that 
such instances doesnot inspire confidance of the examinees in the system. The Committ ee 
therefore recommends that NTA need to quickly get their act together so that such 
instances, which otherwise are fully avoidable, do not occur in future.  
(Para 8) 
2. The Committee notes that several firms involved in paper setting, administration, 
and correction have been blacklisted by one organisation/state government but that this 
however, is not impeding their securing of contracts from other states or organisations. The 
Committee is of the view that s uch blacklisted firms must not be engaged for an y entrance 
test by the NTA or the State Governments. The Committee therefore recommends that the 
Department should compile a nationwide list of blacklisted firms along with the persons or 
entities that constitute such firms so as to prevent such firms/pers ons/ entities from 
securing future contracts and bring further clarity in this regard.  
(Para 9) 
3. The Committee notes that the NTA collected an estimated ₹3,512.98 Crores while it 
has spent ₹3,064.77 Crores on the conduct of examinations thereby creating  a surplus of 
Rs. 448 Crores in the last six years. The Committee recommends that this corpus should be 
used to build the agency’s capabilities to conduct tests itself, or to strengthen regulatory 
and monitoring capabilities for its vendors.  
(Para 10) 
4. The Committee has recommended in its 364 th Report that the NTA should produce 
not just an audited statement but also an Annual Report clearly outlining its activities in 
detail and submit the same to the Parliament annually.  The Committee reiterates the s ame 
recommendation.  
(Para 11) 
5. The Committee notes that in the last few years the results of CUET exams were not 
declared in time by the NTA. Such a delay is a cause of major concern as it not only delays 
the admission process but also delays the start of the academic session by the on boarded 
Universities which ultimately puts unnecessary pressure on the students. The Committee 
emphasises that NTA should not only conduct the examinations within time but also 
declare the results in a time bound manner.   
(Para 12) 

46 
 
6. The Committee expresses concern at the rapid expansion of private -sector coaching 
centers for competitive examinations in the country. The Committee recommends the 
Department to work with the NTA to ensure that the papers are set to more closely 
reinforce the curriculum of sc hool examinations, so as to avoid the introduction of a 
parallel curriculum and the accompanying coaching center indsutry. The Commiittee 
recommends that the Department should set up a high -level committee to address the 
proliferation of coaching centers and suggest methods to regulate the same.  
(Para 13) 
7. The Committee was informed that with regards to securing the examination 
process, the tradeoffs are as follows. Pen and paper exams offer more opportunities for 
paper leaks, while computer -based tests (CBT) can be hacked in a manner that is difficult 
to detect. Between the two, the Committee supported a greater focus on pen -and-paper 
examinations given that there are several models of such examinations which have been 
leak-proof for several years – including the CBSE exams and the UPSC exams. The 
Committee recommends that the NTA closely study these models and implement the same.  
Further in the case of computer based tests (CBT), the Committee recommends that these 
exams be hosted only in government or government-controlled centers and never in private 
centers.  
(Para 14) 
8. The Committee notes that the current process of accreditation/re -accreditation is 
long and bureaucratic, with five yearly re -accreditation and yearly reports that demand 
considerable time from University administrators. The process also involves site visits by 
the accreditation team, which is cumbersome. The Committee therefore reiterates its 
earlier recommendation from 364th Report that the NAAC’s accreditation process for HEIs 
needs to be streamlined so that the whole process is quick and without unnecessary 
bureaucratic hurdles.  
(Para 28) 
9. The Committee notes that there is an investigation ongoing into a recent case of 
bribery in the NAAC. The Committee is of the view that a through internal investigation 
should be initiated in the matter and findings of the investigation may be shared with the 
committee. 
(Para 29) 
10. The Committee appreciates that the NAAC has taken some steps in the last few 
months to enhance transparency – such as the revision in the grading of about 200 
institutions and the removal of about 900 peer assessors. The Committee is of the view that 
the restoration of the NAAC’s credibility is of the utmost urgency. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the N AAC to issue full details that clearly outline the results 
of the investigations so far, the measures undertaken as a response, and the reasons why 
these measures were necessary.   
(Para 30) 
11. The Committee notes that the Department of Higher Education h as evolved the 
National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) to rank institutions as per a variety of 
metrics. In this context, the NAAC’s grading of institutions is extraneous. The Committee 
also observed that the scope for discretion in the accreditati on process is largely in the 
grading rather than the accreditation itself. A binary accreditation model, as recommended 

47 
 
by the Radhakrishnan Committee, would be simpler to implement, ease the bureaucratic 
process, and limit the scope for discretion in the NAAC’s grading. The Commmittee notes 
that the binary accreditation model was scheduled to be implemented in July 2024 but has 
been delayed. The Committee urges the early implementation of the same.  
(Para 31) 
12. The Commmittee recommends that NAAC should allow flexibility for institutes in 
tribal and rural areas which cannot be considered on the same scale as institutes in 
metropolitan cities, etc.  
(Para 32) 
13. The Committee notes that the position of the Chairperson, UGC, has been vacant 
since April 202 5. The Committee notes that the NEP 2020 states that “[L]eadership 
positions shall not remain vacant, but rather an overlapping time period during transitions 
in leadership shall be the norm to ensure the smooth running of institutions.” The 
Committee in v iew thereof recommends that a new Chairperson should be appointed for 
the UGC as soon as possible.   
(Para 39) 
14. The Committee notes that the Draft UGC (Minimum Qualifications for 
Appointment and Promotion of Teachers and Academic Staff in Universities a nd Colleges 
and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education) Regulations, 2025, 
are currently still in review stage and have not been finalized. The Committee was 
informed that at least 10 state governments have written to the UGC raising  concerns and 
giving suggestions about the draft regulations. In this context, the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation from Report 364 that the UGC should discuss the draft regulations with 
the CABE (Central Advisory Board of Education) to ensure all s takeholders are involved 
in the consultation process.  
(Para 40) 
15. The Committee at its meeing held on 5th May, 2025 has examined the recently issued 
draft UGC (Promotion of Equity in Higher Education Institutions) Regulations 2025 which 
replace regulations from 2012. The Committee notes that there has been a considerable 
delay in finalising these draft regula tions.  It was only lately that these draft regulations 
have been issued after the intervention of the Supreme Court. The Commmittee in this 
regard recommends the following  –  
i. The draft Regulations must explicitly include the harassment of students and 
other stakeholders from the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) in its definition of 
caste-based harassment, keeping with the Constitutional recognition of OBCs as 
Socially and Educational Backward Classes (SEBCs) under Articles 15(4) and 
15(5) of the Indian Constitution; 
ii. The draft regulations must explicitly include disability as an axis of discrimination; 
iii. The Equity Committee envisioned by the draft Regulations has provisions for only 
one mandatory woman member and one mandatory member each from the SC 
and ST com munities out of a strength of 10. This should be raised to correspond 
with the provision of 50% reservations for SCs, STs, and OBCs in faculty and 
student positions. Accordingly, the Equity Committee must also draw more than 
half of its composition from th e SC, ST, and OBC communities to ensure fair 
representation and effective decision-making; 

48 
 
iv. The draft Regulations, unlike the 2012 Regulations, must positively identify 
instances of discrimination. Without such detail, it will be left to the discretion of 
the institute to decide whether a complaint is genuine or false. Accordingly, the 
Regulations must explicitly include a comprehensive list of discriminatory 
practices  
v. The draft Regulations must require an annual public disclosure of caste -based 
discrimination cases, mandatory sensitization programs for faculty and 
administrative staff, and adequate mental health support and legal aid in all HEIs. 
 
(Para 41) 
16. The Committee recommends that annual admissions reports outlining gender, caste, 
social, ethnic, rural-urban, national, and class background of students be submitted by all 
centrally funded institutions to the respective University’s Academic and Executive 
Council.  
(Para 42) 
17. The Committee notes the ambitious goals of the NEP, both with regards to  
expansion of higher education to reach 50% GER by 2030, and the intensification of higher 
education with the move from a three -year-undergraduate program to a four -year-
undergraduate program. The Committee notes that considerable infrastructure 
enhancement and faculty recruitment is required to meet these targets. In this context, the 
UGC and the Department’s recent measures to restrict funding for capital projects in HEIs 
poses a challenge to achieving the goals of the NEP. The Committee is also concerned about 
the ability of the degree colleges to meet the requirements of the NEP and it feels that there 
exists mismatch between the current status of these colleges and the vision of the NEP 
which needs a comprehensive evaluation and a concrete response. 
(Para 43) 
18. The Committee notes that Universities need greater support in implementing 
Multiple Entry Multiple Exit because its implementation at a wide scale will be very 
difficult. The Committee also notes that Universities need greater support in draftin g their 
curriculum to ensure that the one -year certificates and two -year diplomas issued under 
Multiple Entry Multiple Exit provide students with marketable skills within these 
timeframes.  
(Para 44) 
19. The Committee notes that the NEP encourages distance  learning and online 
learning which is currently regulated by the UGC’s Distance Education Bureau. However 
it notes that Universities not having A+ NAAC accreditation are not allowed to offer new 
online courses or science courses. The Committee recommends that the UGC re -evaluate 
this decision in consultation with the Universities and NAAC, since NAAC ratings dont 
exclusively check for the ability of an institute to offer distance and online education.  
(Para 45) 
20. During its study visit to Ladakh, the Committee was impressed with the academic, 
research, and entrepreneurship ecosystem at the Himalayan Institute of Alternatives, 
Laddakh (HIAL), especially its success in implementing experiential education and 
learning rooted in local socio -cultural and ecological contexts. The Committee was 
concerned to learn that the UGC has not yet granted recognition to the Himalayan Institute 

49 
 
of Alternatives (HIAL) and that the matter has been pending for many years now. The 
Committee observed that HIAL has achieved tremendous impact on the local community 
and received international fame through its ice stupas and other community engagement 
activities. Further, HIAL is rather exemplary in its implementation of the NEP 2020 which 
calls for such experiential and project -based learning, community engagement, and 
integration of Indian Knowledge Systems (IKS). The Committee recommends that the 
UGC should consider granting recognition to HIAL. Moreover, the Committee encourages 
the UGC and the Department to closely study the HIAL model and consider how it can be 
replicated elsewhere through Centres of Innovation in Education or other interventions.  
(Para 46) 
21. The Committee notes that there are several institutions of education situated within 
other Ministries – the Ministry of Culture, External Affairs, Railways, Textiles, Law, etc. 
The Committee notes that the effective implementation of the NEP 2020 requires close 
coordination with these Ministries and their institutes. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the UGC designate an official for close coordination with these 
institutions to support their take-up of the NEP 2020.  
(Para 47) 
22. The Committee notes that the UGC’s Inter -University Center for Teacher 
Education in Varanasi has  a building that has not yet been handed over to the institution 
by CPWD. The Committee recommends that the Department and UGC take steps to 
ensure smooth and early transition of the building. The Committee also recommends that 
the Inter-University Center work with BHU and other local educational institutions to offer 
degrees to its students. 
(Para 48) 
23. During its study visit to Varanasi, the Committee learnt that the filling of EWS 
positions in faculty is nearly -impossible for Associate Professor and Pro fessor levels. The 
criteria for becoming a Professor is typically to be serving as Associate Professor and the 
criteria for an Associate Professor typically includes tenure as an Assistant Professor. In 
both cases, UGC payscales mean that the candidates se rving as Assistant or Associate 
Professors will be earning more than Rs 8 lakhs, and therefore cannot qualify as EWS. 
Universities spend a lot of time and resources seeking applicants for such positions despite 
knowing that candidates will be impossible to  find. In such a situation, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry re -evaluate the implementation of EWS at the level of 
Associate Professor and Professor.  
(Para 49) 
24. The Committee notes that unlike the IIT and NIT faculty, the newly recruited 
faculty at Central Universities and other UGC -funded institutions do not receive seed 
grants at the beginning of their tenure for establishment and research expenditures. The 
Committee notes that such a facility is critical to enabling top performance for new faculty 
members since they would otherwise be reliant on project and research grants for the same 
which may take long periods of time to reach. 
(Para 50) 
25. The Committee notes that faculty and non -teaching positions at Central universities 
and other UGC -funded institutions are not eligible to receive benefits under the Unified 

50 
 
Pension Scheme (UPS). The Committee would recommend for their inclusion under the 
UPS scheme.  
(Para 51) 
26. The Committee reiterates its observation from Report 364 regarding the inadequacy 
of the current budget for the ICHR. The Committee re -emphasises the need to increase the 
budget for the Council given the critical functions it conducts.  
(Para 66) 
27. The C ommittee notes that the Junior Research Fellowship issued by the ICHR is 
limited to 80 students across the country. Further, the stipend is only Rs 17,600 – a figure 
which has not been revised in many years and which is inadequate given that the UGC’s 
JRF is Rs 37,000 per month. Therefore, the Committee recommends an increase in the 
fellowship amount as well as to the number of students who receive the fellowship.  
(Para 67) 
28. The Committee notes that the ICHR is the only Research Counil without a 
permanent campus of its own. Further, the current building where the ICHR is operating 
is tied up in ownership issues. The Committee recommends a speedy resolution of the 
matter and the establishment of a permanent campus for the ICHR.  
(Para 68) 
29. The Committe e was informed of the proposal for additional regional centers of 
ICHR in Jammu and Kashmir, Varanasi, and the Northeast. The Committee notes that 
dedicated staff members and a physical office can help bring additional focus to the 
ICHR’s efforts in these regions. At the same time, the Committee has previously observed 
that the current regional centers need to be better leveraged, with dedicated building, 
library, multi-media, and conference hall facilities. The Committee recommends that the 
Council and the  Department consider the proposal for these new regional centers and in 
close consultation with local historians, students, and faculty members.  
(Para 69) 
30. The Committee was informed that the current Member Secretary of the ICHR is 
holding additional charge of Director(Research& Adminstration) in ICHR. The Committee 
is of the view that the practice of assigning additional charges needs to be avoided, 
especially for long periods of time. The Committee notes the need for the ICHR to support 
research which  takes a subcontinent -wide view of history, given our inter -connected 
history.  
(Para 70) 
31. The Committee notes that the stipend under the Junior Research Fellowship (JRF) 
issued by the ICPR is only Rs 17,500 – a figure which has not been revised in many  years 
and which is inadequate given that the UGC’s JRF is Rs 37,000 per month. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends an increase in the fellowship amount as well as the number of 
fellowship.  
(Para 78) 
32. The Committee was informed that a high -powered committee was set up in 2016 -18 
to examine the current functinoing of the ICPR and suggest ways in which it can be 

51 
 
improved. The Committee recommends that the Department should review the report of 
the Committee and evaluate the status of the report’s implementation.  
(Para 79) 
33. The Committee notes that the Lucknow campus of the ICPR holds one of the largest 
libraries of philosophy in Asia but that it is currently severely under -utilised. The 
Committee recom mends that the Council and the Department work together to enhance 
the library’s utilization, including possibly creating residential fellowships to facilitate 
scholars seeking dedicated access to the library. 
(Para 80) 
34. The Committee recommends that th e Council take up more projects which 
investigate traditions of philosophy in vernacular language, which has largely remained 
untapped.  
(Para 81) 
35. The Committee notes that there was no Council constituted between 2022 and 2024, 
and no accompanying Chairperson for the Committee. The Committee emphasises that 
such a situation should be avoided in the future. 
(Para 82) 
36. The Committee reiterates its observation made in its 364 th Report that the 
recommendations of the Seventh Pay Commission have still  not been implemented in 
ICSSR research institutes and regional centers. TheCommittee notes that the dimished pay 
scale makes recruitment of faculty members at the research institutes very challenging.  
The Committee therefore recommends the immediate impl ementation of the Seventh Pay 
Commission in the ICSSR research institutes and regional centers, and the implementation 
of the Eight Pay Commission at the appropriate time as well.  
(Para 87) 
37. The Commmittee notes that several State Governments – including but not limited 
to the Governments of Tamil Nadu, Odisha, and Bihar – are implementing the Seventh Pay 
Commission for their share of funding for ICSSR Research Institutes. At a time when State 
Governments are rising to support these institutions, the Co mmittee feels it becomes all the 
more pressing for the Union Ministry of Education to do the same.  
(Para 88) 
38. The Committee expresses its concern over the staffing of the ICSSR Research 
Institutes. At the Center for Research in Rural and Industrial Dev elopment (CRRID) 
Chandigarh, only 7 of the 14 faculy positions are currently filled. At the Giri Institute of 
Development Studies (GIDS) in Lucknow, only 9 of the 18 faculty positions have currently 
been filled and of the 11 sanctioned research staff, only  1 position has been filled. No 
recruitments have reportedly taken place in the Giri institute since 2016. At Nabakrushna 
Choudhury Centre for Development Studies (NCCDS) in Bhubaneshwar, there are only 
two serving faculty of 14 sanctioned positions. At th e Sardar Patel Institute of Economic 
and Social Research (SPIESR) in Ahmedabad, there are only 5 faculty appointed against a 
sanctioned strength of 14 positions. Similarly, there are reports of promotions in ICSSR 
research institutions not happening on time.  
(Para 89) 

52 
 
39. The Committee notes that the ICSSR’s research institutes are typical funded by 
both ICSSR and the State Governments. The coordination between these two bodies needs 
to be strengthened. For instance, the Giri Institute of Development Studi es in Lucknow is 
reportedly facing a 1.5-year time lag in the funds received from the State Government.  
(Para 90) 
40. The Committee expresses its concern over the non -appointment to leadership 
positions in ICSSR Research Institutes. For instance, NCCDS in Bhubaneshwar has not 
had a full -time Director in 5 years. CRRID in Chandigarh too has only had an Acting 
Director since 2018, in additing to having an Acting Secretary and and Acting Financial 
Advisor. SPIESR in Ahmedabad has reportedly had only an Acting Director for 15 years 
now. The Committee recommends that the ICSSR take all possible measures to encourage 
the appointment of full-time, fully empowered leaders to all research institutes.  
(Para 91) 
41. The Committee notes that in the recent past, grants for salary payments have been 
halted by the ICSSR for multiple research institutes. While funding has now resumed for 
all institutes, the Committee strongly emphasises that such non -payment of grants must be 
discouraged and if necessary, must come only after a thorough investigation and the issue 
of a notice to the institute.  
(Para 92) 
42. The Committee notes that ICSSR’ s research institutes have the potential to support 
high-quality teaching and research in universities and colleges. While some research 
institutes are offering PhDs in partnership with local universities, the ICSSR must 
encourage all institutes to do the same. Furthermore, the research institute’s faculty can 
also be encouraged to teach courses in local Central and State Universities.  
(Para 93) 
43. The Committee notes that since December 2019, the position of the Chairperson for 
ICSSR has largely been vacant – with only one Chairperson appointed briefly between 
April 2022 and August 2023. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry look 
into the appointment of a full -time, fully empowered Chairman at the earliest and avoid 
such delays in appointments to the Chairperson role in the future.  
(Para 94) 
44. The Committee notes that the ICSSR has been entrusted with a very broad mandate 
to support social sciences research across the country. At a time when the NEP has set the 
ambitious target of 50% GER in higher educational institutions by 2030, it is critical that 
ICSSR expand in consonance with the same. Accordingly, the Ministry should seek to 
expand funding for the Council.  
(Para 95) 
45. The Committee notes that the ICSSR Doctoral Fellows get only Rs 20,000 per 
month, which is rather inadequate given that the UGC Junior Research Fellowship itself 
pays Rs 37,000 per month. The Committee therefor e recommends an increase in the 
amount paid as stipend under the Doctoral Fellowships.  
(Para 96) 

53 
 
46. The Committee notes that given its focus on social sciences research, the ICSSR has 
the capacity to work more closely with the NITI Aayog and other Govern ment 
policymaking institutions. The Committee recommends that the Council look into setting 
up collaborations with such organisations to leverage the research undertaken by its 
scholars and research institutes into policy decisions.  
(Para 97) 
47. The Comm ittee notes that the decision to conduct a caste census nationally, 
alongside the caste surveys in Bihar, Telangana, and other states, creates an opportunity to 
study unique and new data relating to the country’s demographics and socio —economic 
conditions. The Committee notes that the Center for Economic and Social Studies (CESS) 
Hyderabad, an ICSSR research institute, has worked with the Government of Telangana 
on the Socio -economic, Education, Employment, Political Caste Survey 2024 (SEEEPC). 
The ICSSR mu st seek more such opportunities for collaboration with the Government to 
assist with the analysis of such census and survey-related data.  
(Para 98) 
48. The Committee notes that in 2022, the Ministry had set up a committee to look into 
the implementation o f Pay Commission for the ICSSR’s research isntitutions and regional 
centers. The Committee has been informed that as of June 2025 no report in this matter 
has been issued. The Committee expresses its concern for this inordianate delay. The 
Committee recommends that the report should submitted as soon as possible given that this 
matter has been pending for several years.  
(Para 99) 
49. The Commmittee notes that the Directors of the ICSSR Reearch Institutes used to 
be convened to meet regularly in the past. The Commmittee recommends that the practice 
be revived to enable greater collaboration and dissemination of best practices, etc among 
the institutes. 
(Para 100) 
50.  During its study visit to Shimla in May 2025, the Committee found that the position 
of the  Director, IIAS Shimla had been vacant since August 2021 – an issue that the 
Committee had raised in its 364 th Report on the Demand for Grants (2025 -2026) of the 
Department of Higher Education as well. The position has just been filled in August 2025. 
The committee underscores the need to fill up such vacancies expeditiously in future. 
 (Para 102) 
51. In the same study visit, the Committee also found that the three -year tenure of the 
IIAS Society and the IIAS Governing Body had lapsed in December 2024. The Committee 
emphasises that the IIAS Society and the Governing Body must be reconstituted as soon as 
possible.  
(Para 103) 
52.  The Committee noted that the IIAS currently has only 2 of the 5 National Fellows 
sanctioned. The Committee notes that to fulfill the vision of the institute’s founding 
inspiration Shri Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, the Institue needs to consistently attract a nd 
retain top faculty. The Institute’s inability to fill the sanctioned number of National Fellows 
- the most prestigious position at the Institute - compromises the ability of the institute to 
meet its potential.  

54 
 
(Para 104) 
53. The Committee was informed that the Institute had been granted the Tagore Center 
as part of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore’s 150th birth anniversary. However, only one of 
the four Tagore Fellows sanctioned was in office as of May 2025. Between 2020 and May 
2025, only two Tagore Fellows had been designated whereas there should have been at least 
four Tagore Fellows every year. The annual international seminars envisioned as part of 
the IIAS’s Tagore Center had not been held even once. The Committee noted that IIAS’s 
inaugural Director N iharranjay Ray himself was a biographer of Rabindranath Tagore. 
The Institute’s inability to fully realise the vision and mission of the Tagore Center is 
therefore disappointing.  
(Para 105) 
54.  The Committee expresses its appreciation for the contributio ns made by past 
Chairmen of the Foundation’s Governing Board, Dr Karan Singh and DrKireet Joshi, 
whose stewardship and steadfast commitment has led to the  preservation and nurturing of 
the character and vision of Auroville.   
(Para 136) 
55. The Committee notes with satisfaction the many achievements of Auroville since its 
inceptions and since the passage of the Auroville Act, 1988.  The Committee notes that the 
UNESCO has passed at least six resolutions since 1966 to celebrate Auroville’s ideals. The 
very f irst resolution, passed at the UNESCO’s General Conference held in Paris in 
October-November 1966, notes that “ the project will contribute to international 
understanding and promotion of peace ” and “commends it [the project] to those interested in 
UNESCO’s ideals.” The sixth resolution, adopted at the 18 th plenary meeting on 13 th 
November 2017, recognizes that “Auroville is a successful and unique model project, proving 
the capacity of an international community, after almost 50 years of existence, to continue to 
live up to its initial founding ideas of peace and international harmony .” It also notes that 
“Auroville has developed into a centre of expertise in a wide range of fields, benefiting India”  
and notes “ its success in sharing its experience and helping the development of its 
neighbouring rural population.” 
(Para 137) 
56. The Committee notes that the Auroville Act (1988) is unique in that it governs a 
community, not just an institution. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the sixth 
UNESCO r esolution explicitly appreciates the Government of India for passing the 
Auroville Foundation Act (1988) for the “ purpose of protecting and encouraging the 
development of Auroville.” 
(Para 138) 
57. The Committee notes that the Act sets up three bodies for the governance and 
smooth functioning of Auroville – the Governing Board, the Residents’ Assembly, and the 
International Advisory Council. While the Committee acknowledges the recent Court 
verdict that the Governing Board is supreme, the Committee emphases  that the three 
institutions must work together in close coordination and harmony. The Governing Board 
should continue the practice of consultation and collaboration with the international 
Advisory Council and the Residents’ Assembly before making any key decisions. The 
Committee observes that the objectives of the Auroville Foundation and the ideals of 
human unity enshrined in the Charter of Auroville can only be pursued with such an 
environment of constructive engagement.  

55 
 
(Para 139) 
58. The Committee emphasises the distinctive nature of Auroville as a community and 
the critical importance of the Governing Board as the administrative body that oversees 
the community. The Committee notes that the mandate of the incumbent Governing Board 
has expired as of  5th October, 2025.The Committee emphasises the importance of 
reconstituting the Governing Board with immediacy upon the expiration of the Governing 
Board. It further notes that the Auroville Act specifically stipulates that members of the 
Board must have distinguished themselves by rendering “valuable service to Auroville” 
and “contributed significantly in activities that are being pursued or are envisaged to be 
promoted in Auroville, including activities relating to environment, afforestation, arts and 
crafts, industry, agriculture, humanities, sciences and integral yoga.” 
 
(Para 140) 
59. The Committee notes that Auroville is meant to have an autonomous character and 
that an empowered Residents’ Assembly is critical to the same since it is the only statuto ry 
body capable of representing the residents of Auroville. The Residents’ Assembly therefore 
must hold elections to the Working Committee regularly. To settle disputes and act as a 
check on the Residents’ Assembly and ensure its continued representativene ss, the 
Foundation may consider setting up a standing panel composed of former members of the 
Working Committee. This panel can decide on complaints against the Working Committee 
and make recommendations to the Governing Body about the action that is necessary. 
(Para 141) 
60.  The Committee notes that the Ministry has not designated an official as full -time 
Secretary of the Auroville Foundation, and that for over a year, the position is being held 
as an additional charge. The Committee’s general stance has been that the practice of 
assigning additional charges needs to be avoided, especially for long periods of time. 
(Para 142) 
61. The Committee welcomes the Auroville Foundation’s MoU with IIT Madras which 
paves the way for setting up a sustainability campus . However, the Committee notes that 
the land for the campus is supposed to come at the expense of the Annapurna Farms 
currently existing at the location. Food sustainability is an integral part of the vision of 
Auroville and the loss of farmland will certa inly impact the long -term ability of Auroville 
to sustain itself. Further, Annapurna Farms is currently engaging in organic farming, 
which was central to The Mother’s vision for thecommunity. The Committee recommends 
that Annapurna farms should not be dist urbed and that alternative sites nearby should be 
found to situate the sustainability campus. 
(Para 143) 
62. In the same vein, the Committee is of the view that all land transfers in service of the 
Master Plan should be implemented in full transparency and consultation with all 
stakeholders, including the Resident’s Assembly and the International Advisory Council.  
(Para 144) 
63. The Committee notes that the Auroville Master Plan 2025 was approved in 2001 by 
the Ministry of Human Resources Development and notified in the Gazette in 2010. In view 
of the time that has passed in the interim, the Committee recommends that the Master Plan 
be implemented in close consultation with the Resident’s Assembly and other stakeholders 

56 
 
in Auroville, with changes as may be required. The Committee also notes that as per 
current regulations, all urban development master plans in the state of Tamil Na du are to 
be submitted to the State Urban Planning Department. The Committee recommends that 
the Foundation do so as well in compliance with these regulations.  
(Para 145) 
64. The Committee recommends that any amendments to the Auroville Act or the 
Auroville Foundation Rules 1997 should be developed through a consensual process, with 
the unanimous support of all three statutory bodies – the Governing Board, the 
International Advisory Council, and the Resident’s Assembly.  
(Para 146) 
65. The Committee notes that the Auroville community has achieved many successes in 
its goals of achieving self -sufficiency. The Matrimandir at the center of Auroville is a 
testament to the ability of the community to self -finance and self -direct very ambitious 
projects.  The Com mittee recommends that the Foundation continue this spirit of self -
sustenance and minimize the involvement of the Central Public Works Department and 
other bodies in the conduct of its works.  
(Para 147) 
66. The Committee recommends that the Government may  consider amending the 
Auroville Foundation Act, 1988  to provide for recognition of Auroville as an Institution of 
National Importance, keeping in view that UNESCO has already adopted multiple 
resolutions since 1966 endorsing the project and acknowledging its contribution towards 
international understanding and the promotion of peace. 
(Para 148) 
67. The Committee recommends that the term of office of the Secretary to the Auroville 
Foundation should be made co -terminous with that of the Governing Board (i.e.  four 
years). This will ensure better institutional continuity and coordination between the 
Governing Board and the administrative machinery of the Foundation. 
(Para 149) 
68. The Committee notes that Auroville Foundation receives partial funding from the 
Central Government in the form of annual grants, as stipulated by the  Auroville 
Foundation Act, 1988 . These grants are provided by the  Ministry of Education  to support 
the establishment, maintenance, and development of Auroville, the international cultural 
township. The Foundation also generates its own income, but government grants still 
remain a significant source of funding for its operations and projects.  The Committee feels 
that instead of an anuual grant, the foundation should be granted sufficient amount to 
sustain itself in future.   
(Para 150) 
69.  The Committee notes that the international character of Auroville is not jus t a 
matter of pride but the very intent of Auroville, as evident in the founding Charter’s 
declaration that “Auroville belongs to nobody in particular.” The Committee notes that the 
Ministry of External Affairs has set up a special procedure for visa disbu rsal to Auroville 
residents, which is a necessary safeguard to preserve the international character of the 
community. The Committee emphasizes that the Auroville Foundation’s role in the visa 
process must be speedy and independent of any considerations, an d that the Foundation 
should continue to keep the five -year visa as the norm for all residents. As the Honourable 

57 
 
Prime Minister has noted in his visit to Auroville, “[A]nyone who is willingly in service of 
the Divine Consciousness is entitled to live in Auroville.  
(Para 151) 
****** 
  

58 
 
Confidential  
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & 
SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth & Sports met at 11:00 A.M. on 
Monday, the 13 th October, 2025 in Committee Room No. 3, A -Block, First Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Shri Digvijaya Singh  - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Dr. Sikander Kumar 
3.  Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari  
 
LOK SABHA 
4.   Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
5.   Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
6.   Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
7.   Dr. Hemang Joshi 
8.   Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
9.   Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
10. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar,      Joint Secretary  
Shri J.K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Devashish Sen, Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first meeting of the newly re -
constituted Committee. Thereafter, t he Chairman informed  the Committee that ***. He, then, 
informed that the next agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the following draft 
Reports:- 
(i) 371st Report on "Review of Autonomous Bodies and Institutions -NTA, NAAC, Draft 
UGC Regulations, ICHR, ICPR, ICSSR, IIAS (Shimla) and Auroville Foundation under 
the Department of Higher Education"; and  
(ii) ******** 

59 
 
3. The Committee, accordingly, considered the afor esaid two draft Reports one by one and 
adopted the 371 st Report and *** unanimously with few minor modifications. The Committee 
also authorized the Chairman, to correct any patent errors or make consequential changes, if any, 
in the Report. 
4. ******** 
5. ******** 
6.  The meeting then adjourned at 12.30 P.M. 
 
New Delhi J.K. Mallick 
13th October, 2025 Director 
 
*** Pertains to other matters 