 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
                                                 March, 2020 /Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
316 
THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
ISSUES RELATED TO SAFETY OF WOMEN 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2020) 
 

2 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
ISSUES RELATED TO SAFETY OF WOMEN 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2020/Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …........................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2.       INTRODUCTION..................................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  REPORT…......................................................................................……......................... …….7-37  
4 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE …38-45 
5. ANNEXURE …...........................................................................................….................  46-52 
6. MINUTES …………………………………………………………………………………….53-65
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2019) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda  
3. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Shri Derek O' Brien 
6. Dr.  Sasmit Patra 
7. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa Ramaswamy 
8. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
9. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
10. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh   
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
13. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
14. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
15. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
16. Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Ms Chandrani Murmu 
21. Shri Balak Nath 
22. Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar 
23. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24. Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
28. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30.        Shri S. Venkatesan 
31.        Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
(i) 
  

5 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr.    Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri   Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri   Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Smt.  Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri   K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director 
Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer  
Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
do hereby present this Three Hundred and Sixteenth on the subject issues related to safety of women. 
2. The Committee heard the officials of Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Department of Justice, 
Department of Legal Affairs,  Ministry of Law and Justice,  Department of School Education and 
Literacy, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development and Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. The Committee also interacted with some NGOs namely Centre for Social 
Research, Multiple Action Research Group, All India Women Conference and Jagori.  
3.  The Committee examined the subject in four meetings  held on 19th December, 2019 , 30 th 
December, 2019 and 7th January, 2020. 
4. For the facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
5.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the 
18th March, 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
NEW DELHI 
18th March, 2020 
Phalguna 28 , 1941(Saka) 
  
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on  Human Resource 
Development                                                                    

7 
 
 
                  
REPORT 
 
Jolted by the gruesome rape and murder of young girl in Hyderabad in November, 2019 
which shook the conscience of the nation, the Committee pained by the in cidence, decided to 
thread bare examine the subject “Issues related  to Safety of Women” to understand the causes of 
occurrences of such instances and to suggest remedial steps to develop a zero tolerance policy 
against such heinous crimes.  According to the National Crime Records Bureau data of the year 
2018 the total numb er of al l forms of crimes against women have been raising continuously from 
one decade. In 2012 number of such crimes was 244270 which rose to 359849 in 2017 and 378277 
in 2018. The following table indicating the rising trend of crimes against women with 5 .12% 
annual increase in number of such  cases in 2018 is self revealing and a cause of grave concern for 
the society: 
 
 2. The issue of crimes against women transcends geography, class, culture, age, race and 
religion. In India, the violence committed upo n women has many manifestations such as domestic 
and sexual violence including rape, sexual harassment, child sexual abuse, trafficking for 
commercial sexual exploitation, harmful practices such as dowry harassment, honour related 
crimes, acid attacks, witch-hunting, child marriage, sex selective abortion etc.   
3.         The right to life as enshrined in Article 21 of the Indian Constitution is a basic human right 
which includes the right to a dignified life free of violence. Further, the Constitution also grants 
equality to women and empowers the State to adopt m easures of positive discrimination in favour 
244270
309546
337922 329243 338954
359849
378277
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
400000
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
No. of
crimes
against
women
(year 2012
to 2018)

8 
 
of women, so as to neutralize the cumulative socio -economic, educational and political 
disadvantages faced by them. However, women continue to be victims of disparate treatment, 
violence and crime.  Violence or the threat of violence not only violates this right but restricts 
women’s freedom and germinates imbalance of power between women and men. 
4. The Committee observed that safety of women in the country is of utmost priority.  The 
Committee was of the opinion that it should be the Government’s endeavor to put in place effective 
mechanisms to provide a safe environment for women both in public and private spheres of life. 
 The Committee also noted that the incidences of crime against women cannot be controlled  unless 
the mindset of people is changed.  
5. The Committee heard the officials of Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry 
of Home Affairs, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Department of 
Justice, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Human Resource Development and Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. The Committee also interacted with some NGOs namely Centre for 
Social Research, Multiple Action Research Group, All India Women Conference and Jagori.  
The stakeholders heard by the Committee submitted the following views 
6. Ministry of Women and Child Development highlighted some of the legal provisions:- 
 (i)        The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2013 and 2018:  The Criminal Law 
Amendment Act, 2013, has broadened th e definition of rape to include non -penetrative sex 
and made the criminal provisions relating to rape and sexual violence more stringent. New 
offences such as acid attack, stalking, sexual harassment, voyeurism and disrobing have 
also been included. Duty has been cast on all hospitals to provide free medical treatment to 
victims of acid attack and rape. Similarly, it is mandatory for all police officers to lodge 
FIR of all offence punishable under section 326A -B, 354-B, 370-A, 376, 376A-E, 509 IPC; 
failure to do the same will attract penal provisions against the officer concerned. Recently, 
the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 was enacted which has increased the quantum 
of punishment for rape from 7 to 10 years. The amendments also prescribe prison sentence 
of 20 years to life or death sentence, for the rape of a girl under 12 years. While 
perpetrators involved in the gangrape of a girl below 12 years of age will get life 
imprisonment or death.  
(ii)        The Sexual Harassment of Women at the Workp lace (Prevention, Protection 
and Redressal) Act, 2013 (the SH Act):  The Hon’ble Supreme Court declared that “each 
incident of sexual harassment of women at workplace results in violation of fundamental 
rights of ‘Gender Equality’ and the ‘Right to Life and  Liberty.”  Hence, to provide a safe 
and secure environment to women at the workplace, the SH Act, 2013 was enacted. The Act 
came into force on 9th December 2013. It covers all women, irrespective of their age or 
employment status and protect them against sexual harassment at all workplaces both in 
public and private sector, whether organized or unorganized. The domestic workers are 
also included under the ambit of the Act. The law provides for a mechanism in the form of 
Internal and Local Committee to prov ide redressal in cases of sexual harassment. It also 

9 
 
casts a duty on employers to sensitize employees by carrying out various awareness 
generation programmes and workshops.  
(iii)       Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (POCSO): The 
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, has been amended recently in order 
to make it more effective in dealing with cases of Child Sex Abuse in the Country. It 
addresses the need for stringent measures to deter the rising trend of child sex abu se in the 
country on one hand and the menace of relatively new kind of crimes on the other hand. The 
strong penal provisions, including the option of ‘Death penalty’ are expected to deter the 
possible perpetrators from committing the Crime. It indicates to wards the strong resolve of 
Government to protect children and zero tolerance to violence against children. The 
amended Act addresses the menace of Child Pornography by introducing a definition of 
Child Pornography and introducing suitable punishment. The provisions are expected to 
curb the trend of storage, transmission or commercial use of Child pornography material. 
Besides, amended Act provide direct protection to children affected by natural calamities or 
similar situations, by making provision to trea t the sexual crimes against children during 
such testing times, as aggravated crimes, inviting stricter punishment. It also covers the 
crime of inducing early sexual maturity in children by providing chemical substances/ 
hormones, for their abuse.  
(iv)       The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act (PCMA), 2006: The Ministry has enacted 
the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006 with the objective to prohibit child marriages 
rather than only restraining them. The Act prohibits the solemnization of child marri ages 
where a person who, if a female has not completed 18 years of age and if a male has not 
completed 21 years of age. According to the Act, child marriage is a cognizable and non -
bailable offence.  
(v)         The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (PWDVA): The 
PWDVA recognizes the right of all women to live free from violence occurring within the 
private sphere of home. The objective of the law is to prevent violence and provide 
emergency relief in case of such situations irrespective of the status of their relationship 
with the respondent. The law is civil in nature and defines domestic violence to include all 
acts of omission and commission that cause injury to a woman’s physical, sexual or m ental 
health and includes specific forms of violence such as physical, sexual, verbal, emotional 
and economic abuse. It seeks to provide relief to women in the form of protection orders, 
residence orders, monetary relief, custody order and compensation ord ers. It also protects 
women living in live -in relationships, provided that such relationships are in the nature of 
marriage. 
(vi)       The Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act): Nowadays, with the advent of 
technology, digital space is being increasingly used to perpetuate violence upon women and 
girls. This utilisation of cyber platforms to commit violence upon women and girls is 
emerging as a global threat with serious implications for societies and economies around 
the world. Cyber platforms are mis used by the perpetrators to harass, blackmail, cheat, 
stalk and voyeur girls and women. Recognising the issue, amendment  has been made in the 
IT Act regarding  identity theft (S. 66C), cheating by personation (S. 66D), violation of 
privacy (S. 66E), publica tion or transmission of obscene material/material containing 
sexually explicit act /material depicting children in sexually explicit act in electronic form 
(S. 67, 67A-B).   
(vii)      The Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987: Enacted on 3 rd January, 1988, 
the Commission of Sati (Prevention) Act, 1987 provides for the prevention of the 

10 
 
commission of Sati and its glorification. Under this Act, attempt to commit Sati, abetment of 
commission of Sati and glorification of Sati is a punishable offence.   
(viii)     The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986:  This was 
enacted with the specific objective of prohibiting the indecent representation of women 
through advertisement, publication, writing, and painting or in any other manner. It 
prohibits such representation in any form in any advertisement, publication etc and also 
prohibits selling, distribution, circulation of any books, pamphlets, and such other material 
containing indecent representation of women.   
(ix)       The Immoral Traffic  (Prevention) Act, 1956 (ITPA): The Immoral Traffic 
(Prevention) Act, 1956 is the Central legislation dealing with the issue of prostitution in 
India. The Act defines prostitution as commercial sexual exploitation and penalizes those 
who facilitate and abet commercial sexual exploitation, including clients and those who live 
off the earnings of prostitutes. It also provides for welfare measures towards rehabilitation 
of victims in the form of protective homes to be set up and managed by state governments.  
(x)        The Dowry Prohibition Act (DPA), 1961: Recognizing the need to address the 
social evil of dowry, the Dowry Prohibition Act was enacted in 1961. The Act defines dowry 
and penalises the giving, taking, abetting the giving and taking or advertising  for dowry 
with imprisonment and fine. It also lays down a built -in implementation mechanism in the 
form of Dowry Prohibition Officers to ensure effective and efficacious enforcement of the 
law. 
7. The Committee notes that a number of legislations have bee n framed for the welfare, 
security and benefits of women and also to eliminate gender -based bias, discrimination and 
violence against women. In spite of the legislative framework being in place, women continue 
to face severe forms of inequality, discrimina tion bias and violence which is a cause of grave 
concern for the Committee. As security and safety of women is of utmost priority, instances 
of violence against women indicate that the legislations are not being implemented in true 
letter and spirit. The C ommittee, accordingly, recommends for strict implementation of the 
legislations relating to safety and security of women. 
8. The Committee further notes that even after seven years Nirbhaya is waiting for justice 
inspite of such exhaustive legislative framework. This clearly indicates lacunae in the 
implementation of the legislations and shortcomings in the implementation framew ork. The 
Committee accordingly recommends strengthening of legislative measures by fixing a time 
frame for deciding cases of gender based violence against women. This needs   strict 
implementation of existing laws so  that time boun d justice is delivered to  women. Necessary 
amendments should be made for filing of charge sheet in all such cases within 30 days, 
denying bail to the accused and expediting the disposal of pending cases within 6 months   
time   to provide a reasonable   time for justice and surety of punishment.  
9. The Committee is of the strong view that crime against women take place because society 
sees them in an inferior position in the societal set -up. This is mainly because women are not 

11 
 
represented in the decision making process. It has be en established by number of researches that if 
the women is placed at decision making places, then the incidences of violence decrease at such 
places.  In India,the representation of women in public life is very low. National statistics show that 
women representation is only 9% as Judges in Supreme Court, 10%  in Rajya Sabha and only 14% 
in Lok Sabha.  In spite of various efforts made for empowerment of women, their representation in 
All India Services is still only at a meager 11.5% and on the top of it th e total participation in the 
labour force has declined from 34% in 2006 to 24.8% in 2020, which is a cause of grave concern. 
The Committee is of the opinion that women should be given a decisive role and positions of 
power in all spheres of society to change the mindset of the people and help provide role models to 
the next generation. The Committee accordingly recommends that there is an urgent need to 
address this situation by making thirty-three percent reservation for women at all levels right 
from Panchayats to Parliament at the earliest.    
10. Department of Justice  in their submission stated that they have been making consistent 
efforts in order to aid the provision of speedy and inexpensive justice by ensuring appointment of 
requisite number of judges in the higher judiciary, assisting development of judicial infrastructure 
(Centrally Sponsored Scheme), facilitating ICT -enablement and connectivity of courts, facilitating 
setting up of courts including fast track courts, and giving effect to judic ial reforms in association 
with the judiciary. The Department of Justice also implements other programmes on legal aid and 
empowerment of the vulnerable sections including women, children, senior citizen etc. In 
furtherance to the provisions of expeditious  trial of cases related to rape and POCSO Act, as 
provided in the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018, under the proposed National Mission for 
Safety of Women, the Department of Justice has undertaken a new Scheme for setting up of 1023 
Fast Track Special Courts across the country for time bound disposal of cases. 
 
11. The Committee was informed that 1023 FTSCs will fast track 1,66,882 cases of Rape and 
POCSO Act, that are pending trial in various courts. The above number is derived from the data 
provided by all High Courts as on 31.3.2018. A State/UT -wise break up of latest data of such 
pending cases of both Rape and POCSO Act is given in Annexure 1. A total of 1023 FTSCs are 
proposed to be set up under the Scheme out of which 389 FTSCs will exclusively handle POCSO 
Act cases ( Annexure 2 for State & UT wise distribution of FTSCs) . The remaining 634 FTSCs 
will deal with either rape cases or both rape and POCSO Act cases depending on the pendency and 
requirement. 

12 
 
12. Department of Justice informed that the proposal for setting up of 1800 Fast Track Courts 
(FTCs) during  2015 -20 for dealing with cases involving heinous crimes and cases perta ining to 
women and other vulnerable sections has been endorsed by the 14 th Finance Commission.  At 
present there are 704 numbers of such Fast Track Courts functioning in the country. The 
Commission has urged State Governments to utilize enhanced tax devolu tion (32% to 42%) for 
setting up of fast track courts. Thereafter, the Committee was briefed about the other schemes 
being operated by the Department for safety of women: 
(i) Tele-law and Nyaya Bandhu to provide free legal aid to cover the unreached sections o f 
the society in the remotest of areas; 
(ii) Legal literacy outreach through awareness and training programmes has been 
undertaken in the North –Eastern states and Jammu and Kashmir region of India to 
especially train women legal representatives with active sup port from State Women 
Commissions; 
(iii) key function of legal services authorities constituted under the Legal Services 
Authorities, Act, 1987 is to spread legal awareness and legal literacy amongst the 
people and make the vulnerable (including women) aware abo ut their rights, benefits, 
privileges granted by various welfare legislations and other enactments; and 
(iv) India has also signed in 2015 the UN Sustainable Development Document 2030 that 
provides for Access to Justice as SDG 16 wherein ending violence against women in all 
its forms, strengthening rule of law and making institutions inclusive and responsive are 
the key targets that have to be achieved by signatory States. 
 
13. The Committee took note of the States/ UT Governments which have not given their 
concurrence yet for setting up Fast Track Special Courts as follows: 
S No. States & UTs High Court Total FTSCs to be set 
up under the Scheme 
Exclusive POCSO 
Courts to be set up 
FTSCs for Rape& 
POCSO Act cases 
(4-5)  
1.  Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh 18 8 10 
2.  Bihar Patna 54 30 24 
3.  West Bengal Calcutta 123 20 103 
4.  Goa Bombay 2 0 2 
5.  J&K Jammu and 
Kashmir 
4 0 4 
6.  Uttar Pradesh Allahabad 218 74 144 
7.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Gauhati 3 0 3 
8.  Mizoram Gauhati 3 1 2 
9.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
6 3 3 

13 
 
10.  Meghalaya Meghalaya 5 5 0 
11.  A&N Islands Calcutta 1 1 0 
 Total  437 64 373 
 
14.  Ministry of Home Affairs  in its submission stated that they accord utmost importance to 
safety of women and girls in the country. For effective deterrence the government has enacted the 
Criminal Law Amendment Act 2018 which, inter -alia, prescribes stringent punishment for rape 
and swift administration of justice. The amendment also mandates completion of  investigation and 
trials within 2 months each. In order to facilitate States/Unio n Territories, MHA has 
operationalized an online analytic tool for police called  "Investigation Tracking System for Sexual 
offences (ITSSO)" to monitor and track time -bound investigation in sexual assault cases. 
Advisories have been regularly issued to Sta tes/Union Territories to use ITSSO to ensure 
compliance with the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2018. MHA has also launched the "National 
Database on Sexual offenders" (NDSO) on 20th September 2018 to facilitate  investigation and 
tracking of sexual offenders  across the country by law enforcement  agencies. In order to ensure 
that the amendments in law effectively translate into  action at ground level, MHA is undertaking a 
multi-pronged action plan and has  initiated a series of measures. Some of these initiativ es, funded 
through Nirbhaya Fund, are being implemented by States/UTs as below: 
 
i. Emergency Response Support System (ERSS):  Emergency Response Support 
System (ERSS ) is a pan -India, single, inte rnationally recognized number,  i.e. 112 
based system for various  emergencies, with computer aided dispatch of 
field resources to the location of distress. It has been operationalized in 28 States/ 
UTs (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, M adhya Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, 
Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Daman 
and Diu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Delhi, Lakshadweep and Puducherry, Ladakh and 
the city of Mumbai). Approved cost of the project is Rs. 385.60 crore. The Ministry 
of Home Affairs has  undertaken awareness campaigns to popularize use of ERSS 
and the 112 India  mobile app in print, electronic and digital media and advised all 
States/UTs to popularize its benefits. Creative material for awareness campaign has 
been shared  with the States/UTs with a request to popularise the use of 112 
emergency services and enroll as volunteers for assistance using the 112 India 
Mobile App.  
 
ii.   Safe City Projects in 8 Cities: Safe City Projects are comprehensive and  integrated 
projects developed by the Police and Municipal Corporations of the city, in  keeping 
with the demands of their women citizens and to plug any gaps in 
existing infrastructure. The total approved cos t under the Nirbhaya Fund is Rs. 

14 
 
2,919.55 Crore. The technology to aid smart policing and safety management for the 
future would be enabled under the Safe City Projects, currently being undertaken in 
8 cities (Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderaba d, Kolkata, Lucknow 
and Mumbai) in Phase I. The projects are targeted to complete in 3 years, by FY 
2021- 22. Adding many dimensions to safety of women and children, like the use of 
drones, installation of CCTV cameras with Facial Recognition or Automatic 
Number Plate  Recognition to track and alert Police about criminals and criminal 
activity, technology-enabled infrastructure like smart lighting systems which glow 
as soon as  it gets dark to eliminate dark alleys and crime hot -spots from cities, and 
toilets for women which can be located on Google Maps is being planned.  
 
iii.  Central Victim Compensation Fund (CVCF):  Central Victim 
Compensation Fund (CVCF) has been set up under Nirbhaya Funds at a total cost of 
the project is  Rs. 200.00 Cr. CVCF has been release d as a one -time grant to 
States/UTs to  support and supplement the Victim Compensation schemes in 
respective States/UTs and expenditure from this fund is allowed to States/UTs after 
consuming non- budgetary resources with them.  
 
iv. Cyber Crime Prevention agai nst Women & Children (CCPWC):  The Ministry 
of Home Affairs is implementing a scheme, namely Cyber Crime Prevention  against 
Women and Children (CCPWC) with a total outlay of Rs. 223.19 crore.  Ministry 
has provided grant to all States/UTs to set up cyber for ensic cum 
training laboratories, hiring of Junior Cyber Consultant and training/capacity 
building to  provide hands -on training to Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) 
Investigators, prosecutors and judicial officers. A National Cyber Crime Reporting 
Portal (www.cybercrime.Gov.in) was launched on 20th September, 2018, which 
allowed citizens to report online content pertaining to Child Pornography child 
Sexual Abuse  Material or sexually explicit content such as Rape/Ga ng Rape 
Content. In consultation with the stakeholders, a revamped portal has been launched 
on 30.08.2019 to enable citizens to report all types of cyber crimes with special 
focus on cyber crimes against women and children. To spread awareness on cyber 
crime, several steps have been taken that include dissemination of messages on 
cyber crime awareness  through SMS, MHA twitter handle@CyberDost.Radio 
campaign & publishing of Handbook for Adolescents/Students etc. 
  
v.  New building with women centric facilities  for Special Police Unit for  Women & 
Children (SPUWAC) and Special Police unit for North East Region  SPUNER) at 
Nanakpura, Delhi: Delhi Police is undertaking a project for modernisation of Special 
Police Unit for Women & Children (SPUWAC) and Special  Police unit for North 
East Region (SPUNER) and Police Station Crime Against  Women Cell (CAW Cell) 
including facilities for counseling, mediation and gender  sensitization and Special 
Police Unit for North Eastern Region (SPUNER) including  facilities for counselling 
of North Eastern women etc. The total cost of the project is Rs. 23.53 Crore.  
 
vi.  Hiring of Professional Counsellors/social workers at the District, Sub - Division and 
Police Station level in Delhi Police: Delhi Police has taken up a project for provision 
of Social Workers/counselors at the District and Sub-Divisional, Police Station level 
in Delhi at a cost of Rs. 5.07 Crore. The Professional  Counsellors/Social workers 
give counselling support to the aggrieved women and  their families. It also seeks to 

15 
 
establish an effective multi-agency co-ordinated response by the State to all forms of 
violence against women and children including sexual assault through trained social 
workers providing quality psycho -socio-legal services for violated women and 
children. A total of 60 Social Workers/Counsellors  have been appointed at Sub -
Division Level in Districts to extend the counseling services to victims.  
 
vii.  Various other Activities under Delhi Police -Safety of Women  Scheme: An amount 
of Rs. 10.20 Cr, has been appraised to Delhi Police for undertaking various activities 
which inter alia include holding Camps for Self  Defence Training in 
School/Colleges, Publicity in mass media, procurement of  essential 
items/equipments to enhance the capability of women police fo rce for  imparting 
training, procurement of cyber equipments and making short  films/pamphlets on 
women safety for distribution.  
 
viii   Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CFSL):  MHA has approved setting - up of 
a state -of-the-art DNA Analysis facility at Central Forensic Science Laboratory 
(CFSL), Chandigarh at cost of Rs. 99.76 crore under Nirbhaya Fund. DNA Lab 
have capacity and capability for examining 2000 DNA crime cases per annum for 
speedy disposal of cases relating to sexual assault and POCSO Act r elated cases. 
The Laboratory will contribute to address the gap of forensic DNA analysis of 
pending sexual assault cases in the country. The Laboratory has been inaugurated 
and commissioned on 23rd December 2019.    45 Forensic professionals have also 
been deployed in the Lab.  
 
ix.   Training of Investigation officers/Prosecution officers/Medical officers in forensic 
evidence and Procurement af Forensic Kits for sexual assault cases: An amount of 
Rs. 13.71 crore was appraised under Nirbhaya Fund for trainin g and skill building 
programs for Investigation officers, Prosecution officers and  Medical officers and 
procurement of Forensic kits for sexual assault cases. 6921  officers have been 
trained by BPR&D and NIC&FS in collection, handling and  transportation of  
forensic evidence in sexual assault cases. 3120 Sexual Assault DNA Evidence 
Collection Kits (SAECK) were distributed to States/UTs in 2018 -19 by  BPR&D. 
Additionally, Rs. 3.14 crore has been sanctioned to DFSS for procurement  of more 
than 11000 (SAECK) kit s for distribution to States/UTs in FY 2019 -20. The  Kits 
will facilitate expeditious and efficient collection of DNA samples in the crimes 
of sexual nature, identification of dead bodies etc,  
 
x.  Strengthening of State FSLs (in 13 States): An amount of R s. 131.09  Cr was 
appraised under Nirbhaya Fund for strengthening DNA analysis cyber  forensics and 
related facilities in 13 States (Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &  Kashmir, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Punjab, Rajasthan,  Tamil Nadu, Tripura, 
Uttar Pradesh & West Bengal) in phase-I of the project. The aim and objective of the 
project is to strengthen the DNA analysis and Cyber  Forensic Facilities in these 
states relating to cases of sexual assaults.  
 
xi.  Setting up and strengthening Anti-Human Trafficking Units (AHTUs) in all districts 
of States &UTs: The Empowered Committee for Nirbhaya Fund in Ministry 
of Women and Child Development has recently approved a project by MHA for 
setting-up Anti Human Traffic king Units (AHTU) in all districts of the country at 

16 
 
cost of Rs. 100 crore under Nirbhaya Fund. The AHTUs will povide counselling and 
support to the victims of trafficking.  
 
xii.   Setting up/strengthening Women Help Desks (WHDs) in Police Stations in all States 
& UTs: Ministry of Home Affairs  has approved a project for setting up  and 
strengthening of Women Help Desks in Police Stations, including Police Stations  in 
rural areas, at a total cost of Rs. 100 crores. This project would be implemented 
by the re spective States and Union Territories. Women Help Desks would focus 
on making the Police Stati ons more women friendly and ap proachable, as they 
would be the first and single point of contact for any woman walking into a police 
station. Essentially, lady po lice officers would be deployed at these help desks. The 
officials of Women Help Desk would be trained to be sensitive towards women. 
These help desks would have enlisted panel of experts like lawyers, psychologists 
and NGOs to facilitate legal aid, counselling, shelter, rehabilitation and training etc.  
 
15. The Committee is of the opinion that the these two Ministries i.e. Ministry of Law and 
Justice and Ministry of Home Affairs need to work in well coordinated manner because both 
are critical in providin g institutional structure and justice delivery system. The quest for 
justice for Nirbhaya which is a blot on our collective conscience and the public hailing of 
police action in Hyderabad case echoes the sentiment of the society that the guilty be 
punished immediately.  This is  a call for introspection for both the Ministry of Law and 
Justice and Ministry of Home Affairs along with the associated law enforcement agencies as 
the system is not functioning to provide timely justice.  Therefore, there is a need to bring 
about integrated changes at all levels in the entire system.  
 
16. The Committee notes that simple and accessible justice delivery system is a great 
deterrent to crimes against women because it provides courage to the victims to come out and 
file complaints against the perpetrators of the crimes. The Committee is however anguished 
to note that a number of States like Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh 
have still not given their concurrence for setting up Fast Track Sp ecial Courts. The 
Committee urges the Department of Justice to pursue the matter with the concerned States to 
ensure that 1800 Fast Track courts become operational at the earliest. The Department 
should also look into the possibility of according legislati ve backing to setting up of Fast 
Track Courts on a permanent basis. The Committee further recommends that Fast Track 
Special Courts should decide the matter within six  months of such incident.   
17. The Committee took a note that there are 1023 Fast Track  Special Courts (FTSC) in 
30 States. The Committee further noticed that there is a skewed distribution of Fast Track 
Special Courts across States likes for example 18 in Andhra Pradesh, 218 in Uttar Pradesh, 
14 in Tamil Nadu and 31 in Karnataka. The Commit tee recommends that the Ministry of 

17 
 
Law & Justice should have a balanced distribution of Fast Track Special Courts in States to 
expedite the disposal of cases and ideally there should  be one FTSC  within  500 km  of 
radius.  
18. The Committee also urges t he Department of Justice to look into the feasibility of 
changes in law to ensure no bail is granted to accused involved in heinous crimes against 
women.  There should be filing of chargesheet within 30 days of such a crime and time-bound 
investigation and conclusion of trial within a  year’s  time to provide timely justice. 
19. To address the crime against women in more effective manner, t he Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should set up women cells in all the police 
stations of the c ountry with female police officers/staff, who are trained to handle cases 
related to gender based violence . This would increase the presence of women in the police 
force and the victims of sexual violence would have the confidence to enter the police stati ons 
to lodge their complaints . The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should discuss the possibility of conducting special recruitment drives with the States 
to induct women in the police force to increase their presence at the ground level, which 
would help provide a sense of empowerment to the women especially in the rural areas.  
20. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should 
provide a single help-line number for registering all complaints and for seeking help in cases 
of safety of women related issues. This number should be prominently displayed at all 
railway stations, public transport and other public places.  
21. The Committee took note of the submissions made by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
regarding setting up of forensic laboratories in the country. The Committee in this reference 
is of the view th at a strong network of forensic laboratories is of utmost necessi ty as the 
forensic evidence is of  crucial importance in convicting the offenders . Currently the 
conviction rate is only 32% as against filing of chargesheets in 86.6%  rape  cases. The 
Committee therefore recommends t hat Ministry of Home Affairs should setup one forensic 
laboratory in every state in the country in every state capital within 2 years time . This would 
help the prosecution in building a strong case against the offenders  as with the  collection of 
evidence the conviction rate would certainly go up. 
22.   The Committee took note of the Ministry of Home Affairs ‘Safe City Proposal’ for 8 
cities. In this regard the Committee feels that this is highly inadequate as there is a need to 
develop safe cities across the country. The Country has already identified and  is  working on 

18 
 
making  100  smart  cities. Committee recommends that Ministry of  Home  Affairs   should  
integrate safe  city plan  within  Ministry of  Urban Development for  all  the 100  smart  
cities.    In addition to this the Ministry of Home Affairs should also expand this project and 
cover all States including both rural and urban areas and design.    
23.  The Committee notices that there is no comprehensive law for the prev ention of 
Trafficking of persons  and Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 does n ot define 
trafficking comprehensively . The Committee recommends that the Government of India 
should establish a National Anti -Trafficking Bureau having police officers, NGOs , and other 
stakeholders and it should have powers to investigate cases involving two or more States . The 
Committee further recommends that the Bureau should also have power to co -ordinate with 
international law enforcement agencies and formulate measures for combating and 
prevention of trafficking in children & women.  
24. The Committee further  recommends that the Ministry and Government  should have 
"Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee " for providing relief and 
rehabilitation services to t he victims of trafficking.  The Committee strongly recommends 
that the Ministry and the government should support welfare and rehabilitation of victims 
and provide them support for their skill development and vocational training and also create 
community based programmes with specialized professional like Counselors , Translators , 
Social Workers , Mental Health Care Professionals and other vocational trainers  for 
reintegrating them into the society.  
 SAFETY OF WOMEN IN ROAD AND SURFACE TRANSPORT 
25. The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Committee that 
Justice J S Verma Committee had recommended vehicle tracking system and panic buttons in 
public transport vehicles to enhance the safety of women & children. Accordingly, the Mi nistry of 
Road Transport and Highways has issued notificat ion under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 
mandating the provision of Vehicle Location Tracking (VLT)  and emergency buttons in vehicle 
registered upto 31 December, 2018. Tw o-wheelers, E-rickshaw, three w heelers and any transport 
vehicles for which no permit is required under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 are exempted from this 
requirement. In order to standardize the specification of VLT and Emer gency button across the 
country, AIS 140 standards were releas ed by ARAI for Ministry of Road Transport & Highway 
(MoRTH) . The standard mainly includes the specifications for Vehicle Location Tracking device 
and the emergency button must be fitted by the manufacturers or their respective dealers or 

19 
 
operators as the case may be in accordance with the AIS 140, as amended from time to time, till 
corresponding BIS standards are notified under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986. 
26. The Com mittee was further informed about  the steps taken by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways to enhance the safety of women in public transport which are  as follow. 
(i) The Ministry had approved various proposals in transport sector under Nirbhaya 
fund after recommendation by empower ed committee of Ministry of Women and Child 
Development. Proposals of the Transport Department of Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh State Road 
Transport Corporation (UPSRTC) and Bengaluru Metropolitan Transportation Corporation 
(BMTC) have been sanctioned to improve safety of women in public transportation services. Status 
of these proposals are indicated below:- 
a) Abhaya Project by Transport Department, Andhra Pradesh. 
 Proposal from Transport Department of Andhra Pradesh is for installation of lot 
(Internet of Things) device and related software in public transport vehicle. 
 Proposal was approved by SFC with total estimated cost of Rs.138.49 crore and is 
to be implemented in Vishakhapatnam and Krishna District of Andhra Pradesh on 
pilot basis. The Central Share o f Rs. 58.64 Crore was released vide sanction order 
dated 13.07.2017. 
 Proposal is being re -examined by Government of Andhra Pradesh for necessary 
modifications. 
b) Proposal from Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation (UPSRTC), 
Government Uttar Pradesh. 
 Proposal of UPSRTC has been sanctioned with total estimate cost of Rs. 83.40 Cr 
with the approval of Secretary (RT &H). MORTH has released Rs.40.20 Crore to 
UPSRTC. 
 UPSRTC proposal include following components:-  
i. 50 ladies pink Buses. 
ii. CCTV Panic buttons and controllers on 12500 buses 
iii. 24 interceptors 
iv. Advocate/Advertisements/Awareness Campaign 
 Purchase of 50 Pink Buses and 40 interceptors have been completed. 1.2 lakh 
women passenger bus seats/month have been created exclusively for women for safe 
and secure travel. 
 Revision in component of CCTV, Panic buttons and cont4rollers on 12500 buses by 
UPSRTC is under consideration in the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
c) Women's Safety Initiative by Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation 
(BMTC), Government of Karnataka: 
 Proposal of BMTC has been sanctioned under Nirbhaya fgund with total project 
cost of Rs. 56.07 Crores with approval of Secretary (RT&H). the Central Share of 
Rs. 33.64 Crore has been released vide sensation order dated 26.07.2018.  
 BMTC proposal include following components:- 
i. Training women for Heavy passenger Vehicle (HPV) licences 
ii. Advocacy, advertisement and Awareness Campaign on Women's safety 
iii. Women Lounges at important stations 

20 
 
iv. CCTV Surveillance cameras for 1000 buses 
v. Gender Sensitization and Women safety protocol training for ground staff 
vi. Increase the number of Sarthi Squads/Mobile Police Patrol Vehicles 
vii. Mobile application to improve functionalities on women safety  
viii. Passenger information Display in Bus Stops. 
ii) Proposal for  Vehicle Tracking Platform :- A proposal for funding the State -wise 
Vehicle Tracking Platform for safety enforcement with AIS 140 specification under 
Nirbhaya Fund is under consideration in the Ministry. Safety of women and girl children is 
a prime concern during their travel in public passenger transport vehicles like cabs, taxis, 
public buses etc. the proposed system envisages to enhance the safety of the women and the 
gild children by equipping all the public passenger transpo rt vehicles with location 
tracking device and emergency buttons for raising an alert in case of emergency. The 
proposed Vehicle Tracking System consists of a Vehicle Location Tracking (VLT) device, 
with Emergency buttons, meeting the specification of AIS -140, mounted in the vehicle, 
which will send the vehicle location, health status, alerts and other data to the Monitoring 
centre at a specified periodicity. A Standard Operating procedure (SOP) shall be defined 
by State/UT for handling emergency alerts at t he Monitoring Centre. The Transport 
Department officials will be able to access the system and monitor the alerts at the 
Monitoring Centre. The actionable alerts will be filtered and handled as per the Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) formulated by State/UT. 
iii) Ministry had formulated taxi policy guidelines to promote urban mobility. The 
guidelines were circulated to all the States/UTs vide letter dated  15.12.2016. These 
guidelines would help provide the States with an overarching, common detailed frame work 
to formulate detailed regulations for taxi operations. The Committee inter -alia 
recommended that Aggregators, Radio taxi operators and Agents should: 
a. Have a physical presence/premise in the concerned state. They should have a 
functional grievance redressal system which should be duly publicised. 
b. make available an emergency response centre to handle SOS alerts by 
passengers as prescribed by the States. 
c. Aggregators should preserve and provide on demand the data regarding taxi 
trips and customers  for a period specified by the State Transport, Police or any 
other enforcement authorities as per law. 
d. Clear display of a photograph  of the driver or description of the vehicle 
(including license plate number) should be provided to the rider on the web  or 
mobile application as well as inside the car, so as to enable verification of the 
same once the Vehicle arrives with the said driver, details of which has been 
received via the Agent Aggregator or Radio Taxi operator. Develop and include 
a feature in t he mobile application that provides riders the ability to share their 
location with a minimum 2 persons within their safety network. 
e. Develop and include a feature in the mobile application that gives riders the 
ability for contact local police in case of an emergency. 
f. Follow the directions/guidelines of the State in terms of maximum duty hour of 
drivers to promote road safety and to comply with the labour laws. 
g. Violation of the stipulated rules by the taxi operators/drivers should be strictly 
dealt in accordance with law. 
h. In the event of an incident of a criminal nature involving a trip booked through 
the Radio Taxi Operator, Agent or Aggregator platform, such Aggregator, Radio 

21 
 
taxi Operator or Agent should immediately inform and cooperate with r elevant 
authorities upon lawful request. 
27. The Chairman, Railway Board  informed the Committee that a three tier security 
mechanism of Government Railway Police (GRP), District Police and Railway Protection Force 
(RPF) is in place over Indian Railways. Policing on Railways, being a State subject, prevention of 
crime, registra tion of cases, their investigation and maintenance of law & order in Railway 
premises as well as on running trains are the statutory responsibility of the State Governments, 
which they discharge through Government Railway Police (GRP)/District Police. Howe ver, 
Railway Protection Force (RPF) supplements the efforts of GRP to provide better protection and 
security of passenger area & passengers. Cases of Indian Penal Code (IPC) crime in Railways are 
registered and investigated by the concerned Government Rail way Police. It was informed that t o 
enhance security over Indian Railways, particularly of women and children, two projects of Video 
Surveillance System are sanctioned under Nirbhaya Fund. Under these projects, 983 stations (A1, 
A, B & C category) and 67 stations of Konkan Railway are included.  
28. The Committee was further informed that the following steps have been taken for the safety 
of women: 
o Provision CCTV cameras at stations 
o Panic Button at sensitive locations from women perspective like women waiting 
room. 
o Facial Recognization System (FRS) and Video Analytics (VA) for Intrusion 
detection locate & detect a suspected person, left object detection, overcrowding, 
camera tampering, loitering detection, sound detection & Crowding. 
o CCTV control room a t RPF Post/Thana to View & Monitor the stations under their 
jurisdiction. 
o Limited Monitoring of system at Divisional/Zonal level. 
o Setting up of Central Command & Control Center for real time Viewing & 
Monitoring of any station over Indian Railways on regul ar basis and issue the 
proper instructions. 
o As on date, 78 stations have been commissioned and the work is in progress at 191 
stations. Tender for balance 714 stations was opened on 09.10.2019 and is under 
evaluation.  
 
29. The Committee was informed about  the following measures taken by the Railways in 
coordination with Government Railway Police to ensure security of passengers including women 
passengers:- 
a. On vulnerable and identified routes/sections, 2200 trains (on an average) are 
escorted by Railway Protection Force daily in addition to 2200 trains escorted by 
Government Railway Police of different States daily. 
b. Security Help Line number 182 is operational (24X7) over Indian Railways for 
security related assistance to passengers in distress. Staff monitoring this Security 

22 
 
Helpline has been sensitized to address the problems of women passengers 
proactively. 
c. Through various social media platforms viz. twitter, facebook etc., Railways are in 
regular touch with passengers including women to enhance security of passengers 
and to address their security concern. 
d. Drives are conducted against entry of male passengers into compartments reserved 
for women passengers and persons apprehended are prosecuted under section 162 
of the Railways Act, 1989. During the years 2018 & 2019 (upto November), a total 
of 139422 & 92131 male passengers respectively have been prosecuted fo r 
unauthorized entry/travel in compartments reserved for women passengers. 
e. Ladies Special trains running in Metropolitan cities are being escorted by lady RPF 
personnel. In other trains, where escorts are provided, the train escorting parties 
have been briefed to keep extra vigil on the lady passengers travelling alone, ladies 
coaches en-route and at halting stations. 
f. Frequent announcements are made through Public Address System to educate 
passengers to take precautions against theft, snatching, drugging etc.  
g. Regular coordination is made with the State Police/GRP authorities at all levels for 
prevention of crime, registration of cases, their investigation and maintenance of 
law & order in Railway premises as well as on running trains.  
h. An Integrated Security System (ISS) consisting of surveillance of vulnerable stations 
through Close Circuit Television Camera Network, Access Control etc. has been 
sanctioned to improve surveillance mechanism over 202 railway stations.  
i. Presently a total of 2314  women officers & staff are posted in different capacity in 
RPF. Further, in order to increase representation of women in RPF to the level of 
10%, 4517 out of 9739 vacancies notified in the year 2018 were notified for women.  
j. CCTV cameras have been inst alled at 501 Railway stations and in 2019 coaches. 
There is a provision for installation of CCTV cameras at 6124 Railway stations and 
in 58276 coaches. Work for installation of CCTV at 6124 stations and 7020 coaches 
is targeted to be completed by March-2021 (Phase-1).  
k. Emergency Talk Back system and Closed Circuit Television Surveillance Cameras 
have been provided in all newly manufactured Electrical Multiple Unit (EMU), 
Main line Electrical Multiple Unit (MEMU) coaches and Air conditioned rakes of 
Kolkata Metro. This system is also being provided in all newly manufactured air -
conditioned EMU rakes and underslung MEMU rakes. Railways have already 
provided Emergency Talk Back system and CCTV in ladies compartments/coaches 
of existing 12 EMU rakes and 150 E MU/MEMU rakes respectively. Further, flasher 
lights are also being provided in ladies coaches in 15 nos. of EMU rakes in South 
Eastern Railway. When the alarm chain of the coach will be pulled, these lights will 
start blinking and buzzer will start sounding till resetting of alarm chain. 
30. While taking note of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways submissions the 
Committee took notice of the fact that multiple agencies/authorities are involved across states 
for managing public transport. Hence, there is a need for a unified law for governing public 
transport in the country. Transport Department of each State needs to co -ordinate with the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways so far as providing safety features in public 
transport in concerned. A spec ial cell could be created to receive and deal with emergency 
situations. 

23 
 
31. The Committee noticed that only some States have proposed for CCTV surveillance, 
panic button and controllers in public transport to make road transport safe for women. 
However, there is no unified data available to access as to which extent these features  have 
been implemented in reality. The Committee is of the opinion that these proposals are a step 
in the right direction for ensuring safety of women and accordingly recommends that the 
Union Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should frame a unified policy for 
mandatory installing of CCTV surveillance, panic button and controllers in public transport 
across the country in a time bound manner. 
32. To further combat any crime and to take follow up action there is strong case for a 
creation of a data -base of the drivers, conductors, helpers and associated staff involved in 
public transport. Committee recommends that such data should be collected immediately 
which should be made digital and linked with the police stations for the ease of investigations. 
The name and other details of the driver and conductor should also be displayed on the 
concerned bus/taxi/auto etc.   
33. The Committee notices that there is  no mechanism to register the incidents of sexual 
harassment and violence in trains. The Committee r ecommends that the Ministry of 
Railways in coordination with Ministry of Home Affairs should set up a mechanism to lodge 
the case in the train itself. The Committee further adds that the Railways should setup 
complaint centres at each station. 
34. The Committee took note of the fact that the Ministry of Railways has planned only 
two projects of Video Surveillance System at 983 stations and 67 stations of Konkan Railway , 
which is highly inadequate if safety of whole nation is being considered . Since Railways has 
more that 8500 operational railway stations across the country with over 9200 trains 
operating daily, therefore, Committee recommends that such Video Surveillance System 
should be implemented at all the stations across the country. 
ROLE OF EDUCATION IN SOCIETAL TRANSFORMATION 
35.   The Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development submitted that 
Article 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India provide women with the Fundamental Right  to Equality 
and Prevention of Discrimination against them.  Article 21 of the Constitution gives a woman the right 
to lead a life of dignity with liberty.  Protection of women against sexual harassment and the right to 
work with dignity are recognized universally through International Conventions and Instruments.  In 
line with the already existing Constitutional provisions, the Government of India ratified the 

24 
 
Convention on all forms of Discrimination against Women, on 25 th June, 1993. In order to improve the 
safety of all women, including students and employees, and to provide a healthy and secure atmosphere 
for them on the campus in Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs), following initiatives have been 
taken:  
A. Gender Sensitization in Higher Education (SAKSHAM): 
36.  The UGC set up a Task Force to “Review the Measures for Ensuring Safety of Women on 
Campuses and Programs for Gender Sensitization” on 8 th January, 2013, under the Chairmanship of 
Member UGC, to assess the situation prevailing in all institutions of higher learning to ensu re the 
freedom, safety and security of girls and women, in particular, and the entire youth in general. 
37. The report of the Task Force entitled “SAKSHAM” was forwarded to the Vice Chancellors of 
800 Indian Universities to sensitize the management and the  teachers of their institut ions and affiliated 
colleges  to work out a roadmap of action for the guidance of the colleges and other institutions, which 
may include items like holding of conferences, seminars, conducting of workshops and classes for self -
defence of girls, research and studies under intimation to this office. The detailed report is available on 
UGC website i.e. www.ugc.ac.in 
 UGC has sent two circulars to the Vice -Chancellors of the Higher Educational 
Institutions/Universities to expeditiously undertake the measures like developing a website for lodging 
complaints of sexual harassment and hold regular conference, seminars, workshop and classes for self -
defence of girls, research and studies.  
B. Notification of UGC (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal of Sexual Harassment of 
Women Employees and Students in Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2015: 
 
39. UGC has notified UGC (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal of Sexual Harassment of 
Women Employees and Students in Higher Educational Institutions) Regulations, 2015, which being 
statutory in nature, are binding on Universities and Colleges.  
 
 
C. Development of Women’s Studies in Indian Universities and Colleges:  
 
40. The UGC programme for promotion of women’s Studies envisage s financial assistance to 
universities and colleges for setting up centres and cells for Women’s Studies. The Centres/Cells are 
required to undertake research, develop curricula and organize training and extension work in the areas 
of gender equity, economic self-reliance of women, girls education, population issues, issues of human 
rights, social exploitation, etc. These activities are expected to contribute not only to social awareness 
and change but also to academic development. The Objectives of the Scheme are: 
 

25 
 
 To provide financial assistance to Women Studies Centres for expansion of Women Studies 
through teaching, research and field action. 
 Inter disciplinary approach and theoretical grasp to enhance the understanding of society by 
highlighting feminist perspectives on social transformation, development and processes of 
exploitation.  
 Constant interaction with field reality through field acti on programmes that feed into academic 
activity.  
At present, 159 (84 Universities and 75 Colleges)  Women’s Studies Centres have been established in 
various Universities and Colleges under the scheme “Development of Women’s Studies in Indian 
Universities and Colleges”. 
 
D. Establishment of Chairs on Eminent Women Personalities: 
 
41. In order to enrich the academic resources of the university system for a deeper reflection on 
critical issues, University Grants Commission in association with Ministry of Women and  Child 
Development has formulated the Scheme of Chairs in the name of Nobel Laureates and other illustrious 
persons who have been either Indian Citizen or are of an Indian Origin. In this background,  following 
ten (10) Chairs in different universities in t he name of eminent Women 
Academicians/Administrators/Artists/ Scientists/Environmentalists/ Social Reformers etc. are being 
established in the areas of their outstanding contributions: 
S.No. Name of Chair Subject 
1. Lilavati Mathematics 
2. LalDed (Lalleshwar) Poetry & Mysticism 
3. Amrita Devi (Beniwal) Forest/Wildlife Conservation 
4. Devi AhilyaBaiHolkar Administration 
5. AnandibaiGopalrao Joshi Medicine and Health 
6. Hansa Mehta Educational Reform 
7. Kamala Sohonie Science 
8. Rani Gaidinliu Freedom Fighter (North - East) 
9. Madurai ShanmukhavadivuSubbulakshami Music and Performing Arts 
10 MahadeviVerma Literature 
 
 The academic functions under these Chairs will be to create awareness, promotes 
studies and research along with capacity build ing programmes with regard to the designated 
discipline of the Chair. It will also promote the work and contribution of the person in whose name 
the Chair has been established. It was further informed that UGC has set up a Toll free number for 
registration of grievances related to Women and sexual harassment and UGC has also initiated the 

26 
 
process for creation of excusive/independent online portal for grievances related to women and 
sexual harassment.  
AICTE 
42. AICTE submitted before the Committee that they had issued a regulation ‘Establishment of 
Internal Complaint Committee (ICC)’ as per Section 4 of AICTE Act, 1987, All India Council for 
Technical Education (Gender Sensitization, Prevention and Prohibition of Sexual Harassment of 
Women Employees and Stud ents and Redressal of Grievances in Technical Institutions) 
Regulations, 2016 vide No. F. AICTE/ WH/ 2016/ 01 dated 10th June, 2016 and  AICTE Redressal 
of grievance of student’s regulations 2019 dated 7 th November 2019. As per the above two 
Regulations, three level Grievance Redressal mechanism norms has been issued by AICTE related 
to safety of women: 
i. First at Institute Level:  Institute level Grievance Committee and Institute level Redressal 
Committee are constituted in all AICTE approved institutions. 
ii. Second at University  Level: The next level of escalation will be at University level 
‘Ombudsman’. 
iii. Third at AICTE  Level: AICTE has a Special Grievance Redressal Cell and Complaint 
Section for receiving online grievances regarding this. All complaints are exam ined on a 
regular basis by High Power Committee headed by retired High Court Judge. Necessary 
action is taken on priority on the recommendations of the Committee’s Report. 
Department School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development  
43. The Department of School Education and Literacy in its submission before the Committee 
highlighted that the Department has implemented an Integrated Scheme for School Education 
(ISSE) i.e. “Samagra Shiksha”, effective from 2018 -19, extending from pre -school to class XII.  
The integrated Scheme for School Education envisages the ‘school’ as a continuum from Pre -
school, primary, upper primary, secondary to Senior Secondary levels.  The main outcomes of the 
Scheme are envisaged as Universal Access, Equity and Quality, promoting Vocationalisation of 
Education and strengthening of Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs). 
44. The Department further added that under Samagra Shiksha, there is a provision of Self 
Defence training for girls. Self defence training at school level is being provided for three months 
for inculcating self -defence skills including life skill for self -protection and self -development 
among the girls from class VI to XII. Martial Arts and Self -defence training is already being given 
in Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs). For self-defence training (which is admissible for 
govt. schools), there is a provision for upto Rs. 3000 per month for 3 months per school for schools 

27 
 
having classes VI to XII. Further, instructions have been issued to  all States and UTs to take 
necessary steps to ensure Safety and Security of girls residing in KGBVs. 
45. The Department further submitted that  through National Council of Teacher Education 
Regulations, 2014  notified on 28 th November, 2014, Gender has been  made an integral part of 
Curriculum of all the teacher education programmes. Gender Education, as mentioned in NCTE 
Regulations 2014 ensure empowerment of women through all NCTE recognized teacher education 
programme.  
46. The Committee was further briefe d about the steps taken to include value based moral 
education at all levels. It was informed that  informed that the National Curriculum Framework 
(NCF) 2005, developed by the National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), 
which sets the g uidelines and direction for the development of syllabi and textbooks at all the 
school stages, emphasizes on ethical development, inculcating the values, attitudes and skills 
required for living in harmony with oneself and with others. However, education b eing a subject in 
the Concurrent list of the Constitu tion and majority of schools falling  under the jurisdiction of the 
State Governments; it is for the respective State Governments to ensure that the Values Education 
is taught effectively in their schools .  So far as the schools affiliated to the Central Board of 
Secondary Education (CBSE) are concerned, the Board has introduced Life -Skills education in the 
schools affiliated to it, which promotes inculcation of Values.  
47. The Department stated that valu es and attitudes are acquired and are best nurtured through 
experiences. These experiences need to be consistent and inbuilt in the personal and social 
environment of the students. NCERT has, therefore incorporated such concerns, wherever possible, 
in the textbooks developed for the various stages of school education. NCERT has also brought out 
a Value Education Framework entitled ‘Education for Values in Schools -A Framework’, which 
provides guidelines to schools to identify their priorities of values and p lan their actions 
accordingly. NCERT has also developed a Resource Book for teachers called ‘Ways to Peace’.  
48. It was also informed that CBSE has brought out Values Education Manual and Values 
Education Kit for classes 1 -XII.  The Board has brought out Teacher’s Manual on Environmental 
Education and Adolescent Education, which help to foster values in children. CBSE also organizes 
Capacity Building Programmes in Values Education for teacher of its affiliated schools. Further, 
Adolescence Education Progra mme, being implemented by NCERT, is focused on the needs and 
concerns that are faced during adolescence. This programme aims at facilitating the process of 
comprehensive integration of these needs and concerns in the schools education curriculum and 

28 
 
teacher education system. The ultimate goal of the programme is to empower adolescent learners to 
acquire knowledge of their needs and concerns related to the period of adolescence and develop life 
skills that will enable them to practice informed and responsibl e behavior. At the national level, 
NIOS, KVS, NVS and at the State level, SCERTs/ SIEs/ Directorates of Education are 
implementing Agencies.  
49. The Committee was further informed about the legal provisions formulated to ensure safety 
of women as follows: 
a) The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009  which 
came to effect in April, 2010 mandates that, the School Management Committee constituted 
under Rule 21 shall be the first level of grievance redressal of teachers of schools specified 
therein. The State Government shall constitute School Tribunals a t the State, District and 
Block levels which would act as the grievance redressal mechanism. Complaints related to 
harassment of women teachers shall be accorded priority and shall be redressed without 
delay in compliance with the guidelines issued by the Supreme Court on prevention of 
sexual harassment at the work place.  
 
b) The CBSE (Central Board of Secondary Education)  has issued a circular on 12.09.2017 
directing the schools affiliated to the Board for setting up Internal Complaints Committee 
on sexual h arassment. CBSE is following the provisions of the Sexual Harassment of 
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 scrupulously. 
CBSE, Headquarters, Delhi has issued instructions to all Regional Offices to constitute ICC 
in their respective offices as per the provisions of Section 4(2) of Sexual Harassment of 
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 to deal with the 
complaints of women employees related to sexual harassament strictly as per the provision s 
of the aforesaid Act. The complaints of the women employees posted in the Regional 
Offices are redressed and being investigated/inquired by the respective ICC constituted in 
the concerned Regional Offices of CBSE. The Affiliation Bye Laws of the CBSE pro vides 
under Rule 14.25 that every affiliated schools of CBSE shall follow the provisions of 
Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 
2013 in their respective schools.  
 
c) Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS)  has constituted an ‘Internal Complaints 
Committee’ at KVS Headquarters level and Regional Offices level vide order dated 
13.11.2015 to deal with the complaints regarding sexual harassment of women at 
workplace. The codal provision has also been made in th e Education code of KVs under 
Article 160 detailing therein the composition of the two committees and also their scope. 
 
d) Internal Complaints Committee in Headquarters and Regional Offices of the Navodaya 
Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS) are functional which deal wit h complaints of Sexual Harassment 
of women employees at work place in NVS. At headquarter level moral turpitude cases are 
dealt by summery trial committees. Action  against the staff if found guilty, is taken and in 
serious cases upto termination of services of staff is also taken. 

29 
 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
50. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that t he Adolescent Health 
Programme (Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram) covers the following components which 
support in issues related to women safety: 
A. The School Health Programme  is envisaged as a health and wellness intervention for 
school going children under Ayushman Bharat. School serves as an ideal platform to reach out to 
the children to shape their life defining habits. It is a well -established fact that the habits and 
behaviors adopted during adolescence determine the health in adulthood. The objective of the SHP 
is to increase knowledge, inculcate positive attitudes and enhance life skills to promote informed, 
responsible and healthy behaviors among school going children. The SHP is a joint initiative of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and Ministry of Human Resource Development 
(MHRD). It is proposed that the School Health Programme will be implemented in government 
and government aided schools in aspirational districts of the country in the first phase of the 
implementation. Two teachers, preferably one male and one female, in every sch ool, designated as 
“Health and Wellness Ambassadors” shall be trained to transact health promotion and disease 
prevention information in the form of interesting activities for one hour every week. It is proposed 
that  required time per week be allocated to  the programme in the school timetable for 
approximately 24 weeks in an academic year. These health promotion messages will also have 
bearing on improving health practices in the country as students will act as Health and Wellness 
Messengers in the society.  Every Tuesday is proposed as Health and Wellness Day in the schools.  
The curriculum framework, training materials for training of nodal teachers, facilitators guide and 
activity book for the students have been developed by NCERT in consultation with Mo HFW, 
development partners and civil society organizations. A total of 11 themes were identified for this 
curriculum. The themes include, growing up healthy, emotional wellbeing and mental health, 
interpersonal relationships, values and responsible citizens hip, gender equality, nutrition, health 
and sanitation, promotion of healthy lifestyles, prevention and management of substance misuse, 
reproductive health and HIV prevention, safety and security against violence and injuries and 
promotion of safe use of i nternet, media and social media. A cascade training model from the 
National to the State level has been planned. A National Resource Group (NRG) has been 
constituted with members who have sound training skills and experience on Adolescent Health. 
The Nation al Resource Group will train the State Resource Group, a team with members from 
SCERT, SIHFW and DIETs. A National launch of the School Health Programme is proposed 
shortly.  
 
B. The trained Medical Officers and ANMs and Counsellors working at the Adolescent 
Friendly Health Clinics  across the country provide Counselling and services to adolescent boys 
and girls, mainly related to the six themes viz. Nutrition, Mental Health, Violence including 
Gender Based Violence, Sexual & Reproductive Health, Non Communicab le Diseases  and 
Substance Misuse. These are visited by both the School going and out of school children. 
 
C. Peer Educator Programme being implemented in a few districts currently, for both in 
school and out of school adolescents also aims to train selected Peers from the age of 10 -19 years 
age in the above mentioned themes. These trained peer educators hold sessions in their own age 
groups to further pass on the correct information and also within the community.  
 
 
51. The Ministry further submitted that National Health Policy (NHP) (2017) identifies seven 
priority areas. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has recognised Gender Based Violence 
(GBV) as one of the priority focus areas. The policy articulates to institutionalize inter -sectoral 

30 
 
coordination at National and Sub-national levels with the objective to promote coordinated action 
against gender violence for improving the environment for health. It is committed that “Women’s 
Access to healthcare needs to be strengthened by making public hospitals more  women friendly 
and ensuring that the health providers are orientated on gender – sensitivity issues. The NHP 
identifies the serious and wide ranging consequences of gender violence and “ recommends that the 
health care to the survivors/ victims need to be provided free and with dignity in the public and 
private sector”.  
52. The Ministry also informed about the other measures taken to address the issue of safety of 
women namely (i) development of Guidelines & Protocols- medico-legal care of victims/survivors 
of sexual violence; (ii) establishment of One stop Crises cell/ centre (OSCC) in a hospital setting 
for providing holistic and comprehensive support and assistance to a victim/ survivor of gend er 
based violence under one roof;  and (iii) Establishing of internal complaint committee for sexual 
harassment on women at work places  under Section 4 of the Sexual Harassment of Women at 
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressed) Act, 2013.  
53. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Human Resource Development is 
the only Ministry which can help inculcate the values of respect and dignity towards women 
to the next generation which will lead to change of mindset of people and eventually l ead to 
safety of women  
54. The Committee is of the opinion that violence against women indicates degrading 
moral values of the society arising out of deep rooted patriarchal mindset and feels that the 
steps taken by the Ministry to incorporate moral value s in the school text books are 
insufficient. On one hand we are trying to empower girls and on the other hand we are failing 
to teach the values of respect and dignity towards women in the boys. The Committee 
examined the school books of NCERT and prescrib ed books of CBSE and noticed that they 
do not have enough chapters expressly inculcating moral values. The Committee accordingly 
recommends inclusion of chapters on moral values in the school curriculum and textbooks.  
55. For this purpose, Ministry should  also hold regular workshops and organize 
participatory discussion with the students to inculcate the correct values in them and also 
make them aware about the institutional framework available in case of any gender based 
violence and crime.  
56. The Committee also urges the Ministry to make the Universities and Colleges more 
pro-active to generate awareness about the responsibility of the citizen to make our cities safe 

31 
 
for the women. The Universities/Colleges should organise camps in their respective area s to 
help generate awareness among the people and also the students about the legislative 
measures available to women for their safety. 
57. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to urge more and more Universities and 
colleges to open Department of Women Studies so that the students of these Departments can 
form groups to counsel and support distressed women.   
58. The Committee has noticed  that the kind of attention that needs to be given to the 
victim of gender based violence is generally lacking at the medical centres in most cases. The 
Centres in rural and remote areas are not equipped to handle such cases. Further, due to 
lacunae in the  medico-legal report the accused tend to escape from the clutches of law. The 
Committee notices that crucial evidence is lost due to delay in the conduct of medico -legal 
examination of  the victims. The Committee in this respect recommends that the Ministr y of 
Health and Family Welfare should give due attention to strengthening of medical centres 
especially in rural and remote areas of the country. Further, the doctors and Para -medical 
staff need to be updated on the legal requirements to ensure that loopho les in the 
medico/legal report cannot be exploited.  
59. Committee is aware that Doctors & paramedical staff are under tremendous work 
pressure, however it is required that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should 
sensitize them about the psycholog ical condition of the victims of gender based violence and 
the need to handle them with empathy and due sensitivity.  
60. The Committee recommends that Public awareness programmes through press and 
media should be mandatorily conducted to educate public ab out laws in place for safety and 
security of women along with consequences for violating of these laws. Mindset change 
through Nukakad Natak, plays. Advertisement etc. to inculcate a share of responsibility and 
respect towards women should be adopted.  
EFFECTIVE UTILIZATION OF NIRBHAYA FUND 
61. The Ministry of Women and Child Development further informed that t he Ministry of 
Finance, Government of India had set up a dedicated fund called Nirbhaya Fund in 2013, for 
implementation of initiatives aimed at e nhancing the safety and security for women in the country.  
It is a non-lapsable corpus fund, which lies with the Ministry of Finance.  So far, an amount of Rs. 
4357.62 Cr. has been provided under the Nirbhaya Fund parked with the Department of Economic 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance up to 2018-19. The details are as under :  
FY 2013-14 2014-15 2015- 16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20* 

32 
 
Allocation 
(In Crore) 
1000.00 1000.00 - 707.62 550.00 550.00 550.00 
 * Amount of Rs. 500 Cr. will be transferred by MWCD within this FY.  
62. As per the guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance dated 25.03.2015, Ministry of Women 
and Child Development is the nodal Ministry to appraise schemes under Nirbhaya Fund and also to 
review and monitor the progress of sanctioned Sche mes in conjunction with the line Ministries/ 
Departments. Competent financial approval is then obtained and expenditure undertaken 
directly by the concerned Ministries.  An Empowered Committee of Officers  has been constituted 
under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, WCD for appraising and approving various proposals to be 
funded from the Nirbhaya Fund and its reviewing and monitoring.  The composition of the 
Empowered Committee of Officers is as follows:  
a) Secretary, MWCD - Chairperson 
b) Secretaries of MHA; MoRTH; MeITY - members 
c) Chairman, Railway Board – Member 
d) Joint Secretary, DEA – Member 
e) Secretary of Project Sponsoring Department – Member 
f) Secretary of concerned State Government Department – Member 
g) Secretary, State Dept. of WCD – Member 
h) JS(Nirbhaya), MWCD – Convener 
63.  A Framework of Nirbhaya Fund has also been put in place replacing the existing 
guidelines   in January, 2017 to aid this process.  Formulation of proposals under Nirbhaya Fund 
and the stages of approval are as below: 
i. Central Government Ministries/Departments may formulate project proposals 
concerning women’s safety. 
ii. State Government may formulate project proposals concerning women’s safety with 
regard to their specific sector (for example - road transport, police, power etc.) and submit 
the same to the concerned central Government Ministry/Department with a copy  to the 
Chairperson, Empowered Committee. 
iii. UT Administrations may also formulate project proposals and submit the same to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs with a copy to the Chairperson, Empowered Committee. 
iv. After appraisal by the Empowered Committee, the concerned Ministries do further needful 
for SFC/ EFC appraisal as well as for obtaining competent financial approvals. The 
concerned Ministries also obtain their respective budgetary allocations for their projects/ 
schemes under the Nirbhaya Framework from the Ministry of Finance.  

33 
 
64. The total appraised amount currently stands at Rs.7436.66 Cr. for 32 different projects/ 
schemes across the country. So far, an amount of Rs.  2647.89 Cr. has been disbursed/ released by 
concerned Ministries/Departments including MWCD for the various projects/ schemes under 
Nirbhaya Fund. The details are  at Annexure 3. Against this, the Utilization Certificates from 
States/ UTs as received till date by concerned implementing Ministries/ agencies are at Annexure 
4, 4A and 4B. 
 The Ministry of Women and Child Development  further informed that they were 
implementing the following specific schemes under the Nirbhaya Fund: 
(i) Scheme for One Stop  crisis Centre: Popularly known as Sakhi Centres, the One 
Stop Centre (OSC) Scheme is being implemented across the country since 1st April 2015. 
The objectives of the One Stop Centre Sc heme are to provide integrated support and 
assistance to women affected by violence, both in private and public spaces under one roof 
and facilitate immediate, emergency and non -emergency access to a range of services 
including police, medical, legal aid a nd counselling, psychological support to fight against 
any forms of violence against women.  As on date, 728 OSCs are approved in 724 districts.   
617 OSCs are operational in 35 States/UTs which have provided assistance to over 2.27 lakh 
women as on June, 2019.   
(ii) The Universalisation of Women Helpline (WHL) Scheme is being implemented 
since 1st April, 2015 with the aim to provide an immediate and 24 hour emergency and non -
emergency response to women affected by violence across the country by referral service.  
Under the Scheme, a toll-free 24-hours telecom service through short code 181 is provided to 
women seeking support and information. Women helpline is operational in 32 States/UTs.   
States/UTs of Puducherry, Tripura, Lakshdweep and West Bengal are yet to b e 
operationalized. (WHLs of UTs of J&K and Ladakh are presently over a common exchange). 
Over 38.62 lakh women have been assisted by the WHL across the country as on June, 2019.  
(iii) Mahila Police Volunteers Scheme: The Mahila Police Volunteers Scheme is being 
implemented under Ministry of Women and Child Development in collaboration with 
Ministry of Home Affairs. MPVs act as a link between police and the community and 
facilitate women in distress. MPVs serve as a public -police interface in order to fight crime  
against women and report incidents of violence against women. In the pilot phase two 
districts from every State and one district from every UT were to be chosen for the 
implementation of the scheme and atleast 1 MPV was to be engaged in every 
Panchayat/Ward. Bigger villages could have more than one MPV depending upon the area 
and the requirement.  
65. Till date, the States/ UTs of Haryana, Mizoram, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Chhattisgarh 
have reported identifying 9531 MPVs, and a total of thirteen States/UTs including Mizoram, 
Karnataka, Jharkhand, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Tripura, 

34 
 
Nagaland, Uttarakhand, Andaman & Nicobar Island and Dadra & Nagar Haveli  have given their 
proposals and obtained approvals for the MPV Scheme. The Committee was informed that the 
Ministry of Women & Child Development  is assisting the following other projects under the 
Nirbhaya Fund:   
 CHIRALI: Friends Forever (Govt. of Rajasthan)  of Rs. 10.20 Cr. aims to constitute 
Community Action Groups for women safety in 7 districts of Rajasthan covering a total 
of 2071 Gram Panchayats for a period of three years i.e from 2016 -17 to 2018-19. An 
amount of Rs.4,70,97,240/- has been released to the State of Rajasthan. 
 Smart and safe cities free from violence against Women and Girls programme, 
(Govt. of Madhya Pradesh):  An amount of Rs. 1.74 Cr. has been appraised under 
Nirbhaya Fund for intervention through Education, Urban Planning and Designing of 
Public Spaces, Civic Awareness and Participation and Policing of Public Transport. An 
amount of Rs. 1,04,70,600/-has been released to the State of Madhya Pradesh. 
 Nirbhaya Shelter Home (Govt. of Nagaland):  An amount of Rs. 2.84 Cr. has been 
appraised under Nirbhaya Fund for construction of Shelter Hone in t he State of 
Nagaland. An amount of Rs. 2.55 Cr. has been released to the State of Nagaland. 
 Safety and Security of Women, Govt. of Uttarakhand  (5 districts) : An amount of 
Rs. 0.72 Cr. has been appraised under Nirbhaya Fund for strengthening Nirbhaya  
Yojana Scheme in the State of Uttarakhand. An amount of Rs. 32,40,000/ - has been 
released to the State of Uttrakhand. 
 Safety and Security of Women, Govt. of Uttarakhand (2 districts):  An amount of 
Rs. 0.29 Cr. has been appraised under Nirbhaya Fund for strengt hening 
NirbhayaYojana Scheme in the State of Uttarakhand. 
 Strategic communication initiatives for women's safety, Govt. of Tamil  Nadu: An 
amount of Rs. 1.45 Cr. has been appraised for soft intervention initiatives for women’s 
safety in the State of Tamil Nadu. 
 
66. The Committee understands that a victim of gender based violence faces hurdles at 
every level be it the filing of a police case, getting the medical examination done and also 
having to hand le the social stigma involved. The Committee recommends that one police 
officer should be ear -marked in every police station to handle such cases and he should be 
trained for handling the victims of gender based violence in a more humane and 
compassionate manner.  
67. The Committee took note of the fact that th e total app ortioned amount under the 
Nirbhaya Fund currently stood at Rs 7436.66 crores for 32 different projects/schemes across 
the country. However, an amount of only Rs 2647.89 crore had been disbursed by the 
concerned Ministries/Departments for the var ious projects/schemes under the Nirbhaya 
Fund, which is on extremely low side . The Committee recommends that the 
Ministries/Departments should be more proactive in the matter and ensure that  these 
projects are implemented on a time bound basis so that  the funds are utilized promptly  as 
these projects are crucial for enhancing the safety of women. 

35 
 
68. The Committee took a note that many of the states have not yet utilized the total funds 
allocated to them under One Stop Centers (OSC), Women Helpline (WHL) Sc hemes. The 
Committee further notices that only 20 to 30 percent of the fund has been utilized by 
majority of the States. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development should have direct meetings with the State Governme nts and UT 
administration quarterly to monitor the expenditure of funds on the above mentioned 
schemes.  
69. The Committee recommends that the One stop crisis centres should be set -up in each 
District of the country and counselors trained to handle victims  of gender based violence 
should be associated with these centres. These  counselors should help the victim in all their 
interactions at the hospital, police station etc.    
70. The Committee notes that the pace of implementation of the projects funded from  the 
Nirbhaya Fund is lethargic and needs to be fast -paced. The Committee recommends that a 
status of implementation of the projects/schemes under the Nirbhaya Fund should be 
overseen by a Committee under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary. This would help 
give the Fund the necessary importance and on the other hand help remove the 
administrative hurdles faced in the implementation of the schemes/projects, due to ineffective 
coordination between different Ministries and State Governments. 
71. The NGOs in their submission before the Committee highlighted the following issues :- 
(1) Executive Director, Multiple Action Research Group  focused on short term solutions like 
holding workshops to educate Students (school and colleges), shopkeepers, vendors, auto drivers, 
bus drivers, cab drivers etc. to instill respect for women is a good place to start. The government 
may work in collabora tion with such bodies that work on the ground level to sensitize the general 
masses about gender equality and mutual respect. As for long term solutions the foremost was 
making gender sensitization an integral part of the government school curriculum from a very early 
stage. Upbringing h as a  massive impact on how people perceive the world when they grow up. 
Gender sensitization drives should be made a regular phenomenon in urban and rural areas.  
It is imperative to teach the masses to see women not just as daughters, mothers, sisters or wives, 
but as independent human beings with individual identities 
(2) Chairperson, Jagori stressed on the need to ensure overall safety of women everywhere be it 
a college, a school, shopping complex, work place, home and so on.  Differentiating between 
prevention of violence and response to violence, she stressed upon issues like including women 
representatives in urban planning to ensure safe cities, safe transport, gender transformative 
budgeting, panic response and related  issues. 
(3)  Representatives of All India Womens Conference suggested that to deter the perpetration of 

36 
 
sexual assault the following steps should be taken i.e. (i) filling up vacancies of judges; (ii) a 
separate police cell should be made to deal with the wom en related crimes; and (iii) steps should 
also be taken so that no bail is  given to the rape accu sed and law should be changed so that the 
charge sheet is filed within 30 days. Further, they added that effective utilization of Nirbhaya fund 
should be done.  They suggested that the remaining amount of Nirbhaya funds should be used for 
setting up forensic lab in every State and  one stop crisis centre should be increased to 450 so that 
there is such centre in every city of the country. The representatives also suggested that more 
shelter houses should be made near hospitals for rape and crime survivors.  
(4) Executive Director, Centre for Social Research in her submission stressed on the following 
remedial measures: 
(i) Ensure women are represented in all decision making bodies form panchayat to Parliament. 
In increased number of women in policy making positions leads to more family -friendly 
policies, and policies that focus on women's safety. 
(ii)  At least 1/3rd seats in all internal Committees of political parties be reserved for women. 
(iii) Inter-ministerial Committees on state of women headed by Cabinet Secretary on the line of 
National Mission of Empowerment of Women. 
(iv)  Gender-Budgeting: Ensuring at least 30% of the annual budget be spent for growth and 
development of wo men under gender budgeting provisions and Providing robust 
monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to ensure that the schemes are running efficiently 
and are contributing to long -term sustainable structural change. 
(v)  Government should produce a white paper in  Parliament on its efforts to eradicate 
Violence against Women. 
(vi)  Comprehensive and up to date gender -segregated data in all sectors and government 
departments. 
(vii) Repeal all personal laws- as these are discriminatory towards women. 
(viii) All pending cases of crime against women, including rape be transferred to special courts 
for swift and certain justice. 
(ix) Time bound justice for victims of rape should be made a priority for the Indian judicial 
system. Thus, it is recommended that the judiciary be bound to a strict t ime period of 2 -3 
years to produce their judgements on cases of rape. 
(x) Any and all actions of state and non -state actors including police should be penalised for 
acting against women victims of crime/violence. 
(xi) Decentralisation of Nirbhaya Fund. 
(xii) Zero toleran ce for sexual harassment of women at work -place. Ensure safe, secure, and 
dignified working environment for women. 
(xiii) Safe city structural changes like. 
 Better lighting, 
 More police patrols, 
 Women's safety audits conducted annually, 
 Unsafe areas to be designated for better safety measures, 
 Safe Transport, 
 Increased number of working women's hostels/sort stay homes, and 

37 
 
 Expedited setting up of none-stop crisis centres 
Smart cities need to incorporate safety of women as an integral feature , as the same  is entirely 
missing from smart cities. 
72. While agreeing with the anguish and view points of the NGOs working in the field of 
Women safety, the Committee recommends that gender sensitization drives must be made a 
regular feature in urban and rural areas;  gender sensitization  should be made an integral 
part of the school curriculum from a very early age;  equal attention  should be given to 
women safety issues in urban and rural areas;  safe cities, safe transport and safe working 
environment should be provid ed for women both in rural and urban areas;  more shelter 
homes should be opened near hospitals; cities must have better infrastructures such as better 
lighting at blind spots, more poli ce patrolling at deserted areas and training in self defense 
and physical fitness in women to deal with any grave situation. 
  

38 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE  
73. Increase in number of  crimes against  women is  an  indication that the  present 
mechanism is  not  working satisfactorily and there  is  a  need to  create  a  new  system   
which  is  more  humane and  effective . This  is  required  at  various  levels by  bringing out  
integrated  changes  in  an innovative  way under the   following  headings :- 
I     LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK 
II  LEGAL FRAMEWORK  
III INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AND INSTITUTIONAL 
STRENGTHENING 
IV ROLE OF EDUCATION IN SOCIETAL TRANSFORMATION 
V         EFFECTIVE UTILIZATION OF NIRBHAYA  FUND 
I LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK 
(i) The Committee notes that a number of legislations have been framed for the welfare, 
security and benefits of women and also to eliminate gender -based bias, discrimination and 
violence against women. Inspite of the legislative framework being in place, women continue 
to face severe forms of inequality, bias discrimination and violence which is a cause of grave 
concern for the Committee. As security and safety of women is of utmost priority, instances 
of violence against women indicate that the legislations are not being implemented in true 
letter and spi rit. The Committee, accordingly, recommends, strict implementation of the 
legislations relating to safety and security of women. 
(ii) The Committee further recommends strengthening of legislative measures by fixing a 
time frame for deciding cases of gender  based violence against women. This needs   strict 
implementation of existing laws so that time bound justice is delivered to women,  filing of 
charge sheet in such cases within 30 days, denying bail to the accused and expediting the 
disposal of pending cases within 6 months   time   so  that  timely  justice is  imparted.  
(iii) The Committee is of the strong view that crime against women take place because 
society sees them in a inferior position in the societal set -up. This is mainly because women 
are not  represented in the decision making process. The Committee is of the opinion that 
women should be given a decisive role and positions of power in all spheres of society to 
change the mindset of the people and help provide role models to the next generation . The 
Committee accordingly recommends that there is an urgent need to address this situation by 

39 
 
making thirty -three percent reservation for women at all levels right from Panchayats to 
Parliament at the earliest.    
II LEGAL FRAMEWORK  
(i) The Committee is of the opinion that the these two Ministries i.e. Ministry of Law and 
Justice and Ministry of Home Affairs need to work in well coordinated manner because both 
are critical in providing institutional structure and justice delivery system. The quest for 
justice for Nirbhaya which is a blot on our collective conscience and the public hailing of 
police action in Hyderabad case echoes the sentiment of  the society that the guilty be 
punished immediately .  This is  a call for introspection for both the Ministr y of Law and 
Justice and Ministry of Home Affairs along with the associated law enforcement agencies as 
the system is not functioning to provide timely justice.  Therefore, there is a need to bring 
about integrated changes at all levels in the entire system. 
(ii) The Committee notes that simple and accessible justice delivery system is a great 
deterrent to crimes against women because it provides courage to the victims to come out and 
file complaints against the perpetrators of the crimes. The Committee is h owever anguished 
to note that a number of States like Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh 
have still not given their concurrence for setting up Fast Track Special Courts. The 
Committee urges the Department of Justice to pursue the matter with the concerned States to 
ensure that 1800 Fast Track courts become operational at the earliest. The Department 
should also look into the possibility of according legislative backing to setting up of Fast 
Track Courts on a permanent basis. The Committee fur ther recommends that Fast Track 
Special Courts should decide the matter within six  months of such incident.   
(iii) The Committee took a note that there are 1023 Fast Track Special Courts (FTSC) in 
30 States. The Committee further noticed that there is a skewed distribution of Fast Track 
Special Courts across States likes for example 18 in Andhra Pradesh, 218 in Uttar P radesh, 
14 in Tamil Nadu and 31 in Karnataka. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Law & Justice should have a balanced distribution of Fast Track Special Courts in States to 
expedite the disposal of cases and ideally there  should  be one FTSC  w ithin  500 km  of 
radius.  
(iv) The Committee also urges the Department of Justice to look into the feasibility of 
changes in law to ensure no bail is granted to accused involved in heinous crimes against 

40 
 
women.  There should be filing of chargesheet within 30 days of such a crime and time-bound 
investigation and conclusion of trial within  a  year’s  time to provide timely justice. 
III   INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AND INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING 
(i) To address the crime against women in more effective mann er, t he Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should set up women cells in all the police 
stations of the country  with female police officers/staff, who are trained to handle cases 
related to gender based violence . This would increase the presence of women in the police 
force and the victims of sexual violence would have the confidence to enter the police stations 
to lodge their complaints . The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should discuss the possibility of conducting special recruitment drives with the States 
to induct women in the police force to increase their presence at the ground level, which 
would help provide a sense of empowerment to the women especially in the rural areas.  
 (ii) The Committee stron gly recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should 
provide a single help-line number for registering all complaints and for seeking help in cases 
of safety of women related issues. This number should be prominently displayed at all 
railway stations, public transport and other public places.  
(iii) The Committee took note of the submissions made by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
regarding setting up of forensic laboratories in the country. The Committee in this reference 
is of the view that a strong network of forensic laboratories is of utmost necessi ty as the 
forensic evidence is of  crucial importance in convicting the offenders . Currently the 
conviction rate is only 32% as against filing of chargesheets in 86.6%  rape  cases. The 
Committee therefore recommends that Ministry of Home Affairs should setup one forensic 
laboratory in every state in the country in every state capital within 2 years time . This would 
help the prosecution in building a strong case against the offenders  as with the collection of 
evidence the conviction rate would certainly go up. 
(iv)   The Committee took note of the Ministry of Home Affairs ‘Safe City Proposal’ for 8 
cities. In this regard the Committee feels that this is highly inadequate as there is a need to 
develop safe cities across the country. The Country has already identified and  is  working on 
making  100  smart  cities. Committee recommends that Ministry of  Home  Affairs   should  
integrate safe  city plan  within  Ministry of  Urban Development for  all the 100  s mart  
cities.    In addition to this the Ministry of Home Affairs should also expand this project and 
cover all States including both rural and urban areas and design.    

41 
 
(v) The Committee notices that there is no comprehensive law for the prevention of 
Trafficking of persons  and Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 does n ot define 
trafficking comprehensively . The Committee recommends that the Government of India 
should establish a National Anti -Trafficking Bureau having police officers, NGOs, and other 
stakeholders and it should have powers to investigate cases involving two or more States . The 
Committee further recommends that the Bureau should also have power to co -ordinate with 
international law enforcement agencies and formulate measures for combatin g and 
prevention of trafficking in children & women.  
(vi) The Committee further  recommends that the Ministry and Government  should have 
"Anti-Trafficking Relief and Rehabilitation Committee " for providing relief and 
rehabilitation services to the victims of trafficking.  The Committee strongly recommends 
that the Ministry and the government should support welfare and rehabilitation of victims 
and provide them support for their skill development and vocational training and also create 
community based progra mmes with specialized professional like Counselors , Translators , 
Social Workers , Mental Health Care Professionals and other vocational trainers  for 
reintegrating them into the society.  
 (vii) While taking note of the Ministry of Road Transport & Highw ays submissions the 
Committee took notice of the fact that multiple agencies/authorities are involved across states 
for managing public transport. Hence, there is a need for a unified law for governing public 
transport in the country. Transport Department of each state needs to co -ordinate with the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways so far as providing safety features in public 
transport in concerned. A special cell could be created to receive and deal with emergency 
situations. 
(viii) The Committee noticed that only some States have proposed for CCTV surveillance, 
panic button and controllers in public transport to make road transport safe for women. 
However, there is no unified data available to access as to which extent these features  have 
been implemented in reality. The Committee is of the opinion that these proposals are a step 
in the right direction for ensuring safety of women and accordingly recommends that the 
Union Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should frame a unified policy for 
mandatory installing of CCTV surveillance, panic button and controllers in public transport 
across the country in a time bound manner. 

42 
 
(ix) To further combat any crime and to take follow up action there is strong case for a 
creation of a data -base of the drivers, conductors, helpers and associated staff involved in 
public transport. Committee recommends that such data should be collected immediately 
which should be made digital and linked with the police stations for the ease of investigations. 
The name and other details of the driver and conductor should also be displayed on the 
concerned bus/taxi/auto etc.   
(x) The Committee notices that there is  no mechanism to register the incidents of sexual 
harassment and violence in trains. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of 
Railways in coordination with Ministry of Home Affairs should set up a mechanism to lodge 
the case in the train itself. The Committee further adds that the Railways should setup 
complaint centres at each station. 
(xi) The Committee took note of the fact that the Ministry of Railways has planned only 
two projects of Video Surveillance System at 983 stations and 67 stations of Konkan Railway , 
which is highly inadequate if safety of whole nation is being considered . Since Railways has 
more that 8500 operational railway stations across the country with over 9200 trains 
operating daily, therefore, Committee recommends that such Video Surveillance System 
should be implemented at all the stations across the country. 
 (xii) While agreeing with the anguish and view points of the NGOs working in the field of 
Women safety, the Committee recommends that gender sensitization drives must be made a 
regular feature in urban and rural areas;  gender sensitization  should be made an integral 
part of the school curriculum from a very early age;  equal attention  should be given to 
women safety issues in urban and rural areas;  safe cities, safe transport and safe working 
environment should be provided for women both in rural and urban areas;  more shelter 
homes should be opened near hospitals; cities must have better infrastructures such as better 
lighting at blind spots, more poli ce patrolling at deserted areas and training in self defense 
and physical fitness in women to deal with any grave situation. 
IV ROLE  OF  EDUCATION IN SOCIETAL  TRANSFORMATION 
(i) The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Human Resource Development is the 
only Ministry which can help inculcate the values of respect and dignity towards women to 
the next generati on which will lead to change of mindset of people and eventually lead to 
safety of women  

43 
 
(ii) The Committee is of the opinion that violence against women indicates degrading 
moral values of the society arising out of deep rooted patriarchal mindset and fe els that the 
steps taken by the Ministry to incorporate moral values in the school text books are 
insufficient. On one hand we are trying to empower girls and on the other hand we are failing 
to teach the values of respect and dignity towards women in the boys. The Committee 
examined the school books of NCERT and prescribed books of CBSE and noticed that they 
do not have enough chapters expressly inculcating moral values. The Committee accordingly 
recommends inclusion of chapters on moral values in the school curriculum and textbooks.  
(iii) For this purpose, Ministry should also hold regular workshops and organize 
participatory discussion with the students to inculcate the correct values in them and also 
make them aware about the institutional framework ava ilable in case of any gender based 
violence and crime.  
(iv) The Committee also urges the Ministry to make the Universities and Colleges more 
pro-active to generate awareness about the responsibility of the citizen to make our cities safe 
for the women. Th e Universities/Colleges should organise camps in their respective areas to 
help generate awareness among the people and also the students about the legislative 
measures available to women for their safety. 
(v) The Committee impresses upon the Ministry to urge more and more Universities and 
colleges to open Department of Women Studies so that the students of these Departments can 
form groups to counsel and support distressed women.   
(vi) The Committee has notice d that the kind of attention that needs to be given to the 
victim of gender based violence is generally lacking at the medical centres in most cases. The 
Centres in rural and remote areas are not equipped to handle such cases. Further, due to 
lacunae in th e medico-legal report the accused tend to escape from the clutches of law. The 
Committee notices that crucial evidence is lost due to delay in the conduct of medico -legal 
examination of  the victims. The Committee in this respect recommends that the Minist ry of 
Health and Family Welfare should give due attention to strengthening of medical centres 
especially in rural and remote areas of the country. Further, the doctors and Para -medical 
staff need to be updated on the legal requirements to ensure that looph oles in the 
medico/legal report cannot be exploited.  
(vii) Committee is aware that Doctors & paramedical staff are under tremendous work 
pressure, however it is required that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should 

44 
 
sensitize them about the psycho logical condition of the victims of gender based violence and 
the need to handle them with empathy and due sensitivity.  
(viii) The Committee recommends that Public awareness programmes through press and 
media should be mandatorily conducted to educate pub lic about laws in place for safety and 
security of women along with consequences for violating of these laws. Mindset change 
through Nukakad Natak, plays. Advertisement etc. to inculcate a share of responsibility and 
respect towards women should be adopted.  
V EFFECTIVE  UTILIZATION OF  NIRBHAYA  FUND 
(i) The Committee understands that a victim of gender based violence faces hurdles at 
every level be it the filing of a police case, getting the medical examination done and also 
having to hand le the social stigma involved. The Committee recommends that one police 
officer should be ear -marked in every police station to handle such cases and he should be 
trained for handling the victims of gender based violence in a more humane and 
compassionate manner.  
(ii) The Committee took note of the fact that the total app ortioned amount under the 
Nirbhaya Fund currently stood at Rs 7436.66 crores for 32 different projects/schemes across 
the country. However, an amount of only Rs 2647.89 crore had been disb ursed by the 
concerned Ministries/Departments for the various projects/schemes under the Nirbhaya 
Fund, which is on extremely low side . The Committee recommends that the 
Ministries/Departments should be more proactive in the matter and ensure that  these 
projects are implemented on a time bound basis so that  the funds are utilized promptly  as 
these projects are crucial for enhancing the safety of women. 
(iii) The Committee took a note that many of the states have not yet utilized the total funds 
allocated to  them under One Stop Centers (OSC), Women Helpline (WHL) Schemes. The 
Committee further notices that only 20 to 30 percent of the fund has been utilized by 
majority of the States. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development should have direct meetings with the State Governments and UT 
administration quarterly to monitor the expenditure of funds on the above mentioned 
schemes.  
(iv) The Committee recommends that the One stop crisis centres should be set -up in each 
District of the country and counselors trained to handle victims of gender based violence 

45 
 
should be associated with these centres. These  counselors should help the victim in all their 
interactions at the hospital, police station etc.    
(v) The Committee notes that the pace of implementation of the projects funded from the 
Nirbhaya Fund is lethargic and needs to be fast -paced. The Committee recommends that a 
status of implementation of the projects/schemes under the Nirbhaya Fund should be 
overseen by a Committee under the Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary. This would help 
give the Fund the necessary importance and on the other hand help remove the 
administrative hurdles faced in the implementation of the schemes/projects, due to ineffective 
coordination between different Ministries and State Governments.    
 
  

46 
 
ANNEXURE 1 
STATE& UT WISE DATA OF PENDING CASES OF RAPE AND POCSO ACT (combined) 
S. 
No. 
Name of State/UT  Cases pending under Rape 
and POCSO Act as on 
31.3.2018 
Cases pending under Rape 
and POCSO Act as on 
30.9.2019 
1. Andhra Pradesh,  2811 3445 
2. Telangana 5598 6792 
3. A/N Islands 147 0 
4. Arunachal Pradesh 351 300 
5. Assam 4423 6759 
6. Bihar 8878 13728 
7. Chandigarh  98 106 
8. Chhattisgarh  2360 3887 
9. Goa 235 108 
10. Gujarat 5677 8166 
11. Haryana 2529 3600 
12. Himachal Pradesh  889 1162 
13. Jammu & Kashmir  825 1432 
14. Jharkhand  3533 4503 
15. Karnataka  5121 6236 
16. Kerala 9370 10916 
17. Madhya Pradesh  11051 19639 
18. Maharashtra  22775 29574 
19. Manipur 242 179 
20. Meghalaya  645 838 
21. Mizoram 377 335 
22. Nagaland 75 82 
23. NCT of Delhi  2523 11324 
24. Odisha 7292 9171 
25. Punjab 1902 1706 
26. Rajasthan  7431 11078 
27. Tamil Nadu  2049 19996 
28. Tripura 410 554 
29. Uttarakhand  613 1239 
30. Uttar Pradesh  36008 63411 
31. West Bengal  20221 19384 
Total 166882 259837 
 
  

47 
 
ANNEXURE 2  
DISTRIBUTION OF FTSCs 
(EXCLUSIVELY FOR POCSO ACT CASES &COMBINED FTSCs FOR RAPE & POCSO ACT CASES) 
 
Status as on 19/08/2019 (at 1900Hrs.) 
S No. States/UTs Total FTSCs in State/UT 
as per Scheme 
Excl. Court for 
POCSO Act Cases 
FTSCs for rape/and 
or POCSO Act Cases 
1. Andhra Pradesh 18 08 10 
2. Bihar 54 30 24 
3. Chhattisgarh 15 11 04 
4. West Bengal 123 20 103 
5. A & N Islands 01 01 00 
5. Delhi 16 11 5 
6. Gujarat 35 24 11 
7. Assam 27 15 12 
8. Arunachal Pradesh  03 00 03 
9. Mizoram 03 01 02 
10. Nagaland 01 00 01 
11. Maharashtra 138 30 108 
12. Goa 02 00 02 
13. Himachal Pradesh 06 03 03 
14. J&K 04 00 04 
15. Jharkhand 22 08 14 
16. Karnataka 31 17 14 
17. Kerala 56 14 42 
18. Madhya Pradesh  67 26 41 
19. Manipur 02 00 02 
20. Meghalaya 05 05 00 
21. Odisha 45 22 23 
22. Punjab  12 02 10 
23. Haryana 16 12 04 
24. Chandigarh 01 00 01 
25. Rajasthan 45 26 19 
26. Tamil Nadu   14 14 00 
27. Tripura 03 01 02 
28. Telangana 36 10 26 
29. Uttar Pradesh 218 74 144 
30. Uttarakhand 04 04 00 
Total 1023 389 634 
 
 
  

48 
 
Annexure 3 
 
Details of projects/ schemes being implemented under Nirbhaya Fund 
 (Rs. In Cr.) 
Ministries/ 
Departments 
Sl. 
No. Project Name 
Amount 
approved by 
Competent 
Financial 
Authority 
(CFA) 
Fund released 
as per details 
provided by 
Ias 
Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
1 Emergency Response Support system (ERSS) 321.69 318.03 
2 Creation of Central Victim Compensation Fund 
(CVCF) 
200.00 200.00 
3 Cyber Crime Prevention against Women & Children 
(CCPWC) 
195.83 93.76 
Sub-project under CCPWC 28.93 0.00 
4 Proposal for providing facility of Social Workers/ 
Counsellors at the District and Sub- Divisional Police 
Station Level in Delhi 
5.07 4.38 
5 New building with women centric facilities for 
Special Unit for Women & Children (SPUWAC) and 
Special Unit for North East Region (SPUNER) at 
Nanakpura 
23.53 6.51 
6 Various other activities under Delhi Police ‘Safety of 
Women’ Scheme 
10.12 8.13 
7 Safe City Proposal for 8 Cities i.e.   Ahmedabad, 
Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Kolkata, 
Lucknow, Mumbai 
2840.05 1002.52 
8 Establishment of State of Art DNA Lab. At CFSL, 
Chandigarh 
99.76 12.48 
9 Proposal for procurement of Forensic Kits for sexual 
Assault cases 
7.09 13.71 
10 Strengthening DNA analysis, cyber forensic & 
related facilities in SFSLs in 13 states i.e. Delhi, HP, 
J&K, MP, Mah, Manipur, Mizoram, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, TN, Tripura, UP& WB. 
131.09 64.46 
11 Setting up/ strengthening Women Help Desks in 
Police   Stations in all States & Uts     (covering 
10,000 Police Stations). 
100.00 0 
12 Organized Crime Investigation Agency (OCIA) 83.20 appraised by EC 
13 Proposal for implementing a ‘Safe City Project’ in 
Commissionerate Police, Bhubaneswar -Cuttack, 
Govt. of Odisha 
110.35 appraised by EC 
14 Setting up and strengthening Anti-Human Trafficking 
  Units in all districts of States & Uts. 
100.00 appraised by EC 
Ministry of 
Railways 
15 Integrated Emergency Response Management 
System  (IERMS) 
500.00 300.00 
16 Provision of Video Surveillance System at Konkan 
Railway Station 
17.64 17.64 
MeiTY/ IIT 
Delhi 
17 Development & Field Testing of panic Switch based 
safety Device for Cars and Buses for aiding Women’s 
3.49 3.46 

49 
 
Safety 
Deptt. Of 
Justice 
18 Setting up Fast Track Special Courts to dispose off 
cases pending trial under Rape & POCSO Act 
767.25 88.83 
Ministry of 
Road Transport 
& Highways 
19 Abhaya Project Proposal for safety   of women and 
girl child, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh 
138.49 58.64 
20 Women’s safety in public transport, UPSRTC, Govt. 
of U.P. 
83.50 40.20 
21 Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation, Govt. 
of Karnataka on Training women for heavy 
passengers vehicles 
56.06 33.64 
22 Proposal of C -DAC for customization, deployment 
and management of State -wise vehicle tracking 
platform 
465.02 appraised by EC 
Ministry of 
Women and 
Child 
Development 
23 One Stop Centre  (OSC) 867.74 311.14 
24 Universalisation of Women Helpline (WHL) 155.94 45.25 
25 Mahila Police Volunteers (MPV) 27.76 16.24 
26 Chirali Proposal, Women Empowerment Directorate 10.20 4.71 
27 Smart and safe Cities Free from Violence against 
Women and Girls’ Programme, Govt. of M.P. 
1.74 1.05 
28 Safety and Security of Women, Govt. of Uttarakhand 0.72 0.32 
29 Nirbhaya Shelter Home, Govt. of Nagaland 2.84 2.55 
30 NICSI  for Developing Nirbhaya Dashboard 0.24 0.24 
31 Safety and Security of Women, Govt. of Uttarakhand 0.29 appraised by EC 
32 Strategic communication initiatives for women ’s 
safety, Govt. of Tamilnadu 
1.45 appraised by EC 
    Grand Total 6596.77 2647.89 
  
  

50 
 
 
Annexure 4 
 
  
Releas of 
funds to 
States/UTs 
Utilization 
Certificate 
Received *
Releas of 
funds to 
States/UTs 
Utilization 
Certificate 
Received *
Releas of 
funds to 
States/UTs 
Utilization 
Certificate 
Received *
Releas of 
funds to 
States/UTs 
Utilization 
Certificate 
Received *
Releas of 
funds to 
States/UTs 
Utilization 
Certificate 
Received *
1 ANDHRA PRADESH 1167.98 430.47 146.26 106.50 521.39 75.82 1835.63 612.79
2 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 981.85 94.37 224.64 167.84 1206.49 262.21
3 ASSAM 1408.23 122.79 112.63 78.55 1520.86 201.34
4 BIHAR 1187.90 0.00 202.21 133.36 1390.11 133.36
5 CHHATTISGARH 2017.19 928.67 272.57 204.41 715.55 152.78 3005.31 1285.86
6 GOA 96.07 12.11 27.90 0.00 123.97 12.11
7 GUJARAT 1246.51 56.89 377.40 241.50 76.20 41.65 1700.11 340.04
8 HARYANA 1011.31 189.09 51.58 7.11 77.52 88.45 1140.41 284.65
9 HIMACHAL PRADESH 310.96 15.00 49.70 0.00 360.66 15.00
10 JAMMU & KASHMIR 402.29 48.69 119.49 51.33 521.78 100.02
11 JHARKHAND 1078.85 48.43 34.54 0.23 2.64 0.00 1116.03 48.66
12 KARNATAKA 1205.41 0.00 62.70 0.00 56.13 0.00 1324.24 0.00
13 KERALA 468.86 41.00 174.96 106.79 643.82 147.79
14 MADHYA PRADESH 2797.60 590.73 62.70 0.00 30.18 0.00 104.70 0.00 2995.18 590.73
15 MAHARASHTRA 1446.54 19.41 62.70 0.00 1509.24 19.41
16 MANIPUR 590.45 12.89 49.70 49.70 640.15 62.59
17 MEGHALAYA 436.93 58.17 116.48 49.70 553.41 107.87
18 MIZORAM 416.75 64.63 255.56 187.40 35.85 0.00 708.16 252.03
19 NAGALAND 693.28 211.73 257.39 189.23 9.40 0.00 255.60 0.00 1215.67 400.96
20 ODISHA 1038.82 54.46 191.76 140.64 1230.58 195.10
21 PUNJAB 1185.37 65.62 90.13 28.86 1275.50 94.48
22 RAJASTHAN 1078.37 171.86 109.20 0.00 470.97 108.89 1658.54 280.75
23 SIKKIM 132.06 38.90 115.14 47.25 247.20 86.15
24 TELENGANA 1396.91 138.07 157.25 123.17 1554.16 261.24
25 TAMIL NADU 1672.64 45.88 155.70 62.70 1828.34 108.58
26 TRIPURA 374.91 44.66 49.70 0.00 30.16 0.00 454.77 44.66
27 UTTAR PRADESH 4088.39 540.02 237.86 146.66 4326.25 686.68
28 UTTARAKHAND 566.69 164.31 207.90 139.74 68.82 0.00 32.40 0.00 875.81 304.05
29 WEST BENGAL 0.00 0.00 62.70 0.00 62.70 0.00
30 A & N ISLANDS 96.28 38.95 102.03 0.13 0.00 0.00 198.31 39.08
31 CHANDIGARH 37.50 6.99 199.16 132.80 236.66 139.79
32 D & N HAVELI 87.33 35.22 0.00 0.00 87.33 35.22
33 DAMAN & DIU 89.18 8.08 85.16 20.64 174.34 28.72
34 DELHI (UT) 201.18 0.00 49.78 0.00 250.96 0.00
35 LAKSHADWEEP 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
36 PUDUCHERRY 104.08 0.00 51.08 0.00 155.16 0.00
Total 31114.67 4298.09 4525.66 2416.24 1623.84 358.70 863.67 108.89 38127.84 7181.92
OSC WHL Other Total
Sl. 
No. State/UT
MPV

51 
 
Annexure 4A 
Utilization Certificates of Nirbhaya Fund obtained from States/ UTs – MHA 
 
 
  
Releas of 
funds to 
States/UTs 
Utilization 
Certificate 
Received *
1 ANDHRA PRADESH 2085.00 814.01
2 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 768.86 224.03
3 ASSAM 2072.63 305.06
4 BIHAR 2258.60 702.00
5 CHHATTISGARH 1687.41 745.31
6 GOA 776.59 221.00
7 GUJARAT 7004.31 118.50
8 HARYANA 1671.87 606.00
9 HIMACHAL PRADESH 1147.37 291.54
10 JAMMU & KASHMIR 1256.02 324.53
11 JHARKHAND 1569.81 405.33
12 KARNATAKA 19172.09 1362.00
13 KERALA 1971.77 472.00
14 MADHYA PRADESH 4316.96 639.50
15 MAHARASHTRA 14940.06 0.00
16 MANIPUR 878.78 0.00
17 MEGHALAYA 675.39 0.00
18 MIZORAM 883.57 543.68
19 NAGALAND 689.55 357.84
20 ODISHA 2270.53 58.00
21 PUNJAB 2047.08 300.00
22 RAJASTHAN 3373.20 1011.00
23 SIKKIM 613.33 0.00
24 TELENGANA 10351.88 419.00
25 TAMIL NADU 19068.36 600.00
26 TRIPURA 766.59 0.00
27 UTTAR PRADESH 11939.85 393.00
28 UTTARAKHAND 953.27 679.41
29 WEST BENGAL 7570.80 392.73
30 A & N ISLANDS 653.08 147.05
31 CHANDIGARH 746.02 260.83
32 D & N HAVELI 420.00 158.00
33 DAMAN & DIU 420.00 0.00
34 DELHI (UT) 39090.12 1941.57
35 LAKSHADWEEP 614.71 76.93
36 PUDUCHERRY 496.16 128.55
Total 167221.62 14698.40
MHA
Sl. 
No. State/UT

52 
 
Annexure 4B 
Utilization Certificates of Nirbhaya Fund obtained from States/ UTs – MoRTH 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Releas of 
funds to 
States/UTs 
Utilization 
Certificate 
Received *
1 ANDHRA PRADESH 5864.00 0.00
2 ARUNACHAL PRADESH
3 ASSAM
4 BIHAR
5 CHHATTISGARH
6 GOA
7 GUJARAT
8 HARYANA
9 HIMACHAL PRADESH
10 JAMMU & KASHMIR
11 JHARKHAND
12 KARNATAKA 3364.00 383.00
13 KERALA
14 MADHYA PRADESH
15 MAHARASHTRA
16 MANIPUR
17 MEGHALAYA
18 MIZORAM
19 NAGALAND
20 ODISHA
21 PUNJAB
22 RAJASTHAN
23 SIKKIM
24 TELENGANA
25 TAMIL NADU
26 TRIPURA
27 UTTAR PRADESH 4020.00 3110.00
28 UTTARAKHAND
29 WEST BENGAL
30 A & N ISLANDS
31 CHANDIGARH
32 D & N HAVELI
33 DAMAN & DIU
34 DELHI (UT)
35 LAKSHADWEEP
36 PUDUCHERRY
Total 13248.00 3493.00
Sl. 
No. State/UT
MoRTH 

53 
 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met on Thursday, the 19 th December, 
2019 at 11.00 a.m., in Committee Room No. 3, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.   Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya - Chairman 
2.   Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
3.  Dr. Sasmit Patra 
4.  Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
5.  Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
6.  Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
   
LOK SABHA 
7.     Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
8.     Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
9.     Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
10.   Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
11.   Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
12.   Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13.    Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar 
14.   Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
15.   Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  Dr.    Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri   Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri   Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Smt.  Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri   K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director 
Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer  
Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
 
WITNESSES 
      NGOs  
1. Dr Kalpana Vishwanath, Chairperson, Jagori 
2. Ms Jayashree Velankar, Jagori 
3. Dr Ranjana Kumari, Director, Centre for Social Research 
4. Ms Jyoti Wadhera, Centre for Social Research 
5. Ms Sarojini Sapru, Centre for Social Research 
6. Ms Rakesh Dhawan, All India Women’s Conference 
7. Ms Kuljit Kaur, All India Women’s Conference 
8. Mohd Noor Alam, Executive Director, Multiple Action Research Group (MARG)                       
9. Ms Devika Mishra, Multiple Action Research Group (MARG) 
 

54 
 
 
MINISTRY /DEPARTMENTS 
 
1. Shri Ajay Tirkey, Special Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development 
2. Shri Asish Srivastava, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development 
3. Shri Anuj Sharma, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs 
4. Shri Abhay Damley, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highway 
5. Shri Prafulla Kumar, Director, Ministry of Electronics & IT 
6. Shri Murlidhar Pandey, Director, Department of Justice 
7. Shri Rajat Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs 
8. Shri Umesh Balonde, Executive Director, Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) 
2. At the outset the Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and 
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. "issues related to safety of women". It was 
informed that apart from NGO's the Committee would also discuss the issue with the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development in the post lunch session. 
3. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of Jagori, Centre for Social Research, All 
India Women's Conference and Multiple Action Research Group. The Chairman thereafter, 
requested the NGO's to share their experiences on the issue with the Committee and the legislative 
changes and other measures/steps that need to be introduced to check the anti -social elements and 
promote the safety of women. The Chairman also urged them to suggest innovative strategies to 
utilize the Nirbhaya Fund in a more pragmatic and effective manner. 
4. Chairperson, Jagori in her presentation stressed on the need to ensure overall  safety of 
women everywhere be it a college, a school, shopping complex, work place, home and so on. 
Differentiating between prevention of violence and response to violence, she  stressed upon issues 
like including women representatives in urban planning to ensure safe cities, safe transport, gender 
transformative budgeting, panic response and related issues.  
5. Executive Director, MARG in his presentation reiterated some of the issued highlighted by 
representatives of Jagori and stressed upon self -defence training and steps to boost the judicial 
process of women related cases and implementation of legal rights of women. He also stressed 
upon change of mindset and teach the boys to respect and empower women. 
6. Executive Director, Centre for Social Research in her presentation stressed on the issues 
related to dowry harassment, trafficking of women and children, marital rape, swiftness/surety  of 
punishment, setting up of special courts, implementing of Vishakha guidelines and related issues.  

55 
 
7. Representative of All India Women Conference in her briefing to the Committee stressed 
upon filling the vacancies of Judges, gender sensitization training of police personnel, setting up of  
forensic labs in the country, empowering women and inculcating values in the boys. She also 
highlighted the under utilisation of Nirbhaya Fund. 
8. The members then sought some clarifications from the witnesses and asked them to furnish 
their replies in writing. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
(The Committee re-assembled at 3:00 pm) 
9. The Chairman while welcoming the Special Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development expressed his satisfaction on the fact that representatives of different 
Ministries/Departments like Home Affairs, Railways, Road Transport and Highways and Justice 
had come for deliberation on the subject i.e. 'Issues relating to Safety of women' .  The Chairman, 
expressed his concern on the rising incidences of crime against women and sought the views of the 
Ministries/Departments present on the measures that need to be taken to curb this trend. He also 
sought to be briefed about the measures on which the Nirbhaya Fund could be utilized in an 
efficient and effective manner.  
10. Special Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development in his presentation briefed 
the Committee about the legal provisions contained in different Acts and the steps taken to make 
them more effective. The Committee was briefed about the poor status of utiliza tion of the 
Nirbhaya fund and the lack of response by a number of states. The Committee was also briefed 
about the steps taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs to ensure prevention of crimes against 
women and sensitize the police administration while dealin g with victims of gender based crime. 
Representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Railway Board also apprised the 
Committee about the steps taken to ensure safety of women. 
11. The representative of the Department of Justice submitted th at Fast Track Special Courts 
have been set up to deal with heinous crimes against women and cases under POCSO Act. The 
Committee was informed that 20 States/UTs out of 31 have joined the Fast Track Special Court 
Scheme so far and the Department was followi ng up with the remaining States/UTs to join this 
scheme. The representative apprised the Members on the other schemes of the Department such as 
Tele Law Scheme provides legal advice from a panel of lawyers to needy and vulnerable via 
Video-Conferencing, Legal Aid through National Legal Services Authority and involving tools of 
legal awareness through lectures, seminars, sensitization programmes, print & electronic media etc. 

56 
 
12. The Committee then sought clarification on a number of issues. Thereafter, the Chairman 
urged the Ministries and Departments present to make more innovative strategies for the safety of 
women. He also was of the opinion that the situation had reached alarming propositions and stern 
measures were needed to rectify the situation. He di rected the Ministry/ Department concerned to 
furnish their comments/clarifications on the issues raised in the meeting within a week. 
13. A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.  
14. The Committee decided to meet again on 30th December, 2019 in New Delhi. 
15. The meeting then adjourned at 4.51 pm. 
    
  

57 
 
 
 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met on Tuesday, the 30 th December, 
2019 at 11.00 a.m., in Committee Room No. B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.   Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya - Chairman 
2.   Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
3.   Dr. Sasmit Patra 
4.   Dr. Sasikala Pushpa Ramaswamy 
5.   Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
6.   Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
7.   Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
    
LOK SABHA 
 
8.   Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
9.   Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
10.   Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
11. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
12.. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
13. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
14.  Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
15.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
16.  Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr.    Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri   Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri   Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Smt.  Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri   K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director 
Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer  
Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
1. Shri Sanjeev Rajnan, Secretary 
2. Shri I. K. Pandey, DG (RD) & SS 

58 
 
3. Ms Leena Nandan, Special Secretary 
4. Shri Abhay Damle, JS, (Transport) 
5. Shri Amit Kumar Ghosh, JS (Highways) 
6. Shri Kamlesh Chaturvedi,  JS(Parliament) 
7. Shri Priyank Bharti, JS (MVL) 
8. Shri Ashish Srivastava, JS, WCD 
9. Shri R. K. Pandey, Member (Project) 
10. Shri Paresh Kumar Goel, Director (Transport) 
11. Shri Piyush Jain, Director, (MVL) 
 
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD) 
1. Shri V. K. Yadav, Chairman, Railway Board 
2. Shri manoj Pande, Member Taff 
3. Shri Arun Kumar, DG,RPF 
4. Shri R. K. Jain, AM, Tele 
5. Shri Aroma Singh Thakur, DIG, RS 
6. Shri Neeraj Sharma, ED, PM 
7. Shri R. D. Pathak, Director, F (BC) 
8. Shri Rajeev K. Khurana, DDF (BC)-II 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
1. Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary 
2. Smt. Punya Salila Srivastava, Joint Secretary, (WS) 
3. Shri Anuj Sharma, Joint Secretary, (CIS) 
4. Shri Vivek Gogia, Joint Director, NCRB 
5. Ms. Nuzahat Hasan, Special CP,WS 
6. Shri Mukesh Chandra, Special CP, DP 
7. Shri S. K. Singh, DCP, DP 
8. Shri S.K. Jain, Director, CFSL 
 
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
1. Shri Sadanand Date, Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Sushma Taishete, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Alok Agarwal, Member Secretary, (NALSA) 
4. Shri Muralidhar Pandey, Director 
5. Shri Sunil Chauhan, Director, (SALSA) 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
1. Dr. Anju Rathi Rana, JS & LA 
 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and 
apprised them  about the agenda of the meeting i.e. issues related to safety of women. It was 
informed that the Committee would   hear the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, 
Chairman, Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, representatives of the Departments  of Justice and 
Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice and the Home Secretary on the subject “Issues related 
to Safety of Women”. 

59 
 
 
 
3. The Committee first invited the Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and 
Chairman, Railway Board, Ministr y of Railways to make a presentation before the Committee on 
the subject. The Secretary, Road Transport & Highways while making a presentation before the 
Committee informed that a notification was issued in November, 2016 which was reviewed further 
under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 mandating the provision of Vehicle Location Tracking (VLT)  
device and emergency buttons in all public service vehicles registered on or after 1 st January, 2019. 
States have been allowed to decide timelines for implementation of VLT and emergency buttons in 
vehicles registered up to 31 st December, 2018. The Committee was further apprised of the Taxi 
Policy guidelines formulated by the ministry and circulated to all the States/UTs in 2016 containing 
several features relating to saf ety of women. He also outlined interventions under Nirbhaya 
framework by some states.  
4. Thereafter, the Chairman, Railway Board, then informed the Committee that there is a three 
tier security mechanism in the railways comprising of Government Railway Po lice (GRP), District 
Police and Railway Protection Force (RPF). He submitted that these three agencies work together 
to provide protection and security to passengers and passenger area. Among the other major steps 
taken to enhance security of women and chi ldren, he cited the provision of CCTV Cameras at 
stations, Panic button at sensitive locations, facial  recognition system (FRS) and Video Analytics 
(VA) for intrusion detection and locating suspected person etc; CCTV Control room at RPF 
Post/Thana to view and monitor the stations under their jurisdiction, limited monitoring of system 
at divisional/zonal level and setting up of centre command and Control Centre for real time 
viewing and monitoring of any station etc. In the other women specific safety interventions he cited 
operation of (24X7) security help line number 182, sensitization of staff, use of social media 
platforms to enhance security of women passengers, and prosecution of male passengers into 
compartments reserved for women, running of ladies special trains, increasing the women staff and 
regular co -ordination with state police/GRP at all levels for prevention of crime, registration of 
cases, their investigation and maintenance of law and order in railway premises as well as on 
running trains. He also apprised that TEE's had been given power to file FIR in case of any incident 
happening on running trains.  Members raised some queries on the presentation made by both the 
ministries. Some of which were replied to by them. The Committee directed the  witnesses to 
submit the written replies to the queries raised by members of the Committee.  

60 
 
5. The Committee, thereafter, heard the presentation of the Department of Justice and Legal 
Affairs. The representative of the Department of Justice submitted that  Fast Track Special Courts 
have been set up to deal with heinous crimes against women and cases under POCSO Act.  20 
States/UTS out of 31 have joined the Fast Track Special Court Scheme so far. The Department is 
following up with the remaining States/UTs t o join this scheme. The representative apprised the 
members on the other schemes of the Department such as Tele Law Scheme provides legal advice 
from a panel of lawyers to needy and vulnerable via Video -Conferencing, Legal Aid through 
National Legal Servic es Authority and involving tools of legal awareness through lectures, 
seminars, sensitization programmes, print & electronic media etc. The representative of the 
Department of Legal Affairs submitted before the Committee that it has been mandated with the 
task of creating additional post of public prosecutors and engagement of special public prosecutors 
through empowered Committee at district level. In pursuance to the National Mission of Safety of 
Women, Law Secretary requested Chief Secretaries/Administra tors of all States/UTs for ensuring 
the appointment of one prosecutor each in every Fast Track Court. The Members raised a number 
of queries, some of which were replied to by the witnesses. 
(The witnesses then withdrew). 
6. Post lunch, the Committee heard the Home Secretary on the subject. He apprised the 
Committee about major initiatives taken by the Home Ministry for Safety of Women such as 
amendments in criminal laws in 2018 providing for stringent punishment for the offence of rape, 
speedy investigation in rape cases and denial of anticipatory bail to accused in case of rape or gang 
rape of a girl less than 16 years etc. He also apprised the Committee regarding investigation 
tracking system for sexual offences scheme launched in 2019 and creation of Nati onal database on 
sexual offenders, strengthening DNA forensics of Centre and States, training of investigation 
officers and prosecutors in collecting sexual assault evidence and Cyber Crime Prevention against 
women and children and creation of emergency re sponse support system under which number 112 
can be used for all emergency services through Call, Panic button in mobile phone, 112 India 
mobile app, e-mail, website. ERSS has commenced in 28 States/UTs and the remaining states will 
be covered by April 202 0. The Members, then, raised a number of queries, some of which were 
replied to by the Home Secretary and other officials. The Committee directed the witnesses to 
submit written replies to the queries remaining unanswered within one week.  
(Witnesses then withdrew). 

61 
 
7. The Committee, after some discussion, decided to undertake a study visit to Mumbai and 
Hyderabad in the third or fourth week of January, 2020 in connection with examination of subjects 
“Issues and challenges before Higher Education Sector in India, functioning of Higher Education 
Financing Agency (HEFA), Promotion and Recruitment of Sportspersons in PSUs and PSBs, 
Education loan to students and Issues related to Safety of Women.  
8. The Committee authorized the Chairman to approach Hon’ble Cha irman, Rajya Sabha in 
this regard.  
9.  The Committee decided to meet again on 7th January, 2020 in New Delhi. 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
11. The meetings adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
  

62 
 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met on Tuesday, the 7 th January, 2020 at 
3.00 p.m., in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.   Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya - Chairman 
2.   Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
3.   Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
4.   Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5.   Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
6.   Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
7.   Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
    
LOK SABHA 
 
8.    Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
9.    Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
10.  Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
11.  Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
12.  Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
13.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
14.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
15.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
16.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr.    Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri   Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri   Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Smt.  Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri   K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director 
Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer  
Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
WITNESSES 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION 
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY 
 
1. Shri Amit Khare, Secretary,(HE) 
2. Ms. Kamini Chauhan Ratan, Joint Secretary 
3. Ms L. S. Changsan, Joint Secretary  
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar Sinha, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Prashant Agarwal, Director 
6. Ms. Purnima Tudu, Deputy Secretary 
7. Shri Subhash Chandar, Deputy Secretary 
8. Prof Rajnish Jain, Secretary, UGC 
9. Dr. Archana Thakur, Joint Secretary, UGC 
10. Prof. Anil D. Sahasrabudhe, Chairman, AICTE 
11. Prof. M. P. Poonia, Chairman, AICTE 
12. Ms. Anita Karwal, Chairperson, CBSE 
13. Shri Santosh Kumar Mall, Commissioner,  Kendriya Vidalaya Sangatha 
14. Dr. Hrushikesh Senapaty, Director, NCERT 
15. Shri G. Arumugam, Joint Commissioner,  Navodaya Vidalaya Samiti 
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND WELFARE 
1. Shri Manohar Agnani, Joint Secretary 
2. Ms Vidushi Chaturvedi, Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and 
informed them that the meeting had been called to hear the views of Secretary, Department of 
Higher Education who also was holding additional charge of Department of School Education & 
Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development and the representatives of Ministry of Health 
and Welfare on issues related to safety of women. 
3. The Secretary, Department of Higher Education, holding additional charge of Department 
of School Education and Literacy made his submissions under three heads viz (i) special measures 
taken for educating girls and women, (ii) security measures and (iii) va lues in education. He 
informed about the steps taken viz free uniform & books to girl students up to class 8th, provision of 
girls toilets in schools up -gradation of Kastuba Gandhi Balika Vidalayas, stipend to girl child with 
special needs, NISHTHA program me for sensitisation of teachers, and updation of school books 
indicating a more gender neutral role in the books. He further informed that it had been stipulated 
that at least fifty percent of the school management Committee Members would be women. 
Programmes for self defence training were being run wherein boys were also covered. Emphasis 
was given on life skill education for values in education and value education kit had been 

64 
 
developed. In Higher Education, emphasis was being given on preventing gender based harassment 
of students.  
 
4. The Chairperson, CBSE, thereafter informed the Committee about the revision of affiliation 
Bye-laws to incorporate stringent guidelines for ensuring safety of students covering all other 
aspects, viz. hygeine, water safety, building safely etc, she informed about incorporation of value 
integrated questions in the CBSE text books, training of teachers in life skills and value education, 
to develop more responsible students. 
 
 
5. Secretary, UGC informed they had started a course i .e. Jeewan Kaushal, having 3 -4 
components viz. communication skills, problem solving skills and a module on value education. He 
further informed about other courses viz "GURU DAKSHTA" for faculty induction, 
'DEEKSHARAMBH' for student induction, JEEVAN KAUS HAL, MULYA PRAVAH for 
ensuring a women friendly environment in colleges and universities. Further, 159 women's study 
centres had been opened in different colleges and universities. The Committee was also briefed 
about the efforts made to expedite the women  grievance redressal mechanism in the Higher 
Education Institutions.  
 
6. Representative of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare informed about the structure 
devised for providing health care facilities to women especially in rural areas. He further stated that 
their primary role was at 2 levels (i) to ensure that women affected by violence are not 
discriminated and how healthcare providers remain sensitive while providing care, and (ii) to train 
the healthcare personnel including doctors to understand gender  based violence and bring a change 
in their behaviour. The Committee was informed about the sensitization steps taken to address the 
doctors and health care workers handling Medico -legal cases involving victims of gender violence. 
It was also informed that  the Ministry was planning to train teachers in schools and colleges to 
become health and wellness ambassadors for, the students. The Committee was informed that the 
gender based violence victims were priority focus area for them and all efforts were being  made to 
provide the best possible care to them. He further informed that since health was a State subject 
under the Constitution, States were encouraged under National Health Mission. 
 
7. The Committee, thereafter, sought clarifications on a number of issues . The Chairman 
highlighted the lack of adequate health care centres in rural parts of the country and the time lost in 
conducting medical examination of victims of gender based violence which leads to prosecution 
cases becoming weak in courts. He urged the  Ministries/Departments present to work in co -

65 
 
ordination to ensure that the society becomes sensitive to the needs of genders violence. He 
thereafter, directed that the clarifications sought by the Members be furnished with two weeks. 
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
9. The Committee decided to meet again on 17th January, 2020. 
10. The meetings adjourned at 4.50 P.M. 
 
 
 