PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
THREE HUNDRED FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninetieth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of School
Education and Literacy
(Ministry of Human Resource Development)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th February, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February/Magha, 1939 (Saka)
301
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rs-hrd@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
THREE HUNDRED FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninetieth Report on the Demands
for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of School
Education and Literacy
(Ministry of Human Resource Development)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th February, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th February, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February/Magha, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS  .......................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-38
Chapter-I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government............................................................................... 2-14
Chapter -II Observations/Recommendations  which  the  Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply ..................... 15-27
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee................ 28-37
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in  respect of which replies of the
Government are still awaited....................................................... 38
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS — AT A G LANCE................................................... 39-40
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 41-44
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 45-53

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted w.e.f.  1 st September, 2017)
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
4. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury
5. Prof. M. V . Rajeev Gowda
6. Shri Anubhav Mohanty
7. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
8. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa
9. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
10. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat
12. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
13. Shri Nihal Chand
14. Shrimati Bhawana Gawali (Patil)
15. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
16. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
17. Prof. Chintamani Malviya
18. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
19. Shri Ramachandran Mullappally
20. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
21. Shri Hari Om Pandey
22. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
23. Shri N. K. Premachandran
24. Shri K. N. Ramachandran
25. Shri M. I. Shanavas

(ii)
26. Dr. Nepal Singh
27. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
28. Shri Satyapal Singh
29. Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati
30. Shri P . R. Sundaram
31. Shrimati P . K. Sreemathi Teacher
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P . Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby
present this Three Hundred First Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in its Two Hundred and Ninetieth Report on Demands for Grants
(2017-18) of the Department of School Education and Literacy (Ministry of Human Resource
Development).
2. The Two Hundred Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Human Resource Development was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 21st March, 2017.
The Replies of the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, were
considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 8th February, 2018.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the
8th February, 2018.
N
EW D ELHI; DR. SA TYANARAYAN JA TIYA
8 February , 2018 Chairman,
Magha 19, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development,
Rajya Sabha.

                   ACRONYMS
AMS : Automated Monitoring System
A WBP : Annual Work Plan & Budget
B E : Budget Estimate
BPL : Below Poverty Line
CTSA : Central Tibetan Schools Administration
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
GAR : Gross Attendance Ratio
KGBVs : Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas
KVS : Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
MDMS : Mid-Day-Meal Scheme
NCERT : National Council of Educational Research and Training
NER : North East Region
NMMSS : National Means-Cum-Merit Scholarship Scheme
NSIGSE : National Scheme of Incentive to Girls for Secondary Education
NUEP A : N ational University of Educational Planning and Administration
NVS : Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti
P AB : Project Approval Board
PMMMNMT : Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya National Mission on Teachers
& Teaching
PTR : Pupil Teacher Ratio
RE : Revised Estimate
RMSA : Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan
RTE : Right To Education
SFDs : Special Focus Districts
SSA : Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in its Two Hundred and Ninetieth Report on the Demands for Grants (2017-2018) of the
Ministry of HRD, Department of School Education and Literacy. The 290th Report was presented to both
the Houses of Parliament on 21st March, 2017. The Report was thereafter, forwarded to the Department
of School Education and Literacy on 23rd March, 2017. Subsequently, reminders were issued to the
Department on 25th August and 17th November, 2017 for timely submission of the Action Taken Notes
to the Committee. Thereafter, the Department has vide their communications dated 4th January, 2018
furnished their Action Taken Notes to the Committee.
2. The Committee is anguished to note the inordinate delay by the Department in furnishing
their ATNs and would like to impress upon the Department the fact that if these ATNs were
furnished in time the Committee would have been in the position to present its ATRs in the just
concluded Winter Session, 2017. This would have given time to the Department to assimilate/
incorporate the views/observations of the Committee in its DFGs for the subsequent years. The
Committee would, therefore, like to impress upon the Department to adhere to the time limits
in furnishing their ATNs in future.
3. The Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the observations /
recommendations contained in the 290th Report have been categorized as follows:
(i) Chapter-I: Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government
Paras - 2.3, 3.4, 3.10, 3.15, 3.47, 4.6, 4.12, 4.13, 4.15, 4.22, 4.23, 4.24, 5.12, 5.26, 6.4,
6.22, 6.24, 6.28, 6.40, 7.6 and 8.5
Total - 21
(ii) Chapter-II: Observations /Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue
in view of the Government's reply -
Paras - 2.12, 2.5, 2.10, 2.15, 3.17, 3.30, 3.34, 3.44, 4.4, 5.5, 5.7, 5.18, 5.20, 6.23, 6.34,
7.7 and 9.5.
Total - 17
(iii) Chapter-III: Observations /Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee -
Paras - 3.3, 3.6, 3.8, 3.13, 4.14, 9.6, 6.14, 6.15, 6.37 and 7.5
Total -10
(iv) Chapter-IV: Observations /Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government
is still awaited.
Paras - Nil
Total - Nil

2
CHAPTER-I
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee notes that the Budgetary Allocations of the Department, as compared to the GDP
of the Country, has seen a consistent decrease during the last five years. This does not speak well of
the thrust that needs to be given to the education sector at this stage. If the Country is to march ahead,
the focus on the education of our younger generation is of utmost importance and the pace of spreading
of education right from elementary to secondary level cannot be slackened. The Committee observes that
the increase in the Budgetary Allocation this year, though small, should have to be judiciously utilized
by the Department so as to ensure that these reach the beneficiaries and also help in covering the various
schemes, which have suffered from dearth of funds in the pr evious years.            (Para 2.3)
Action Taken
Education is in the Concurrent List and the responsibility of running majority of the schools vests
with the States. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is the designated
vehicle for implementation of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009.
Section 7(1) of the RTE Act, 2009, states that both the Centre and the State shall have concurrent
responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the provisions of the Act. Section 7(2) states that
estimates for implementing the Act shall be prepared and the PAB (Project Approval Board) outlay may
be taken as the estimates prepared in compliance with this sub-section. Further, Section 7(3) states that
the Central Government shall provide to the State Government, as grants-in-aid of revenues, such
percentage of expenditure as it may determine, while, Section 7(5) states that the State Government shall,
taking into consideration the sums provided by the Central Government to a State Government, be
responsible to provide funds for the implementation of the provisions of the Act. It is, therefore, clear
that the responsibility for meeting the fund requirement vests with both the Centre and the States.
With the acceptance of the recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission by the Government
of India, the devolution of funds to the States has been increased from 32% to 42 % of the net Union
Tax Receipts. In this regard, it is stated that States have received an additional fund of ` 186149.79 crore
more during 2015-16 as compared to 2014-15 through 14th FC Award. Similarly, there is additional
devolution of funds of ` 232528.13 crore more during 2016-17 as compared to 2014-15. With the
enhanced devolution of funds, States have been advised to allocate more funds to SSA so as to carry
out the functions and responsibilities conferred upon the States by Section 7(5) of the RTE Act, 2009.
Accordingly, this Department has written to the Chief Secretaries of all the States for ensuring the
allocation of adequate amount of funds for the School Education Sector in their state budget.
To ensure that the Central fund releases are used to enhance the quality of education, States have
been advised to spend at least 30% on entitlements and quality related interventions under SSA.
2

3
Observations / Recommendations
RIGHT TO EDUCATION/SARV A SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RTE/SSA)
The Committee also notes that the figure of Actual Release in 2016-17, stood at ` 20,614.57 Crores
(91.62% of R.E.). The Committee, accordingly, impress upon the Department to ensure complete utilisation
of funds.   (Para 3.4)
Action Taken
The Budget Estimate in 2016-17 was ` 22500.00 crore. Against the BE, the total amount of
`21678.46 crore was released to all States and UTs which represents 96.35% of the BE. The Department
had sent the file containing 3rd Supplementary re-appropriation proposal of funds under SSA to Ministry
of Finance in January 2017. However, the final approval for re-appropriation of the amount came late
in the evening of 31st March 2017. All out efforts were made by the department for release of funds.
However, due to shortage of time, all funds could not be released. However, during 2017-18, all efforts
would be made to plan the releases in such a manner that the funds are suitably re-appropriated upto
2nd supplementary stage itself and a need for 3rd supplementary re-appropriation does not arise.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee finds it heartening to note that the reach of Primary School and Upper Primary
Schools has improved dramatically and has reached a near universal level. However, in the case of Upper
Primary Schools, the accessibility radius has been fixed at 3kms. while that of Primary Schools are at
1km. The Committee recommends that the Department should now strive to reduce this radius to a level
of the Primary Schools so that no Student has to go beyond 1km to get education.   (Para 3.10)
Action Taken
A neighbourhood school is a school located within the defined limits or area of neighbourhood, as
notified by the State or UT Government under the State RTE Rules. The Department is making every
effort to render universal access at elementary level.
Observations/Recommendations
Impact on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes:
The Committee notes that dropout rate in both the SC and ST categories have gone down. The
Committee feels that it is still high and needs strict measures to check it. The Committee, therefore, directs
the Department to take appropriate measures.   (Para 3.15)
Action Taken
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) supports provisions for textbooks to all children in Government/local
body and Government aided schools. SSA provides two sets of uniform to all girls, SC, ST children and
Below Poverty Line (BPL) children, wherever State Governments have incorporated provision of school
uniforms as a child entitlement in their State RTE Rules. Further, Mid-day-meals is provided to all
children from MDM scheme.

4
Under the SSA, the districts with high concentration of population (i.e. 25% and above) of SCs and
STs have been identified as Special Focus Districts (SFDs).
Section 12(1)(c) of RTE Act provisions 25% reservation in private unaided schools to children
belonging to disadvantaged weaker sections.
Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) are upper primary residential schools for girls belonging
predominantly to the SC, ST, OBC and minorities in difficult areas.
Residential Schools and Hostels: SSA norms provide for provisioning of residential schools and
hostels to the following categories of children:-
(a) Children in sparsely populated, or hilly and densely forested areas with difficult geographical
terrain where opening a new primary or upper primary school may not be viable, and
(b) Urban deprived children, homeless and street children in difficult circumstances and without
adult protection, who require not merely day schooling, but also lodging and boarding facilities.
A total of 944 residential facilities with a capacity of 1,01,905 children have been sanctioned
to States under SSA. So far under the SSA, 309 residential schools and 635 hostels with a capacity
of 54,750 and 47,155 students respectively have been sanctioned to the States/UTs.
Through the interventions made under SSA in SFDs, at the national level the enrolment share of
SC children as per Unified District Information System for Education (UDISE), 2015-16, at primary and
upper primary level is 19.94% and 19.49% respectively, whereas their share in population is 16.6% (as
per Census 2011). Similarly, the enrolment share of ST children at primary and upper primary level as
per UDISE 2015-16, is 10.64% and 9.81% respectively, whereas their share in population is 8.6% (as
per Census 2011).
Observations / Recommendations
Complaints/Irregularities
The Committee is happy to note that the Department has put in place an effective monitoring system
to oversee the implementation of SSA. There are undoubtedly important lessons to be learnt from many
of the highly successful States and efforts should be made to replicate them in the underperforming
States. The new initiative of Digital India and use of ICT must also be utilized to bring in more
transparency, timely transfer of benefits to the beneficiaries and even in the spreading the light of
education across the Country.   (Para 3.47)
Action Taken
The Department launched the Shagun portal in January, 2017 for online monitoring of the
implementation of SSA interventions and also showcasing the best practices of different States and UTs.
‘ShaGun’ aims to capture and showcase innovations and progress in Elementary Education sector of
India by continuous monitoring of the flagship scheme -Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA). ShaGun, which
has been coined from the words 'Shala' meaning Schools and 'Gunvatta' meaning Quality, has been
developed with a twin track approach.

5
First, is the Repository with an engaging interface that focuses on positive stories and developments
in the field of School Education. In this repository, best practices are documented in the form of videos,
testimonials, case studies, and images, which displays state-level innovations and success stories that are
driving improvements in performance under SSA. This repository has a decentralized management
structure that enables State governments to choose, upload and manage their own content.
Secondly, it has an online monitoring module to measure state-level performance and progress
against key educational indicators. It has been developed to collect and report data which will enable the
government and administrators to track the efficiency with which SSA funds are being utilized and the
results that this is delivering. SSA is a centrally sponsored scheme providing universal access to education
to children in the age group of six to fourteen years of age.
This online monitoring by Shagun portal will enable the Government Officers of States and UTs (at
all levels) to assess the implementation by using their specific passwords it comprises of questionnaires
related to various interventions under SSA and the performance of the State, which will be filled in by
the States and UTs. There are 122 Reports which will be automatically generated from the data filled
in the questionnaires. These Reports, along with the success stories in the Repository, will create an
online platform to see the status of implementation of the SSA and the elementary education in all States
and UTs.
Observations/Recommendations
Mid-Day-Meal Scheme (MDM)
The Committee is dismayed to note that funds have remained unspent in this flagship scheme of
the Department and the Committee finds it astounding to see the reasons for the un-utilized funds as
furnished by the Department. The Committee cannot agree with the logic that the since the child
population in the NER is 6% of the total population, the 10% funds allocated for the region could not
be spent. The Department cannot afford to undermine the hardship that children have to go through to
get a formal education and the difficulties in getting food and other resources, which the children in the
Cities and Urban areas get very easily. The Committee recommends that the Department furnish the
specific data of the Children in the NER, which could not come under the umbrella of MDM and what
steps have been taken by the Department in this regard. Secondly, the Committee wishes to know whether
the saturation of demand for Kitchen-cum-Stores in the NER is due to policy paralysis on the part of
the State Governments or whether all the areas have actually been covered. The Committee recommends
that the Department furnish a report in this regard for the information of the Committee.  (Para 4.6)
Action Taken
It was submitted that the during the financial year 2016-17 ` 9483.40 crore (97.76%) was released
against the RE of 9700.00 crore, similar to expenditure trend of the financial year 2015-16. One of the
reasons for less release is less child population of NER-State. As per decision of Central Government,
NER States are allocated 10% of the BE of the Scheme. But the child population under MDMS in NER
States is 6% (approximately) of the total number of children under the Scheme. During the year
2015-16 61.10 lakhs children (approximately 6% of total children) were covered on an average basis in
NER region against the total number of 10.03 crore children covered under the scheme.

6
Under Mid-day Meal Scheme (MDMS) financial assistance is provided on the basis of number of
children and number of working days. Financial assistance is proportionate to number of children and
number of working days, therefore, if the number of children and number of working days increase,
the financial assistance will also be increased. Similarly, if number of children and number of working
days decrease, the financial assistance will be decreased. Therefore, total allocation of 10%funds could
not be released in NER region.
PAB-MDM has approved 88293 Institutes for implementation of Mid Day Meal in NER States
during 2017-18. So far kitchen-cum-stores have been sanctioned for 84439 schools from 2006-07 to
2016-17. Thus, 96% of the schools have been sanctioned kitchen-cum-stores under MDMS in NER
States. Out of 84439 sanctioned kitchen-cum-stores, 75704 kitchen-cum-stores (90%) have been
constructed. The construction work is in progress in 3495 kitchen-cum-stores(4%). The work in the
remaining 5501 schools is yet to start.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes from the data furnished by the Department that in many of the States, the
students to cook ratio is very high, whereas as per the MDM guidelines, 1 cook-cum-helper (CCH) for
schools up to 25 students, 2 cooks-cum-helpers for schools with 26 to 100 students and one additional
cook-cum-helper for every addition of up to 100 students can be engaged. In Kerala, the ratio is
extremely high at 183 students per CCH, which is beyond any justification. The Committee, however,
notes that Kerala also give an additional amount of 
` 6500 per CCH as honorarium above the minimum
mandatory amount of `1000 per CCH. This is the second highest honorarium after Puducherry, which
gives `13000 per CCH.   (Para 4.12)
Action Taken
As per MDM Guidelines, 1 cook-cum-helper (CCH) for schools up to 25 students, 2 cooks-cum-
helpers for schools with 26 to 100 students and one additional cook-cum-helper for every addition of
up to 100 students can be engaged.
However, it may be stated that the scheme is implemented in partnership with the States/UTs. The
overall responsibilities for providing cooked and nutritious mid day meal to the eligible children lie with
the State Government and Union Territory Administration. The State Government of Kerala has framed
its own guidelines for engagement of cook-cum-helpers and is paying wages instead of honorarium to
its cook-cum-helpers because of high cost of labour. The Central share is only `600/- out of the
honorarium of `1000/- The State is contributing `6500/- per cook-cum-helper from its own resources.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee also observes that around 3 Crore children are still beyond the coverage of MDMS
and the submission of the Secretary that the figure is high due to duplication of AADHAR data of the
number of Children. The Committee recommends that a foolproof enrolment of Children should be
carried out at the earliest for the MDMS so that a realistic assessment of the Scheme could be
done.

7
Action Taken
It was informed that a notification has been published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) dated
28th February, 2017 which came into effect in all States and Union Territories except in the States of
Assam, Meghalaya and the State of Jammu & Kashmir. As per the notification, the beneficiaries are
required to furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number or undergo Aadhaar authentication and, if not
enrolled for Aadhaar, shall have to apply for Aadhaar enrolment by 30th June, 2017 provided that till the
time Aadhaar is assigned to the individual, he/she shall be entitled for benefit subject to the production
of the following identification documents, namely: (Para 4.13)
(i) If he or she has enrolled, his or her Aadhaar Enrolment Id slip; or
(j) A copy of his or her application made for Aadhaar Enrolment and an undertaking by the parent
or legal guardian that the child is not availing benefit from any other school and any one of
the documents mentioned in the notification.
The date for enrolment of school children under Aadhaar is being extended to 31st December, 2017.
It would bring in transparency and efficiency for delivery of services or benefits or subsidies
simplify the Government delivery processes and enable beneficiaries to get their entitlements directly to
them in a convenient and seamless manner and useful for making realistic assessment of the Scheme.
The Aadhaar also obviates the need for producing multiple documents to prove one's identity.
From the year, 2016-17 onwards, child-wise data with Aadhar ID, wherever available, or software
generated unique ID is being collected by States and UTs. This would lead to the creation of a National
level child-wise database giving full details of all students in all Government, Aided and Private schools
from standard I to standard XII. This would also help to track all the children for enrolment, attendance,
promotion, completion and migration issues and curb dual or inflated enrolment.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes from the data furnished that 7,96,319 Kitchen-cum-Stores (KcS) have been
constructed till 30.09.2016 out of a total sanctioned 10,05,477 KcS. This is approximately 79% of the
target that has been achieved. However, it is seen that in some states instead of the KcS increasing across
the period, it had decreased e.g., Andhra Pradesh and Manipur in 2014-15, Maharashtra in 2016. While
some states/UT like Goa, Delhi, Lakshadweep did not have any infrastructure development, other states
like Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Telangana have seen a multiple fold increase in the number of KcS. The
Committee feels that there has been a commendable progress in the infrastructural development and it
feels that the Department should continue to press for more such development so that the objective of
the scheme is achieved in the best possible manner. (Para 4.15)
Action Taken
It was informed that a total number 817400 Kitchen-cum-Stores has been constructed as on 31st
March, 2017.

8
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee appreciates the different initiatives undertaken by the Department in pursuance of
the objectives of the MDM Scheme. It is by no means, an easy task to feed the Children across the
Country hot cooked, wholesome and Hygienic food everyday. The Committee appreciates the innovative
best practices adopted by many of the States, which have established to be lessons for other States. The
Department should replicate these innovations in other States or search for other ways more suited to
the local conditions. The Department should now focus on the most downtrodden parts of the Country,
where these activities would establish to be a life-changer for each child. (Para 4.22)
Action Taken
A compendium on State wise 'Best Practices under Mid Day Meal Scheme has been issued to all
States for replicating the best practices of other States in their States and the same are shared on web
portal of MDM.
Observations/Recommendations
4.23 The Committee also appreciates that only 273 complaints have been received during the last three
years. This shows that the Scheme is functioning well. However, to ensure that irregularities/Quality issues
do not go unreported, the Committee recommends that continuous monitoring and on-the-spot surprise
checks should be carried out from time to time.
Action Taken
The Department has stated that the recommendation of Committee had been noted. The Government
has already adopted an elaborate monitoring mechanism at Central, State and District levels to ensure that
quality food is served to children under the Mid-Day Meal Scheme. In addition, the Centre constitutes
Joint Review Missions (JRMs) consisting of educational and nutritional experts, which review the
scheme through field visits from time to time. The reports of JRMs are shared with concerned States/
UTs for taking corrective action on the findings.
The department was also in process of putting in place an Automated Monitoring System (AMS)
of data collection for real time monitoring of MDMS. Such data would be captured from schools with
no cost to school HM/Teacher. An IVRS based system of data collection is already running in States of
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar for last few years. Under the proposed automated system, States/UTs are in
process of setting up a suitable system of data collection ( i.e. IVRS/SMS/Mobile Application) from
schools on a daily basis and use it for purpose of monitoring and timely follow up action. States/UTs
would push data on specific fields on a real time basis to the Central Server maintained by NIC. A central
portal for analysis and display of data at the Central level will be managed by NIC. So far, 24 States/
UTs have started pushing daily data into central server namely Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Daman & Diu, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Odisha,
Puducherry, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.

9
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee is also aware of issues like delayed payments to vendors, which would directly reflect
on the quality of food given to the Children. The Committee also, during its study visits found out that
the PPP-mode in MDM is running exceptionally well and it should be replicated in other parts of the
Country as this would help in standardizing the food quality and also will be easier to monitor. The
Committee appreciates the involvement of renowned NGOs like Akshay Patra, as the concept of Centralized
Kitchen would help in ensuring both the quality of food and making available standardized food across
the State. (Para 4.24)
Action Taken
The Department stated that it was in the process of revising the guidelines regarding engagement
of NGOs/Civil Society organizations in MDM. A provision is being made to the effect that schools in
urban areas and in identified rural areas which have good road connectivity, for the purpose of leveraging
efficiency gains, may use the facility of centralised kitchen for cooking meals wherever required in
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central Government. The Model MOU for engagement of
Civil Society Organizations under Mid Day Meal have since been issued to all States/UTs on 26th April,
2017.
Observations/Recommendations
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA):
The Committee notes that there has been marked improvement in various parameters indicating the
general improvement in the status of secondary education in the Country. However, the data pertaining
to GAR (Gross Attendance Ratio) is especially worrisome as it is indicative of the regional imbalance
in the coverage of RMSA across the Country. Most of the NE States are languishing way below the
National Average and this need to be addressed ur gently. The Committee feels that spread of education
to the NER is very important as the Country cannot march ahead without taking each of its Citizens
along. The need for Students from that region to travel to far off places leaving the comfort of their
homes to get education would automatically be addressed if the Department stringently target the GAR
of this region. (Para 5.12)
Action Taken
The RMSA framework, states that the objective of this scheme is to improve access to secondary
schooling to all young persons according to norms - through approximate location (say, Secondary
Schools within 5 km.) including open schooling. However in hilly and difficult areas, these norms can
be relaxed.
In the last three years, the national GAR has increased from 76.85% to 86.48%. In NER States
GAR has increased from 59.52% to 61.86% in the last three years and 91 New Schools have been
approved to NER States in 2016-17 (Only in case of Mizoram, there is increase in habitation leading to
a slight decrease in GAR).The GAR of the North Eastern Region is also affected due to the challenging
geographical terrain. However, the GAR as per UDISE 2016-17 in North East is 85.65% which is higher
than the national average of 80.01%.

10
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken under the Integrated RMSA Scheme and feels that
these have great potential in improving the health of Secondary Schools in the Country. The Committee,
however, understands that much work still remains to be done and desires that the Department should
now focus on the quality of Education imparted under RMSA. The Committee is aware of the disconnect
between the curriculum and the expertise/knowledge required in the practical world and as a result, the
employability of the Students after passing out from the schools is missing. Further, due to this disconnect,
students have to undergo private coaching to clear the entrance exams for Higher Education like
Engineering, Medical, Law etc. and this has resulted in the mushrooming of all sorts of unregulated
coaching Centres. This is actually an accurate reflection of how irrelevant the present curriculum in
Secondary Schools is for preparing the Student for his future career. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should review the curriculum so as to make it more relevant for their higher
education or for their future vocation/ employability. (Para 5.26)
Action Taken
In order to improve quality education to students at the secondary level various interventions are
funded under RMSA. These include provision of: (i) additional teachers to improve Pupil Teacher Ratio,
(ii) induction and in-service training of Principals, Teachers (iii) Math kits, Science kits, Sports kits,
(iv) Lab equipments, (v) Special teaching for learning enhancement, (vi) ICT facilities in schools,
(vii) Guidance and Counselling services.
NCERT is the academic authority at the National Level that prepares and reviews the curriculum
and course content for School Education from time to time and the States are advised to adopt or adapt
the same as per their local content.
The initiatives taken under RMSA with a view to improve Quality in government secondary school
education (class 9th & 10th) is at (Annexure-'B').
The component of V ocationalisation of secondary and higher secondary education is being implemented
under the umbrella of RMSA from Class IXth onwards. The scheme integrates vocational education with
general academic education with an aim to prepare educated, employable and competitive students for
various sectors of the economy. Till date, number of schools approved under the scheme is 8227 and
the scheme has been implemented in 6483 schools.
Observations/Recommendations
VI. Autonomous Bodies: Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
The Committee takes note of the budget allocations for the year 2017-18 and also the expenditure
incurred in the last 4 years. From the data given above, the Committee notes that the actual expenditure
for the years 2013-14, 2014-15, and 2015-16 has been more than the allocations made at the RE level.
It seems that it includes the expenditure incurred from non-lapsable funds given to north-eastern states
in the previous years. The Committee is unable to comprehend the actual expenditure incurred in all these
years from the allocations actually made, rather the Department should have furnished the figures
separately. (Para 6.4)

11
Action Taken
In regard to the Actual expenditure incurred by the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan during the year
2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, it is informed that Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan incurred the expenditure
taking into account the Unspent balance of the previous year as well as Internal receipts generated in
the form of Tuition fees and other Misc. income. Unspent amount of previous year were carried forward
to the subsequent year with the approval of Ministry and utilized the funds accordingly. Non lapsable
funds given to North-eastern states in the previous year were utilized in the subsequent year for the
benefit of North-eastern area only.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee takes note of the refresher courses /workshops for the Teachers. The Committee,
however, desires that KVS should also study the efficacy of these courses and make an assessment as to
what extent these are useful, areas for improvement, if any and apprise the Committee accordingly.
(Para 6.22)
Action Taken
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan has devised monitoring tools to assess the efficacy of the In-service
Courses conducted for teachers. Besides, supervision and monitoring is done by Regional officers and
Principals / Vice-principals / H.Ms. for effective improvement. The positive impact of these supervision
and monitoring is reflected in the Board result of Kendriya Vidyalaya students i.e. (Pass percentage
98.92% in Class X and 95.46% in Class XII in 2016).
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee also observes that for a huge Country-wide organization like KVS, having only 8
Hostels is very inadequate. The Committee feels that the Department can review this aspect for increasing
the number of Hostel. (Para 6.24)
Action Taken
There is no proposal for having more hostels in KVs. As such, Kendriya Vidyalayas are day schools
and no such demand has come.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee feels that a good beginning has been made by the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
and a stage has now come for focusing more on the quality of Education and a composite overhauling
of its functioning is the call of the Hour for bringing all-round development for its Students.
(Para 6.28)
Action Taken
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan has taken good number of initiatives to ensure enhancement in quality
education and all round development of its students. The measures undertaken by KVS in this regard are
as under:
• In-service Training Programme : Organizing In-service programme and short term duration
Workshops for teachers to improve their quality of teaching. Specialized agencies of national

12
level such as National Institute of Financial Management, Faridabad (for PGTs of Commerce
& Economics) and Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan (for TGTs of Sanskrit) have also been involved
in teacher's training. Besides, specialized training of teachers of Physical Health & Training
through National Institute of Physical Education at Gwalior and Guwahati is also being done.
• Supervision of Classroom :  A well-defined and organized system of classroom supervision
through three tier system (School level by the Principals, Regional level by the Assistant
Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners and National level by the officers of KVS(HQ) is
in place.
• Use of Technology: Use of Technologyin education which ensures delivery of quality education
to the students.
(i) E-Classrooms :  KVS has taken various initiatives for strengthening teaching-learning
process, such as, e-classrooms. 3700 e-classrooms already exists in KVS spread across
the country in which 3000 more e-classrooms have been added through the session
2016-17. A good number of e-classrooms are in the process of establishment.
(ii) Modernization of Labs. :  411 Kendriya Vidyalayas have already been equipped with
modern facilities of Lab Equipments.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes that a considerable amount of time have lapsed since the new JNVs were
sanctioned in 2014 and so far only 40 proposals have been approved, which have been scheduled for
completion by 2019. The Committee feels that work is not going on as per schedule. The Committee asks
the Department to closely monitor the program so that time lines are met. The Committee wishes that
the Department should now take up the matter in a mission mode and ensure that atleast the 15 approved
proposals are completed during this year itself and also ensure that the Vidyalayas can start functioning
without any further delay. (Para 6.40)
Action Taken
The approval of Govt. of India for opening of new 62 JNVs have been communicated in the month
of December, 2016. In a very short period of time (3 months) proposals of land for construction of
JNVs have been arranged in following cases -
(i) Number of JNVs approved - 62
(ii) No. of proposals received - 42 (as on 31.03.2017)
(iii) No. of proposals approved - 27
(iv) Sites found suitable, but pending due to process, Environmental Forest clearance / status of
land - 06
(v) Proposals received and inspection report awaited - 02

13
(vi) Proposals received but rejected as not found suitable - 09
(vii) Proposals not received so far - 19
The implementation is being monitored closely.
Observations/Recommendations
VII. NATIONAL MEANS-CUM-MERIT SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME (NMMSS) AND NATIONAL
SCHEME FOR INCENTIVE TO GIRLS FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION:
The Committee also notes that there has been a major increase in the Budgetary allocation of both
these schemes and these can be put to good use in helping deserving students get the financial support
in furtherance of their education. The Committee, however, observes that the scholarship amount of
` 6000/-, which was last fixed in 2008, is very less and not adequate during the present expensive times.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should enhance the Scholarship and incentive
of both the Schemes adequately. (Para 7.6)
Action Taken
As per the evaluation study carried-out by National University of Educational Planning and
Administration (NUEPA) for these schemes, the schemes have helped poor families in sending their
children for secondary and senior secondary education and in the process continuing their education. The
schemes have acted as a motivation for scholarship holders to continue their education and be clear about
their academic goals.
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 20.10.2017 has recommended for
continuation of the scheme for three years from 2017-18 to 2019-20 along with enhancing the scholarship
amount under National Means-cum-Merit Scholarship Scheme (NMMSS) to Rs 12000/- from ` 6000/
- per annum from 2017-18 onwards. The further necessary action is being taken on the recommendations
of the EFC.
Regarding National Scheme of Incentive to Girls for Secondary Education (NSIGSE), EFC in its
meeting on 20.10.2017 has recommended that the scheme has not been able to achieve the stated
objectives and therefore either the scheme should be discontinued or redrafted in a manner that the
beneficiary girls covered under the scheme are able to get the incentive amount in time. Further necessary
action in the matter on the recommendations of the EFC is being considered.
Observations/Recommendations
VII. NATIONAL MEANS-CUM-MERIT SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME (NMMSS) AND NATIONAL
SCHEME FOR INCENTIVE TO GIRLS FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION (NSIGSE):
The Committee notes that the performance of the Scheme in terms of budgetary utilization has been
quite weak through out the time except for the initial year i.e., 2013-14. This could explain the massive
cut in the BE for two consecutive years. The Committee understands from the submission by the
Department that this is the only scheme which is implemented through the Voluntary Agencies and not
directly by the Department and hence utilization of funds have been very low and erratic. The Committee

14
recommends that the Department should ensure that the objectives of the scheme should not suffer for
want of funds. (Para 8.5)
Action Taken
Approximately ` 100.00 crore budget is required to provide grant-in-aid as per approved parameters
of the Scheme. The grant provided during the last four years as under:
Financial Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure
2013-14 100.00 118.00 114.41
2014-15 100.00 79.99 61.98
2015-16 75.00 100.00 93.67
2016-17 40.00 115.85 113.74
As can be seen from the above table, there had never been under utilisation of the funds during
the last four years except in the year 2014-15. In this financial year, the tenure of the Scheme was to
be extended from 11th Plan to 12th Plan period. The first installment had been released but the second
installment could not be released for want of extension to the 12th Plan. The extension was based on
the evaluation by the third party which was completed by December 2014. In the meantime, the RE was
fixed to ` 79.99 crore. The file for extension was submitted to the Competent Authority in the month
of December 2014. The proposal for continuation was finally approved by the Competent Authority in
March 2015.

15
CHAPTER-II
OBSERV ATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
Observations/Recommendations
II BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee notes from the above status of utilization of funds for its major schemes that the
Department could spent roughly 89% of the funds allotted in the Financial Year 2016-17. However,
around 10% of the funds still remain to be utilized in two months' time and this is a factor which needs
a thorough introspection by the Department for making itself more efficient. The Committee is more
worried about certain schemes, namely, NCERT, National Bal Bhavan, Adult Education & Skill
Development, Central Tibetan Schools Administration, Support to VAs for AE & Skill Development,
National Literacy Mission Authority in which the utilisation has been considerably low. The spending
pattern in these schemes needs a review and the factors affecting it adversely, should be identified and
rectified on a mission mode. The fact that if the funds meant for these schemes/programmes are not spent
fully, it may imply that either the projections of the Department for them are not realistic, or the
implementing agencies of these Schemes are not able to carry out their responsibilities efficiently. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should come up with an action plan to address
this issue.  (Para 2.12)
Action Taken
Adult Education: The current financial year i.e. 2017-18, there is a provision of ` 320.00crore as
BE for implementation of the scheme of Saakshar Bharat. The BE, RE & Expenditure for last three years
for implementation of Saakshar Bharat Scheme for Adult Education and Skill Development is provided
as under:
(` in Crore)
Financial Year B E RE Expenditure
2014-15 450 371.35 358.35
2015-16 450 360 344.13
2016-17 320 244.15 213.42
The savings are largely due to the non-utilization of funds by the states especially North-Eastern
Region.
Central Tibetan Schools Administration (CTSA): The Government of India decided in January,
2013 to transfer the CTSA school to DOE-CTA Dharmshala within 3 years. The transfer is being
done in two phases. 47 schools have been already transferred to CTA in two phases. The decision
to transfer the remaining 14 schools from CTSA to CTA has been under consideration of the
15

16
Government. Since the decision about the No of schools to be transferred to CTA could not be
taken till 31.03.2017, the activities relating to major repair, maintenance and other major works
could not undertaken during the financial year 2016-17, resulting to the savings.
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT): The grant-in-aid provided by
the Ministry to NCERT during 2016-17 was fully utilized, except the salary head. The NCERT has
in fact incurred excess expenditure under all the heads except Salary head, as against the funds
made available to them by the Government. The over and above expenditure incurred beyond the
grant-in-aid provided by the Ministry was met out from the Council's Internal Miscellaneous Receipts.
As regards, savings under the head 'Salaries - Non Plan', it is stated that provision was made in
the BE 2016-17 for meeting the expenditure on account of implement the recommendations of the
7th CPC as notified by the Government of India during 2016-17 itself, but due to some administrative
reasons, the same could not be implemented in 2016-17. Further, NCERT was in the process of
recruitment of LDC but the same could not get completed. Hence, there was some savings under
Salary head.
Observations/Recommendations
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Committee agrees with the observation of the Department and feels that there should, however,
be a mechanism to sensitise and to motivate the States to make available certain portion of the funds
for social sectors of which education should be one of the top priority areas. The Committee wishes that
the suggestion of the Department be looked into by the Finance Ministry. (Para 2.5)
Action Taken
The Department has written to the Finance Ministry to evolve such a mechanism to ensure that
States earmark adequate and exclusive funds for school education out of the enhanced devolution of
funds under the 14th Finance Commission. The Department has also written to the Chief Secretaries of
all the States for ensuring the allocation of adequate amount of funds for the School Education Sector
in their state budget.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee observes from the above that the amount allocated for the year 2017-18 for NER,
SCSP and TSP are slightly higher than the previous year but it is certainly less than the prescribed %
age being only 9.12, 18.28, and 9.78 respectively. The Committee therefore desires that the reasons
therefor may be furnished in the action taken replies. (Para 2.10)
Action Taken
From the Financial Year 2017-18, the Plan and Non-Plan classification has been done away with
and the Schemes of the Department of School Education & Literacy are now classified into Schemes
and Non-Schemes. In 2016-17, the amount of ` 40,000.00 crore is the Plan Budget out of total Budget
of ` 43554.00 crore. In 2017-18, the BE for both Schemes and Non-Schemes is ` 46356.25 crore. As

17
per instructions of Ministry of Finance, the Department has to keep the percentage of NER, SCSP and
TSP in respect of Schemes only. But it was stipulated that the allocation for SCSP/TSP should not be
less than the allocation made under these components during the previous two years. Therefore, the
Department has followed the instructions of Ministry of Finance in this regard and though the percentage
of amount allocated for NER, SCSP and TSP appears less than the prescribed percentage, it is more than
the allocations made in the previous two years.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes that expenditure pattern of the Department in the last five year plan period
reflects its overall capacity to absorb the funds meant for its schemes. There cannot be any justification
for seeking more funds from the Government unless it is able to fully spend the funds at hand. The
Committee had, in its previous reports, regularly emphasized on this aspect and yet the situation remains
the same. The Committee feels that it is high time that the Department should introspect and come out
with a foolproof plan to execute its objectives and the education of the children should not suffer for
any reason and more so when there is unspent fund remaining idle. (Para 2.15)
Action Taken
The expenditure of the Department against Budget allocation is as under:
(` in crore)
Year BE RE Actual % w.r .t. RE
2013-14 52701.00 50136.30 46975.74 93.70%
2014-15 55115.10 46805.00 45756.59 97.76%
2015-16 42219.50 42286.50 41809.28 98.87%
2016-17 43554.00 43896.04 42904.01 97.74%
2017-18 46356.25 NA 27686.06 59.72%
(up to 30.09.2017)
It may be observed from the above table that the actual utilization of funds has been in the range
of 93.70% to 98.87% over the last five years. The savings if any occurring, are mostly in North Eastern
Region (NER) which cannot be used for other States/UTs, as the allocation to NER funds is a mandatory
provision to be kept.
Further, the expenditure is limited to the final allocation made, although the requirements are much
more and there are committed liabilities which become pending due to lesser availability of funds. This
is evident from the proposed requirement and allocation made for the last three years as tabled below
and also in the MTEF projections and allocations:
(` in crore)
Y ear Proposed by D/o SE&L Allocation as per M/o Finance
2017-18 84117.86 46356.25
2018-19 92721.48 51024.51
2019-20 100156.29 55648.94

18
The MTEF proposed by the Department and allocation as per M/o Finance is compared as under:
(` in crore)
Y ear Proposed by D/o SE&L Allocation as per M/o Finance
2017-18 84117.86 46356.25
2018-19 92721.48 51024.51
2019-20 100156.29 55648.94
Observations/Recommendations
Impact on Girls' Education:
The Committee observes that the data provided by the Department is not up-to-date to have
meaningful understanding of the progress. The Committee finds that it is absolutely imperative on the
Department to put in more efforts to collect and furnish the latest figures so that at least the yearly
progress could be studied and recommendations could be given by the Committee. This would help the
Department in giving timely intervention to address all issues plaguing its schemes and programmes and
help in achieving its targets in its true letter and spirit.           (Para 3.17)
Action Taken
National University of Educational Planning and Administration (NUEPA) annually collects the data
on various educational indicators as on 30th September of every year under U-DISE. To address the
concerns on the quality and reliability of its data, especially on enrolment and infrastructure, the Department
has decided to upgrade the existing system of school-wise data wef 2016-17.
NUEPA is working on developing software to make UDISE data collection online with inbuilt
validation rules and consistency checks. Once this is implemented, the time lag is expected to reduce.
IMPACT ON INFRASTRUCTURE
Observations/Recommendations
3.30 The Committee appreciates the effort put in by the Department in ensuring the benefits of SSA that
are now visible across the Country. It also appreciates the new focus of the Department on the poorest
and the most downtrodden part of the Country, which has been left out till now and could not get the
benefits. However, the Committee wishes to see this issue to be brought to its logical conclusion and
hence, the steps taken by the Department in these neglected Districts and the status of the implementation
of the SSA programmes and its infrastructures may be furnished to the Committee.
Action Taken
Under SSA, since its inception upto 31.12.2016, 99365 primary schools, 62670 upper primary
schools and 954621 additional classrooms have been constructed in SFDs (Special Focus Districts).
Besides, Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) have played an important role in furthering the goal
of girls' education in educationally backward blocks of the country. A total of 330 KGBVs, which are

19
upper primary residential schools for girls, have been sanctioned in the SC SFDs, out of which 329 are
operational. Similarly, 508 KGBVs have been sanctioned in ST SFDs, out of which 507 are operational.
In SC SFDs, 4 residential schools and 2 hostels have been sanctioned. In ST SFDs, 110 residential
schools and 200 hostels have been sanctioned. In LWE SFDs, 71 residential schools, 101 hostels and
913 KGBVs have been sanctioned.
Under SSA, provisions have also been made for residential schools/hostels and transportation/
escort facility for children living in sparsely populated areas, children living in areas where schools cannot
be opened due to unavailability of land and children in need of care and protection. Special training is
also provided to all such children who are school dropouts and long absentees and they are enrolled in
"back to school" camps.
Additionally, other strategies adopted under SSA such as strengthening school infrastructure, improving
pupil-teacher ratios, providing incentives like free textbooks, uniforms for eligible category of children
and mid-day meal in schools have proved to be useful in increasing the enrolment of children in
elementary schools.
Observations/Recommendations
UNDER-PERFORMING STATES
The Committee notes from the information submitted by the Department that infrastructure facilities
like Play ground, Boundary Wall, Ramp etc. are still not developed across the States. While facilities
like Drinking Water and Library are being provided by a majority of the States. The Committee, however,
cannot ignore the fact that most of the NER States are faltering in all these facilities. The condition is
also bad in States like Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha
and Rajasthan, where facilities like electricity, playground, boundary wall, ramp etc. need to be provided.
(Para 3.34)
The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Department should make concerted efforts
with the co-operation of State Governments to ensure full utilization of allocated funds.
Action Taken
States & UTs propose the additional requirement for school infrastructure components in their
respective Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B), based on gaps as per UDISE data and priority, along
with justifications, admissibility and the notified Schedule of Rates (SoR) in respect of the items for
consideration and approval by Project Approval Board (PAB) in Ministry of Human Resource Development
(MHRD).
The physical and financial achievements of the States/UTs are periodically monitored by MHRD
through review meetings and field visits by the officials of MHRD. Joint Review Mission meetings are
held twice a year wherein progress of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is also reviewed. State Education
Secretaries and State Project Directors participate in the review meetings. An online monitoring system
for SSA has also been developed.
During every quarter, Govt. of India is reviewing the progress of SSA School Infrastructure. The

20
review includes progress of implementation and issues relating to the implementation of SSA as well as
utilization of funds. Based on the discussion with the officials from the States/UTs, the Minutes relating
to the review of progress are issued and uploaded on MHRD website.
A real time monitoring of the implementation of the Scheme has started on the SSA SHAGUN portal
from 18th January, 2016. In this portal, there are 122 Reports which will be automatically generated from
the data filled in the questionnaires and these Reports, along with the success stories in the Repository,
will create an online platform which can be viewed by officers in the Department to see the status of
implementation of the SSA and the elementary education in all States and UTs.
Observations/Recommendations
Impact on Quality of Education
The Committee is appalled to note the existing percentage of untrained teachers in active service
and it is even more alarming to note that there is no visible effort to address the issue. Some of the States
have extremely high level of un-trained Teachers e.g., Tripura, Meghalaya, Nagaland, West Bengal,
Bihar, J&K, Assam and Manipur and some of the figures are higher than 50%. The Committee feels that
these figures speak for themselves and no amount of words can elaborate the state of quality of education
in the Country. The most worrisome fact is that the Department has no plan to tackle this situation and
the apathy still seems to continue. There is no dearth in the number of qualified candidates for teachers
in the Country and it is one of the top Countries in the world supplying highly qualified Teachers,
Researchers and many more professionals across the Globe. The Committee fails to understand why we
are not able to tap this abundant resource on one hand and cry about high level of unemployment on
the other hand. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department must act as the Bridge
between the huge workforce that the Country churns out every year and the existing vacancies in its
schools. The Committee also directs the Department to furnish the details of the 'Pandit Madan Mohan
Malviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching' and its funding and achievements to
Committee. (Para 3.44)
Action Taken
It is stated that Hon'ble Prime Minister of India launched the Central Sector Scheme of Pandit
Madan Mohan Malaviya National Mission on Teachers & Teaching (PMMMNMTT) having All India
coverage, on 25th December, 2014 with an outlay of ` 900 crores.
(ii) The Mission aims at addressing comprehensively all issues related to teachers, teaching,
teacher preparation, professional development, curriculum design, and developing assessment
& evaluation methodology, research in developing effective Pedagogy. This is one of the major
thrust areas of action of the Government. The Mission addresses, on one hand, current and
urgent issues such as supply of qualified teachers, attracting talent into teaching profession and
raising the quality of teaching in schools and colleges. On the other, the Mission will pursue
long term goals of building a strong professional cadre of teachers by setting performance
standards and creating top class institutional facilities for innovative teaching and professional
development of teachers.
(iii) The Mission focuses on these goals in a holistic manner dealing with the whole sector of
education without fragmenting the programmes based on levels and sectors as school, higher,

21
technical etc. This is an umbrella scheme aimed at creating synergies among the various
ongoing initiatives on Teachers and Teaching under Ministry of HRD and other autonomous
institutions.
(iv) The Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and actual expenditure of the Scheme as
of now are as given below (Total expenditure under Scheme till date is ` 156.16 crore):
(` in crores)
Y ear 2014-15* 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Budget Estimates (BE) 100 100 120 120
Revised Estimates (RE) 15 63 110 Not available
Actual Expenditure 1.25 59.95 70.06 24.90
* The Scheme was launched in December, 2014
** F.Y . 2017-18 expenditure as on date is ` 24.90 crores
(v) During the 12th Plan period, from the inception of the scheme, i.e. from December 2014, 42
institutional arrangements have been operationalised which are as follows: 9 Schools of Education,
3 Centres of Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education, 16 Teaching Learning Centres,
4 Faculty Development Centres, 2 Subject Based Networks and 3 Centres of Academic
Leadership & Education Management have been set up. Grants have been given to 5 Innovation
Awards and Teaching Resource Grants for conduct of workshops/Seminar and Teacher innovator
awards. In all, 1000 teachers and teacher educators are under preparation through integrated
B.Ed & M.Ed programmes. Through in-service training, capacity building and professional
development programmes, nearly 25000 teachers /faculty have been trained. Under Leadership
development programmes, 5084 senior level functionaries have undergone training, 1500 faculty/
researchers etc. have been networked through SBN in life sciences, specialized research in
teacher education is ongoing through Centres within Schools of Education in the areas of pre-
service teacher education; curriculum development, educational planning & development ;
learning and pedagogic studies; disability studies and special education, language teaching,
online teaching and assessment & evaluation. Teaching resources have been developed through
TLCs, SBNs, and Centres in SoEs, such as, ICT related applications, e-content , pedagogic
resources and assessment tools , software programmes are being developed by institutes like
SGTB Khalsa, IISER Bhopal, IIT Madras, IIT Bombay, IIT Kanpur, MGAHV Wardha, IIT
Hyderabad etc. inter-alia in form of e-kit, TPACK Curriculum, mooKIT, FlipKIT ,Educational
software, open source computational tools like Octave & Python, Raspberry Pikits, Attendance
App, iChem data, CNCs, Internet of Things (IoTs), Nano Science etc.
(vi) Further, vide Nine PAB meetings held till now, a total of 48 proposals from various Universities/
Institutes from all over the country have been approved till now for setting up institutional
arrangements under various components of the Scheme. The Mission consists of the following

22
components (list of all the approved centres under various institutions may be seen at
Annexure-X):
Sl. No. Name of the Component Total Number to Number set
be set up up till now
1. Schools of Education (in Central Universities) 30 10
2. Centres of Excellence for Curriculum and Pedagogy 50 26
2.1 Centres of Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education 5 3
2.2 Teaching Learning Centres 25 19
2.3 Faculty Development Centres 20 4
3. Inter-University Centres for Teachers' Education 2 -
4. National Resource Centre for Education 1 -
5. Centres for Academic Leadership and Education Management 5 3
6. Innovations, Awards, Teaching Resource Grant, including No specific 6
Workshop & Seminar number
7. Subject Networks for Curricular Renewal and Reforms No specific 3
number
Total 48
Observations/Recommendations
IV. MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME (MDM)
The Committee appreciates the effort put in by the Department to provide wholesome and hygienic
food to the Children across the Country and the achievements during the 12th Plan period. However, the
Committee notes that the total Budgetary allocation of 
` 67,303.40 crore for this period, falls way short
of the target of ` 90,155 Crores then approved by the Planning Commission. The Committee also notes
that the performance has seen a continuous slide since the beginning of the 12th Plan and this needs
to arrested as soon as possible and the Department must introspect and also find out the reasons for the
continuous decline in the utilization of the funds, despite the allocation being reduced every year. The
Committee feels that the lessons learnt during this period, if not implemented, would not help in
achieving future targets and even the increase of 
` 300 Crores in the allocation of 2017-18 would not
be utilized completely and optimally.            (Para 4.4)
Action Taken
The following reasons may be attributed to less allocation of BE during 12th Five Year Plan:
(i) The Ministry of Finance revised the sharing pattern between Central and State Governments/
UTs under Mid-Day Meal Scheme with effect from 01.04.2015 as per details given below:

23
Category Existing sharing Revised Sharing
pattern pattern
Non NER States 75:25 60:40
J&K, HP and Uttarakhand 75:25 90:10
NER including Sikkim 90:10 90:10
UTs 75:25 100
It is pertinent to note that the allocation of Non-NER State is almost 80% of the total Due
to revision of sharing pattern, the BE for 2015-16 is reduced by more than 30% than the BE
for 2014-15.
(ii) Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in its meeting held on 9th July, 2014 'Deferred' the
revisions/modifications in the norms of cooking cost linked to WPI; honorarium to each CCH
@ `2000/- per month for 12 months against existing `1000/- for ten months in a year;
Transport Assistance at PDS rates subject to maximum of `150/-per quintal for States other
than NER and Himalayan States, MME @3% instead of 2% and Kitchen Devices @ `15,000/
- on an average for each school linked to enrolment. These norms were recommended by EFC
in its meeting held on 30th January, 2014 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure).
Due to non revision of these norms, the allocations were lesser than the anticipated amount.
Observations/Recommendations
V. RASHTRIYA MADHYAMIK SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RMSA):
The Committee notes that the expenditure pattern for RMSA is quite healthy throughout the 12th
plan period. However , it dropped significantly during 2016-17, which is a cause of concern. The
Department has, however, not given any reasons for the poor performance in this financial year but
hopes that it would be able to achieve its targets fully and efficiently. The Committee recommends that
the Department should ensure that the funds earmarked for the Schemes should be released timely so that
last minute rush is avoided to cover its lost grounds. Such a practice would directly and adversely affect
the performance of the Scheme. (Para 5.5)
Action Taken
During 2016-17, against a Budget Estimate of `3700.00 crore, an amount of ` 3699.30 crore
(99.98%) has been released. The funds under RMSA were released based on Utilisation Certificate &
Audited Reports received from States/UTs. Due to delay in submission of these documents by States/
UTs, the balance funds were released during Feb - March 2017.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes that the Department has performed well in executing its goals. However,
much more needs to be done as it has fallen short of the targets in all its sub-schemes except opening
of new schools, where the target has been achieved. The performance has been worst in strengthening

24
of existing schools, appointment of additional teachers and setting up of Girls Hostel in all the EBBs. The
Committee feels that the Department should introspect on these issues keeping in view the distance it
has covered during the 12th plan period and the targets set. (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
The Centrally sponsored scheme of Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) was launched
in March, 2009 but during 11th Plan against an approved outlay of ` 20,120 crore, allocation of only
` 4,562 crore was made. During 12th Plan period, as against approved outlay of ` 32,846 crore, only
` 17,040 crore has been allocated. The actual allocation being much lesser than the approved outlay
during both 11th & 12th Plan affected the pace of implementation. However till 2016-17, 12394 New
Secondary Government schools are approved out of which 11300 schools are functional. Under
Strengthening of existing schools, 25715 Science Labs, 20384 Computer rooms, 29705 Art Culture
Rooms, 25776 Library Rooms, 52068 Additional class Rooms and 11831 Water facilities have been
approved. the completion rate for these works is around 56.39 %.
Appointment of additional teachers: In order to ensure availability of adequate numbers of
teachers in schools and to improve the Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR), it has been decided that the State
Govt. should first fill-up the vacancies under State Cadre and then the teachers left after filling the
post of State cadre, will be counted as additional teachers approved under RMSA. This will further
prompt the states to fill up their vacant posts.
Girls' Hostel: Construction has been completed in 1165 Girls Hostels (GH), 683 GH are in progress
and 1147 Girls Hostel are functional having enrolment of 103948 Girl Students.
Construction of hostels/making them functional and implementation of the scheme is the responsibility
of the State. Earlier the funds of Girls Hostel were being approved on the basis of fixed normative
cost due to which many states were unable to complete the construction of the hostels as per norms
of the scheme. In 2013-14 the funds were sanctioned on the basis of State schedule of Rate
(SSOR) to improve the progress of construction of Girls Hostel. Besides, there are local issues like
non availability of land and time taken for construction purposes which affect the entire process.
Department monitors the progress of constructions with the State Government by way of writing
letters, monitoring though video conferences, conducting workshops, Project Approval Board Meetings
etc. to ensure effective performance of the scheme.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee finds that the reasoning of the Department that the recruitment of Teachers falls
within the Administrative Domain of the States and hence it is absolved of the responsibility for
recruitment of Teachers cannot be agreed to. The Division of Executive Powers between the Centre and
States is clearly defined and the Centre is well within its right to give directions to the State for execution
of the Central Laws. This is especially so, if there is an administrative paralysis in the States. The
Committee feels that the Department should search for innovative solutions keeping in mind the huge
vacancies in Teachers' posts under RMSA, which have remain unfilled for so long. There can be a

25
Central Recruitment Agency for RMSA, which can have representation of both Central and State
Governments, which can take adequate steps for recruiting Teachers or if required, conduct recruitment
exams for filling these vacancies or this activity can be given to other organizations like EdCIL or any
similar agency. (Para 5.18)
Action Taken
Instructions are issued to the States to fill up vacant posts through communications, review
meetings, PAB meetings etc.
To ensure availability of adequate numbers of teachers in schools and to improve the Pupil Teacher
Ratio (PTR), it has been decided the State Government first needs to fill-up the vacancies under State
Cadre and then the teachers left after filling the post of State cadre will be counted as Additional teachers
approved under RMSA. This will further prompt the states to fill up their vacant posts.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee appreciates the initiatives undertaken by the Department in furtherance of the
Scheme and especially in the context of use of ICT at schools which is the way ahead for the future.
However, the Committee observes from the Financial details of this scheme that in 2015-16, out of a
total of 36 States/UTs, only 10 States have projects approved under ICT component and the remaining
26 States have no projects. Further, the Committee notes that the data provided by the Department is
not up-to-date and no information has been furnished for 2016-17 and hence it is not in a position to
make a reasonable assessment of such an important aspect of RMSA. (Para 5.20)
Action Taken
The scheme currently covers both Government and Government aided Secondary and Higher
Secondary Schools. Financial assistance is provided to States, on the basis of the approvals accorded
by the Department for a period of 5 years. Fresh approvals for covering new schools in a particular year
are given on the basis of states' proposals, past performance and availability of funds.
So far, 88078 schools have been approved to be covered under ICT component of RMSA. State-
wise list of total number of schools approved under ICT in Schools component of integrated RMSA is
enclosed at Annexure-A. During 2016-17, an amount of ` 323.29 crores was released to States/UTs for
implementation of ICT scheme.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee observes that last year there were 711 KVs functioning from permanent Buildings
as compared to this year's figure of 732 permanent Buildings. This indicates that only 21 New school
Buildings were added since last year. This achievement is quite poor compared to the target of 101 under
construction KVs last year. The Committee feels that the Department needs to streamline its functioning
and ensure that all concerned agencies deliver on time. The plea of fund constraint by the Department
as mentioned in preceding paras cannot be agreed to as Budgetary allocation for the organization has
not yet been fully utilized. The Committee recommends that the Department should keep a strict timeline
for finishing the new target of 102 New Buildings this year. (Para 6.23)

26
Action Taken
As on 01.01.2016, 711 KVs were functioning in permanent buildings which increased to 732 on
01.01.2017 i.e. 21 KVs were added during this period. 101 KVs were under construction as on 01.01.2016.
Completion of KV buildings takes 2-3 years i.e. 6-12 months pre tender activities (Planning, drawing,
design, estimation and award of tender) and 18-24 months post tender activities (execution period).
However, availability of adequate funds is also a pre-requisite for timely completion of these school
buildings.
As on 1.2.2017 there were 102 KVs under construction, and the funds required for completion of
these buildings is estimated at `1156.48 crores over a period of 2-3 years. As against a target of
completion of 30 new school buildings during 2017-18, KVS has so far completed construction of 10
school buildings till 1.11.2017.
As regards the observation of the Committee about the budget allocation not being fully utilised, it
has been informed by KVS that, as on 31st March, 2017 only an amount of ` 10.23 crores was lying
unspent against the total grant of ` 476.73 crores under the head "Creation of Capital Assests" during
the year 2016-17. This unspent balance also included the last instalment of ` 9.33 crores released in the
last week of March, 2017.
The progress of the construction activities are regularly monitored by the Works Committee chaired
by Vice Chairperson and Additional Secretary (SE&L). Further, the Commissioner KVS, at his level also
reviews the progress from time to time.
A web based monitoring system is also being contemplated with the following objectives:
• To monitor/review the progress/funding of ongoing works.
• To have an inventory of physical facilities available in Kendriya Vidyalayas and their present
condition with photographs.
• Expediting transfer of land by sponsoring authorities in stipulated time.
• Planning of new school buildings.
Observations/Recommendations
B. NA VODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI (JNV):
The Committee observes that the utilization of funds has been very good in the last three FYs,
however, there has been a significant drop this time and only 75.05% of the Budgetary allocation has
been utilized. The Committee notes that by this time last year, the utilization figures were as high as
92.38% and the Committee finds this worrying as difficulty will rise in achieving targets, if funds remain
un-utilized. The Committee feels that the fiscal discipline can be improved so as to avoid hasty performance
towards to FY closing to meet the targets. The Committee appreciates the efforts undertaken by the
Department during 2013 to 2016 and hopes that such a trend continues in the years to come. Proper
utilization of funds can ensure achievement of the objectives laid out for this scheme and the talented
children from rural areas can enjoy quality education and provide them with the opportunities to develop
their potential.  (Para 6.34)

27
Action Taken
As on 31.03.2017, a fund of ` 2693.31 crore is anticipated to be utilized against the Grant-in-aid
of ` 2619.57 crore received from the Ministry for the financial year 2016-17. The excess expenditure
has been met from the unspent balance of previous year and internal receipts of current financial year.
Hence, there exists no underutilization of budget allocation during financial year 2016-17 in respect of
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee further observes that the Department could not meet its target of awarding scholarships
to 1 Lakh Students per annum due to the criteria fixed for the eligibility of the Student. The Committee
feels that the Department should not be so strict with the technicalities of the Scheme and it should
explore the reasons as to why this criteria is not being met and if necessary review the scheme.
 (Para 7.7)
Action Taken
The Department has requested the State Governments to ensure that enough number of students
appear in the NMMSS test so that they are able to fulfil the allotted quota of scholarships for their states.
It has also been proposed in EFC memorandum, prepared for continuation of the scheme for three years
from 2017-18 to 2019-20, to raise the parental income from the present ceiling of `1.50 lakh to ` 2.5
lakh per annum which will enhance the number of eligible students for appearing in the NMMSS test
leading to selection of sufficient number of students for the scholarships, and thus helping in fulfilment
of quota of scholarships by such States. Further, some changes in the pattern of NMMSS test are also
proposed to be carried out so that more number of students are able to qualify the NMMSS test.
Observations/Recommendations
IX. STRENGTHENING OF TEACHER TRAINING INSTITUTIONS
The Committee notes that the Budgetary allocation has decreased over the period of the Twelfth
Plan period and the reason seems to be inability of the Department to fully utilize the funds during the
initial years of the plan period and even in the 2016-17. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should pursue with the concerned authority for enhancement of the funds for strengthening
the existing infrastructure and other facilities but more importantly to ensure that the funds are utilized
properly and more efficiently.    (Para 9.5)
Action Taken
It may be noted that the budgetary allocation has decreased over the period of the Twelfth Plan
period, as the sharing pattern has been revised to 60:40 in place of 75:25 for general states by the finance
department. Department is in process to pursue with the concerned authority for enhancement of the
funds for strengthening the existing infrastructure and other facilities.

28
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Observations/Recommendations
RIGHT TO EDUCATION/SARV A SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RTE/SSA)
The Committee notes that the budget allocation for SSA has increased to 
` 23,500 crores for
2017-18, as compared to ` 22,500 crores in 2016-17. However, from the submissions of the Department
it is observed that the allocation of ` 23,500 crores as B.E. for 2017-18 for implementation of RTE-
SSA programme is against a demand of `55,000 crores and this is quite disturbing. The Department has
submitted that SSA is the designated scheme for the implementation of the RTE Act, 2009. The outlays
estimated under the Scheme are as per the requirements of the States and UTs for fulfilling the norms
and standards laid down under the Act and this budgetary allocation will not be sufficient to meet the
estimates of States and UTs under SSA. The Committee notes that the allocation for SSA is less than
half of the projected demand. It implies that either the demand of the Department was not realistic or
the Ministry of Finance did not consider it appropriate to agree thereto. In this backdrop the Committee
would like to know the reasons for this shortfall and also to what extent the activities under SSA are
likely to suffer. The Department is accordingly directed to explain it in its action taken replies.
(Para 3.3)
Action Taken
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) has been designated as the
vehicle for implementation of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009
vide Cabinet decision dated 9th September, 2010. The allocation of funds to all States and UTs under
the SSA is decided in the Annual Plans which are prepared on the basis of the entitlements laid down
in the RTE Act, 2009 e.g., appointment of teachers necessary to maintain the Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR),
creation of school infrastructure as per the norms, provision of uniforms and text books to children in
Government Schools etc.
All States and UTs submit their proposal under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) programme through
their Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B). Based on their proposal, the Project Approval Board (PAB)
in the Ministry of Human Resource Development approves an outlay as per the programmatic and
financial norms of the scheme, which includes the share of both the centre and state. The approved
outlay is apportioned between central and state share as per the existing funds sharing pattern of 60:40
(90:10 for North-Eastern States and 3 Himalayan States).
Section 7(1) of the RTE Act, 2009, states that both the Centre and the State shall have concurrent
responsibility for providing funds for carrying out the provisions of the Act. Section 7(2) states that
estimates for implementing the Act shall be prepared and the PAB outlay may be taken as the estimates
prepared in compliance with this sub-section. Further, Section 7(3) states that the Central Government
shall provide to the State Government, as grants-in-aid of revenues, such percentage of expenditure as
28

29
it may determine, while, Section 7(5) states that the State Government shall, taking into consideration
the sums provided by the Central Government to a State Government, be responsible to provide funds
for the implementation of the provisions of the Act. It is, therefore, clear that the responsibility for
meeting the fund requirement vests with both the Centre and the States.
With the acceptance of the recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission by the Government
of India, the devolution of funds to the States has been increased from 32% to 42% of the net Union
Tax Receipts. In this regard, it is stated that States have received an additional fund of ` 186149.79 crore
more during 2015-16 as compared to 2014-15 through 14th FC Award. Similarly, there is additional
devolution of funds of ` 232528.13 crore more during 2016-17 as compared to 2014-15. With the
enhanced devolution of funds, States have been advised to allocate more funds to SSA so as to carry
out the functions and responsibilities conferred upon the States by Section 7(5) of the RTE Act, 2009.
Accordingly, this Department has written to the Chief Secretaries of all the States for ensuring the
allocation of adequate amount of funds for the School Education Sector in their state budget.
In order to ensure that activities related to quality improvement and entitlements as per the RTE Act
are fulfilled, the Department has categorized all the activities under SSA into three categories. The
category I & II comprises of all essential activities including entitlements as per the provision of RTE
Act, 2009 and category III is for civil works and teacher salary. The States have been advised to incur
at least 30% of the expenditure towards category I and II out of the available funds so that the main
activities are not affected. The States have also been advised to utilize the additional funds devolved out
of 14th FC Award.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the clarification furnished by the Department regarding
allocation of only `````23,000/- crore as B.E for 2017-18 for implementation of RTE-SSA programme.
The Committee, however, would like the Department to urge the State Governments that the
additional funds devolved to the States as a result of the 14th Finance Commission award are
spent in a prudent manner and the RTE-SSA programme does not suffer due to delay in the
allocation of resources for it. The Department should monitor the performance of the States
lagging behind to the implementation of RTE-SSA programme and take remedial steps wherever
needed so that outreach of this scheme to all essential activities do not get marred. The Committee
desires that the progress made in this regard may be apprised to the Committee.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes from the above figures that there has been a constant slide in the performance
of SSA in the NER. The '% of Release against RE' has seen a constant fall from 10.55% in 2012-13
to 7.05% in 2016-17, whereas the ideal figure should around 10%, which is the allocation of NER vis-
a-vis BE. The Committee is dismayed to note that only 7.05% of the funds could be released till now
and the Financial year is coming to an end. The Committee feels that benefits of SSA are not reaching
the children in the NER and the Department needs to bring about a proactive approach to ensure its
objectives are achieved in the far and disadvantageous parts of the Country too. The Committee, further
suggests that this issue, if necessary, be taken up with concerned States to resolve this problem.
(Para 3.6)

30
Action Taken
The details of BE, RE provided by the Ministry of Finance under SSA, 10% of RE/Final Grant (FG)
earmarked for NER, Gol release under NER etc., (for SSA) are given in the following table:
(` in crore)
Year BE RE/Final 10% of RE/FG GoI % Release under
Grant (FG)  Earmarked Release NER aga inst the
for NER under NER amount earmarked
for NER
2012-13 25555.00 23875.83 2519.36 2519.36 100
2013-14 27258.00 26608.01 2660.08 2392.64 89.95
2014-15 28258.00 24380.00 2421.80 2328.95 96.17
2015-16 22000.00 22015.00 2180.00 1928.15 88.45
2016-17 22500.00 22500.00 2205.96 1764.11 79.97
As per the mandatory requirement, 10% of the BE/RE/FG is to be earmarked for NER. In this
regard, it is stated here that the funds provided at BE/FG is earmarked for NER by the Budget Division,
MHRD with the approval of Ministry of Finance.
The release of central share depends upon the unspent balance at the beginning of the Financial year,
release of commensurate State/UT share, pace of expenditure, furnishing of relevant documents/papers/
information, submission of Audit Report and unsettled outstanding advances etc.
The non-release of full amount provided for NER States are generally due to the higher unspent
balance specifically under capital head, the outstanding advances pending for settlement and the furnishing
of the final utilization certificate and Audit Report etc. The NER States are emphasized at different fora
for the maximum utilization of the funds, settlement of the outstanding advances and furnishing of the
required documents in time. A quarterly meeting of Finance Controllers of States and UTs are held to
review the progress of the utilization of fund for the approved intervention.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that the reasons provided by the Department for the constant fall in
the 'percentage release against RE' for the NER States are mainly administrative in nature and
these need to be addressed with utmost urgency. The Committee expresses its concern over the
fact that the benefits of SSA are not reaching the children in the NER due to administrative
lacunae. The Committee, therefore, urges the Department to address the reasons for the delay
in the release of funds for the NER with utmost urgency and the concerned States should also
be involved in streamlining the process so that administrative reasons do not hamper the
educational prospects of the students in these States.

31
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes from the above data made available by the Department, that there has been
a steady progress and the gap between the target and the achievements is closing rapidly. However, the
progress in the Teachers' appointment was disappointing to say the least as only 69,000 Teachers were
recruited during this five years' period and there are still a huge number of vacancies, which stood at
3.74 lakh vacancies. The Committee, accordingly, impress upon the Department to expedite the recruitment
of teachers and apprise the Committee in its action taken replies. (Para 3.8)
Action Taken
The recruitment and service conditions of Government teachers are primarily in the domain of
respective State Governments and UT Administrations. The Central Government through the flagship
programme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) at elementary level provides assistance to State/UT government
for additional teachers to maintain appropriate Pupil Teacher Ratio as per the prescribed norms for
various levels of schooling. The vacancy of teachers has reduced from 9,70,205 in the year 2015-16
to 9,48,803 in the year 2016-17 at elementary.
The Central Government has been consistently pursuing the matter of expeditious recruitment and
redeployment of teachers with the States and UTs at various fora. Advisories on this issue have also been
issued to States and UTs from time to time. Further the Central Government has launched Shagun portal
to monitor various interventions of SSA. Through this portal, States and UTs will be able to share their
progress on physical targets and fund utilization.
As per Unified District Information System for Education (UDISE) 2015-16 (Provisional), the PTR
at national level for elementary schools is 24:1. The PTR in most of the States and UTs is found to be
satisfactory. However, since some schools have lesser number of teachers than the required PTR, it is
clear that while there is sufficient number of teachers, the main issue is of their optimum deployment
in schools.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee fails to comprehend the clarification provided by the Department that as per the
Unified District Information System for Education 2015-16 (Provisional), the PTR at the national level
for elementary schools was 24:1 and in most of the States and UTs it was found to be satisfactory
whereas on the other hand there were 3.74 lakh teachers vacancies in the country. The Committee would
like to impress upon the Department to pursue with the States/UT Governments to not only expedite the
process of filling up the vacancies but also ensure their optimum deployment to ensure improvement in
the qualitative parameters of the student's education, especially in the remote and inaccessible areas of
the country.
Observations/Recommendations
Teacher vacancies and Training:
The Committee is disheartened to note the amount of vacancies presently existing in the Teachers'
post across the country and specifically in SSA, which is the major flagship scheme of the Department.
The Committee notes that while some States have done exceedingly well in maintaining its teachers'

32
workforce, some states like Bihar, U.P., Jharkhand, Punjab, Assam are clearly lagging behind. The
Committee feels that the Department as well as the concerned States have not done enough to address
this problem. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take immediate steps
and give specific targets to these states to fill up these vacancies by this year itself and submit a report
to the Committee in this regard. (Para 3.13)
Action Taken
The recruitment and service conditions of Government teachers are primarily in the domain of
respective State Governments and UT Administrations. The Central Government has been consistently
pursuing the matter of expeditious recruitment and redeployment of teachers with the States and UTs
at various fora. Advisories on this issue have also been issued to States and UTs from time to time.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee while noting the clarification provided by the Department that recruitment
and service conditions of the Government teachers are primarily in the domain of the respective
State Governments and UT Administrations, expresses its concern over the fact that the States
like Bihar, U.P., Jharkhand, Punjab, Assam are lagging behind in the recruitment of teachers.
The Committee observes that some of these States have very poor track record regarding
children's education and would like to impress upon the Department to devise assertive means
and take up the matter with the concerned States to expedite the process of recruitment of
teachers at the earliest.
Observations/Recommendations
MID-DAY-MEAL SCHEME (MDMS)
The Committee is disappointed to note that despite having raised the issue of the need to increase
the amount of honorarium given to the CCH to a respectable level at various occasions and a number
of recommendations of the Committee in this regard, no outcome is seen till date. The Committee
recommends that the Department should pursue the matter whole-heartedly so that a uniformly high basic
honorarium is given to all CCH across the country so that the variations seen across different states in
the honorarium given to CCH is reduced to the minimum. (Para 4.14)
Action Taken
The proposal for revision of honorarium to Cook-cum-helpers from the existing amount of
`1000/- per month per cook-cum-helper for 10 months in a year to `2000/- per month for 12 months
in a year, was considered by CCEA in its meeting held on 9th July, 2014 but it was 'Deferred'. The
Department is pursuing the matter.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee expresses its deep concern and reiterates that there should be uniformly
high basic honorarium to CCH across the country. As per the clarification submitted to the
Committee, the Department has stated that the matter was considered by CCEA in its meeting

33
held on 9th July, 2014 but it was 'Deferred'. This Committee further recommends to the
Department to take up the matter with due seriousness with the Ministry of Finance and ensure
that the recommendations of the Committee are brought into action at the earliest.
Observations/Recommendations
IX. STRENGTHENING OF TEACHER TRAINING INSTITUTIONS
The Committee is also disappointed to note that there still exists huge amount of vacancies of
Academic Posts in the TEIs despite a number of recommendations of the Committee in its earlier reports.
The Committee finds this apathy unacceptable and it is an indicator of the status of quality of teaching
in our schools as the Teachers that graduate from such institutes cannot have the desired quality. The
Committee, therefore, recommends again to the Department to take concerted efforts to fill up these
vacancies at the earliest. (Para 9.6)
Action Taken
The States and UTs have been asked to fill up the vacancies of academic posts in Teacher Education
Institutes (TEIs).  The TEAB, under the Chairmanship of Secretary (SE&L), while considering the
Annual Work Plan proposals received from the State Governments has emphasized the need for filling
up of vacant positions in TEIs by the end of this financial year.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee expresses its dis-satisfaction over the comments furnished by the Department
regarding filling up of the huge amount of vacancies of Academic Posts in the TEIs despite a
number of recommendations of the Committee in its earlier reports. The Committee reiterates
the need and necessity of filling up these vacancies as they are essential for training of the
teachers which in effect would reflect in the quality of education provided at the grass root level.
The Committee may be informed about the steps taken to fill up the vacancies in the TEIs by
the end of this financial year as recommended by the TEAB, under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(SE&L).
Observations/Recommendations
VI. AUTONOMOUS BODIES:
(A) KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN (KVS):
The Committee is very disappointed with the very slow pace of development in the filling up of
vacancies in the KVs. The Committee is also concerned about the leakage of question papers for the
recruitment exams, which is a very grave matter . Th e Department should understand that every delay in
the filling up these vacancies would directly affect one generation of students as these vacancies have
been kept piling up. The Committee would remind the Department that there is no dearth in the
availability of well-qualified Teachers and other officials and there is no reason for keeping these
vacancies despite the same having been pointed out at every opportunity by the Committee in the past.

34
The Committee feels that the Department is not serious enough as unlike in the case of SSA and RMSA,
KVs is purely a Central Body, which falls squarely within its jurisdiction and the Department has no
option but to fill these vacancies at the earliest. (Para 6.14)
Action Taken
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS) has reported that 6170 offers of appointment have been issued
upto 6.10.2017 to candidates selected for the posts of PGTs, TGTs, PRTs and PRT (Music).
Examination for Special Recruitment Drive for the 546 vacancies of teaching staff in the North
Eastern Zone upto 31.3.2018, are scheduled to be conducted by CBSE on 16th and 17th December,
2017. Further, Limited Departmental Examination for 4473 vacancies of teaching staff upto 31.3.2017
are scheduled to be conducted by CBSE during December, 2017/January, 2018.
KVS has further informed that the work of recruitment of a total number of 985 vacancies of
Officer's cadre and Non-Teaching staff has been entrusted to Ed.CIL and the examination for the same
is scheduled to be conducted in the month of December, 2017/January, 2018.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Department has not touched upon the
aspect of leakage of question papers in the recruitment examination held for the KVS. The
initiatives, therefore, taken by the Department in this regard may be furnished to the Committee.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee is also very disappointed to note that the Recruitment Rules of KVS was amended
reducing the promotion of PGTs to the post of Vice-Principals (VPs) through seniority-cum-selection
method to zero percent even though earlier it used to be 100%. This step is a retrogressive step, which
would result in the discontentment of the 7,700 PGTs, who have given their blood and sweat for the KVs.
The Committee had made its stand clear in its 267th Report on Demands for Grants 2015-16 and in a
number of occasions thereafter. The Committee was given to understand that presently the Board of
Directors of KVS has approved 50% by Direct recruitment, 25% by Limited Departmental Exam (LDE)
and 25% by promotion, which is in contravention of the Expert Committee that recommended for 75%
by promotion and 25% by LDE and the matter is now under the consideration of the MHRD. The
Committee hopes that the fate of the 7,700 PGTs are taken care of and the important role they play in
the organization is duly recognized by giving them promotions to the post of Vice-Principals rather than
direct recruitment in the name of administrative capacity and experience. The Committee is not inclined
to agree with assumption that direct recruitment would bring more administrative experience because the
PGTs would undoubtedly have more relevant experience in running KVs than the new recruits. The
Committee again reiterates its recommendation that the recruitment to the post of Vice-Principals should
be 100% by promotion from the PGTs only. (Para 6.15)
Action Taken
• A Committee was constituted vide order dated 1.10.2015 to comprehensively review the
recruitment rules of all cadres of KVS.

35
• Several meetings of the Committee have been conducted so far to review the recruitment rules
of various Teaching and Non-Teaching posts in KVS.
• The Recruitment Rules for the post of Vice-Principal have been reviewed by the Committee
constituted for this purpose and amended.
• Recruitment Rules as recommended by Finance Committee have been approved by BoG on
15.11.2016. The following revised Recruitment Rules for the post of Vice-Principal effective
from 01.04.2017 have been notified on 21.09.2017.
(a) Method of recruitment
- 50% by Direct Recruitment
- 25% by Limited Departmental Competitive Examination
- 25% by Promotion
(b) After reviewing the performance of the promote Vice Principals, the promotion quota
may be considered to be increased in future.
• The Recruitment Rules for other teaching posts such as PGT, TGT, PRT & PRT (Music) and
non-teaching posts such as Section Of ficer, Assistant, UDC, LDC and Sub-Staff are also being
reviewed and likely to be finalized shortly by the committee constituted for this purpose.
• The recommendations of the Review Committee will be placed before the BoG through the
recommendations of Finance Committee.
• After approval of the BoG, the revised Recruitment Rules of remaining Teaching and Non-
Teaching posts will be notified by KVS.
It is also informed that 6170 teachers have been appointed in October, 2017.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not convinced by the Department's reply as it provides only 25% vacancies
for the post of VPs, to be filled up by promotion where as the Committee recommended for 100%
by promotion. Further, the Committee notes that the performance of promotee VPs subject to
review whereas no such provision has been prescribed in respect of the other two categories. The
Committee finds it discriminatory. The Committee therefore, impress upon the Department not
only to remove such a pre-condition and enhance the percentage of quota from PGTs to VP by
promotion.
Observations/Recommendations
B. NA VODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI (NVS)
The Committee notes from the information provided by the Department that 45 NVS are operating
from temporary sites. The Committee impresses upon the Department to ensure that the schools shift to
its permanent sites within the stipulated time. As regards the strength of the teachers and other staff, that
as on date, there are 10,319 teachers against a sanctioned strength of 13,146 Teachers, which is about

36
78.5% of the required strength. Similarly, there are 7412 Non-Teaching staff against a sanctioned strength
of 9316, which is around 80% of the required strength. The Committee is constrained to note that more
than 20% of posts are vacant which need to be filled up urgently. The Committee feels that the efforts
made by the Department are not enough and the Committee recommends that these should be filled up
at the earliest. (Para 6.37)
Action Taken
Shifting of JNVs from temporary to permanent site –
Out of 45 JNVs, 04 JNVs have been shifted to permanent sites. Hence, the figure has dropped from
45 JNVs to 41 JNVs functioning from temporary sites.
Comments of the Committee
The reply furnished by the Ministry is silent on the existing vacancy of teaching/non-
teaching staff in JNVs. Hence, the Committee feels that the Ministry has not paid due attention
to the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee therefore, asks the Government to
take concrete action and appraise the Committee of the progression in the matter.
Observations/Recommendations
VII. NATIONAL MEANS-CUM-MERIT SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME (NMMSS) AND NATIONAL
SCHEME FOR INCENTIVE TO GIRLS FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION (NSIGSE):
The Committee is unhappy to note that scholarships meant for the children of NER has remained
un-utilized for so long and no remedial steps seems to have been taken to address this issue. The
Committee recommends that the Department should find out why viable proposals are not coming and
also to take necessary steps to give wide publicity to these schemes for popularizing amongst targeted
groups and schools so as to avail maximum benefits under the schemes. Further, the Department should
also review and monitor the schemes on regular basis with State Governments, especially of the NER,
for their effective implementation of the schemes. (Para 7.5)
Action Taken
The Department has written to Education Departments in NER to ensure that viable proposals of
scholarships with allotted quota of scholarships for the State under NMMSS and with sufficient number
of girl students under NSIGSE are sent to this Ministry as sufficient funds are available under the
schemes. The Department had organized a regional workshop of State Nodal Officers of these two
schemes on 6th April, 2017 at Guwahati regarding effective implementation of these two schemes. The
State Nodal Officers of the States were requested to take effective steps and ensure that the viable
proposals are sent for these two schemes so as to enable this Ministry to fully utilize funds allocated
under the schemes leading to benefit of maximum number of students.
The Department has requested all State/UT Governments to take necessary initiatives to popularize
the scheme among targeted groups and schools including wide publicity so as to avail maximum benefit
under the schemes. The Department also monitors the schemes on regular basis with the State Governments

37
and this mechanism will be made more effective, especially for States in NER for effective implementation
of the schemes.
Comments of the Committee
In its reply, the Department has not spelled out the reasons as to why viable proposals are
not being received from NER States despite the Department's initiative with the respective State
Governments. It also makes quite clear that the monitoring by the Department is not effective.
The Committee therefore, impresses upon the Department to find out the reasons, take appropriate
steps, review the schemes out, if needed revise it.

CHAPTER-IV
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED.
-NIL-
38

OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
RIGHT TO EDUCATION/SARV A SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RTE/SSA)
The Committee takes note of the clarification furnished by the Department regarding
allocation of only `````23,000/- crore as B.E for 2017-18 for implementation of RTE-SSA programme.
The Committee, however, would like the Department to urge the State Governments that the
additional funds devolved to the States as a result of the 14th Finance Commission award are
spent in a prudent manner and the RTE-SSA programme does not suffer due to delay in the
allocation of resources for it. The Department should monitor the performance of the States
lagging behind to the implementation of RTE-SSA programme and take remedial steps wherever
needed so that outreach of this scheme to all essential activities do not get marred. The Committee
desires that the progress made in this regard may be apprised to the Committee. (Para 3.3)
The Committee notes that the reasons provided by the Department for the constant fall in
the 'percentage release against RE' for the NER States are mainly administrative in nature and
these need to be addressed with utmost urgency. The Committee expresses its concern over the
fact that the benefits of SSA are not reaching the children in the NER due to administrative
lacunae. The Committee, therefore, urges the Department to address the reasons for the delay
in the release of funds for the NER with utmost urgency and the concerned States should also
be involved in streamlining the process so that administrative reasons do not hamper the
educational prospects of the students in these States. (Para 3.6)
The Committee fails to comprehend the clarification provided by the Department that as per
the Unified District Information System for Education 2015-16 (Provisional), the PTR at the
national level for elementary schools was 24:1 and in most of the States and UTs it was found
to be satisfactory whereas on the other hand there were 3.74 lakh teachers vacancies in the
country. The Committee would like to impress upon the Department to pursue with the States/
UT Governments to not only expedite the process of filling up the vacancies but also ensure their
optimum deployment to ensure improvement in the qualitative parameters of the student's
education, especially in the remote and inaccessible areas of the country. (Para 3.8)
The Committee while noting the clarification provided by the Department that recruitment
and service conditions of the Government teachers are primarily in the domain of the respective
State Governments and UT Administrations, expresses its concern over the fact that the States
like Bihar, U.P., Jharkhand, Punjab, Assam are lagging behind in the recruitment of teachers.
The Committee observes that some of these States have very poor track record regarding
children's education and would like to impress upon the Department to devise assertive means
and take up the matter with the concerned States to expedite the process of recruitment of
teachers at the earliest.
(Para 3.13)
MID-DAY-MEAL SCHEME (MDMS)
The Committee expresses its deep concern and reiterates that there should be uniformly
high basic honorarium to CCH across the country. As per the clarification submitted to the
39

40
Committee, the Department has stated that the matter was considered by CCEA in its meeting
held on 9th July, 2014 but it was 'Deferred'. This Committee further recommends to the
Department to take up the matter with due seriousness with the Ministry of Finance and ensure
that the recommendations of the Committee are brought into action at the earliest.
(Para 4.14)
STRENGTHENING OF TEACHER TRAINING INSTITUTIONS
The Committee expresses its dis-satisfaction over the comments furnished by the Department
regarding filling up of the huge amount of vacancies of Academic Posts in the TEIs despite a
number of recommendations of the Committee in its earlier reports. The Committee reiterates
the need and necessity of filling up these vacancies as they are essential for training of the
teachers which in effect would reflect in the quality of education provided at the grass root level.
The Committee may be informed about the steps taken to fill up the vacancies in the TEIs by
the end of this financial year as recommended by the TEAB, under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(SE&L). (Para 9.6)
AUTONOMOUS BODIES:
(A) KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN (KVS)
The Committee notes that the reply furnished by the Department has not touched upon the
aspect of leakage of question papers in the recruitment examination held for the KVS. The
initiatives, therefore, taken by the Department in this regard may be furnished to the Committee.
(Para 6.14)
The Committee is not convinced by the Department's reply as it provides only 25% vacancies
for the post of VPs, to be fdled up by promotion where as the Committee recommended for 100%
by promotion. Further, the Committee notes that the performance of promotee VPs subject to
review whereas no such provision has been prescribed in respect of the other two categories. The
Committee finds it discriminatory. The Committee therefore, impress upon the Department not
only to remove such a pre-condition and enhance the percentage of quota from PGTs to VP by
promotion. (Para 6.15)
(B) NA VODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI (NVS)
The reply furnished by the Ministry is silent on the existing vacancy of teaching/non-
teaching staff in NVS. Hence, the Committee feels that the Ministry has not paid due attention
to the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee therefore, asks the Government to
take concrete action and appraise the Committee of the progression in the matter.
(Para 6.37)
NATIONAL MEANS-CUM-MERIT SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME (NMMSS) AND NATIONAL SCHEME
FOR INCENTIVE TO GIRLS FOR SECONDARY EDUCATION (NSIGSE)
In its reply, the Department has not spelled out the reasons as to why viable proposals are
not being received from NER States despite the Department's initiative with the respective State
Governments. It also makes quite clear that the monitoring by the Department is not effective.
The Committee therefore, impresses upon the Department to find out the reasons, take appropriate
steps, review the schemes out, if needed revise it. (Para 7.5)

41
MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 8th February,
2018 in Committee Room No. '63', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
 1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
3. Prof. M. V. Rajeev Gowda
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad
5. Dr. Sasikala Pushpa
6. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chouhan
10. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
11. Shrimati Geetha Kothapalli
12. Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra
13. Shrimati Neelam Sonker
14. Dr. Bhagirath Prasad
15. Shri N. K. Premachandran
16. Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh
17. Shri Satyapal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri K. P. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Deputy Secretary
43

44
Shrimati Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee convened to
consider and adopt the draft (i) 300th Report on the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
(Second Amendment) Bill, 2017; and (ii) 301st Report on Action Taken by Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the 290th Report on the Demands for Grants 2017-18 of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development (Department of School Education and Literacy).
3. The Committee considered the draft 300th and 301st Reports and adopted them after some discussion.
4. The Committee, then, decided to present/lay the 300th and 301st Reports to both the Houses of
the Parliament on 9th February, 2018. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence, Dr.
Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe, Member, Rajya Sabha to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Faggan
Singh Kulaste, Member, Lok Sabha and in his absence Shri Nihal Chand, Member, Lok Sabha to lay the
Reports in the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 11.00 A.M.

45
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-X
Details of Centres set up in Universities/Institutes from all over the country (48 in total);
under each component of the Scheme PMMMNMTT till now is given below:
A. Schools of Education (in Central Universities):
(i) Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi
(ii) Assam University, Silchar
(iii) Dr. Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar (M.P.)
(iv) Central University of Kerala
(v) Central University of South Bihar
(vi) Central University of Jammu
(vii) Banaras Hindu University
(viii) Central University of Haryana
(ix) Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya
(x) Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, U.P.
B. Centre of Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education:
(i) Indian Institute of Science (HSc), Bangalore
(ii) Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune
(iii) Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati
C. Faculty Development Centre:
(i) Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad
(ii) Banasthali University, Rajasthan
(iii) Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, Srinagar (U.K)
(iv) Tripura University
D. Teaching Learning Centre:
(i) Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya for Teaching Learning Centre for Hindi
Studies (TLCHS)
(ii) National Institute of Technology, Warangal
(iii) Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur
(iv) Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad
(v) Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhopal for TLC vide Centre of Research
in Advance Technology for Education in Science (CREATES)
47

48
(vi) Indian Institute of Technology, BHU
(vii) Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak, M.P
(viii) Tezpur University, Assam
(ix) Indian Institute of Information Technology Design & Manufacturing, Kancheepuram
(x) Sri Guru Tegh Bahadur Khalsa College, University of Delhi
(xi) Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur for Teaching Learning Centre for Pedagogy design
and Research
(xii) IIT Madras
(xiii) University of Calicut
(xiv) IIT Patna, IIT Kanpur, IIT Kharagpur, IIT Indore (IoT)
(xv) IIT Bombay
(xvi) Dr. Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar
(xvii) Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth
(xviii) Ramanujan College, New Delhi
(xix) Savitri Bai Phule University, Pune
E. Centre for Academic Leadership:
(i) Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, U.P.
(ii) T ata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai
(iii) NUEP A
F. Innovations, Awards, Teaching Resour ce Grant, including Workshop and Seminar:
(i) Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, M.P. for International Seminar on New Education
Policy and Namodi Framework (ISNEPNF) under component of Seminars
(ii) National Institute of Technology, Silcharfor Innovations, Awards and workshops/seminars
(iii) Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad for Innovations, Awards and Teaching Resource
Grant including workshop and seminars
(iv) National Institute of Technology, Goa for workshop and seminars
(v) National Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu for Workshop on Application of ICT Tools for
Pedagogy Development to Engineering Teachers
(vi) Post Graduate College, Ghazipur (UP) for national workshop
G. Subject Networks for Curricular Renewal and Reforms:
(i) National Centre for Biological Sciences (NCBS)
(ii) Bararas Hindu University
(ii) Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidyapeeth, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh - Subject Based Network in Ayurveda

49
(PARA 5.20) A NNEXURE-A
State-wise list of number of schools approved under ICT in Schools
components of Integrated RMSA
Sl. No. State/UTs T otal No. of ICT
Schools Approved
12 3
1. Andaman and Nicobar 28
2. Andhra Pradesh 5470
3. Arunachal Pradesh 265
4. Assam 3350
5. Bihar 1273
6. Chandigarh 97
7. Chhattisgarh 2199
8. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 16
9. Daman and Diu 23
10. Delhi 1174
11. Goa 488
12. Gujarat 5298
13. Haryana 3196
14. Himachal Pradesh 2148
15. Jammu and Kashmir 627
16. Jharkhand 1036
17. Kar nataka 6444
18. Kerala 2513
19. Lakshadweep 10
20. Madhya Pradesh 2230
21. Maharashtra 9144
22. Manipur 363
23. Meghalaya 175
49

50
12 3
24. Mizoram 350
25. Nagaland 687
26. Odisha 6000
27. Puducherry 130
28. Punjab 3797
29. Rajasthan 7428
30. Sikkim 181
31. Tamil Nadu 5265
32. Telangana 4855
33. Tripura 579
34. Uttar Pradesh 5608
35. Uttarakhand 625
36. West Bengal 5006
T
OTAL 88078

51
ANNEXURE-B
The initiatives taken under RMSA with a view to improve Quality in government secondary
school education (class 9th & 10th) is as under:
(i) Separate Cadre of Principals and Head Masters: Having a separate cadre of school
headmasters/principals would be desirable as effective leadership can bring about significant
improvements in the functioning of the school and in improving the teaching-learning process.
A headmaster/principal in a school is a pedagogical, administrative and guiding authority for
the teaching staff. Various research studies have shown that school leadership could be a key
factor in transforming the education system.
In this regard the Report prepared by National Centre for School Leadership (NCSL), NUEPA
I wherein strategies have been suggested for creation of a separate cadre of school Headmasters/
Principals have been circulated to the States/UTs for comments. Comments from the all State/
UTs have been received.
(ii) Rural Tenure Policy: The desirability of having minimum tenure for teachers in rural areas
have been emphasized to address the problem of shortage of teachers in rural and far-flung
areas in the States and UTs. The Education Secretaries of all States/UTs were accordingly
requested to provide feedback on teachers' tenure policy in rural areas in their States/UTs.
Advisory dated 16.08.2016 to the States not having such policy, has been issued with a
comparative report on the teacher transfer policies in different States/UTs, so as to evolve a
rural tenure policy as per the State requirements.
(iii) Performance Based Disbursal of funds for Quality component for the Financial Year
2017-18: Fund amounting to ` 650 crore which is 10% of total estimated outlay for
2017-18 has been earmarked for allocation amongst States/UTs for quality component. This
has been divided into two categories as given below:
• ` 350 crores for committed quality interventions (teachers training, remedial teaching,
Kala Utsav, excursion trips for students, self defence for girl students, RAA, etc.);
` 300 crores has been earmarked for the States/UTs based on the criteria which includes NAS
(Performance Class 'X' ) having Separate cadre of Headmasters, having Rural Tenure Policy
for teachers, subject-wise PTR, Gender Gap and Implementation of Shaala Siddhi in States/
UTs.
(iv) In service training to the teachers:  Under RMSA, in service training of Math, Science,
Social Studies, English, Computers, Language and Sports/Phy. Education teacher is approved
on the basis of the proposals received from the States/UTs in their Annual Work Plan and
Budget.
(v) Shaala Siddhi: School Standards and Evaluation Framework and its web portal was launched
on 7th November, 2015. It is a comprehensive instrument for school evaluation leading to
school improvement. Developed by the National University of Educational Planning and
Administration (NUEPA), it aims to enable schools to evaluate their performance in a more
51

52
focused and strategic manner and facilitate them to make professional judgments for
improvement. The programme's objective is to establish an agreed set of standards and
benchmarks for each school, by focussing on key performance domains and their core
standards. The web portal for the framework enables all schools to engage in self-evaluation
in the 7 key domains under the Framework. The results of the evaluations will be available
on a public platform along with the School Report card.
(vii) GIS MAPPING: To ensure universal access to schools including secondary schools within
a reasonable distance of any habitation and without any discrimination, the Geographic coordinates
of school along with the school information available in UDISE is being uploaded on . the
school GIS Web enabled platform i.e. http://schoolgis.nic.in. All states have conducted GIS
mapping and shared geographical coordinates of schools with the NIC. This mapping is linked
to the UDISE data base to ensure that every school is mapped and is backed by a detailed
school report card based on UDISE information. This effort of developing web enabled
platform about school information (Spatial and Non Spatial data) will add to the quality of
planning and better utilization of resources available under SSA and RMSA.
(viii) National Achievement Survey for Class X: The National Achievement Survey for Class X
has been undertaken for the first time by MHRD. A summary report on the National Achievement
Survey (NAS) Class X was submitted by NCERT to the Ministry on 4th January, 2016. The
survey investigates student achievement in five subjects: English, Mathematics, Social Science,
Science and Modern Indian Language. The test has been administered in 34 States and Union
Territories after a scientific and robust process of sample design, test development and
translation, with rigorous adherence to technical procedures.
The achievement of a child is dependent on various background factors, which have been
collected in detail under the survey. Indepth analysis of achievement scores and background
variables is giving more insight to policy makers and curriculum developers and other
stakeholders. Accordingly, teachers training (pre-service and in-service) programmes will be
designed on the basis of NAS findings to improve pedagogical aspects in relation to different
subjects. It will also help States to revisit curriculum expectations and initiate curriculum
reforms. The State Report Card has also been forwarded to the States/UTs.
2nd Cycle of NAS Class X has been approved w.e.f. 2016 to 2018 which will go upto district
level.
(ix) Kala Utsav:- Kala Utsavs an initiative of MHRD to promote Arts (Music, Theatre, Dance,
Visual Arts and Crafts) in education by nurturing and showcasing the artistic talent of school
students at secondary stage in the country, and it is also a platform to bring arts to the centre
stage in an inclusive environment.
As part of Kala Utsav, Competitions in the four themes of Music, Dance, Theater and Visual
Arts were held at District and State levels and the winning teams thereafter participated at the
National level Kala Utsav 2016 which was held at New-Delhi from 15-18th November, 2016.
Nearly 1700 Students from all 36 States/UTs, KVS and NVS participated in the event.

53
(x) Remedial Classes: The quality component of Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA)
has a provision for remedial teaching for the academically weak students of Class IX. Remedial
teaching aims to provide additional help to students who at the time of transition from Class
VIII to Class IX, are found to be behind the expected level of achievement required to keep
pace with the secondary stage studies.
(x) Vocational Education: Under National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF), NCERT has
developed curricula for 55 job roles in 26 sectors including students' workbook. Training
programmes in the area of IT & ITES, developing teaching skills in classroom, workshop and
laboratory on latest trends and development in the area of Automobile Engineering, IT&ITES,
Garment Designing and Making, Horticulture and Entrepreneurship Development and for
implementation of NSQF in the schools.
(xi) ICT support for teaching - learning:
NROER - The National Repository of Open Educational Resources ( nroer .gov.in) has been
created to support the educational needs of students, teachers, parents and educators through
e-contents (Audios, videos, text, images, interactive, maps, lesson plans etc.) in Indian languages,
for all subjects and at all levels of education and help enhance learning. More than 1978
concepts and 16000 e-contents available as open educational resources (in more than 30
languages) with creative commons license: CC-by-SA.
E-books - cross platform digital access to all textbooks : All NCERT publications have
been converted as e-books (e-pubs and flipbooks). For its wider dissemination, NCERT has
developed mobile apps (Android, Windows and iOS platform) to be launched shortly.
MOOCs - online courses for students inside and outside the formal system of education:
With the experience of launching online courses for teachers and educators (Action Research
OER) the council has started preparations for launching of MOOCs beginning with secondary
schools. These courses will be freely available to students, teachers and educators and those
registered with the National Institute of Open Schooling. MOOCs for teachers and other
school level functionaries as part of in service professional support are also planned.
E-Pathshala: E-Pathshala app launched by Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD),
Government of India has been developed for showcasing and disseminating all educational e-
resources including textbooks, audio, video, periodicals and a variety of other print and non-
print materials. The platform addresses the dual challenge of reaching out to a diverse clientele
and bridging the digital divide (geographical, socio-cultural and linguistic) offering comparable
quality of e-contents and ensure its free access at every time and every place. Students,
teachers, educators and parents can access e-books through multiple technology platforms i.e.
mobile phones, and tablets (as e-pub) and on web through laptops and desktops (as flipbooks).
E-Pathshala also allows users to carry as many books as their, device supports. Features of
these books allow users to read, select, zoom, bookmark, highlight, navigate, share and make
notes digitally. Resources can be accessed through mobile apps (Android, iOS, and Windows).
All NCERT books in Hindi, English and Urdu for class I to XII have been digitised & uploaded.
States/UTs are being approached to digitise and share all textbooks in Indian languages through
this platform, which will be done in a phased manner.