PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
April 
TWO HUNDRED 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT, 
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
April , 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY SIXTH  REPORT 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 59 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT, 
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27 th  April, 2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th  April, 2016) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO. 
276  
REPORT  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
REPORT ON  
2016 (DEMAND NO. 59 )  
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT, 
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY  

PARLIAMENT 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL 
 
TWO HUNDRED 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 
OF MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT, 
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
April 
 
 
PARLIAMENT  OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVEL OPMENT  
 
 
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY SIXTH  REPORT 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE TWO HUNDRED SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2015 -2016 (DEMAND NO. 59 
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT, 
SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27 th  April,  2016) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th  April,  2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
April , 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka) 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN  
REPORT ON  
2016 (DEMAND NO. 59 )  
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT, 
SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY  

C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …........................................................... (i)-( ii)   
2.        PREFACE.................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3.  ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................... (iv) 
4.  REPORT............................................ .............................................…............................  
Chapter-I  -   Recommendations/Observations which h ave been accepted  
 by the Government ...................................................................  
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply.............  
Chapter-III -  Recommendations/Observations in resp ect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee...  
Chapter-IV -  Recommendations/Observations in respe ct of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited......................................................... 
   
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE    
5. *MINUTES........................................ ................................................................... 
6. ANNEXURES....................................... ...........................................................     
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Constituted w.e.f. 31 st  August, 2015) 
 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. *Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri C.R. Chaudhary 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali Patil 
15.       Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16 .       Shri  Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.       Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
30.       Shri Ajay Tamta 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher  
 
_____________________________ 
* Ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f .21.3.2016  
  
  
(i) 

SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

 
P R E F A C E 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorised by the Committe e to present the Report on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Two Hundred Seventy-Sixth Repor t on Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Sixty-  Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 59) of the Ministry of Human Resource D evelopment, Department of School 
Education and Literacy for the year 2015-16.   
 
2. The Two Hundred Sixty- seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Human Resource Development was present ed to Rajya Sabha on 23 rd April, 2015 
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 23 rd  April, 2015.  Replies of the Government to the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Repor t, were considered by the Committee at its 
meeting held on the 25 th  April, 2016. 
 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopt ed the same at its meeting held on 
the 25 th  April, 2016. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
April, 25-, 2016 
Vaisakha 5,1938 (Saka) 
 
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
                             
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

ABBREVIATIONS  
 
 
1. BRC:   Block Resource Centre 
2. CEE:   Comprehensive Continuous Evaluation  
3. CRC:   Cluster Resource Centre 
4. CTE:   College of Teacher Education 
5. CWSN:  Children with Special Needs 
6. DIET:   District Institutes of Educational Training  
7. DISE:   District Information System for Education 
8. EBB:   Educationally Backward Blocks 
9. FCI:   Food Corporation of India/Food Craft Institu te 
10. GER:   Gross Enrolment Ratio 
11. IAS:   Indian Administrative Service 
12.  IASE:   Institute of Advanced Studies in Education  
13. IVRS:   Interactive Voice Response System 
14. ICT:   Information and Communication Technology 
15. IDMI:   Infrastructure Development in Minority Inst itution 
16. IEDSS:   Inclusive Education for Disabled at Second ary School 
17. IHMs:   Institute of Hotel Management 
18.  JNV:   Jawahar Navodaya Vidalaya 
19. KGBV:  Kasturba Gnadhi Balika Vidyalaya 
20.  KVS:   Kendriya Vidalaya Sanghathan 
21. MDM:   Mid Day Meal Scheme 
22. MHRD:  Ministry of Human Resource Development 
23. MIS:   Management Information System 
24. MPLADS:  MP Local Area Development Scheme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development deals with the action taken by  the Government on the recommendations 
contained in its Two Hundred sixty-seventh Report o n Demands for Grants (Demand No. 59) of 
the Department of School Education and Literacy, Mi nistry of Human Resource Development for 
the year 2015-16  
2. The 267 
th  Report of the Committee was presented to /laid on the table of both the Houses 
of the Parliament on the 23 rd  April, 2015 and its copy was forwarded to the Depa rtment of School 
Education and Literacy on the 24 th  April, 2015.  The Department was required to furni sh a 
statement showing action taken (ATN) by them on the  recommendations/observations contained 
therein within ninety days from the date of present ation of the Report, which is followed by each 
Ministry/Department of the Government of India.  Wh en the ATN was not received within the 
stipulated time period, reminders were sent to the Department on 5 th  June and 18 th  August, 2015 
respectively. Result still not forthcoming, the Cha irman of the Committee decided to seek 
explanation from the Secretary of the Department on  10 th  March, 2016 on this issue. However, on 
the request of the Secretary this meeting was postp oned and held on the 14 th  March, 2016.  In the 
instant sequel, the ATN was furnished to the Secret ariat on the 11 th  March, 2016.  The Secretary, 
in the meeting with the Chairman of the Committee o n the 14 th  March, 2016, regretted for the 
inordinate delay in furnishing the ATN and assured that such delay would not be repeated. 
3. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the 267 th  Report have been categorized as follows: 
(i)  Recommendations/Observations which have been a ccepted by the Government – 
paras – 2.9, 3.2, 4.10, 4.20, 4.21, 4.23, 4.27, 7.5 , 7.7, 8.2, 8.4, 9.2, 9.3, 9.5, 9.6, 
11.3, 12.3 and 12.4. 
 (Chapter-I) Total – 18 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply – paras – 4.22, 5.3, 5.4, 5.6 and 6.6. 
 (Chapter-II) Total –  5 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee – paras – 2 .5, 2.11, 3.1, 3.4, 4.11, 4.15, 
4.26, 4.29, 4.31, 5.12, 5.13, 6.8, 7.3, 7.14, 8.3 and 10.3. 
 (Chapter-III) Total – 16. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch replies of the Government are 
still awaited. 
 (Chapter-IV) Total - NIL 
  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendations/observations 
2.9  
The Committee observes that 
there is under- utilization of funds on the other hand in respect o f some schemes. The Committee 
expressed its concern about it and feels that the f actors responsible for under 
under the above mentioned schemes need to be address ed on an urgent basis as these schemes are 
meant to provide essential educational infrastructu re, facilitating expansion of education by 
improving access, quality and educational opportuni ties to different 
the country. The Committee further recommends that the Department should make concerted 
efforts to optimally utilize the allocated funds if  the desired goals of various schemes were to be 
achieved. The Committee has been showi 
after year terming it as unacceptable positions. Be ing the nodal Department for School Education 
and Literacy, it is the responsibility of the Depar tment not only to get the required funds allocated 
but also to ensure their optimum and judicious util ization at least as per the spending formula laid 
by the Ministry of Finance in this regard. 
Action Taken   
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan: 
Up to 2013-
14, the Central share & State share were released d irectly to S 
Implementation Societies (SIS), SSA for implementin g the approved activities. However, keeping 
in view the emphasis on cooperative federalism, fro m 2014 
to State Governments which in turn is released to S tate Imp 
State/UTs. The time gap in receipt of central share  by SIS has resulted in high unutilized balances 
at the level of State/UTs. This situation of delaye d receipt of funds by SIS is likely to smoothen in 
coming year. 
Co mponent wise quarterly reviews, an annual Education al Management Information 
System (EMIS), quarterly review meeting of Finance Controllers, regular meetings with State 
officials are held to ensure effective implementati on of the programme. A Manual on Fin 
Management and Procurement also assists States in s treamlining implementation and financial 
management. 
Sl.  No.  Year  Revised 
Expenditure (RE) 
1 2012-2013 23875.83 
2 2013-2014 26608.01 
3 2014-2015 24380.00 
4 2015-16 22000.00 
Teacher Education: 
 
For the year 2014- 15, out of total budget allocation of 
Sponsored Scheme of Teacher Education, the utilization of funds,  as on  31.3.2015, was 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
The Committee observes that on the one hand there is shortage in fund allocatio ns and 
utilization of funds on the other hand in respect o f some schemes. The Committee 
expressed its concern about it and feels that the f actors responsible for under -utilization of funds 
nder the above mentioned schemes need to be address ed on an urgent basis as these schemes are 
meant to provide essential educational infrastructu re, facilitating expansion of education by 
improving access, quality and educational opportuni ties to different  social groups and regions of 
the country. The Committee further recommends that the Department should make concerted 
efforts to optimally utilize the allocated funds if  the desired goals of various schemes were to be 
achieved. The Committee has been showi ng its concern about funds remaining under 
after year terming it as unacceptable positions. Be ing the nodal Department for School Education 
and Literacy, it is the responsibility of the Depar tment not only to get the required funds allocated 
but also to ensure their optimum and judicious util ization at least as per the spending formula laid 
by the Ministry of Finance in this regard.  
14, the Central share & State share were released d irectly to S 
Implementation Societies (SIS), SSA for implementin g the approved activities. However, keeping 
in view the emphasis on cooperative federalism, fro m 2014 -15 the central share is being released 
to State Governments which in turn is released to S tate Imp lementation Societies by the concerned 
State/UTs. The time gap in receipt of central share  by SIS has resulted in high unutilized balances 
at the level of State/UTs. This situation of delaye d receipt of funds by SIS is likely to smoothen in 
mponent wise quarterly reviews, an annual Education al Management Information 
System (EMIS), quarterly review meeting of Finance Controllers, regular meetings with State 
officials are held to ensure effective implementati on of the programme. A Manual on Fin 
Management and Procurement also assists States in s treamlining implementation and financial 
(` in crore) 
Revised 
Expenditure (RE)  
Actual Expenditure 
(AE)  AE as a % of RE 
23875.83  23858.01 99.93 
26608.01  24820.93 93.28 
24380.00  24122.51 98.94 
22000.00  19267.58* 
(as on 1.3.2016) 
87.57% 
 
15, out of total budget allocation of `500.00 crores, under the Centrally 
Teacher Education, the utilization of funds,  as on  31.3.2015, was 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
on the one hand there is shortage in fund allocatio ns and 
utilization of funds on the other hand in respect o f some schemes. The Committee 
utilization of funds 
nder the above mentioned schemes need to be address ed on an urgent basis as these schemes are 
meant to provide essential educational infrastructu re, facilitating expansion of education by 
social groups and regions of 
the country. The Committee further recommends that the Department should make concerted 
efforts to optimally utilize the allocated funds if  the desired goals of various schemes were to be 
ng its concern about funds remaining under -utilized year 
after year terming it as unacceptable positions. Be ing the nodal Department for School Education 
and Literacy, it is the responsibility of the Depar tment not only to get the required funds allocated 
but also to ensure their optimum and judicious util ization at least as per the spending formula laid 
14, the Central share & State share were released d irectly to S tate 
Implementation Societies (SIS), SSA for implementin g the approved activities. However, keeping 
15 the central share is being released 
lementation Societies by the concerned 
State/UTs. The time gap in receipt of central share  by SIS has resulted in high unutilized balances 
at the level of State/UTs. This situation of delaye d receipt of funds by SIS is likely to smoothen in 
mponent wise quarterly reviews, an annual Education al Management Information 
System (EMIS), quarterly review meeting of Finance Controllers, regular meetings with State 
officials are held to ensure effective implementati on of the programme. A Manual on Fin ancial 
Management and Procurement also assists States in s treamlining implementation and financial 
crore)  
AE as a % of RE  
99.93  
93.28  
98.94  
87.57%  
500.00 crores, under the Centrally 
Teacher Education, the utilization of funds,  as on  31.3.2015, was `499.99 

crores, which is 99.9% and hence there was no under utilization of funds. 
 
III. ENROLMENT, RETENTION AND DROP OUT 
(iii) Drop out 
Recommendations/observations 
3.2 The Committee appreciates the reduction in the overall dropout rate and the dropout rate of 
the girl students and the students of SC/ST categor ies. However, the Committee feels that dropout 
rate is still high for all categories of students and is particularly high in the case of SC/ST students. 
Keeping in view the mandate of RTE/SSA to attain op timum enrolment the need is to reduce 
dropout rate for all categories of children to zero  percent which is still a daunting task. The 
Committee feels that a concerted effort is required  to retain all students in the schools till the 
completion of elementary cycle of Eight years of sc hooling. The Committee would appreciate if 
the Department takes up the issue of dropout with t he States/UTs and employ specific 
interventions to bring the dropout rate to zero percent for all categories of students. 
 
Action Taken  
 
The trends in the dropout rate during the last two years may be seen below. 
Year 
Dropout Rate 
All Girls SC ST 
Primary  Upper 
Primary  Primary Upper 
Primary  Primary  Upper 
Primary Primary  Upper 
Primary 
2012-
13 5.62  2.65  5.34  3.2  5.2  6.1  9.0  8.4  
2013-
14 4.67  3.13  4.66  4.01  3.1  4.6  6.7  7.9  
Source: UDISE 2013-14 
 
Multi-pronged strategies have been adopted to reduc e the dropout rate and increase 
retention rate. These include inter-alia increase a ccess of primary and upper primary schools, 
strengthening school infrastructure, improving pupi l teacher ratio, gender sensitization of teachers, 
separate girls toilet, opening of Kasturba Gandhi B alika Vidyalayas in Educationally Backward 
Blocks, making available the teaching material in t ribal dialect and other bridge courses, providing 
incentives like free textbooks, uniforms, mid-day m eal in schools, and strategies for promoting 
education of girls and children belonging to disadvantaged group. 
 
A crucial step in this direction is the identificat ion of Special Focus Districts across the 
country under the SSA scheme. These districts are i dentified on the basis of the indicators like out 
of school children, high gender gap, low retention rate and infrastructure gap as well concentration 
of SC, ST and minorities’ population. The financial  allocation to Special Focus districts as 
percentage to total allocation was as high as 49% in 2013-14 and 48% in 2014-15. 
 
IV. SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN/RIGHT TO EDUCATION 
Funding and Fund sharing pattern for RTE/SSA Programme 
Recommendations/observations 
4.10 From the above the Committee can only conclude  that required amount is not being made 
available by the Centre for this major initiative p utting a question mark on the objectives to be 

achieved under RTE/SSA. In view of new system of fu nds allocation, if the required funds were 
delayed it would be impossible to maintain the pace  of this scheme. The Committee calls upon the 
States to contribute the required funds in time to avoid any dilution of the goals of RTE/SSA. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that all out effor ts be made by the Centre and the States in this 
regard so that the implementation of RTE/SSA progra mme, which caters to the needs of the 
society at large, is not held up.  
 
Action Taken 
 
  Up to 2013-14, the Central share was released dir ectly to State Implementation Societies 
(SISs) to implement the approved activities of Sarv a Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) Scheme in states. 
However, keeping in view the emphasis on cooperativ e federalism and as per the advice of 
Ministry of Finance, from 2014-15 the central share  is released to State Governments for adding 
the commensurate state share and transfer to SISs w ithin 30 days of release of central share. State 
Governments have been requested to expedite transfe r of funds to SSA SIS for smooth execution 
of mandated and approved activities under the combi ned RTE-SSA programme in the state. 
Situation of delayed receipt of funds by SIS is lik ely to smoothen this year. This Department 
releases central share in two or three installments , keeping in view the opening balance, approved 
outlay and pace of expenditure by SIS, to facilitat e them achieving the goals of RTE/SSA and the 
implementation of RTE/SSA programme. 
 
Quality of Education under RTE/SSA 
Recommendations/observations 
4.20 The Committee finds from the above data that b y the time students come to class V their 
performance or learning outcomes in both language a nd mathematics decline considerably. 
Learning outcomes show sharper decline in mathemati cs in comparison to language in class V. 
Further, in class VIII learning outcomes for both l anguage and mathematics come below 50 
percent indicating poor learning outcome in both th e subjects with language showing sharper 
decline. Even for science and social science learni ng outcomes remain around 50 per cent only. 
The above findings put a question mark on the quali ty of education being imparted to the children. 
It also reflects that in spite of a number of initi atives taken by the Department under RTE/SSA, 
learning outcomes for more than 50 percent of child ren do not show any improvement. The 
Committee would like to state that concerted effort s are required to ensure that a minimum set of 
cognitive skills are acquired by all the children d uring eight years of elementary school education. 
This would require, besides the existing initiative s of the Department, ensuring availability of 
trained teachers, developing good curriculum and in novative pedagogy. Teacher absenteeism and 
lack of accountability should also be addressed so as to ensure quality education for all children at 
elementary level to make their basic education foundation strong. 
 
Action Taken 
 
  Recognizing the need to focus on improving learning  levels of students across different 
classes, the Government of India has included a sec tion under the chapter on Quality in 
Framework for Implementation of Centrally Sponsored  Scheme of SSA which, interalia, includes 
measuring learning level outcomes of all children o n regular basis and to catalyse a performance-
driven culture.   
 

As per the current status, the NCERT has developed learning indicators for all subjects 
across all elementary grades which have been shared  with all States/ UTs. 18 States/UT’s (Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tam il Nadu, Telengana, Uttarakhand, Uttar 
Pradesh) have developed State specific learning ind icators while others have adopted the NCERT 
indicators.  
 
For focussed programmes to ensure learning States h ave been provided guidance to plan 
for different classes i.e foundational programme fo r ensuring reading, writing with comprehension 
and basic mathematics in classes 1 and 2; thereby i mproving learning outcomes in Maths and 
Science in upper primary classes.  
 
In August 2014, the Government has launched Padhe B harat Badhe Bharat a sub 
programme of the SSA providing a framework for ensu ring learning in classes 1 and 2. 
States/UT’s have been provided funds for various ac tivities including large scale assessments for 
measuring learning against the learning indicators that have been set. In 2015-16, States/UT’s have 
also been provided additional funds to conduct acti vities for promoting reading habits amongst 
children with the belief that if children become independent readers at an early stage, then they can 
take charge of their learning.  
 
Similarly, funds have been provided to States/UT’s for focussed programmes for ensuring 
learning in classes 3-5 at primary level and classe s 6-8 at upper primary level. The Government is 
expected to launch Rashtriya Avishkaar Abhiyaan which would span across elementary, secondary 
and higher education institutions to promote learni ng of maths, science and technology.    The 
NCERT has also developed PINDICS – a Performance In dicator Tools for Assessing the 
Performance of Teachers and many States/UTs are usi ng this framework. The SSA framework 
also has detailed provisioning for in-service teach er training for elementary teachers.  In 2014-15, 
a funding of `28622.93 lakhs was provided for training of 540566 teachers, at BRC and CRC 
levels. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
4.21 The Committee would also like to observe that there is a need to make the elementary 
education syllabus more child-friendly so that it h as enough space to cover visual and performing 
arts, physical education and teaching of human values to students. 
 
Action Taken   
 
The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Educat ion (RTE) Act, 2009 became 
operative with effect from 01st April, 2010. Sectio n 29 the RTE Act provides that (1) the 
curriculum and the evaluation procedure for element ary education shall be laid down by an 
academic authority to be specified by the appropriate Government by notification. 
 
(2) The academic authority, while laying down the c urriculum and the evaluation procedure under 
sub-section (1), shall take into consideration the following, namely:— 
(a) conformity with the values enshrined in the Constitution; 
(b) all round development of the child; 
(c) building up child’s knowledge, potentiality and talent; 

(d) development of physical and mental abilities to the fullest extent; 
(e) learning through activities, discovery and explorat ion in a child friendly and child-
centered manner; 
(f) medium of instructions shall, as far as practicable, be in child’s mother 
tongue; 
(g) making the child free of fear, trauma and anxiety and helping the child to 
express views freely; 
(h) comprehensive and continuous evaluation of child’s understanding of knowledge 
and his or her ability to apply the same. 
 
The Government of India has adopted the National Cu rriculum Framework- 2005. State 
governments through their notified Academic Authori ty have developed State specific curriculum 
in consonance with NCF 2005. States have used SSA f unding for implementing innovative 
programmes for introducing children to music, art f orms, drama and theatre. Local artists have 
been involved at the school, cluster, block or dist rict level activities, e.g. in Kerala, a local 
Kathakali dancer who lives in the same village as t he school was invited to demonstrate the dance 
form and other details related to the dance form. I n Haryana, teachers in schools have been trained 
by theatre experts who have, in turn, done theatre workshops with children in upper primary 
schools.    
 
Under SSA, as per the RTE norms, schools with an en rolment of more than 100 students are 
eligible for part time physical education teacher. So far, 69844 physical education teacher 
positions have been approved and 30048 are filled. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
4.23 The Committee would also like to draw the atte ntion of the Department to the Planning 
Commission Report on the Twelfth Five Year Plan (20 12-2017) which on quality aspect observed 
that the biggest concern in elementary education is  the poor level of student learning and evidence 
suggests that learning outcomes for children in Ind ian schools are far below. Improvement of the 
quality of education is strongly linked to the quality of physical space, textual materials, classroom 
processes, academic support to the teachers, assess ment procedures and community involvement. 
All these areas should receive support, while adequ ate inputs and infrastructure are necessary for 
the proper functioning of schools, inputs will not automatically translate into effective teaching-
learning processes or satisfactory learning outcome s. Therefore, improving school inputs is the 
starting point in improving educational quality and concerted efforts for building a strong systemic 
focus on teacher capacity, improving school leader- ship/management, strengthening academic 
support system, better community and parents' parti cipation, measuring and improving learning 
outcomes in a continuous manner is required. Such a  focus should be on provision for child-
friendly schools and systems in teaching and learni ng processes as well as in improved water, 
sanitation, hygiene and mid-day-meal practices. The Committee would like the Department to take 
into account these observations. 
Action Taken  
 Through the SSA, the Central government has financ ially supported the State 
governments/UT administrations to address gaps and challenges in ensuring quality education to 
children in elementary classes.  Following steps have been taken in this regard : 

1. ‘Padhe Bharat Badhe Bharat’,:- A sub-programme on e arly grade reading, writing & 
comprehension, and early mathematics. 
2.  Rashtriya Aavishkar Abhiyan (RAA): To motivate and  engage children of the age group 
from 6-18 years in Science, Mathematics and Technol ogy through observation, experimentation, 
inference drawing, model building, etc. 
3. Focused Teacher Training: To provide focused traini ng to teachers, States have been asked 
to dedicate teachers for teaching the classes-1&2, 3-5 and 6-8. Class 1& 2 teachers are being 
provided training to teach early grade language and  Mathematics. Teachers for classes 3-5 are 
trained for teaching Mathematics, Language and EVS.  For classes 6-8 the training is provided to 
teachers in Mathematics and Science.  
4. Teacher Appraisal system: PINDICS (Performance Indi cators of teachers) developed by 
the NCERT are to be used by teachers themselves for  assessing their own performance and to 
make continuous efforts to reach the highest level.  
5.  Systemic focus on teacher capacity:- To upgrade sk ills of teachers, SSA provides for 
annual in-service training up to 20 days for all te achers, induction training for 30 days to newly 
appointed teachers and financial support for traini ng of untrained teachers to acquire professional 
qualifications, duly approved by the National Counc il of Teacher Education (NCTE) through 
Open Distance Learning (ODL) Mode.  
6. Measuring school performance over the academic year : A new plan scheme namely, 
Programme for School Assessment, Leadership and Str engthening of School Education Statistics 
has been launched during 2014-15. The plan scheme i s being implemented by the National 
University of Educational Planning and Administration (NUEPA), in partnership with States/UTs.  
7.  Measuring and improving learning outcomes in a con tinuous manner: The National 
Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT ) conducts National Achievement Surveys 
(NAS) at periodic intervals to assess the learning levels of children in classes III, V and VIII.  
Three rounds of NAS have been conducted so far whic h reveal that the learning outcomes have 
improved in various subjects, though these continue to below. 
States have also been assisted to conduct comprehen sive external student assessment 
surveys to assess gaps in student learning, in order to undertake corrective actions.   
Beti Bachao Beti Padhao 
Recommendations/observations   
4.27 Under this scheme, `5 crore will be made available for strengthening gi rls' education in 
100 specified districts on the basis of Child Sex R atio which works out to `5 lakh per district, for 
instituting district level awards to be given to 5 schools in each district every year on the followin g 
parameters:- 
 
- `1 lakh award may be given to the School Management Committee (SMC) which 
enrols 100 percent girls in the neighbourhood of the primary school and also retains 
them in the first year;  

- Another `1 lakh can be given as an award to the SMC of a pri mary school which 
causes the transition 100 percent girls studying in  class V into class VI of 
same/other neighbourhood upper primary schools;  
- Two awards each of `1 lakh may be given to SMCs of upper primary school s 
which affect a 100 percent transition of girls stud ying in class VIII to class IX in 
same/other neighbourhood secondary schools; and  
- `1 lakh award can be given to the SMC of the school which affect 100 percent 
transition of girls studying in class X to class XI  in same/neighbourhood higher 
secondary schools.  
The  Committee  appreciates  this  endeavour  of  t he  Department  and  hopes  that  positive 
outcomes will result from the scheme. 
 
VII.  KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN  
Recommendations/observations 
7.5 The Committee observes that the cumulative achi evement of KVs in respect of 
infrastructure creation in the last three years is only 58 percent. The Committee feels that the pace 
of construction of school buildings was quite slow in the first two years and picked up only during 
the last year. The Committee would appreciate if a steady pace of construction is kept and 
Procedural and Administrative bottlenecks removed a t the shortest possible time so that planned 
KVS are operationalised in a time bound manner. 
 
Action Taken:    
Construction of permanent school buildings depends upon the availability of suitable piece, 
of land, availability of funds in Plan Head. Howeve r, all possible efforts are being made to get the 
land transferred and for enhancement of constructio n funds in Plan Head for speedy construction 
of School Building. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
7.7 The Committee also took note of the suggestion of the Members that the Number of 
dispensation coupons given to the Members of Parlia ment for recommending admission to KVs in 
their respective constituencies is needed to be enh anced as a large number of requests are received 
by the Members during each academic year. The Commi ttee recommends the Department to 
consider enhancing dispensation quota to the Members of Parliament.  
 
Action Taken:    
 
The matter of enhancement of special dispensation a dmissions under MP quota was placed 
before the Board of Governors in its 103rd meeting held on 30-11-2015 and the Board approved 
the proposal to enhance the special dispensation qu ota for Members of Parliament (MPs) with 
regard to admission in KVs from 6 to 10 from next academic session i.e. 2016-17. 
 
  

VIII.  NAVODAYA VIDYALAYA SAMITI  
Recommendations/observations 
8.2 According to the Department construction work f or JNVs is sanctioned in phases on 
requirement basis. Out of 589 functional JNVs, 442 JNVs have adequate infrastructure based on 
present student strength. Out of the remaining 147 JNVs, 62 are functioning from temporary sites 
provided by the State Government and in 85 JNVs pha se-B work is under progress at various 
stages. It may be noted that out of 62 JNVs functio ning from the temporary sites 26 are in the 
North-East States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mani pur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and 
Sikkim. The remaining JNVs functioning from tempora ry sites are in the States of Chhattisgarh, 
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & K ashmir, Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Bihar Jharkhand, West Bengal, Gujarat and Maharasht ra. The Committee observes that since the 
JNVs cater to the educational needs of children fro m rural/remote areas, traditionally lacking 
school facilities, every school sanctioned for such  area must be run with proper infrastructure i.e  
permanent school buildings and other facilities if educational needs of such children were to be 
fulfilled in true sense. Therefore, 62 JNVs running  from temporary sites, out of which 26 are in 
North-East, is a cause of major concern for the Com mittee. The Committee feels that tribal and 
border areas already lack in adequate infrastructur e and school facilities, therefore, creating school  
infrastructure in these areas should be our top pri ority. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
that procedural bottlenecks, administrative formali ties with regard to construction work, 
identification of land, building plans etc. must be  removed on priority basis so that sanctioned 
JNVs start functioning from permanent buildings with proper infrastructure.  
 
Action Taken 
   
Efforts are being made by NVS for early completion of construction of JNVs in order to 
provide proper infrastructure in the Vidyalayas. 59 1 JNVs have been made functional upto the 
31.10.2015. Out of 591 JNVs, 536 JNVs have been shi fted to their permanent buildings. 55 JNVs 
are functioning from temporary sites provided by th e State Government (Annexure-X) . Out of 
536 JNVs, Phase – B has been completed in 428 JNVs and in 82 JNVs Phase – B work is in 
progress, according to the requirements from Regional Offices. 
 
      A list of State wise and District wise 55 JNV s, functioning from Temporary site, where 
construction work is in progress is at  Annexure-X-A. 
 
     Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti is making every effo rt to provide the infrastructure in these 23 
JNVs of North-East States on priority. 10 JNVs out of 23 will be completed upto 31.12.2016 
subject to the availability of required funds as per details given in AnnexureX-B.  Samiti is making 
all possible efforts to sort out the problems in co nstruction of remaining 13 JNVs in NE Region 
and to provide complete infrastructure facilities t o the students as soon as possible. The list along 
with the problems faced is given in Annexure-X-C.  The problems of these JNVs will be sorted 
out on priority basis and required funds will be made available. 
 
With a view to make all the sanctioned Vidyalayas f unctional at the earliest, construction of 
permanent building has been sanctioned where perman ent site has been made available by the 
concerned State Govt./ UTs. The matter regarding tr ansfer of land and temporary accommodation 
is being pursued vigorously at the level of Commiss ioner, NVS with the concerned authorities of 
the State Govt. It is expected that the position wi ll improve considerably in the coming Academic 
Session. 

 
Construction work in JNVs is being executed by C.P. W.D. and Central / State undertakings. These 
departments also have their own internal projects m onitoring system. Apart from this, the Samiti 
has been conducting quarterly and half yearly proje cts review meetings at Regional & Hqrs. level 
to monitor the progress of projects.  
 
Achievable target dates are proposed by the Samiti to the construction agencies. Quarterly 
progress reports are being obtained from the constr uction agencies. Besides, meetings are being 
held by the Commissioner, NVS, General Manager( Con struction), the Executive Engineers, 
Regional Offices to monitor the progress of the works effectively 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 8.4 The Committee's attention was also drawn to th e academic performance of the JNVs. 
Figures for the last three years reveal the following:- 
 
Year Class 
 2011-12  2012-13  2013-14  
Class X XII X XII X XII 
Pass Percentage  99.58 95.96 99.73 96.14 99.80 97.67  
 
The Committee, taking into account the academic per formance of the JNVs, would suggest the 
expansion of the scheme to each block of the countr y especially in tribal, border and rural areas 
which would not only improve the condition of the s chooling system in these areas but would also 
open-up immense educational opportunities for the children in these areas. 
 
Action Taken 
    
As per the scheme of NVS, only 1 JNV is to be set u p in each district of the country. 
Opening of new JNVs is a continuous process which d epends upon the approval by competent 
authority, availability of funds and willingness of  the state government to provide suitable land 
construction of the JNV school building. However, 1 0 additional JNVs have been sanctioned in 
districts having large concentration of ST population and 10 additional JNVs have been sanctioned 
in districts having large concentration of SC popul ation. Two special JNVs have also been 
sanctioned at Senapati and Ukhrul in Manipur. 
 
IX. RASHTRIYA MADHYAMIK SHIKSHA ABHIYAN 
Recommendations/observations 
9.2 A perusal of the targets and achievements under  RMSA during the first three years of the 
Twelfth plan period, the Committee notes that achie vements have not been optimum as compared 
to targets. During the entire Twelfth plan a total number of 1854 new schools were to be opened. 
However, from 2012-13 to 2014-15 only 1075 new scho ols out of 1854 could be sanctioned. 
Further out of 1075 sanctioned schools only 30 scho ols have become functional. While all the 
existing secondary schools were supposed to be stre ngthened, only 2576 schools have been 
approved so far for strengthening. As against, 1270 00 additional teachers to be appointed, only 
6354 teachers could be approved. The Committee finds that there has been a gap in the targets and 
achievements which indicate slow implementation of the scheme or bottlenecks in its 
implementation. One of the reasons given for shortf all in the target set and achieved was delay in 
implementation by the State implementing societies.  Now that the other components have been 

added to the scheme, efforts are required to identi fy bottlenecks and taking of remedial measures 
for expeditious implementation of the scheme.  
 
Action Taken   
  
Till 2015-16, a total of 2166 New schools have been  approved under RMSA. It is 
mentioned that out of 2166 approved schools 919 sch ools have become functional. It is also stated 
that 127000 teachers indicated as the target for 12 th Plan includes teachers already approved in 
11th Plan. It is further stated that 115554 teacher s have been approved till 2015-16. Also 5166 
schools have been approved for strengthening till 2015-16. 
 
The main problem areas in the implementation of RMSA are that. 
• Slow progress in civil work in most of the State/UT s which leads to slow down in 
implementation of the scheme.  The reason for delay  in Civil Works are the non-availability 
of land for sanctioned schools, delay in identifica tion of construction agency delay, in 
finalisation of tenders, revision of construction c ost and long gestation period of construction 
work etc.   
• Also after subsuming of various components under th e RMSA scheme, the funds of all 
subcomponents (ICT, IEDSS and Girls Hostel) are tra nsferred directly from State Treasury 
to the Department/Society implementing these compon ents. Sometimes, the funds for the 
components are not released to State Implementing Society in a timely manner.  
• There is shortage of teachers in Core subjects and also a number of posts of 
teachers/headmasters are lying vacant.   
In addition, there is delay in submission of docume nts like UCs, Audited Account, 
Expenditure Statement, from the State/UT  which lea ds to delay in releasing of funds to the 
States/UTs. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
9.3 The Committee also takes note of the physical t argets and achievements of the other 
component schemes under RMSA. The Committee finds that in respect of Girls Hostel Scheme the 
target was to set up Girls' hostel in all the Educa tionally Backward Blocks (EBBs) of the country. 
Out of 3453 EBBs approval for setting up of Girls' hostel in 2160 EEBs has been given. 
Surprisingly even out of 2160 only 536 Girls' hoste l are functional. Similar gaps in targets and 
achievements are seen in ICT @ schools, IEDSS and v ocational education schemes. The 
Committee feels that these schemes have not been ab le to expand their outreach thus defeating the 
very objectives of the schemes. In view of the slow implementation of the schemes, the Committee 
feels that merger with RMSA would slow down the imp lementation of ambitions RMSA scheme 
itself leading to a situation where gains of optima l enrolment at elementary stage would be 
negatived. In view of this, the Committee feels tha t time bound achievements of the targets 
through effective implementation and monitoring would be required. 
 
Action Taken 
   
The Department based on the recommendation of Shri D.K.Chaturvedi Committee and 
with the approval of Cabinet subsumed the four othe r Centrally Sponsored Schemes catering to 

Secondary education  viz, ICT @Schools, Girls Hoste l, Inclusive Education for Disabled at 
Secondary Stage (IEDSS) and Vocational Education (V E) under integrated RMSA in year  2013-
14.  Subsuming these schemes under the RMSA has led  to significant financial savings and 
administrative rationalization and brought in a gre ater flexibility in utilization of funds leading to  
better utilization of funds under RMSA. 
 
As regards to Girls Hostel scheme, the physical pro gress as on date (June, 2015) is that 2225  Girls 
Hostel have been approved against which 624  Girls Hostel are functional with an enrolment of 
52,649 girls.  Out of 624 Girls Hostel, 184 are run ning in own building, 133 in rented 
accommodation and 80 in KGBV campus.  The State Gov ernments are continuously stressed upon 
to complete the constructions process so that all t he approved Girls Hostels become functional in 
their own building. 
 
Apart from this, following measures for expeditious  implementation of the scheme have been 
taken:-  
 
1 Half yearly National Level Review meeting of State Education Secretaries being 
organized to take stock of implementation of integrated RMSA. 
2 Also half-yearly Joint Review Mission with Works Ba nk organized to see  the progress 
undertaken in selection States/UTs. 
3 On line quarterly progress reports from the   States/UTs introduced. 
4 Field Visits to the States/UTs for monitoring and evaluation. 
5 Half-yearly/Quarterly National Level and Regional L evel Workshops with the 
implementing States concerning each component of RM SA undertaken.  In these 
workshops, the obstacles if any, in the process of implementation of components such as 
ICT @ Schools, Girls Hostel, IEDSS and Vocational E ducation are taken up and issues 
discussed and resolved as far as possible. 
6 In order to hasten the implementation as per Annual  Work Plan, this Department has 
started releasing ad-hoc grants at the beginning of  financial year without waiting for UCs, 
and other requirements.  Follow up action with Stat es and UTs is regularly under taken 
besides the review meeting to ensure timely utiliza tion of funds on the approved activities 
so that no funds gets lapsed. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
9.5 The Committee finds that there is a huge gap be tween the allocation and the actual 
expenditure under the RMSA. The trend of allocation  and expenditure of the last two years i.e 
2013-14 and 2014-15 reveals that the allocation was  reduced at RE stage in both the years  and the 
actual expenditure was even lower than the reduced RE allocation. The Committee notes that the 
total outlay for the RMSA during the Twelfth Plan p eriod is `27466 crore out of which less than 
50 percent has been allocated during the first thre e years of the plan. The Committee feels that 
RMSA is an ambitious scheme aimed at sustaining the  optimum enrolment at elementary level to 
secondary level, there should not only be optimum u tilization of funds but also optimum required 
allocation of funds under the scheme. As for the su bsumed schemes the Committee finds that 
actual utilization of funds have been lower than th e RE allocation under the Girls' hostel, IEDSS 

and vocational education schemes for the years 2013 -14 and 2014-15. Fund utilization in ICT @ 
schools scheme has been optimum during the years 20 12-13 and 2013-14. Now that these schemes 
have been subsumed under RMSA, the Committee is of the considered opinion that enhanced 
funds should be made available under the RMSA integ rated scheme. The Committee would also 
like the Department to have focussed strategies in co-ordination with the States/UTs for smooth 
and effective implementation of the scheme. 
 
Action Taken 
  
Under RMSA Scheme (including components of RMSA, IC T, Girls Hostel, IEDSS and 
Vocational Education) during 2013-14, against RE of  `4171.61 crores funds amounting to 
`4084.01 crores were released, and during 2014-15 ag ainst RE of ` 3480.1 crores funds amounting 
to `3398.33 crores were released. The minor shortfall i n release of funds against RE was mainly 
due to shortfall in receipt of viable proposals fro m NER States and slow implementation of Civil 
works under the scheme. 
 
Based on the 14th Finance Commission recommendation s, due to higher devolution of funds and 
also change in the funding pattern from overall 75: 25 to 60:40 in respect of most of the States, 
allocation at Central level to various Centrally Sp onsored Schemes including RMSA is now being 
done accordingly. 
 
 An online Project Monitoring System (PMS) has been  developed for smooth and effective 
implementation of the scheme. The States/UTs are re quired to submit physical and financial 
progress online in the system. This system has resu lted in facilitating continuous monitoring of the 
scheme which would help in implementation of scheme at a faster pace. Besides, the Ministry time 
and again corresponds with States/UTs at different levels for expediting the implementation. Also, 
capacity building workshops are organized at State as well as National level for providing training 
to the concerned staff. 
Recommendations/observations 
9.6 The Committee during its visit to Srinagar and Leh received a large number of 
suggestions for effective implementation of RMSA an d regular release of funds under the 
scheme. The Government authorities in both the regi ons, especially, in Leh brought to the 
notice of the Committee that due to difficult terra in and extreme cold weather conditions the 
time period available for carrying out construction  activities is very limited and that is the main 
reason for non spending of funds by them. They have , therefore, suggested that in view of the 
extreme and hard geographical conditions in this re gion, the funds may be released to them 
immediately in April itself and the time period to spend the money also be increased so that full 
allocation may be utilized. The Committee agrees wi th the suggestion put forward by them and 
directs the Department to take into consideration t his peculiarity especially in Leh and work in 
close co-ordination with the State Government for e ffective implementation of the scheme and 
optimum utilisation of funds. 
 
Action Taken   
  
In this regard, the Ministry has adopted the proces s of Ad-hoc releases (from the F.Y. 

2014-15) to take up initial activities at the start of the financial year itself.     
 
XI. NATIONAL MEANS-CUM-MERIT SCHOLARSHIP SCHEME 
Recommendations/observations 
11.3 The Committee was informed that all the States /UTs except Lakshadweep have taken the 
benefit of the scheme since its launch. According t o the information made available to the 
Committee for the year2014-15, the following States /UTs had the minimum number of students 
covered under the scheme:- 
States/UTs  No. of students  
Sikkim 3 
Uttarakhand  26  
Daman & Diu  49  
Arunachal Pradesh 103  
A&N Island  116  
Mizoram  137  
Tripura  185  
Nagaland  225  
Chandigarh 238  
 
From the above data the Committee notes that in nin e States/UTs less than 250 students are 
covered under the scheme. Coverage of scheme in the  North-East Region is particularly low. 
Maharashtra with 29478 students had the maximum num ber of students covered under the scheme 
followed by Kerala 13803, Karnataka 10803, Tamil Na du 9760, Orissa 7564, Bihar 5088, Punjab 
4966, Uttar Pradesh 3142 and Andhra Pradesh with 30 61 students. The above details indicate that 
all the States/UTs have not been taking full benefi t of the scheme. The Committee feels that there 
appears to be a lack of interest on the part of the States/UTs in the scheme reasons for which needs 
to be found out. The Committee recommends to take r emedial measures accordingly for making it 
more attractive. Required publicity may also be given to the scheme to expand its outreach. 
 
Action Taken     
 BE  for 2014-15 was Rs 70 crore out of which Rs 7 crore was for scholarships in eight 
NER States. The total expenditure under the scheme was ` 65.20 crore covering sanction of 
106770 scholarships during 2014-15 which also inclu des an expenditure of ` 2.20 crore for NER 
States. The unutilized amount of Rs 4.80 crore for NER States was on account of lack of viable 
proposals from these States. 
 2. One lakh scholarships of `6000/- per annum ( `500/- per month) per student are awarded to 
selected students of class IX  every year and their   continuation/renewal  in classes X to XII for 
study in State Government, Government-aided and Loc al body schools under the scheme.Students 
whose parental income from all sources is not more than `1,50,000/- per annum are eligible to 
avail the scholarships. Some States have not been a ble to fully utilize the allotted quota of 
scholarships due to the fact that the students appe aring in examination for award of NMMSS 
scholarships are not able to get the prescribed  mi nimum number of qualifying marks in the 
examination. If the sufficient number of students a re made to appear in the examination by the 
State Governments, this problem may be overcome.  
3. The Department has been monitoring the scheme re gularly and identifying the constraints 
being faced by the students and States and based on  the feedback received from students, States 

Governments and Bank, regular interventions are bei ng made for effective implementation of the 
scheme. 
4. The Department has advised the State/UT Governme nts to popularise the scheme amongst 
the weaker sections of the society so as to make maximum use of the scheme. 
XII.  ADULT EDUCATION AND SKILL DEVELOPMENT SCHEME (SAAKS HAR 
BHARAT)  
 
Recommendations/observations 
12.3 According to the Department upto 30/11/2014, t he following were the achievements of 
Saakshar Bharat:- 
- 1.53 lakh Adult Education Centres set up;  
- Survey has been completed in 1,28,562 gram panchayat;  
- 9,99,64,574 teachers identified;  
- Teaching learning process commenced in 34,43,504 literacy centres.  
 
 Committee's attention was also drawn to the result  of the biannual basic Literacy 
Assessment tests conducted by the National Institut es of Open Schooling (NIOS). It was informed 
that 2.86 crore learners out of 3.92 crore learners  had successfully passed the Assessment Tests 
under basic literacy up to March, 2014. In addition  about 41 lakh learners had taken up the 
Assessment Tests held in August, 2014. Data in resp ect of 3667247 learners was received out of 
which 2715054 learners were declared successful. Re sult of remaining learners was under 
compilation. The Committee appreciates the outcomes  of the Saakshar Bharat programme under 
the Adult Education and Skill Development Scheme. T he Committee recommends greater 
expansion and periodic evaluation of the scheme wit h strengthening of monitoring mechanism so 
that learning skills and outcomes of the learners are sustained. 
 
Action Taken 
   
It is submitted that the Programme is covering 410 Districts in 26 States and 1 UT. However, 
due to financial constraints, it has not been possi ble to consider further expansion of the Scheme 
beyond 410 Districts. 
Periodic evaluations are carried out by NLMA with t he help of National Institute of repute. 
Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai un dertook an evaluation of the processes of 
Saakshar Bharat in 2011.  
A consortium of three IIMs - IIM Lucknow, IIM Banga lore and IIM Shillong- have 
conducted the mid-term review of Saakshar Bharat pr ogramme in different zones. IIM, Lucknow 
has separately submitted ‘All India Report’ on Saak shar Bharat and report on ‘Review of 
Processes of Saakshar Bharat Programme’.  
The Monitoring Mechanism is being strengthened by i nvolving ICT initiatives.  The 
implementing agencies are being asked to submit the  progress online on the Saakshar Bharat 
Portal. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
12.4 The Committee's attention was also drawn towar ds the budget allocations and expenditure 
under the scheme for the years 2013-14 and 2014-15. The details of which are as under:-  
  

(`` ``    in crore)  
 2013 -14   2014 -15   
BE  RE  Actual (31.3.2014)  BE  RE   Actual (31.3.2015)  
572.00  354.00  297.28  450.00  371.35   358.35  
 
The Committee notes that the allocated BE of `572.00 crore for the year 2013-14 was reduced to 
`354.00 crore at RE Stage. The actual expenditure wa s even less than the RE allocation. Further, 
during 2014-15, the BE allocation was kept at `450.00 crore which was reduced to `371.35 crore 
at RE stage. This year also the actual expenditure was less than the RE allocation. The Committee 
feels that lower actual expenditure shows that the benefits of the scheme are not reaching to the 
targeted beneficiaries or there are implementation flaws. The Committee would appreciate if the 
implementation of the scheme is improved. The Committee further notes that this scheme has been 
subsumed under the support to Educational Developme nt including teacher Training and Adult 
Education and an outlay of `450.00 crore for the year 2015-16 has been kept in BE allocation. The 
Committee apprehends that subsuming of the scheme m ay dilute the objective of the Saakshar 
Bharat scheme which caters to specific groups of th e society across the country. The Committee 
hopes that the Department would ensure smooth and e ffective implementation of the scheme by 
employing innovative methods. 
 
Action Taken 
  
Noted. It is submitted that the actual expenditure during 2014-15 is `358.35 crore which is 
96.5 per cent of RE of 2014-15. Due to timely non-s ubmission of Utilization Certificates by the 
State Literacy Mission Authorities, the required gr ants to the States could not be released. Regular 
reviews with the States are being held to accelerat e the pace of implementation and utilization of 
funds under the programme. 
 
 
  

CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
IV. SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN/RIGHT TO EDUCATION 
Quality of Education under RTE/SSA 
Recommendations/observations 
4.22 Further, the Committee feels that one of the r easons for poor learning outcomes of the 
students at elementary level is the automatic up-gr adation from class I to VIII or the policy of 'No 
Detention' upto class VIII under the RTE Act, espec ially in view of the findings of the NCERT 
Learning Achievement Survey. One must not forget th at the main objective of RTE/SSA is to 
ensure the right of every child to have a quality e lementary education. The Committee feels that 
with no detention policy a student may not be motiv ated to work hard if he/she is aware that 
his/her promotion to the next grade is guaranteed. This would work against interests of the child 
especially when he/she will be required to sit for formal examination from class IX onwards and 
obtain the minimum benchmarks. Further, even the te achers, parents, peer groups will not succeed 
in motivating the child to learn through step by st ep process and be prepared with enough 
cognitive faculties to take on higher grade examina tion. The Committee feels that the 'no 
detention' policy in its present form works against  the children particularly of those children 
coming from disadvantaged categories for whom it ha s been specially designed. It is a known fact 
that learning outcomes are very poor in rural areas  than the urban areas. The Committee would 
like the Department to reconsider the policy of 'no-detention' upto class VIII accordingly.  
 
Action Taken  
 
   In pursuance of a resolution adopted in the 59th me eting of the Central Advisory Board of 
Education (CABE) held on 6th June, 2012, a Sub-Comm ittee was constituted for assessment of 
implementation of Continuous and Comprehensive Eval uation (CCE) in the context of No-
Detention provision in the Right of Children to Fre e and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009. 
The Sub Committee during the course of its work hel d 5 (five) regional meetings and consulted 
various stakeholders over the issue of No Detention . The Sub-Committee has submitted its report 
in August, 2014. The recommendations of Sub-Committ ee include, inter-alia, measuring Learning 
Level Outcomes of all children on regular basis, to  catalyse a performance-driven culture and 
review of ‘No-Detention’ policy and its implementation in a phased manner.  
             The report of the Sub-Committee was pl aced before CABE in its meeting held on 
19.8.2015, wherein it was decided to request all St ates/UTs to share their views on the No-
Detention policy, in writing with Ministry of Human  Resource Development. 22 States shared 
their views on the No Detention policy out of which  18 States have suggested to modify the No 
Detention policy.  
            Another Sub-Committee under the Chairpe rsonship of Minister of Education, Government 
of Rajasthan has been constituted on 26.10.2015 int er-alia, to review the feedback received from 
States/UTs on the No-Detention policy. 
 
  

V. NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF MID-DAY-MEAL IN SCHOOLS  
Fund utilization under MDM Scheme  
Recommendations/observations 
5.3 During the first three years of the Twelfth Fiv e Year Plan a total BE allocation `38367.00 
crore has been made under the scheme against which `32195.00 crore were spent. That the fund 
utilization under the scheme has remained underutil ized in the first three years of the Twelfth Five 
Year Plan is indicated by the trend of expenditure which is as under:- 
(`    in crore) 
Year  BE  RE  Actuals  
2012-13  11937.00  11500.00  10867.00  
2013-14  13215.00  12189.16  10927.21  
2014-15  13215.00  11050.90  10400.57  
 
The Committee notes that there has always been a ga p in the allocation of funds and their 
utilization under the MDM scheme. According to the Department, one of the reasons for 
underutilization of the funds is the availability o f unspent balances with the States/UTs in the 
beginning of the financial year. The Committee feel s that the maximum utilization of funds under 
the scheme should be made each year as the scheme i s meant for the welfare of the small children. 
The Committee would appreciate if the Department ta kes concerted efforts to facilitate/motivate 
the States/UTs to achieve optimum utilization of the funds. 
 
Action Taken:    
 
The Year wise status of Budget Estimate, Revised Es timate, release and expenditure under 
Mid Day Meal Scheme is as under: 
(` in Crore) 
*as on 05.01.2016 
 
It may be seen from the above table that the total released against Revised Estimates (RE) during 
first four years of the Twelfth Five Year Plan i.e.  2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 are 
95%, 90%, 95% and 92% respectively and against thes e releases total expenditure (total funds 
utilised by States/UTs) during the financial years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 is 94%, 99.50% 
 2007-08  2008-09  2009-10  2010-11  2011-12  2012-13 2013-14  2014-15  2015-16  
Budget  
Estimate 
7324.00  8000.00  8000.00 9440.00 10380.00  11937.00  13215.00  13215.00  9236.40 
Revised 
Estimate 
6678.00  8000.00 7359.15 9440.00 10239.01  11500.00  12189.16  11050.90  9236.40 
Total 
Release  
5835.40 6539.52 6937.79 9128.44  9901.91  10867.90  10927.21  10526.97  8470.10*  
% Releases 
against RE 
87% 82% 94% 97% 97% 95% 90% 95% 92% 
Total Exp.  3483.60 4999.55 5621.67 7786.56  9235.82  10196.98  10873.75  11316.28  8470.10*  
% Exp. 
against 
Releases 
60% 76% 81% 85% 93% 94% 99.50% 107% 92% 

and 107% respectively. Comparing to the earlier yea rs i.e. 2007-08 & 2008-09 there is a vast 
improvement in utilisation of funds. This is a refl exion of efforts and initiatives taken by 
Government to motivate the States/UTs to achieve optimum utilization of the funds. 
 
Lifting of foodgrains  
 
Recommendations/observations 
5.4 As per the information made available by the De partment during 2014-15 a number of 
States/UTs lifted less than 45 percent of the allot ted food grains. The following figures reveal less 
than 45 percent lifting of foodgrains by a number of States/UTs. 
(in MTs) 
States/UTs 
 2014-15  
 % lifting as on 30/9/2014  
Arunachal Pradesh  42.90  
Assam  43.63  
Bihar  42.56  
Chhattisgarh 36.82  
Gujarat  43.64  
Haryana  30.61  
Karnataka 40.70  
Kerala 40.92  
Madhya Pradesh  35.83  
Maharashtra 42.83  
Orissa  42.21  
Tamil Nadu 30.87  
West Bengal 35.01  
A&N Island  44.21  
Chandigarh  27.57  
Dadra & Nagar Haveli  42.06  
Lakshadweep 42.06  
 
 
The Committee notes that five States/UTs namely Chh attisgarh, Haryana, Tamil Nadu, West 
Bengal and Chandigarh have lifted even less than 40  percent of their allocated foodgrains during 
2014-15. Further remaining 11 States/UTs lifted les s than 45 percent of their allocated foodgrains 
during 2014-15. The Committee is aware of the fact that many States/UTs have opening balance of 
foodgrains in the beginning of the year and that th e allocation of foodgrains under the scheme is 
done on the basis of number of children and working  days approved by the Project Approval 
Board (PAB) based on the performance of the States/ UTs upto third quarter of the preceding year. 
Meticulous planning needs to be done before approvi ng the number of children and working days 
in a year, to avoid the availability of opening bal ance of the foodgrains with the States/UTs in the 
beginning of the year. The Committee can only concl ude that either there are some grey areas in 
the projected requirements of foodgrains or all the  targeted beneficiaries are not being covered 
under the scheme. Either way, it is a fit case for making analysis and taking corrective measures. 
The Committee would further like the Department to take up the matter with the concerned 
States/UTs and ensure follow-up action required in this regard. 

 
Action Taken 
  
 As per the existing system the Ministry allocates foodgrains in two instalments. The first 
instalment for first two quarter of the forthcoming financial year is issued in the month of February 
of the preceding financial year on the basis of PAB  approvals for the last year. As per the 
guidelines the State can lift the foodgrains one month in advance i.e. for the quarter (April to June)  
lifting can be made in the month of March itself. T he position of lifting of foodgrains is also been 
reviewed through regional workshops etc. The status  on lifting of foodgrains was also discussed in 
detail with the States/UTs during the meetings of P rogramme Approval Board. The States/UTs 
have been requested from time to time for preparing  a lifting calendar and lift food grains 
accordingly. The status of lifting of foodgrains during 2014-15 is given attached at Annexure-VII. 
 
Infrastructure under MDM Scheme  
Recommendations/observations 
5.6 The Committee would like to point out that this  parameter was supposed to be completed 
by the 31st March, 2013 under the mandate of the RT E Act. Backlog and slow progress in the 
construction of Kitchen-cum-Stores is a cause for s erious concern for the Committee. Availability 
of Kitchen-cum-Stores is the very basic requirement  of the MDM Scheme. Proper Kitchen-cum-
Stores have to be in place. Only then, it can be en sured that students are being served good quality 
meal as mandated under the Scheme. The Committee wo uld like to be apprised of the reasons for 
such a slow pace of construction of stores. The det ails of monitoring mechanism for ensuring 
timely completion may also be provided. The Committ ee would recommend State-specific follow-
up action for completing construction of Kitchen-cum-Stores in these States. 
 
Action Taken 
   
The issue of non-completion of the sanctioned kitch en-cum-stores has been discussed with 
the concerned States/UTs from time to time on vario us forums. The issue was discussed in detail 
with the States/UTs during the meetings of Programm e Approval Board meetings held for 
approval of Annual Work Plan & Budget for the year 2015-16. All the States/UTs were advised to 
complete the construction of pending kitchen-cum-st ores latest by December, 2015. The status of 
construction of kitchen-cum-stores was again discus sed and reviewed in the National Consultation 
held at Shillong on 1-2nd June, 2015 and regional workshops held at Aurangabad on 11 July, 2015 
and Amritsar on 16th September, 2015. 
 
As per the information provided by States/UTs throu gh 2nd QPR of 2015-16, construction 
has been completed for 7.59 lakh kitchen-cum-stores , work is in progress for 1.28 lakh kitchen-
cum-stores and work is yet to start for 1.19 lakh k itchen-cum-stores. Many of the States have 
expressed that the kitchen-cum-stores which were sa nctioned earlier at the rate of ` 60,000/- per 
unit are the one, which are at various stages of co nstruction. This issue will be reviewed through 
regional workshops to be held during January and Fe bruary, 2016 and also by the PAB-MDM in 
the meetings scheduled to be held from February, 20 16. The State wise status of construction of 
kitchen-cum-stores is given at (Annexure-VlIl) . 
Comments of the Committee 

 
 There has been a marked improvement in the constru ction of Kitchen-cum-Stores 
and some states like Kerala have been outstanding i n this regard, the percentage of 
constructed Kitchens was only 13% at the beginning  has now completed 98%. The best 
practice from such states can be learnt and efforts  should be made to replicate it in other 
states. The Committee, therefore, feels that the De partment needs to keep pressing the 
States/UTs for achieving more result in this regard.  
 
VI.  TEACHER EDUCATION 
 
Recommendations/observations 
6.6 The  Committee  appreciates  the  large-scale  initiatives  taken  by  the  Department  to 
strengthen teacher education in the country. Howeve r, inspite of all these concerted efforts there is 
no denying the fact that standard of teaching in mo st Government and private sector schools at 
elementary level is a cause for serious concern. Th e fact that most children cannot read or write 
upto V Standard, especially in rural areas, indicat es that our education system has remained more 
focussed on quantitative expansion rather than qual itative. The Committee feels that there is a 
need to focus on improving the standard of teaching  in the schools especially in rural, tribal, 
extremism affected and remote areas. 
 
Action Taken   
 
NCTE has revised its Regulations in November, 2014 and some salient features of the revised 
regulations are: 
• Norms and Standards of 12 Teacher Education Programmes revised. 
• New Norms and Standards framed for 3 Teacher Educat ion Programmes: 4 yrs integrated 
courses: BA/B.Ed. & B.Sc./B.Ed.; B.Ed. Part time fa ce to face (for in situ teachers); and 3 
yrs. integrated B.Ed./M.Ed. 
• Curriculum of all courses revised and more sharply defined. 
• Yoga, ICT, Gender and Children with Special Needs (CWSN) included in curriculum of all 
programmes. 
• Clear thrust and focus on Practicum, School Interns hip and Field work in Teacher 
Education Programs. 
• School Internship of full 20 weeks. 
• Accreditation principle introduced. 
 
2. Joint Review Missions:  As a part of the monitor ing mechanism of TE scheme, Joint Review 
Mission consisting of experts in Teacher Education have been sent to 26 States from the year 
2012-13 till 2015-16 for ensuring effective impleme ntation of Centrally Sponsored Scheme for 
Teacher Education (CSSTE). By 2016-17 all States un der CSSTE will be covered with a JRM 
team visiting the 4 remaining States i.e. Delhi, Go a, Himachal Pradesh and Nagaland from 15th to 
22nd March, 2016.  
 
3. E-Governance Initiatives: Enhanced use of E-Gove rnance in Teacher Education by National 
Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) for better regulation of the sector.  
4. Accreditation for Teacher Education Institutions  (TEIs) by NCTE for better management and 
improved quality of teacher education.   
 

5.  Mapping of Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs ) by NCTE to identify the gap areas for 
effective future planning. 
 
6. Demand and Supply gap study: NCTE has also under taken a demand and supply gap study to 
forecast State-wise requirement of different categories of teachers over the next 10 years.  
 
7. In-STEP: Capacity Building Program of Teacher Ed ucators:  Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (MHRD) and USAID have formulated the In -STEP program (India Support to 
Teacher Education Program).  110 teacher educators from the Eastern and North Eastern part of 
the country have undergone a 3 month fellowship at Arizona State University with the clear 
purpose of understanding issues related to teacher education in the years 2013-14 and 2014-15.  
 
8. TESS India Programme:  TESS-India (Teacher Educa tion through School based Support) is 
another programme for Teacher Educators – A joint c ollaboration between Department for 
International Development (DFID) and DEA with MHRD as the implementing agency.  Under this 
programme, 125 Teacher Developmental Units (TDUs) f or 7 States (U.P, Bihar, M.P, Odisha, 
Assam, West Bengal, Karnataka) in Mathematics, Science, English, Social Science and Leadership 
have been developed in English language and the regional language of the States.  
 
9. Various National and Regional Workshops (2 Natio nal Workshops and 2 Regional 
Workshops) have been conducted under CSSTE to revie w the effective implementation of the 
Teacher Education Scheme and to envisage future roadmap and initiatives.   
 
10. As on 4th March, 2016 a sum of `449.10 Crore has been allocated in Revised Estimate  (RE), 
out of which `442.70 Crore has been released by the Ministry. 
 
 
XIII.  CONCLUSION 
 
  
13.1 School Education is the basic aspect of a nati ons' life. Good quality school education goes a 
long way in shaping the quality of people and ultim ately of the nation. Over the years, Department 
of School Education and Literacy has been striving to strengthen the elementary and secondary 
education system in the country. There is no denyin g the fact that quantitative expansion of 
education has taken place across the country but a lot more remains to be done on the qualitative 
aspect. Therefore, all the stakeholders viz  Central/State Governments, Union Territory 
Administrations, society and others need to come together on one platform and focus on both these 
aspect of Education. The Department has to play the  role of a co-ordinator especially with respect 
to the allocation of funds to the States and ensuri ng better utilisation thereof so as to achieve the 
maximum results which would go a long way in improv ing the social status of the lower strata of 
society who have remained outside the growth and de velopment attained so far. The Committee 
further believes that Department has all the expert ise and capacities at its command and if the 
things are taken in mission mode they would surely succeed in giving a better and desired shape to 
the future of the country. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Department is committed to make all efforts as suggested by the Committee to 
improve the implementation of various schemes by co llaboration with States/UTs Rashtriya 
Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) was launched by Go vernment of India in March, 2009 
envisaging inter-alia provision of a secondary scho ol within a reasonable distance of any 
habitation and to improve quality of education impa rted at secondary level by making all 

secondary schools conform to prescribed norms, remo ving gender, socio-economic and disability 
barriers etc. In 2013, secondary education the sche mes of ICT, vocational education, Girls Hostel 
and IEDSS were subsumed under the umbrella of RMSA.  
Due to various interventions implemented under RMSA , there has been improvements in overall 
educational scenario at secondary level as tabulated below: 
Sl. No. Indicator SSE* 2009-10 UDISE 2014-15 
1. GER (total) 62.71% 76.64% 
2. GER (boys) 66.65% 76.80% 
3. GER (girls) 58.45% 76.47% 
4. Dropout rate 52.76% (I to X) 17.86%  
(Secondary Level) 
           *Statistics of School Education  
Under RMSA, 11,599 new secondary schools have been approved and funds have been provided 
for strengthening of 37,731 existing secondary schools. the details of are as under: 
Sl. No. Intervention Status 
Sanction Functional Yet to be 
functional 
1. New Schools 11599 10082 1517 
Sanction Completed In progress 
2. Strenghtening of existing schools 37731   
2.1 ACR 52715 22065 7926 
2.2 Science Lab 25948 10962 4323 
2.3 Computer room 21864 7925 3105 
2.4 Library 27428 11594 5178 
2.5 Toilet Blocks 62218 62218 0 
2.6 Drinking Water 12327 7476 747 
 
Under this scheme, 115554 secondary school teachers  to the existing Government secondary 
schools have been approved from 2009-10 to 2015-16.  
Under the Scheme, various type of training programm e has been introduced to improve quality of 
teachers which includes in-service teacher training  to Headmasters/Principal, Master Trainers 
Training , Training of Key Resource Persons, induct ion training of Teachers, 
Headmaster’s/Principals Professional Development/ M anagement and Leadership training of 
Headmasters & State Resource Groups (SRGs) through NUEPA. The details Teacher’s Training 
are as under:- 
Sl. No. Categories of Trainings Approved Training 
Completed  
1. In-service Teacher Training 3657370 1445952 
2. In-service Training of Headmasters 260340 81292 
3. Master Resource Person & Key Resource 
Persons (MRP & KRP) 
50209 16534 
4. Induction training of Teachers 182168 39151 
5 State Resource Groups (SRGs) routed to NEUPA 1334  742 
 
  

Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee is happy to note that a considerable effort has been made by the 
Department in pursuance of its recommendations to i mprove various schemes in 
collaboration with States/UTs.  There has been a ma rked improvement in GER across the 
board and the drop-out rate has decreased considera bly under RMSA.  However, the 
Committee notes that teachers' training is not prog ressing as well as in other areas. The 
figures pertaining to completed Teachers' training vis-a-vis  approved training shows that 
majority of the teachers have not yet been given tr aining.  Hence, the Committee feels that 
renewed efforts are needed for imparting training t o at least the teachers, whose training has 
been approved. 

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendations/observations 
2.5 The Committee finds that there has always been a gap between the projected requirement 
of funds and allocations to the Department for its various schemes. Taking into account the fact 
that SSA/RTE, MDM and other Programmes of the Depar tment are major social sector schemes 
meant to create a network of educational facilities  for all sections of the society across the country  
with focus on universal access, retention, social a nd gender parity, greater amount of funds is 
required for each of these schemes/programmes. Howe ver, lower allocation of funds for each of 
these programmes does not match the objectives to b e achieved. Inadequacy of funds would 
certainly adversely impact the outreach of the sche mes to the remote and tribal/border areas 
lacking school infrastructure and other facilities,  unserved habitats, disadvantaged groups, 
backward and poor people having no access to school facilities defeating the very objectives of the 
schemes. 
 
Action Taken 
   
The financial outlay for SSA for 2014-15 in the BE was `28258.00 crore which was 
revised to `24380.00 crore at the RE stage. The overall plan bu dget of the Department during 
2015-16 is `39038.50 Crore, out of which the BE for SSA is `22000.00 crore and `9236.40 crore 
for Mid Day Meal Scheme.  Against the allocation of  ` 24380 crore for SSA-RTE programme in 
2014-15 an amount of `24122.51 crore (98.94%) has been released. It has b een the endeavour of 
the Department that SSA programme addresses the inf rastructural gaps and socio-geographical 
diversities among the States and ensure that its goals are met. 
 
The Mid Day Meal Scheme (MDMS) has been allocated 3 0% budget in 2015-16 w.r.t. the 
BE 2014-15.  The less allocation has affected the i mplementation of the scheme in the sense that 
additional funds of `560.48 Cr. have been demanded from MoF under 3 
rd  supplementary for 
meeting the requirement of funds of States like Jha rkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan & West Bengal.  The funds are also requir ed for GNCT of Delhi, Puduchery and all 
UTs without legislature. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
The Department has not taken any concrete step to a ddress the gap between the 
projected requirement of funds and allocations for its various schemes.  Further the 
allocation were reduced by `` ``3878 crore, at RE Stage.  This could be for the rea son that the 
Department was not able to spend as per the norms o f Ministry of Finance. While replying, 
the Department should have made explanation to that  effect nor has the Department 
mentioned the reasons why there has been decreased allocation for the year 2015-16. 
Inadequate funds would certainly act as a huge hurd le in the implementation of these 
important schemes. The Committee observes that the Department should examine as to what 
measure, can be taken by them to avoid such a situa tion and if need be, take up this matter 
with the Ministry of Finance at the earliest so tha t the implementation of the schemes does 
not get affected. The Committee is also of the view  that the Department should make all out 

efforts to increase the outreach of the schemes to every nook and corner of the Country. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
2.11  The Committee is fully aware of the fact that vario us schemes of the Department are 
implemented in accordance with the Annual Action Pl an. Pending Utilization Certificates are 
indicative of the non-adherence of the financial no rms of the schemes and availability of unspent 
balances indicates slow pace leading to targeted be neficiaries not being covered fully as also 
physical targets for various schemes remaining unac hieved. The Committee reiterates that the 
Department has to be more vigilant in realizing its  fiscal responsibility and that the Department 
should initiate steps for liquidating old pending U tilization Certificates expeditiously and 
facilitating the implementing agencies to submit th e same in time. The Department should also 
pursue the issue of unspent balances with the State  Governments/Uts to ensure that the allocated 
funds are utilized optimally and judiciously. Besid es, the Committee would like to be apprised of 
the latest State-wise figures of outstanding Utiliz ation Certificates and also the amount of unspent 
balances. The Committee once again emphatically sta tes that factors responsible for funds 
remaining unutilized need to be identified and reme dial measures taken accordingly. The 
Committee also calls upon the States and other impl ementing agencies to treat the matter of 
Utilization Certificates and unpsent balances with all seriousness so that the pace of the schemes 
does not suffer. 
 
Action Taken 
   
The central share is released in two installments i n a year, once in April and then again in 
September.  The 1st installment is released in two tranches, 1st tranche as ad-hoc installment & 
2nd tranche as balance of the 1st installment.  The  ad-hoc installment is released in the month of 
April-May to the tune 25% to 30% of the expenditure  made in the previous financial year. 
 In order to maintain the steady fund flow, the bal ance of the 1st installment is released in 
the month of June-July subject to release of matchi ng share by the State & provisional utilization 
certificate of previous year.  The 2nd installment is released in the month of September-October 
based on the pace of expenditure, receipt of commen surate state share, audited accounts, 
adjustment of outstanding advances etc. and provisional utilization certificate for the current year.  
 
  All the States/UTs have already submitted their A udited accounts for 2013-14 under SSA. 
Quarterly meetings are held up for review of financ ial management status including the issue of 
settlement of outstanding advances.  With the resul t, substantial reduction in the amount of 
outstanding advances has taken places during the pa st three years from `16498.02 crore (as per 
audit report for the year 2011-12), on 01.04.2012 to  `5232.67 crore as on 31.03.2015.  
 
The release of 2 nd  instalment of central share depends on availabilit y of Audited Utilization 
Certificate, pace of expenditure, providing of comm ensurate State share of previous year and the 
current year, adjustment of outstanding advances et c. The Govt. of India has already laid down the 
timelines for following up during the preparation o f Annual Reports and Audited Accounts as per 
Annexure-I.     
 
The unspent balance consist of central share, state share, excess state share, bank interest & 
misc. receipts.   The unspent balance of the previo us year is passed on to next financial year for 
implementation of approved interventions.  Further un-utilized balance sometimes accumulates 

due to excess state share/contribution.   The State-wise unspent balance as on 01.04.2015 com es to 
only 12.8% ( Annexure-II). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee acknowledges the efforts put in by t he Department in reducing the 
amount of outstanding advances. The Department has however not given detailed 
information about the pending UCs of the last three  years. Hence, the Committee observes 
that a comparative analysis of the pending UCs of t hese years cannot be made. Pending UCs 
continue to remain as a perennial problem. Hence, t he Committee can only reiterate that the 
Department should make all out efforts to deal with  this problem. Pendency pertaining to 
the recent years also needs to be brought to the minimum level. 
 
III. ENROLMENT, RETENTION AND DROP OUT 
 
(i) GER/NER 
 
Recommendations/observations 
3.1 The Committee is happy to note that the country  has almost achieved the goal of universal 
access at primary level and there is considerable i mprovement both in GER and NER at upper 
primary level. However, at upper primary level both  GER and NER show decline with NER 
showing a sharper decline. NER of 70.20 percent ref lect that around 30 percent children drop out 
of the schools by the time they reach class VIII, t herefore, for maintaining the optimum GER and 
NER at upper primary level is still a challenge for  the Department. The Committee is aware that a 
number of factors such as non-availability of schools in neighbourhood, poor school infrastructure, 
non-availability of adequate number of teachers, te achers absenteeism and other socio-cultural 
barriers are responsible for sliding GER and NER at  upper primary level. The Committee 
however, feels that notwithstanding these constrain ts, the gains of optimum enrolment at primary 
level are negatived if the same level of enrolment is not sustained at upper primary level. The 
Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the three most crucial parameters 
of RTE/SSA i.e  availability of neighbourhood schools, proper scho ol infrastructure with all the 
facilities and the availability of required number of teachers in the schools, which were required to 
be pursued in a mission made manner and completed w ithin a stipulated timeframe. The 
Committee feels that inspite of the considerable pr ogress made in this regard, the ground realities 
might be different and perhaps these factors may be  contributing towards sliding GER and NER at 
upper primary level. The Committee would like the D epartment to make State specific assessment 
about the GER and NER at primary level ascertaining  the factors responsible for low GER and 
NER at upper primary level and take corrective measures. 
 
Action Taken 
 
   Section 6 of the Right of the Children to Free a nd Compulsory Education Act, 2009 
provides for establishment of schools within the ar ea or limits of neighbourhood as prescribed in 
the State RTE Rules. Accordingly the required numbe rs of schools have been sanctioned/opened 
as per neighbourhood norms. Since coming into force  of the RTE Act, 2009, 44,595 school 
buildings, 7,00,460 additional classrooms, 5,46,513  toilets and 34,671 drinking water facilities 
have been sanctioned to the State under SSA program me to augment the school infrastructure for 
compliance with RTE.  
 

The GER, at upper primary level has increased from 75.80 in 2009-10 to 91.24 in 2014-15 
and NER increased from 58.29 to 72.48 during the sa me period. Under SSA, the teachers posts are 
sanctioned as per the provisions contained in the S chedule to RTE Act to maintain the Pupil 
Teacher Ratio (PTR) of 30:1 at primary level and 35 :1 at upper primary level. Since inception of 
SSA, 19.77 lakh teacher posts have been sanctioned,  of which 15.58 lakh teachers have been 
recruited.  The average attendance rate of teachers  at primary level has also improved from 81.7 in 
2006-07 to 84.8 in 2012-13 and at upper primary lev el the same has improved from 80.5 in 2006-
07 to 83.1 in 2012-13. 
 
(iii) Out of School Children 
Recommendations/observations 
3.4 The Committee feels it is not a happy situation  that over 60 lakh children are out of school. 
Still worrisome fact is that majority of the out-of -school children belong to the disadvantaged 
communities viz  scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, minorities, mi grants, children with special 
needs, deprived children, working children, childre n in difficult circumstances i.e  those living in 
difficult terrain, children from displaced families  and areas affected by civil strife. Attention of 
Committee was drawn to the fact that while discussi ng the issue of social access and equity, the 
tendency was to confine it to broad categories like  SC, ST, Muslims, Girls etc. However, our 
social realities are too complex as there are more disadvantaged within the disadvantaged groups. 
The Committee feels that there is a need to identif y all the out-of-school children and to 
mainstream them to appropriate classes by adopting a flexible approach. All this requires taking 
concerted efforts to reach out to the out-of-school  children. The Committee feels that the 
Department should shift its focus from schooling to  learning for these children and also envisage 
new ideas and schemes so that they are attracted to schools. 
 
 
Action Taken 
   The number of Out of School Children (OoSC) has dec lined from 81.5 lakh in 2009 to 
60.64 lakh in 2014 as per All India Survey of OoSC conducted by an independent agency. Under 
SSA, to enrol and retain children in the 6-14 years  age group, steps have been taken, inter alia, to 
open schools in the neighbourhood, construct additi onal class rooms, provide drinking water & 
toilet facilities, provide additional teachers, tex tbooks, uniforms (for all girls and children 
belonging to SC, ST and BPL families in government schools) and provide special training to 
OoSC for eventual mainstreaming into schools. 
Through the SSA, the States /UTs are being financia lly supported to address gaps and 
challenges in ensuring quality education to childre n in elementary classes through recruitment of 
additional teachers to improve the Pupil Teacher Ra tio (PTR), regular annual-in-service teacher 
training to all teachers to update their skills and  knowledge, support for Computer Aided Learning 
at upper primary level and regular academic support  through Block Resource Centres and Cluster 
Resource Centres. Padhe Bharat Badhe Bharat, a sub- programme under SSA has been launched to 
enhance the quality of foundational learning in lan guages and early mathematics in classes 1 & 2 
and a focused programme for Science and Maths at up per primary level under SSA is also being 
supported.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts taken by the  Department in ensuring 
improvement in GER and NER at upper primary level. However, the Committee observes 

that a lot more can be done in this regard. The Dep artment has not provided the factors 
responsible for low GER and NER at upper primary le vel, nor has the Department 
mentioned information about the corrective measures  taken. Teachers’ absenteeism and 
non-availability of adequate number of teachers con tinue to remain as hurdles in ensuring 
universal access at primary education. The Departme nt should take urgent steps to ensure 
that maximum students are retained at the upper pri mary level as well. More 
neighbourhood schools with proper infrastructure wi th all the facilities need to be 
established. The Committee is of the view that the Department should take up urgent steps to 
find out the problems at grass-root level which are  contributing towards sliding GER and 
NER at upper primary level and take corrective meas ures. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the progress made in this regard. 
 
SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN/RIGHT TO EDUCATION 
 
Funding and Fund sharing pattern for RTE/SSA programme 
Recommendations/observations 
4.11 The Committee feels that RTE/SSA programme, la rgely being a Central Government 
initiative, is the responsibility of the Government  for mobilizing adequate resources to achieve the 
mandates of the RTE Act. It is a known fact that ti me and again States/UTs have been pressing for 
more funds for implementing the provisions of the R TE Act. The RTE obligates the States/UTs to 
ensure completion of free and compulsory education from class I to VIII for all children in a 
neighbourhood school, make provisions for buildings  and infrastructure, maintaining norms and 
standards relating to Pupil Teacher Ratio, increase d school working days, appointment of 
appropriately trained teachers and developing curri culum for all around development of the 
children through a system of child-friendly and chi ld-centred learning. It is believed that the 
States/UTs are not able to fulfil many of these man dates mainly on account of inadequacy of the 
funds. This indicates lack of the required commitme nt on the part of the Central and State/UT 
governments to strive for universalization of quali ty elementary education for all. In view of the 
above, the Committee recommends that adequate funds  be mobilised at the earliest for 
implementing the Scheme. 
 
Action Taken 
 
The Planning Commission had allocated Gross Budgeta ry Support at current prices of an 
outlay of `1,92,726 cr. for SSA scheme for the 12th Plan period (2012-17).  
      The financial outlay for 2014-15 in the BE wa s `28258.00 crore which was reduced to 
`24380.00 crore at the RE stage. Against the demand of `50000.00 crore, the Government has 
approved `22000.00 crore for 2015-16 for implementation of RT E-SSA programme. State-wise 
central releases under RTE-SSA programme from 2010- 11 to 2014-15 are placed at Annexure-
III . 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Depart ment to mobilise the funds to the 
concerned States/UTs. However, inadequate funds con tinue to be a major obstacle in 
implementing the RTE/SSA programme. The Committee i s of the view that the Department 
should find ways to tackle this obstacle and to ens ure that the States/UTs utilize the funds 
meaningfully. For universal access, retention and i mproving the quality of elementary 

education, sufficient funds are required. The Commi ttee, therefore, reiterates that the 
problem of insufficient funds should be dealt with earnestly without any delay. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
4.15 The Committee would like the Department to kee p an eye on the ground reality with 
respect to infrastructures created in various State s and to take up the issue on priority basis with 
States/UTs which shows dismal and slow performance.  The Committee would like to reiterate that 
all the schools must be run as per the mandate of R TE with proper infrastructure having sufficient 
facilities. The Committee views the inadequacy of i nfrastructural and facilities seriously and 
desires the Department to play a more pro-active ro le in persuading the States/UTs in creating the 
required infrastructure facilities in a time bound manner. Another related issue with the 
infrastructure creation is the design of the school  buildings. The Committee feels that irregularly 
planned schools not only disturb the students but a lso has an adverse impact on the whole range of 
activities of the schools. The Committee accordingl y recommends that the school buildings must 
be designed in such a manner that it helps in attracting the students to them.  
 
Action Taken 
 Regular meetings are held with States and UTs repre sentatives to monitor performance of 
infrastructure created. Planning and design of scho ol building are done by the States and UTs as 
per availability of resources including suitable land. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee observes that it is the responsibili ty of the Department to ensure that 
the States/UTs construct the required infrastructur e facilities in a time bound manner. The 
Department has not provided any UT/Statewise details of the infrastructures those have been 
constructed in the States/UTs so far. Strict action s are needed to be taken up with those 
States/UTs whose performance in this regard is dism al and slow. Regarding the design of the 
school buildings, the Committee is of the view that  experts’ opinion needs to be taken so that 
the school activities do not get disturbed. 
 
Kasturva Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) 
 
Recommendations/observations 
4.26 The Committee finds that the overall enrolment  percentage of the Minorities and the BPL 
girls in KGBVs is abysmally low. Further even in Mu slim concentration districts, the enrolment 
percentage of muslim girls is very low. The Committ ee feels that the muslim girls are not coming 
forward to join KGBVs in even muslim concentration districts, the probability of their being 
enrolled in other areas in large numbers is remote.  Another area of concern for the Committee is 
girls from economically weaker families not availin g of this facility as envisaged under the 
scheme. The Committee is of the view that public aw areness about the targeted areas and the 
benefits of the KGBV Scheme needs to be taken to hi gher levels of penetration in targeted areas 
with increased intensity as well as with more parti cipation of Gram panchayats and community 
leaders in its implementation. 
 
Action Taken  
  
The enrolment of Muslim girl’s in 544 KGBVs which h ave been sanctioned in Muslim 

Concentration Districts (SFDs) has increased from 2 1.64% in December, 2014 to 25.19% in 
December, 2015 which is a 3.55% increase in the ove rall enrolment of Muslim girls. The state-
wise details of enrolment of girls belonging to Muslim families in KGBVs are as under:- 
 
SN  State  KGBV 
Sanctioned  
KGBV 
Operational  
Total Girls 
belonging to 
Muslims Families  
% of 
Muslim 
Girls  
1 Assam 34  34  1083  58.54  
2 Bihar 102  102  1714  17.08  
3 Gujarat 8 8 60  12.24  
4 Haryana 6 6 175  31.19  
5 J & K 69  69  2163  75.03  
6 Jharkhand 40  40  544  13.86  
7 Madhya Pradesh 2 2 1 0.33  
8 Manipur 1 1 0 0.00  
9 Rajasthan 3 3 26  10.08  
10 Uttar Pradesh 219  219  4277  20.10  
11 Uttarakhand 9 9 14  3.31  
12 West Bengal 51  51  1423  40.88  
 Total  544  544  11480  25.19  
            Similarly, the overall category-wise en rolment % of the girls of minority communities in 
the KGBVs has increased from 6.22% in December, 201 4 to 7.68%, in December, 2015 an 
increase of 1.46% in the overall enrolment of Minor ity girls. State wise details are placed at 
Annexure-V. 
            The Overall category-wise % of girls in  the KGBVs as on 30 
th  December, 2015 is as 
below:- 
Description  % enrolment  
SC 30.02%  
ST 24.95%  
OBC 31.27%  
BPL 6.07%  
Minority 7.68%  
 
In order to improve the enrolment of girls from Mus lim communities and weaker sections a 
range of strategies and interventions have been evo lved to improve SC, ST and Muslim girls’ 
participation in KGBVs, through building systemic r esponsiveness, motivating girls and their 
parents and forging partnerships with community bas ed groups so that maximum number of 
eligible girls of said categories benefit from this scheme. 
Some measures taken in this regard are:- 
• Provision of an option for a section to provide ins tructions in Urdu medium in 
KGBVs in Muslim dominated blocks. 
• 2 Urdu teachers provided (only for blocks with Musl im population above 20% and 
select urban areas), if required 
• Involvement of community members in functions celebrated in KGBVs. 

 In addition quarterly meetings are held at the Nat ional level and Regional level to review 
the implementation of girls’ education Programmes i ncluding the KGBV scheme. These are 
review cum capacity building workshops with exchange of good practices across the State. 
National level meetings are conducted by Secretary,  Department of School Education & 
Literacy, with State Education Secretaries and Stat e Project Directors (SPDs) of SSA including 
Directors of State Council for Education Research a nd Training twice a year and other regional 
Reviews are also held. Progress of KGBV is reviewed in each of these. 
Other than this School enrollment campaigns are gen erally launched by States at the start 
of the school academic year for awareness generatio n to enroll out-of-school children in schools 
and KGBVs. The school enrolment campaigns enable St ates to reach out to hitherto unreached 
children, including children in remote areas, worki ng children, girls, children belonging to SC, ST 
and Minority communities, and children in difficult  circumstances to facilitate their enrolment in 
KGBVs and schools. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes that in Muslim concentrated di stricts there has been an increase 
of 3.55% in the over-all enrolment of Muslim girls and thereby raising their enrolment to 
25.19% .  The Committee desires that continued effo rt should be made by the Department so 
that there is a remarkable growth in their enrolmen t. Further, the Committee observes that 
the overall enrolment percentage of the Muslim, Min orities and the BPL girls in KGBVs 
continues to be abysmally low despite the efforts o f the Department. Therefore, the 
Committee feels that either the public awareness ab out the KGBVs is not there or the target 
audience are not getting the message. The Committee, therefore, urges the Department to act 
pro-actively to find more innovative and out-of the  Box solution so as to improve the 
enrolment of Girls in the most weakest and vulnerable parts of the Country. 
 
Teacher Recruitment and Training under RTE/SSA  
Recommendations/observations   
4.29 Given the fact that RTE norms require the pupi l teacher ratio to be 27:1 existence of such a 
large number of vacancies is a cause of serious con cern for the Committee. The Committee would 
like the Department to find out the factors respons ible for such a large number of vacant posts in 
co-ordination with the respective State Governments . The Committee would recommend to the 
Department to ensure filling up of all existing tea cher vacancies in the States/UTs, if qualitative 
expansion of elementary education is to be achieved. The Committee would like to emphasize that 
there should remain no gap between the number of te achers required and teachers recruited, not 
only in the underperforming States/UTs but also in all other States/UTs. A mission mode approach 
should be applied in recruiting targeted number of teachers. This may also be reviewed on a 
periodic basis in co-ordination with the States/UTs. 
 
Action Taken   
The Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) norm as per the RTE A ct 2009 is 1:30 for primary schools 
and 1:35 for upper primary schools. Since the imple mentation of the Act, States have been 
sanctioned around 7 lakhs additional teachers' post s in order to meet the PTR norm. As on 
31.03.2015, 19.77 lakhs teachers' posts have been s anctioned to all States/UTs to improve the PTR 

under SSA, against which 15.58 lakhs teachers’ post s have been filled up by the States/UTs.  As 
on 31.03.15, the national PTR is 26:1.  However, inter State variations remain. 
The issue of filling up of vacant teachers' posts, deployment of teachers are periodically 
taken up with State governments/UTs through fora li ke Education Secretaries Meetings and the 
Project Approval Board Meetings.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee fails to understand that even with ar ound 4.19 lakh posts of teachers 
vacant under SSA as on 31.03.2015, the Department h as submitted that the present National 
Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) is 26:1. This implies tha t either the previously estimated PTR do 
not reflect the correct ratio, or the estimate of t he number of students/Teachers under SSA 
does not reflect the actual figures. Hence, the Com mittees desire that the total number of 
pupils under SSA and the total number of Teachers m ay be provided. Further, the 
Committee also feels that not enough has been done to fill up the vacancies as recommended 
earlier.  
 
Recommendations/observations 
4.31 The Committee finds that no training has been given to untrained teachers in a number of 
States/UTs. The Committee does not know the reasons  for this and desires to have State-wise 
figures of service teachers requiring professional training and the number of untrained teachers in 
the States/UTs. The Committee would also like to kn ow what steps the National Council for 
Teachers' Education is taking to ensure that only p rofessionally qualified teachers are appointed 
under RTE/SSA to provide quality education to children. 
 
Action Taken  
In 18  States/UTs, viz, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Dadra 
& Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, H aryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Tamilna du, Telangana all the teachers at elementary 
level in Government and Govt. Aided Schools are tra ined teachers. The details of untrained 
teachers in remaining 18 States/UTs is placed at Annexure-VI . 
The NCTE as the notified Academic Authority as per Section 23(2) of the RTE Act, 2009 
has prescribed minimum qualification for persons to  be eligible for becoming teachers in Classes 
I-VIII.  Additionally, NCTE has also laid down guid elines for the Teacher Eligibility Test (TET).  
The State Government/UTs conduct the TET examinatio n to ensure that well qualified candidates 
join the teaching profession. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee finds that the total number of untra ined teachers recruited is very 
high i.e., 7,45,327. This figure is even higher tha n the total number of NCTE approved 
trained teachers. This does not speak well of the s tatus of fitness for teachers in the Country 
and it would ultimately reflect on the quality of t eaching and the students under SSA. The 
Committee, therefore, feels that pro-active steps n eed to be taken up by the Department to 
impart training to these teachers in the right earnest. 
 
V. NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF MID-DAY-MEAL IN SCHOOLS  

Recommendations/observations 
5.12 The Committee notes the various measures and i nitiatives taken by the Central and State 
Governments with respect to the maintenance of qual ity of food being served to the students under 
MDM Scheme. The Committee, is, however, also aware that a large number of complaints 
regarding poor quality of food served to students a ll over the country reported in the media. The 
Committee feels that either the aforementioned meas ures largely remain on paper and are far way 
from ground realities or there is no proper monitoring mechanism put in place to check these kinds 
of reports and to provide remedial measures. 
 
5.13 The Committee therefore, strongly feels that t he implementation of MDM scheme needs a 
very strong and effective supervisory mechanism. Th e best practices and initiatives in some States 
can easily be adopted by schools in other States/UT s. The Department should motivate the other 
States/UTs by sharing such information with them. T he other suggestions which the Committee 
wants the Department to consider is that the teache rs, as far as, possible be taken off from all 
MDM duties and specialised staff be deployed for this purpose  
 
Action Taken    
Various complaints regarding poor quality of food s erved to students are received from 
different places from time to time, despite the various measures and initiatives taken by the Central 
and State Governments for providing quality of food  to the students under MDM Scheme. 
However, it may be mentioned herewith that the matt er is immediately taken up with concerned 
States/UTs for sending their comments as well as ac tion taken report on the complaints whenever 
any complaints or news reports come to the notice o f this Department regarding any irregularity 
including poor quality of meals in implementation o f the scheme. The status of complaint received 
and action taken thereon during the year 2012 to 2015 is given at Annexure-IX. 
 
The need for strengthening the monitoring mechanism  by the State Governments at the district, 
block as well as state level was discussed with States/UTs in the regional workshop held on 11-07-
2015 at Aurangabad and on 16-09-2015 at Amritsar. O ne of the reasons that emerged is that there 
is insufficient staff for regular monitoring of the  implementation of the scheme. The States/UTs 
have been advised to take care of aforesaid problem. 
 
As per suggestion of Committee, the best practices and initiatives in some States/UTs have already 
been shared with other States/UTs on different foru ms and platforms and motivated them to adopt 
these best practices and initiatives. As far as the  other suggestion of committee regarding the 
teachers, as far as, possible be taken off from all MDM duties and specialised staff be deployed for 
this purpose is concerned, it is submitted that The Mid Day Meal Guidelines envisage that teachers 
should not be assigned responsibilities that will i mpede or interfere with teaching learning.  The 
teacher is to supervise that the mid day meal is se rved in an orderly manner within specified time 
(recess period) and to taste the meal on rotational  basis before it is served. Except the above 
supervisory responsibility, he / she has no other r ole in the preparation of the mid day meal, as 
there are cooks-cum-helper preparing and serving th e meals. The teaching learning activities are 
not affected because the meals are served during the recess period.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 

 The Committee notes that the data regarding variou s types of action taken on 
complaints received during 2012-2015 is not elabora te or up-to-date and it also does not 
show the actual nature of complaints received by th e Department. Thus, Committee feels 
that the Department should keep up its vigil on the  quality of food and the extent of its reach 
in giving nutritious food to the children of this Nation.  
 
VI.  TEACHER EDUCATION  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
6.8 The Committee notes that in some of the States/ UTs, a large number of posts are lying 
vacant in DIETs, CTEs and IASEs. Situation is parti cularly discouraging in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Tamil Nadu,  Telangana and Uttar Pradesh where 
vacancies exist in all the teacher education instit utions. Position is no better in a number of other 
States/UTs in this regard. The Committee has been m aking observations in its previous reports 
also about the vacant positions in the teacher educ ation institutions. It has been the Committee's 
consistent opinion that teacher education instituti on would not be strengthened unless all the 
sanctioned academic posts have been filled up. If 4 0 to 50 percent of the posts are lying vacant in 
teacher education institutions, then the Department 's claim of there being fully functional and 
strengthened teacher education institutions cannot be taken seriously. Further, the quality of 
teaching in the schools cannot be improved, unless the quality of teacher education and institutions 
thereof are also improved. This cannot be done, if the optimum faculties are not available in the 
teacher training institutes. The Committee hopes th at the Department would make concerted 
efforts to ensure fully functional DIETs, CTEs and IASEs for teacher education. 
 
Action Taken  
The updated status for States with respect to DIETs , CTEs and IASEs are as provided in 
the table below:  
 
Sl. 
N
o 
States 
DIETs CTEs IASEs 
Sanction 
ed Posts 
Filled 
Posts 
Vacant 
Posts 
Sanction 
ed Posts 
Filled 
Posts 
Vacant 
Posts  
Sanction 
ed Posts 
Filled 
Posts 
Vacant 
Posts 
1 Andhra Pradesh  340 135 205 51 39 12 26 6 20 
2 Assam 572 323 249 136 120 16 51 34 17 
3 Madhya 
Pradesh 741 406 335 143 65 78 71 51 20 
4 Odisha 640 371 269 149 122 27 52 28 24 
5 Tamil Nadu 725 497 228 93 82 11 18 18 0 
6 Telangana 250 72 178 91 30 61 31 10 21 
7 Uttar Pradesh 2030 1150 880 66 21 45 27 5 22 
 
In the Teacher Education Approval Board (TEAB) meet ings which are conducted annually to 
consider the AWP&B of States/UTs and various forums  such as National and Regional 
Workshops, JRMs, etc States/UTs have been encourage d to fill up existing vacancies in TEIs on a 
priority basis.  Moreover funding under programme &  activities for different TEIs is directly 

linked to the number of academic Posts filled in these institutions. 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes that the data for sanctioned n umber of posts for DIETs, CTEs 
and IASEs provided by the Department at the beginni ng of the year do not match with the 
data provided now. Even some of the data seems to b e wrong e.g., the % of Vacancy under 
Teacher Education Institution (TEIs) has been total led and its sum has been stated as 
141.53% vacancies, which is prima facie not correct . Notwithstanding the factual 
inaccuracies, the Committee is saddened to note the  large amount of vacancies still exist and 
strongly urge the Department to take strong measure s to ensure that all these vacancies are 
filled up at the earliest and in right earnest.  
 
Recommendations/observations 
7.3 With regard to infrastructure under KVs the fol lowing information was provided:- 
Description 
 
As on 
1/3/2015  
Kendriya Vidayalayas with permanent school Building 713  
Kendriya  Vidyalayas   where  school  building  is  under construction  77  
Kendriya  Vidyalayas  where  school  building  is  under planning  48  
Kendriya Vidyalayas where land identified and awaiting lease in favour  88  
of Sangathan   
Kendriya Vidyalayas  where land yet to be identified  41  
 
From the information made available, it is evident that 77 buildings are under construction and 
building plans are under process in respect of 48 K Vs. In case of 88 KVs land has been identified 
but lease in favour of KVs is awaited and for 41 KV s land is yet to be identified. According to the 
Department, KVs was making concerted efforts at var ious levels for procurement of land and 
execution of lease deed in order to sanction perman ent school buildings at the earliest. The 
Committee notes with serious concern that the delay ed construction of building has become a 
perennial problem. In case of 177 KVs, the construc tion of buildings is yet to be started as the 
proposals are in various stages of procedural and a dministrative formalities. The Committee, 
would appreciate if the projects are awarded for co nstruction only after all the procedural and 
administrative formalities have been completed. Und er construction building also needs to be fast-
tracked. The Committee would like to be informed about the latest position in this regard. 
 
 
Action Taken    
The present status of construction of school buildings as on 01-08-2015 is as under: 
 
Description  As on 01-08-2015 
Kendriya Vidyalayas with permanent school building  713 
Kendriya Vidyalayas where school building is under 
construction 
92 
Kendriya Vidyalayas where school building is under 58 

planning 
Kendriya Vidyalayas where land is identified and aw aiting 
lease in favour of Sangathan 
83 
Kendriya Vidyalayas where land yet to be indentified 37 
During the current financial year till 1st August, 2015, 8 new KVs have been opened. 
Regarding delay in construction of school buildings, review meetings are being regularly held with 
construction agencies from time to time for complet ion of ongoing construction work at site 
removing all bottlenecks. 
At present 92 school building works are under const ruction and in order to timely 
completion of works all efforts are being made by r eviewing the progress of works with the Head 
of construction agencies at various levels and through Vidyalaya Monitoring Committee.  
It is further reported that KVS has been awarding w orks to construction agencies only after 
leasing/permanent grant of land done by the sponsor ing agencies. There has been considerable 
delay in transfer of land i.e. completion of lease/ permanent grant basis formalities by the sponsor. 
To tide over this problem, regular reminder are sen t to sponsoring authorities i.e. State Govt., Min. 
of Home Affairs, Min. of Defence, Min. of Railways etc. In the past matter has been taken up by 
the : 
 
(i) Hon’ble HRM vide letter dated 09.01.2012 & 26.0 8.2014 to all Chief Ministers of the 
States concerned for transfer of land in favour of KVS.  
(ii) Hon’ble HRM vide letter dated 18-09-2014 to De fence Minister, Minister of Railways & 
Home Minister (Govt. of India) for transfer of land  in favour of KVS for Kendriya 
Vidyalaya opened under their sponsorship.  
(iii) Addl. Secretary (SE&L), Ministry of HRD vide letter dated 04-09-2012 to  all Chief 
Secretary of the States concerned for transfer of land in favour of KVS. 
(iv) Commissioner, KVS vide letter dated 26-04-2013 , 17-11-2014, 26-12-2014 & 17-06-2015 
to all Chief Secretary of the states concerned for transfer of land in favour of KVS. 
(v) Addl. Commissioner (Admn.) KVS vide letter date d 11-02-2015 to all Collector concerned 
District for early allotment of land in favour of K VS. DC, KVS  of the concerned ROs are 
also directed to liaise with sponsoring authority for allotment of land. 
(vi) Further follow up communications were sent by Secretary (SE&L) on 17.12.2015 to the 
Chief Secretaries concerned and Heads of Organisati on or Sponsoring agencies for early 
completion of land transfer formalities. 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee notes that there are 37 KVs where lan d for construction has not been 
identified.  The Committee also notes that for 83 K Vs land has been identified and waiting 
lease in favour of Sangathan.  The Committee feels that the Department has to take a pro-
active role and take up this issue with the concern ed authorities for identification and leasing 
of land for the KVs. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
7.12 To a query of the Committee as to whether intr oduction of cent per cent filling of post of 
Vice-Principal in  Kendriya  Vidyalaya   by  Depart mental/  direct  recruitment undermines 
importance of experience, subject expertise viz. a viz. capacity to memorize and to reproduce, the 
Department has informed that 6 years experience as PGTs for direct recruitment and 5 years 

experience for PGTs for limited departmental examin ation is still required. The Committee is, 
however, of the opinion that 5 or 6 years experienc e is not sufficient to acquire the level of 
maturity needed for the post for Vice-Principal. In  reply to another query, the Department has 
stated that questions relating to establishment and financial matters are very relevant for the post of 
Vice-Principal in view of duties of that post and t hat has been cited as a rationale for testing PGTs 
in financial and establishment rules. Caliber of a person is best judged by testing him on what he 
knows than what he may be required to know in futur e if promoted. It is on this principle that 
candidates to be recruitment even to prestigious po sitions like Indian Administrative Service (IAS) 
are tested in the subjects which they have studied and not in the financial and establishment rules 
that they may be required to deal with if selected.  Once a person is selected, he/she is given 
necessary training in these rules. In view of its a bove-mentioned arguments the Committee feels 
that testing of PGTs in establishment and financial  rules for promotion to the post of Vice-
Principal is not appropriate and it needs to be reconsidered. 
 
Action Taken   
A Committee has been constituted under the Chairman ship of joint Commissioner (Acad.) to 
review the syllabus of Limited Departmental Examination, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan.  
The observation made by the Parliamentary Committee  regarding syllabus and recruitment 
rules in respect of teaching and non-teaching posts  will be placed before the Committee for 
necessary action while reviewing the recruitment ru les and syllabus of Limited Departmental 
Examination of KVS. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
7.14 In view of above, the Committee strongly recom mends that amendments by the Kendriya 
Vidyalaya Sangathan which have reduced promotion to  the post of Vice-Principal through 
seniority-cum-selection method to zero percent even  though earlier it used to be 100% be repealed 
forthwith and original position of 100% promotion t hrough seniority-cum-merit be restored. 
 The Committee feels that this has happened mainly due to absence of a clear cut transfer 
and promotion policy in KVs. Such a policy should b e put in place at the earliest to avoid 
discretion etc. in these matters. 
 
Action Taken 
  
 
The Board of Governors of KVS, in its 103 rd  Meeting held on 30.10.2015 has approved 
recommendation of Finance Committee, KVS that all R ecruitment Rules (RRs) of KVS should be 
vetted by Law Department and DoPT,  Govt. of India.   In case of any financial implications 
involved, the approval of Finance Ministry should a lso be taken. The recommendation of the 
committee for review of Recruitment Rules will be p laced accordingly to the MHRD for approval 
by the concerned Department/Ministry. 
A Committee has been constituted under the Chairman ship of Addl. Commissioner ( 
Admn) to review the syllabus of Limited Departmenta l Examination Kendriya Vidyalaya 
Sangathan.  
The observation made by the Parliamentary Committee  regarding syllabus and recruitment 
rules in respect of teaching and non-teaching posts  will be placed before the Recruitment Rules 
Committee for necessary action while reviewing the recruitment rules of KVS 
KVS transfer policy is under review by a Committee and suggestions made by the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee will also be taken into consideration during the review of these 

policies. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee is not at all in agreement with the existing policy of 100% recruitment 
of Vice-Principals (VPs) of KVs from Limited Depart mental Examination (LDE) and Direct 
Recruitment as it will affect the morale of the PGT s completely halting their career 
progression.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that for the 
promotion of PGTs to the post of Vice-Principal, th e original position of 100% through 
seniority-cum-selection be restored. As regard the requirement of specific knowledge of 
Establishment and Financial Rules for the post of V Ps, the Committee feels that the PGTs in 
the zone of consideration can be suitably trained b y the developing short term modules. 
Further, regarding the matter of reviewing of the R ecruitment Rules (RRs) of KVs, which is 
pending before the Cadre Review Committee of KVs, t he Committee recommends that the 
same may be expedited at the earliest, keeping in v iew this Committee's recommendations as 
stated above.  
Recommendations/observations 
8.3 The Committee's attention was also drawn to the  number of teaching and non-teaching 
staff vacancies in JNVs. The Committee notes that 1 140 vacancies of PGT, and 826 posts of TGT 
were vacant. In all out of 12917 total teachers pos ts 2276 posts were lying vacant. In non-teaching 
staff also out of 9154 posts 1627 were lying vacant . The Committee feels that such a large number 
of teaching and non-teaching posts lying vacant is a cause of serious concern. Since, the JNVs 
cater to the needs of rural children, the Committee  would like the Department to take steps to 
ensure that all the posts are filled up expeditious ly so as to ensure quality education to children in  
rural areas. 
 
Action Taken    
Recruitment to fill up the vacant posts is a contin uous process. Vacancies keep on arising due 
to the following reasons: 
a. New posts arise every year at the starting of new a cademic session due to upgradation of 
Vidyalayas from secondary level to senior secondary level. 
b. Vacancies arise due to retirement/resignation of existing teachers. 
c. Vacancies arise due to promotion from TGTs to PGTs, PGTs to Vice-Principals. 
d. Vacancies exist due to non-availability of suitable candidates in the reserved category. 
Regular efforts are being made to fill up the vacan t posts. In 2015, in the month of April, 229 
TGTs have been promoted to the post of PGTs. Furthe r, recruitment drive 2014 of teachers has 
also been finalized in 2015 and in the month of Jun e, offer of appointments to 463 candidates (227 
PGTs + 236 TGTs) have been issued on direct recruit ment basis. Process for recruitment drive 
2015 to fill up the remaining unfilled vacant posts has already been initiated.  
It is further stated that all Regional Offices / Pr incipals have been empowered to fill up the 
vacancies of teachers from time to time on contract  basis so that studies of the students are not 
hampered. For filling up of the vacancies against r est of the posts in non-teaching cadre, action is 
being taken on priority basis to fill up the vacancies at the earliest.  
The performance of the students of JNVs have been much higher than the average of the CBSE 

affiliated schools and are also comparable with any  established public schools and other group of 
schools. 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee is not happy with the reply of the De partment.  The Committee 
strongly feels that the shortage of teachers at bot h PGT and TGT levels would affect the 
studies of the children.  The Committee recommends that the Department should take 
urgent steps in recruiting the teachers in JNVs. 
Recommendations/observations 
10.3 The Committee observes that the Scheme is aime d at promoting enrolment of girls 
belonging to weaker sections of the society at seco ndary school level and also to reduce their 
dropout rate at secondary and higher secondary stag e. The Department should pursue with the 
respective State Governments/UT Administrations to make maximum use of the Scheme. The 
Committee would appreciate if the Department encour ages the States/UTs to popularize the 
scheme amongst the weaker sections of the society t o enhance its outreach and also ensure that 
funds are utilised to the full extent to achieved better results. 
 
Action Taken     
BE  for 2014-15 was Rs 100 crore out of which Rs 10  crore was for eight NER States. The 
total expenditure under the schemeduring 2014-15 was `94.23 crore covering sanction of incentive 
amount to 312736 girls. This expenditure of `94.23 crore  also included  an expenditure of  `4.23 
crore for NER States as well as  `0.41 crore of administrative expenditure. The unuti lized amount 
of `5.77 crore  for NER States was on account of lack o f viable proposals from these States.   The 
Department has advised the State/UT Governments to popularise the scheme amongst the weaker 
sections of the society so as to make maximum use of the scheme. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
The Committee feels that the National scheme of inc entive to girl child for secondary 
education is a good scheme for promoting emolument of girls belonging to weaker sections at 
secondary level and reduce their dropout rate.  The  Committee notes that the expenditure in 
NER states is not up to the mark due to the lack of  viable proposals by these states.  The 
Committee strongly feels that as the nodal agency f or implementation of this scheme, the 
Department should take pro-active steps and collabo rate with these States/UT/NER 
Governments to promote this scheme in an aggressive  manner and make sure that girls from 
the weaker sections benefit from this scheme. 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
-NIL- 
  

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE  
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
V. NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF MID-DAY-MEAL IN SCHOOLS  
 
 
 There has been a marked improvement in the constru ction of Kitchen-cum-Stores 
and some states like Kerala have been outstanding i n this regard, the percentage of 
constructed Kitchens was only 13% at the beginning  has now completed 98%. The best 
practice from such states can be learnt and efforts  should be made to replicate it in other 
states. The Committee, therefore, feels that the De partment needs to keep pressing the 
States/UTs for achieving more result in this regard.     (Para 5.6)  
 
 
 
XIII.  CONCLUSION 
  
 
The Committee is happy to note that a considerable effort has been made by the 
Department in pursuance of its recommendations to i mprove various schemes in 
collaboration with States/UTs.  There has been a ma rked improvement in GER across the 
board and the drop-out rate has decreased considera bly under RMSA.  However, the 
Committee notes that teachers' training is not prog ressing as well as in other areas. The 
figures pertaining to completed Teachers' training vis-a-vis  approved training shows that 
majority of the teachers have not yet been given tr aining.  Hence, the Committee feels that 
renewed efforts are needed for imparting training t o at least the teachers, whose training has 
been approved.               (Para 13.1) 

CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
The Department has not taken any concrete step to a ddress the gap between the 
projected requirement of funds and allocations for its various schemes.  Further the 
allocation were reduced by `` ``3878 crore, at RE Stage.  This could be for the rea son that the 
Department was not able to spend as per the norms o f Ministry of Finance. While replying, 
the Department should have made explanation to that  effect nor has the Department 
mentioned the reasons why there has been decreased allocation for the year 2015-16. 
Inadequate funds would certainly act as a huge hurd le in the implementation of these 
important schemes. The Committee observes that the Department should examine as to what 
measure, can be taken by them to avoid such a situa tion and if need be, take up this matter 
with the Ministry of Finance at the earliest so tha t the implementation of the schemes does 
not get affected. The Committee is also of the view  that the Department should make all out 
efforts to increase the outreach of the schemes to every nook and corner of the Country. 
         (Para 2.5) 
 
 The Committee acknowledges the efforts put in by t he Department in reducing the 
amount of outstanding advances. The Department has however not given detailed 
information about the pending UCs of the last three  years. Hence, the Committee observes 
that a comparative analysis of the pending UCs of t hese years cannot be made. Pending UCs 
continue to remain as a perennial problem. Hence, t he Committee can only reiterate that the 
Department should make all out efforts to deal with  this problem. Pendency pertaining to 
the recent years also needs to be brought to the minimum level.    (Para 2.11) 
 
III. ENROLMENT, RETENTION AND DROP OUT 
 
(i) GER/NER 
 
 
(iii) Out of School Children 
 
 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts taken by the  Department in ensuring 
improvement in GER and NER at upper primary level. However, the Committee observes 
that a lot more can be done in this regard. The Dep artment has not provided the factors 
responsible for low GER and NER at upper primary le vel, nor has the Department 
mentioned information about the corrective measures  taken. Teachers’ absenteeism and 
non-availability of adequate number of teachers con tinue to remain as hurdles in ensuring 
universal access at primary education. The Departme nt should take urgent steps to ensure 
that maximum students are retained at the upper pri mary level as well. More 
neighbourhood schools with proper infrastructure wi th all the facilities need to be 
established. The Committee is of the view that the Department should take up urgent steps to 
find out the problems at grass-root level which are  contributing towards sliding GER and 
NER at upper primary level and take corrective meas ures. The Committee would like to be 
apprised about the progress made in this regard.    (Paras 3.1 & 3.4) 

 
SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN/RIGHT TO EDUCATION 
 
Funding and Fund sharing pattern for RTE/SSA programme 
 
 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Depart ment to mobilise the funds to the 
concerned States/UTs. However, inadequate funds con tinue to be a major obstacle in 
implementing the RTE/SSA programme. The Committee i s of the view that the Department 
should find ways to tackle this obstacle and to ens ure that the States/UTs utilize the funds 
meaningfully. For universal access, retention and i mproving the quality of elementary 
education, sufficient funds are required. The Commi ttee, therefore, reiterates that the 
problem of insufficient funds should be dealt with earnestly without any delay. (Para 4.11) 
 
 
 The Committee observes that it is the responsibili ty of the Department to ensure that 
the States/UTs construct the required infrastructur e facilities in a time bound manner. The 
Department has not provided any UT/Statewise details of the infrastructures those have been 
constructed in the States/UTs so far. Strict action s are needed to be taken up with those 
States/UTs whose performance in this regard is dism al and slow. Regarding the design of the 
school buildings, the Committee is of the view that  experts’ opinion needs to be taken so that 
the school activities do not get disturbed.       ( Para 4.11) 
 
Kasturva Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs) 
 
 The Committee notes that in Muslim concentrated di stricts there has been an increase 
of 3.55% in the over-all enrolment of Muslim girls and thereby raising their enrolment to 
25.19% .  The Committee desires that continued effo rt should be made by the Department so 
that there is a remarkable growth in their enrolmen t. Further, the Committee observes that 
the overall enrolment percentage of the Muslim, Min orities and the BPL girls in KGBVs 
continues to be abysmally low despite the efforts o f the Department. Therefore, the 
Committee feels that either the public awareness ab out the KGBVs is not there or the target 
audience are not getting the message. The Committee, therefore, urges the Department to act 
pro-actively to find more innovative and out-of the  Box solution so as to improve the 
enrolment of Girls in the most weakest and vulnerable parts of the Country.  (Para 4.26) 
 
 
Teacher Recruitment and Training under RTE/SSA  
 
The Committee fails to understand that even with ar ound 4.19 lakh posts of teachers 
vacant under SSA as on 31.03.2015, the Department h as submitted that the present National 
Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) is 26:1. This implies tha t either the previously estimated PTR do 
not reflect the correct ratio, or the estimate of t he number of students/Teachers under SSA 
does not reflect the actual figures. Hence, the Com mittees desire that the total number of 
pupils under SSA and the total number of Teachers m ay be provided. Further, the 
Committee also feels that not enough has been done to fill up the vacancies as recommended 
earlier.         (Para 4.29)  
 
 The Committee finds that the total number of untra ined teachers recruited is very 
high i.e., 7,45,327. This figure is even higher tha n the total number of NCTE approved 

trained teachers. This does not speak well of the s tatus of fitness for teachers in the Country 
and it would ultimately reflect on the quality of t eaching and the students under SSA. The 
Committee, therefore, feels that pro-active steps n eed to be taken up by the Department to 
impart training to these teachers in the right earnest.    (Para 4.31) 
 
V. NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF MID-DAY-MEAL IN SCHOOLS  
 
 
 The Committee notes that the data regarding variou s types of action taken on 
complaints received during 2012-2015 is not elabora te or up-to-date and it also does not 
show the actual nature of complaints received by th e Department. Thus, Committee feels 
that the Department should keep up its vigil on the  quality of food and the extent of its reach 
in giving nutritious food to the children of this Nation. (Paras 5.12 & 5.13)  
 
VI.  TEACHER EDUCATION  
 
 The Committee notes that the data for sanctioned n umber of posts for DIETs, CTEs 
and IASEs provided by the Department at the beginni ng of the year do not match with the 
data provided now. Even some of the data seems to b e wrong e.g., the % of Vacancy under 
Teacher Education Institution (TEIs) has been total led and its sum has been stated as 
141.53% vacancies, which is prima facie not correct . Notwithstanding the factual 
inaccuracies, the Committee is saddened to note the  large amount of vacancies still exist and 
strongly urge the Department to take strong measure s to ensure that all these vacancies are 
filled up at the earliest and in right earnest.  (P ara 6.8) 
 
  
 
The Committee notes that there are 37 KVs where lan d for construction has not been 
identified.  The Committee also notes that for 83 K Vs land has been identified and waiting 
lease in favour of Sangathan.  The Committee feels that the Department has to take a pro-
active role and take up this issue with the concern ed authorities for identification and leasing 
of land for the KVs.            (Para 7.3) 
 
 
The Committee is not at all in agreement with the existing policy of 100% recruitment 
of Vice-Principals (VPs) of KVs from Limited Depart mental Examination (LDE) and Direct 
Recruitment as it will affect the morale of the PGT s completely halting their career 
progression.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that for the 
promotion of PGTs to the post of Vice-Principal, th e original position of 100% through 
seniority-cum-selection be restored. As regard the requirement of specific knowledge of 
Establishment and Financial Rules for the post of V Ps, the Committee feels that the PGTs in 
the zone of consideration can be suitably trained b y the developing short term modules. 
Further, regarding the matter of reviewing of the R ecruitment Rules (RRs) of KVs, which is 
pending before the Cadre Review Committee of KVs, t he Committee recommends that the 
same may be expedited at the earliest, keeping in v iew this Committee's recommendations as 
stated above.          (Paras 7.13 & 7.14) 
 
 

The Committee is not happy with the reply of the De partment.  The Committee 
strongly feels that the shortage of teachers at bot h PGT and TGT levels would affect the 
studies of the children.  The Committee recommends that the Department should take 
urgent steps in recruiting the teachers in JNVs.                                                  (Para 8.3) 
 
 
The Committee feels that the National scheme of inc entive to girl child for secondary 
education is a good scheme for promoting emolument of girls belonging to weaker sections at 
secondary level and reduce their dropout rate.  The  Committee notes that the expenditure in 
NER states is not up to the mark due to the lack of  viable proposals by these states.  The 
Committee strongly feels that as the nodal agency f or implementation of this scheme, the 
Department should take pro-active steps and collabo rate with these States/UT/NER 
Governments to promote this scheme in an aggressive  manner and make sure that girls from 
the weaker sections benefit from this scheme.     ( Para 10.3) 
 
 