    
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2021 /Agrahayana, 1943, (Saka) 
 
REPORT  
331 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary  
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT  
REFORMS IN CONTENT AND DESIGN OF SCHOOL TEXT 
BOOKS 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th November,2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th November,2021) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail : rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in   

 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY FIRST REPORT  
REFORMS IN CONTENT AND DESIGN OF SCHOOL TEXT 
BOOKS 
 
  
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th November,2021)  
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th November,2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943, (Saka) 
Hindi Version of this publication 
is also available 

 
 
  
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. PREFACE (iii)-(iv) 
3. ABBREVIATIONS (v) 
4. REPORT 1-37 
 1 INTRODUCTION 1-3 
 2 DEPOSITION OF WITNESSES 
  2.1.Department of School Education and Literacy 
     2.2. Director, NCERT and Chairman, CBSE 
     2.3. State-Level Organizations  
     2.4. Other Organizations  
     2.5. Subject Experts 
 
 
3-9 
9-12 
12-14 
14-22 
22-27 
 3 COMMENTS FROM STAKEHOLDERS/PUBLIC AT 
LARGE 
27-29 
 4 OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 29-32 
 5 RECOMMENDATIONS 32-37  
5. MINUTES 
 
38-48 
 

 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & 
SPORTS 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2021) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri R. S. Bharathi  
3. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
4. * Ms. Sushmita Dev  
5. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad  
7. Shri K. C. Ramamurthy  
8. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
9. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
17. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
18. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
19. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
20. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
21.  Shri Balak Nath 
22.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
23.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
24.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
25.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Shri Dharambir Singh 
29. Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
 
 
(i) 
 

 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
---------------------------------- 
* Nominated w.e.f. 27.09.2021 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri. A.K. Mallick, Director 
Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Executive Officer (in-situ) 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports , having been authorised by the Committee 
to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Thirty First 
Report of the Committee on “Reforms in Content and Design of School Text books”.   
 
2.  In the Indian education system school textbooks prepared by NCERT and its manner of 
presentation of content, designing and coverage of the subject is the primary tool that guides 
the education of school students across the cou ntry. In this backdrop, no ting their role in 
shaping our future generations and their learning, the Committee had decided to take up the 
subject for examination and seek inputs from all stakeholders for their improvement.  In this 
regard, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of School Education & 
Literacy alongwith Director, NCERT and Chairman, CBSE in the meeting held on 13 th 
January, 2021 on the subject. The Committee also heard the views of Prof. J.S. Rajput, 
Former Director, NCERT and representatives of Bhartiya Shikshan Mandal on the same 
day. The Committee also held discussions with representatives of Janana Probodhini, 
Pratham Education Foundation, Central Square Foundation and Vidya  Bharathi on 21 st  
January, 2021 and of Public Policy Research Centre on 21 st June, 2021. The  Committee 
also  heard the  views of  Samvit Research Foundation and Professor Nachiketa Tiwari, IIT  
Kanpur alongwith  Shri  Hukmdev Narayan  Yadav, Ex -MP, Lok Sabha in its meeting  held 
on 23 rd  July, 2021. The  Committee issued an advertisement inviting suggestions from 
organizations/individuals across the country on the subject for consideration of the 
Committee. The Committee received approximately 20,000 rep resentations from experts, 
individuals and organizations on the subject pointing to discrepancies /omissions  in the   
school textbooks. The Committee also undertook a study visit to Pune and heard the views 
of Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production & Curriculum Research and SCERT 
on the subject. The Committee in its meeting held on 12 th November, 2021 d iscussed the 
draft Report in length and the changes suggested by the Chairman and the members of the  
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
Committee were incorporated in the draft Report. The Committee also gave an opportunity 
to a class 9 student to present his views on the subject  in its meeting held on 26th November, 
2021. Based on the above interactions, the Committee formulated the draft Report.    
 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting 
held on 26th November, 2021.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                    
26th November, 2021 
Agrahayana / 1943 (Saka)                                                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on   Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AICTE All India Council of Technical Education  
BARC Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
CBSE 
CISCE 
Central Board of Secondary Education 
Council For The Indian School Certificate Examinations 
CPA Concrete Pictorial Abstract 
DIET District Institute of Education and Training 
DIKSHA Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing 
DTH TV Direct-to-Home  Television   
GST Goods and Services Tax 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
INFLIBNET Information and Library Network 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organization  
KV Kendriya Vidyalaya 
MoE Ministry of Education 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NISHTHA National Initiative for School Heads and Teachers Holistic 
Advancement  
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
NCF National Curriculum Framework 
NCFSE National Curriculum Framework for School Education 
NEP New Education Policy 
NIOS National Institute of Open Schooling 
NROER National Repository of Open Educational Resources 
NSSO National Sample Survey Office 
PARAKH Performance Assessment, Review and Analysis of Knowledge for 
 Holistic development 
QR Quick Response 
RTE Right To Education 
SCERT State Council of Educational Research and Training 
SCF State Curriculum Framework 
SIL Sports Integrated Learning 
SSA Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds 
UGC University Grant Commission  
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Emergency Fund 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
U.T. Union Territory 
VR Virtual Reality 
WHO World Health Organization  
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
REPORT   
1. INTRODUCTION  
1.1. Education is the foundation of a nation. It provides the fra mework for achievement of full 
human potential, development of an equitable and just society and promotion of national 
development. The changing employment landscape and global ecosystem necessitates a shift in the 
orientation- purpose of education from bei ng totally content driven to being the vehicle for 
enhancement of critical thinking and problem-solving ability of the learners together with 
encouraging creativity. Imparting education should adopt a multi-disciplinary approach and help 
learners to innovate, adopt and adapt to new ideas and skills. Education must build character, bring 
change in the learners to be ethical, rational, compassionate and caring and at the same time prepare 
them for gainful employment.    
1.2. The primary pedagogical tool avail able for the impartation of education is the school 
textbook.  School Textbooks, in our educational system, remain the easiest way of sharing a single 
narrative across millions of students through the multitude of diversity that defines our country. 
They a lso thus become a great tool to ensure that all children get the same level of education, 
regardless of location or economic capacity of the school by ensuring standardization and 
continuity. The basis of writing and development of textbooks in India is th e National Curriculum 
Framework (NCF). Since the new National Curriculum Framework is going to be revised 
consequent to the announcement of the New Education Policy (NEP) 2020, the development of 
these textbooks would include inputs not only from the Centr e but also from States in the form of 
State Curriculum Framework (SCF). This exercise has led to a widespread public discourse on the 
content and design of school textbooks and fuelled discussions in the academic circles and public at 
large.   
1.3. In this  perspective, the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports took up the  subject  "Reforms in the content and 
design of  School Text Books" focusing on:  
a. Removing references to un -historical facts and distortions about our national heroes 
from the text books; 
b. Ensuring equal or proportionate references to all periods of Indian History; and 
c. Highlighting the role of great historic women achievers, including Gargi, Maitreyi, or    
rulers like Rani of Jhansi, Rani Channamma, Chand Bibi, Zalkari Bai, etc.    

2 
 
1.4.      The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the Department of School 
Education and Literacy, CBSE, NCERT and various organizations and experts on this subject. The 
Committee also issued a public notice inviting suggestions from organizations/individuals across 
the country on the subject for consideration of the Committee. Approximately 20,000 
representations were received from experts, individuals and organizations on the subject pointing to 
discrepancies /omissions in the  school textbooks.  A list of all the organizations, experts and 
non-government organizations who deposed before the Committee is as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Central/State Government 
Organization/ Non-Government Organizations 
Date on which deposed before 
the Committee 
Ministry/Department and Statutory Body  
1. Department of School Education and Literacy 
represented by Secretary  
 
13/01/2021 & 23/07/2021 
2. CBSE represented by Chairman 13/01/2021& 23/07/2021 
3. NCERT represented by Director   13/01/2021 & 23/07/2021 
State Level Organizations 
4. Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production 
& Curriculum Research, Pune 
01/09/2021 
5. SCERT, Maharashtra 01/09/2021 
Various Other Organizations 
6. Bhartiya Sikshan Mandal 13/01/2021 
7. Siksha Sankriti Uthan Nyas 13/01/2021 
8. Jnana Prabodhini 21/01/2021 

3 
 
9. Pratham Education Foundation           21/01/2021 
10. Vidya Bharati Akhil Bhartiya Siksha Sansthan            21/01/2021 
11.  Central Square Foundation  21/01/2021 
12. Public Policy Research Centre 21/06/2021 
13. Samvit Research Foundation, Bangalore 23/07/2021 
Subject Experts 
14. Shri J. S. Rajput, Ex-Director, NCERT 13/01/2021 
15. Shri Shankar Sharan, Author 13/01/2021 
16. Prof. Nachiketa Tiwari, IIT Kanpur 
Dr. Prerna Malhotra 
23/07/2021 
17. Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav, Ex-MP, Lok Sabha 23/07/2021 
 Others  
18.      Master Tanish Ve nkatesh                                    26.11.2021  
 
  2. DEPOSITION OF WITNESSES  
2.1. Department of School Education and Literacy 
2.1.1. The Department of School Education and Literacy informed the Committee that at the 
central level, NCERT is involved in developing National Curriculum Framework, Syllabi and 
Textbooks across the stages of school education. At the State levels, SCERTs/SIEs play a major role 
in developing Curriculum Framework. Department of School Ed ucation and Literacy highlighted 
the major roles of various State education institutions.  
2.1.2. It was informed to the Committee that the process of the development of new National 
Curriculum Framework (NCF) and the State Curriculum Frameworks has starte d. The whole 
process will reorient and revamp all aspects of the curriculum and pedagogy in the light of the 

4 
 
National Education Policy 2020. There are 4 National Curriculum Frameworks to be prepared 
(Early Childhood Care and Education, School Education, Teacher Education and Adult Education). 
They will follow the new structure of 5+3+3+4 for all the curricular and pedagogical processes. 
Once the NCF will be prepared syllabi and new textbooks will be also be developed for all stages 
and classes.  
2.1.3. The National Curriculum Framework for School Education on the basis of National 
Education Policy 2020 is in the process of conceptualization, designing and development. The 
strategy proposed for the development of four NCFs focuses on bottom-up approach, i.e., States will 
prepare their State curriculum framework first, which will provide inputs for all the four NCFs. 
2.1.4. The changes required in new NCFs over NCF -2005 as per the recommendations of NEP, 
2020 and RTE, 2009, inter -alia, includes-restructuring of stages of curriculum and pedagogy as 
5+3+3+4, more focus is on Early Childhood Care and Education and Foundational Literacy and 
Numeracy, Integration of Pre-vocational Education from classes 6 to 8, Integration of Knowledge of 
India across the stages, focus on the holistic development through experiential learning, flexibility in 
choice of subjects etc. are going to be in the heart of proposed NCF. 
2.1.5. They further added that physical education and art education were recommended as 
curricular areas of s chool education as well as arts and crafts education as value education and 
pre-vocational education to be integrated through all stages of school education. It was informed that 
they have been integrated in the present syllabi and textbooks. It was furthe r clarified that the 
upcoming NCF will follow the recommendations of the NEP, 2020, to reorient curriculum and 
pedagogy in consonance with the new proposed structure – 5+3+3+4 with a focus on the aforesaid 
areas, process for which has already been initiate d by NCERT for the preparation of NCFs. A 
strategy document had been developed for carrying out the whole process of the NCF preparation 
including these areas . Working papers on value education, art education, vocational education, 
health and physical education were already in the process.  
2.1.6. The Department of School Education and Literacy further informed about new ways for 
promotion of experiential learn ing, art integrated learning, sports integrated learning and 
competency-based learning, including internships, 10 bag less days, peer tutoring, interdisciplinary 
and multidisciplinary projects and development of fun-based student appropriate learning tools to 
promote and popularize Indian arts and culture etc. However, other pedagogies found to be 

5 
 
appropriate for the subject and suitable for the age group of students such as group discussions, 
mock drills, excursion trips, visits to various places, such as zoo, museum, local store or restaurant; 
field study, classroom interactions, etc. were also being used to support experiential learning. Also, 
opportunities were provided to break subject  boundaries by integration of art forms (visual or 
performing arts, such as dance, design, painting, photography, theatre, writing, etc.), stories, 
pictures, fun activities or games, sports, etc. for holistic learning of concepts of science and 
mathematics without burden. 
2.1.7. Further, it was added that the future syllabi and textbooks will be based on goals and 
competencies which will lead towards mapping of core essentials with competencies hence 
lessening the curriculum burden and focusing on holistic learning and development. 
2.1.8. The Department of School Education and Literacy submitted that constitutional values and 
concerns have always been integrated across the stages and subject areas while preparing curricular 
material by NCERT. Capacity building programmes of teachers and tea cher educators, including 
NISHTHA also provide adequate space to constitutional values. As per the NEP, 2020 perspectives, 
more focus on experiential learning, art education, physical education, and vocational education will 
help inculcating these values in students through their continuous engagement with peers, in groups, 
projects, internships, etc. 
2.1.9. The availability of textbooks in regional languages with simplified illustrative and graded 
content (reading material) will make an impact on learning to be enjoyable and engaging for all . 
Researchers have also shown that using the language the child is most comfortable with, particularly 
in the early school years increases classroom participation and improves learning outcomes. NEP, 
2020 also recommends textbooks with local flavor across the States. 
2.1.10. The Department informed that currently, NCERT publishes textbooks in Hindi, English and 
Urdu medium. Textbooks of different subjects in other languages are prepared/ translated by the 
States, as per their need. Based on the recommendations of NCF, NCERT would consider preparing 
bilingual textbooks, particularly in Science and Mathematics in future.  
2.1.11. As per the strategy document of the M inistry of Education and NCERT, NCFSE will b e 
developed by August, 2023 in the line of NEP, 2020. This will draw its inputs from the State 
Curriculum Frameworks in consonance with the recommendations of the NEP, 2020 on curriculum 
and pedagogy for 5+3+3+4 structure, focus on experiential learning, f oundational literacy and 

6 
 
numeracy, pre -vocational education, assessment reforms, etc. The NCF  Committee will discuss 
about the periodicity of subsequent upgradation of such curriculum. 
2.1.12. The Department submitted that NEP 2020 recommends to develop National Textbooks with 
local content and flavor. The diverse nature of Indian society needs variety of textbooks and other 
supplementary materials, and the same is also recommended by NEP 2020. NCERT develops model 
textbooks and supplementary materials o n the basis of syllabi developed as per the guidelines 
provided by National Curriculum Framework. It is expected that states/UTs will adopt or adapt these 
textbooks as per their local context and needs. Presently, NCERT is involved in the process of 
developing National Curriculum Framework  (NCF). Also, the State Curriculum Frameworks 
(SCFs) will also be developed simultaneously and every SCF will include existing practices and 
local ethos in their frameworks. On the basis of the recommendations and guidelines finalized for 
SCFs and NCF, the curricular materials including syllabus and textbooks will be developed. 
2.1.13. They further stated that as per the NEP, 2020, the curriculum and syllabi will provide lots of 
space for experiential lear ning and textbooks will be based on competencies rather than content. 
This perspective of developing textbooks will reduce not only the information burden but also the 
weight of school bag. Moreover, it is suggested in the Policy on School Bag, 2020 releas ed by the 
MoE, that time table of the school is to be revamped including long periods of one or two subjects so 
that children will not need to bring books for all the subject areas every day.  
2.1.14. NEP, 2020 recommends integration of knowledge of India across the stages and subject 
areas in the curriculum. Under this concern , as per the directions of new National Curriculum 
Framework for school education , various activities including development of digital and 
audio-video materials will be taken up. Keeping in view the vision of NEP -2020, NCERT has 
initiated action in development of digital resources including energized textbooks and e -Contents 
i.e., audios-videos, interactives, infographics, augmented reality contents etc. Digital resources like 
audio books and ISL videos are being developed to address the concerns of children with special 
needs. e-Courses for teachers and students are also being develope d. These are being disseminated 
through multiple modes i.e., PM e -VIDYA, DTH TV Channels, Radio broadcast, DIKSHA, 
e-Pathshala, NISHTHA, NROER, SWAYAM etc. 
2.1.15. The NCERT continuously receives the feedback from students, parents, teachers and general 
public on the content given in school textbooks. Accordingly, the text is modified at the time of 

7 
 
bringing out the reprint editions. All such feedback  and suggestions are also considered while 
developing the frameworks, syllabi and textbooks. 
2.1.16. The task of updating the data in textbooks is accomplished at the time of producing the 
reprint editions of all the textbooks, which is a routine annual academic exercise. The updating is 
done on the basis of data from authentic and reliable official sources suc h as Economic Surveys, 
National Statistical Organization (formerly NSSO) surveys, Census of India and other important 
reports from ministries. Economic data is also updated on the basis of latest international agencies’ 
reports such as Human Development Report and World Development Index. 
2.1.17. The present textbooks include activities, figures, tables, box items etc. to ensure the lucidity, 
precision and conceptual clarity. Textbooks are also embedded with QR code to provide additional 
materials. Further,  to make the textbooks more lucid, precise and provide conceptual clarity, 
contents (audios, videos, infographics etc.) have been developed and mapped with textbooks and 
uploaded on e-Pathshshala, DIKSHA, NROER portal and apps for easy access and its use a nytime 
and anywhere by the students, teachers, parents etc.  
2.1.18. Now, as per the perspective of NEP, 2020, the development of new National Curriculum 
Framework for School Education will provide roadmap for the development of new generation of 
textbooks providing more space to experiential learning for bringing in students the conceptual 
clarity and motivate students for self -learning and self -assessment to improve not only cognitive 
skills but also the social -personal qualities. 
2.1.19. In this age of online education, initiatives are being taken by the Department to align Text 
Books with digital learning. All NCERT textbooks are supported with different ICT materials and 
made available to all students and teachers through portals like National Reposito ry of Open 
Educational Resources (NROER), DIKSHA, PM e-VIDYA channels, e-Pathshala  and QR codes, 
etc. Almost all the states are partners in these activities and along with the NCERT materials, 
textbooks and other materials have been digitized in state languages for dissemination through these 
portals. 
2.1.20. The Department further added that National Curriculum Framework and position papers are 
based on various researches and studies and provide the guidelines for the development of 
curriculum at various stages of school education. Accordingly, the task of development of curricular 
material including the textbooks is accomplished in consultation with experts and teachers. 

8 
 
2.1.21. Textbook Development Committees discuss and decide the contents for t he textbooks 
according to children’s age, class level, interests, language etc. NEP, 2020, recommends that 
learning outcomes and literature available in different languages and regions to be considered as 
well. The content is developed by the textbook auth or teams keeping in view the principles laid 
down in the National Curriculum Framework. In this regard, real stories, case studies, newspapers 
reports, authentic websites and children’s literature from different sources are also used for creating 
content. 
2.1.22. There was a need to ensure uniformity of core content material in textbooks prescribed for 
Central Education Board vis-a-vis State Education Board and as per the NEP, 2020, there would be 
focus on core essentials in the syllabus developed as follow -up of new State and National 
Curriculum Frameworks. This core essential will cut across all the stages and subject areas which 
will be finalized through wide consultations as suggested in the strategy laid down for their 
preparation. Local flavor will be added to the core essentials in textbooks of the States, to showcase 
the diversity of the country. 
2.1.23. NCERT proposes to achieve reduction of content load while encapsulating and 
incorporating all necessary data in school textbooks. As recommended in the NEP2020, the content 
will be kept limited to core essentials and will be mapped with competencies. This would lead to a 
reduction in the load. Methods of experiential learning have been the part of curricular materials and 
teacher training. More emphasi s will be laid upon experimental learning in the light of NEP 2020 
recommendations. 
2.1.24. The Department informed about the steps and measures conceptualized by it and NCERT for 
revamping History and other subject textbooks in the light of the inter -disciplinary approach 
envisaged in NEP, 2020. NCERT has initiated the process for the development of National 
Curriculum Framework as a follow-up of the NEP, 2020. New NCF for School Education will guide 
the development of new generation textbooks across the s ubject areas. The new generation 
textbooks across subject areas will take care of the thematic, inter -disciplinary and 
multi-disciplinary approaches to highlight Indian culture and traditions, national heroes including 
women achievers and great regional personalities besides providing coverage to different phases of 
Indian history.  These textbooks will also emphasize upon experiential learning through 
multi-disciplinary projects, age-appropriate activities besides visually rich with illustrations, 
photographs, maps, etc.  

9 
 
2.1.25. The proposal in pipeline to bring out school textbooks to meet the requirement of 
differently-abled children/ Divyang children, for e.g., textbooks in Braille script, audio textbooks, 
simplified reading material for dyslexic, etc. T he Department added that NCERT has been 
instrumental in printing of tactile textbooks and additional resources different subjects, including 
Social Science, Mathematics and Science for classes VI and VII. The NCERT has also prepared 
audio textbooks for children with hearing impairment. NCERT has been working towards bringing 
dictionary on Indian sign language, which will help in developing material in sign language. The 
upcoming books and other materials based on the new NCFSC will follow the same pursuit i n 
future.  
2.1.26. The Department further informed that NCERT has taken initiatives to make its textbooks 
accessible for all children including Children with Disabilities/Divyang Children (terminology used 
as per the RPwD Act 2016). The NCERT textbooks are  being converted in Braille Scripted 
textbooks by the National Institute for Empowerment of Persons with Visual Impairments, 
Dehradun. The Council has also signed MOU with the Indian Sign Language Research Training 
Centre, New Delhi to convert its textbook s and other resource materials in Indian Sign Language. 
Both the specialized institutions are apex level bodies in the area of visual disabilities and Indian 
Sign Language respectively, functioning under the Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities, Ministry of Social Justice, Government of India.  
2.2. NCERT and CBSE  
Director, NCERT  
2.2.1. The Director, NCERT in his presentation submitted that the NCFSE will be developed in 
consonance with the perspectives of the NEP-2020, which will provide guidelines for syllabus and 
textbook developers across the subject areas and classes. He informed that NCERT has already 
started groundwork for the development of NCFSE. In this regard, the discussion regarding Social 
Science Textbooks including hi story textbooks has also been initiated.   The new generation 
textbooks in general, and specifically of History will, take care of the following concerns- 
 Thematic, interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary approaches to highlight Indian Culture 
and Traditions, our National Heroes including women achievers and great personalities 
from different regions of the country and perspective of equity, integrity, gender parity, 
constitutional values and concern for environment and other sustainable development 

10 
 
goals. 
 Experiential Learning through projects and age-appropriate activities, simple language, 
glossary, more in -text and end -text assessment questions and reduction of curriculum 
load to core essentials 
 All textbooks will be visually rich with illustrations, pho tographs, maps, etc., the 
illustrations and activities will be age/class appropriate. 
 All textbooks will be available in print and digital modes, with Quick Response (QR) 
codes embedded with additional digital materials. 
   2.2.2. The Director, NCERT on th e topic of removing references to un -historical facts and 
distortion about our national heroes from the text books, submitted that NCERT is in the process of 
constituting a Committee to immediately analyze and address some of the issues with regard to 
un-historical facts and distortions about our national heroes as well as events if any raised by 
different stakeholders. 
2.2.3.  Textbooks of Indian History will ensure proportionate references to all periods of Indian 
History, i.e., ancient, medieval and modern . NCERT was highlighting the role of great historic 
women heroes, including Gargi, Maitreyi, rulers like Rani of Jhansi, Rani Channamma, Chand Bibi, 
Zalkari Bai etc. Great historic women have also been represented in the supplementary materials and 
other subject textbooks such as Sociology prepared by the NCERT. However, coverage of great 
historic women belonging to different periods of Indian History will be taken up in the new 
textbooks, supplementary materials and e-content. 
2.2.4. The Director, NCERT further added that the review of syllabi and textbooks developed as a 
follow up of NCF-2005 was carried out in the year 2017-18. The feedback from teachers and other 
stakeholders received formed the basis of the review process. Further, some of the national 
initiatives such as Swachh Bharat, Digital India, ‘Beti Bachao Beti Padhao’, ‘Demonetization’, 
GST etc. were also integrated in the new textbooks. Again in 2018 -19, contents were added in 
history textbooks regarding knowledge, traditions and practices of India. For example, addition of 
material on Vikram Samvat, Metallurgy, Shivaji Maharaj, Paika revolt, Subhash Chandra Bose, 
Swami Vivekanand, Ranjeet Singh, Rani Avantibai Lodhi and Sri Aurbindo Ghosh . He further 
added that all the updated textbooks are available from 2018-19 session onwards.  
2.2.5. Once the Curriculum Frameworks is finalized at national level, Syllabus Committees are 

11 
 
constituted which decide State wise and class wise themes based on the guidelines provided by the 
Curriculum Framework. NCERT prepares model syllabus and textbooks which are adopted and 
adapted by different states. Moreover, education comes under the ‘Concurrent List’ of the Indian 
Constitution which provides states an option of adoption or adaptation as per requirements.  
2.2.6. The great Upanishadic thinker Gargi has been included in the class VI History textbook Our 
Pasts I. The bravery of Rani Channamma is lauded in class VIII History textbook, Our Pasts III, 
which mentions that when the British tried to annex the small state of Kitoor (in Karnataka today), 
Rani Channamma took to arms and led an anti-British resistance movement. Similarly, in the same 
textbook and in other textbooks of History, there are narratives which me ntion how Rani 
Lakshmibai joined the rebel sepoys and fought the British along with Tantia Tope, the general of 
Nana Saheb.  
2.2.7. In Class VII Hindi, textbook there is a whole chapter on Zhalkari Bai which mentions her 
contribution/sacrifice in helping Rani of Jhansi in her fight against Britishers.  In the textbook of 
Hindi of class VIII, there is a story on Chand Bibi. In the English textbook of class VIII, Maitreyi 
has been mentioned as a prominent woman Vedic scholar. Similarly, historic personalities like, Rani 
Avantibai, Tararani Shinde, Pandita Ramabai, Rani Durgawati also find space in the textbooks of 
NCERT. The role of women bhakti saints like Ammaiyar, Andal, Mirabai also find adequate space 
in History textbooks. Great historic women have also been represented in the supplementary 
materials and other subject textbooks such as Sociology prepared by NCERT.  
2.2.8.  The Director, NCERT further added that different departments of NCERT conduct small 
studies on different aspects to evaluate the textb ooks, taking feedback from stakeholders including 
students. However, for the current textbooks no such study to evaluate psychological impact related 
with course material/ curriculum has been conducted.  All periods of Indian and world history are 
covered as per the established historical scholarship in India. The content pertaining to each period 
of history is decided by the Syllabus Committee based on the guidelines provided by National 
Curriculum Frameworks.  
Chairman, CBSE 
2.2.9. The Chairman, CBSE in his presentation before the Committee submitted that Central Board 
of Secondary Education recommends textbooks developed by NCERT and is not responsible for the 
coverage and quality of content in the textbooks. CBSE provides syllabus,  advises schools on 

12 
 
pedagogy and conducts examination. The Board had, however, facilitated a feedback survey on the 
quality of NCERT textbooks through its website in the year 2018 -19 and NCERT, subsequently, 
revised its textbooks. On the  issue of  highlig hting the role of great historic women heroes, 
including Gargi, Maitreyi, or rulers like Rani of Jhanshi, Rani Channamma, Chand Bibi, Zalkari Bai 
etc. he  submitted that Rani of Jhansi has been described in detail in one poem in the Hindi 
Textbooks of clas s VI and also referred in the Social Science Textbook of class VIII,  Rani 
Channamma has been mentioned in class VIII textbook of Social Science. One complete chapter on 
Chand Bibi is there in the NCERT textbook of Urdu class VII, one complete chapter on Zalkari Bai 
is there in the NCERT textbook of Hindi ‘Durva’ of class VII. References of Gargi and  Maitreyi 
are in class VI textbook of Social Science. 
2.2.10.  The  Chairman, CBSE further added that CBSE through its syllabus for classes IX -XII 
advises schools to facilitate students in expansion of their knowledge on any theme by way of 
different learning enrichment activities with the help of teachers. Curriculum encourages schools to 
make use of material appropriate to the local context while developing projects and other 
co-curricular activities focusing on local history, national or local heroes. Students are required to 
conduct projects/case studies in almost all subjects and interdisciplinary areas. The Board has taken 
many initiatives to make pedagogy innovative, child friendly and context oriented, and empower 
teachers for using these pedagogies. 
2.2.11 CBSE has also taken steps for training of teachers on different areas , including online 
pedagogy, from April till December, 2020 . Several bite -sized modules were also prepared and 
disseminated post training to augment the capacit ies of teachers.  Teachers have also been trained 
under National Initiative for School Heads  and Teachers  Holistic Advancement (NISHTHA)  
program of the Government of India. 
  2.3. State-Level Organizations (Study Visit to Pune) 
 
2.3.1. As part of its efforts to examine the initiatives and innovations attempted by various 
organizations in the area of text book and curriculum design, the Committee visited the Maharashtra 
State Bureau of Textbook Production & Curriculum Research, Pune Campus and had an interaction 
with the representatives of the Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production & Curriculum 
Research, State Council of Educational Research and Training along with Department of School 
Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education.  

13 
 
2.3.2. The representatives of Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production & Curriculum 
Research (better known as Bal Bharti) informed the Committee that the Bureau was established by 
the Government of Maharashtra in 1967 with the objective of creation of text books for grades I to X 
as per the approved curriculum as well as prepare and publish other educational material in the State 
conforming to the requirements of quality and affordability. One of the most important functions of 
the Bureau is to undertake research in areas of both curriculum and text books as they are strongly 
interconnected. This research is carried out by the Bureau's Council for Curriculum and Textbook 
Research. It carries out testing of new books and also assesses the results of t hese tests, thereafter 
advising the Bureau in the fields of curriculum and text book design and production.  
2.3.3 The Committee was briefed about the efforts and initiatives taken by the organization to 
ensure that the school textbooks are not only informative but also that they are designed and printed 
in a manner to make them attractive and able to retain the attention of the children, highlighting that 
all the text books for classes I to XII are in color and in A-4 size, they have laminated covers and 
attractive binding and are printed using advanced printing technology. The Bureau even publishes a 
bilingual (English -Marathi) pictorial dictionary for students. The Books are published in 10 
languages i.e., Marathi, English, Hindi, Urdu, Gujarati, Kannada, Sindhi, Telugu, Bengali, Tamil.  
2.3.4 Further, as per Section 4.6 of NEP 2020, the Bureau had started designing integrated books 
on a pilot basis to incorporate Art Integrated Learning (AIL) and Sports Integrated Learning (SIL). 
This pilot project was running in 488 model schools declared as such by the State government. The 
Committee was also briefed about one major innovation undertaken for which another pilot project 
for primary education has been started in this year wherein lessons on Marathi, Englis h, 
Mathematics and 'Play, Do, Learn' for Class I students are integrated quarter wise, into one book by 
the name 'Srijan Balbharti' (Marathi medium). The quarter -wise integration has been done on the 
basis of one theme being designated for every trimester.  The four themes are 'Me and My Family', 
'Water', 'Animals' and 'Transport'. This integration of text books is aimed are reduction in the burden 
of carrying the number of text books to school, thus reducing the weight of the school bag for the 
children and helps adhere to the Supreme Court guidelines in this regard. 
2.3.5. Director, SCERT in his presentation informed the Committee about the steps taken by them 
to give effect to the provisions of NEP 2020 and also for the preparation of the State Curriculum 
Framework (SCF) based on the principles of NEP 2020. The preparation of the State curriculum was 
being undertaken with the involvement of various stakeholders coming together to form a SCF 

14 
 
Preparation Expert Team. This Team comprises school teachers, unive rsity professors, District 
Institute of Education and Training (DIET) experts, NGO and education experts, entrepreneurs and 
other department officials and experts. 
 
2.4. Other Organizations 
      Bharatiya Shikshan Mandal, New Delhi 
2.4.1. The representatives of Bharatiya Shikshan Mandal while submitting that the objective of 
teaching history was to instill high self-esteem in students, National Renaissance, National unity, 
Social Inclusion and establish links with cultural roots mentioned that the following points are to be 
kept in mind while writing text books: 
 Depicting cultural unity 
 Linguistic heritage - importance of Sanskrit, Prakrit and Pali for national unity and 
international spread. 
 Linking Indian languages. 
 Civilization development -Vedic to present. 
 Comparison of scientific temper with other civilizations on scientific and objective ground. 
 History of sacrifices of various segments of Indian society for saving cultural values. 
 Social inclusion.  
 India and its cultural boundaries. 
 Civilization proofs of India in other countries of the world. 
 Religio-cultural emissaries from India should have proper place. 
 Local, national as well as international influence of any event or thought should be 
highlighted.   
2.4.2. The representatives of Bharatiya Shikshan Mandal suggested the following points on the 
issue of text book design: - 
 Cover page of book should include the pictures which show the continuum of history not 
only political but social-economic, legal, arts and educational aspects. 
 The portion which enhances self-esteem and national pride and unity should be highlighted 
and emphasized; images of historical proof should also be published with the text. 
 Publication agency should be able to provide proof and evidence of the text. 
 Exercises and questions should be formed in such a manner by which the student’s sense of 
pride self-esteem feeling of national unity and linked with on cultural routes can also be 
evaluated. 
 Separate Detailed Manual should be prepared for teachers. 
 Textbooks should not just contain syllabus but curriculum. 
 Audio Visual aids and Drama and simulation exercises should be added in teaching 

15 
 
methodology.  
 Proper weightage should be given to the History of People with History of Rulers. 
 
Shiksha Sanskriti Uthan Nyas, New Delhi  
2.4.3. Shri Desh Raj Sharma , representative from Shiksha Sanskriti Uthan Nyas  deposed 
before the Committee that the organization is working towards the progress of the country's culture, 
education and environment protection. He also mention ed that researchers belonging to the 
organization are working on 14 different subjects including designing/ reforming Indian text-books 
from many years with focus on content development and its availability for school going children. 
Vidya Bharti, New Delhi  
2.4.4. The representatives of Vidya Bharti also put forth their views on the subject and pointed out 
certain factual distortions about vedic  tradition, incompatibility of certain facts with constitutional 
ideals and values in the school textbooks. They suggested a thorough review and removing of such 
distortions/discrepancies from the school textbooks. They also mentioned about 'My NEP' 
programme launched to reach non-academic people and to make them learn about the things in the 
National Education Policy in a nutshell.  
Jnana Prabodhini, Pune  
2.4.5. The representatives of Jnana Prabodhini, Pune  suggested for forming of committees on 
textbooks to look into the aspects of Content, Process and Design. In this regard they made the 
following suggestions:   
A. Content: 
 Inclusion of History of North East India: Bhakti and social movements in Assam and 
Manipur, tribal heroes who fought agains t British, contribution of Arunachal and Manipur 
with reference to Azad Hind Fauj and 1962 war, dynasties in Assam, Manipur, Tripura, 
Meghalaya. 
 Regional history content needs to be introduced as supplementary reading material in 
NCERT syllabus schools, CBSE schools in the respective regions so that those students do 
not feel alienated with the history of that specific region. 
 More emphasis on role of women: Role of women as rulers, their role in knowledge sector, 
social reforms, Bhakti movement, art and culture, freedom struggle. 
 There can be more emphasis on interdisciplinary approaches: geography in history, 
chemistry in history – so that students inclined towards other disciplines than humanities 
may also learn the value of history. 

16 
 
 Apart from history of  political dynasties, there must be proportionate representation on 
History of knowledge: history of mathematic learning in India, history of Indian medicine, 
history of Indian architecture, history of philosophy. 
 Post-independence History of Indian pride also needs to be stressed: Story of ISRO, story of 
BARC, story of cooperative movement (Story of Amul), story of restorations (Somnath, 
Hampi, archaeological sites such as Lothal) etc. 
 Shortcomings of the Indian society (in sectors such as social structures, industrialization, and 
governance) with thoughts of eminent persons to overcome those shortcomings. 
 Changes in religious practices of various religions over centuries, commensurate to 
changing times. 
B.   Process: 
 Project based learning in formative assessment to explore historical events, thinking and 
to practice historical skills. 
  Ability to process information: acquiring information, organizing information 
(classifying, analysing, synthesizing, summarizing), Using  information 
(interpreting, evaluating, decision making) 
 Interpersonal relations and social participation which can lead to empathy and harmony: 
Interaction with community elders and Field visits from neighborhood to different states. 
  Emphasis on Activities to promote enquiry in History. 
  Comprehensive and Continuous teacher training programmes for Innovative pedagogy 
with focus on history. 
 Comparative chronology can be made integral part of Textbooks so that students can 
reflect upon national progress by studying century wise concurrent e vents in other 
continents and societies. 
C.   Design: 
 Curriculum of history can be organized in an ascending order. The scope of curriculum 
grows with the growth of experience sphere of students from local to global. 
 Digitization of textbooks to make them attractive and dynamic document to go beyond 
text/ printed form: need to add audio-visuals with QR codes. 
  Inclusion of intellectual games, simulations. VR Games modeled to let students 
experience the historical times (for example ‘Real lives’) 
  Digitization of workbook that can be integrated with digitized textbooks so that students 
can access what they have learnt in previous standards, what they have expressed in 
previous standards. Just as digital locker can keep their personal documents, similar 
processes need to be coupled with education so that expression of students as regards to 

17 
 
history may be stored and accessed digitally. 
  Efforts can be taken on National level to integrate Artificial Intelligence and Machine 
learning in evaluation or assessment of education. A pilot project is underway at 
Jnana Prabodhini to make use of chat -bots so that students can ‘teach’ software so that 
we can assess students for what they have learnt. 
Central Square Foundation, New Delhi 
2.4.6. The representatives of Central Square Foundation gave the following suggestions:   
 Textbooks to be structured around grade -specific and highly -targeted learning 
objectives, with clear and developmentally-appropriate scope and sequence and reasonable 
width of content coverage. This will ensure that students are taking systematic, micro-steps 
in mastering each concept, and that teachers’ focus moves from simply covering ‘portions’ 
to learning outcomes. 
 Textbooks to follow evidence -informed pedagogical strategies, de -emphasizing 
rote-memorization/drilling bereft of understanding. The textbooks should be based on 
updated, evidence -based pedagogical principles and strategies that enable active and 
sustained learning in children. Broadly, this could translate into using the Concrete 
Pictorial Abstract (CPA) approach for mathematics and the Balanced/Comprehensive 
Approach for literacy. Currently, the textbooks are largely not based on these approaches or 
they do not overtly orient teachers to their significance and application. 
 The textbook should enable/guide teachers to foster conceptual understanding. This can be 
done by: (1) Structuring lessons through the entire “I do - We Do - You do” sequence, (2) 
Use of real -life examples, graphic organisers, highlighting key 
concepts/messages/vocabulary, and (3) Enabling skill -acquisition and higher -order 
thinking through worked out examples, hands -on activities, real -world projects and 
open-ended/inquiry-focused questions. 
 Text length, vocabulary and semantic complexity to be aligned to the reading abilities and 
cognitive levels of young learners. Young children require exposure to different levels and 
types of texts, as well as different ways of engaging with those texts for them to develop 
their literacy skills. This means children benefit greatly from teacher read-alouds of stories, 
poems and other texts, but they also require texts at the correct level of challenge for them 
to practice and apply their emerging reading skills. 
 The content in the textbooks should provide both “Mirror” and “Wind ow” functions for 
children’s development. That is, the content should be appropriate to the age, cultural, 
linguistic and socio -economic context of the learner. The content should also expose 
learners, over time, to the rich social, cultural, gender/ability and geographical diversity of 
the nation and the world. 
 Textbooks as “Single -Gateway” for the teacher. Textbooks can integrate pedagogical 

18 
 
instructions/tips for teachers with reference to Teaching Learning Materials, student 
workbooks, assessment/practic e tools, and at -home-learning for children. This way, 
teachers have everything they need in one place to ease their cognitive load and to make 
better use of limited instructional time. 
 Textbooks would benefit from visually engaging design with intuitive fl ow of 
information, story -telling approach and use  of illustrations, appropriate fonts and 
iconography. Instead of simply adding images and graphics to existing content; the logic 
and simplicity aspects need to be considered in an effective design, wherever  appropriate 
Ed-Tech solutions can be used to supplement content for learners and enablers. 
 
Pratham Education Foundation, Mumbai  
2.4.7.  Pratham Education Foundation suggested the following steps to help children in Std III-V 
“catch up” on foundational skills: 
• Move from “over-ambitious” curriculum and textbooks to materials at the “right level” : 
In terms of helping children in Std III to V to “catch up” and build their foundational reading and 
arithmetic skills, it is important to enable children to do activities and use learning materials at 
their current level rather than at the level of the grade in which they are. Teaching at the right 
level helps children to progress rapidly. 
• Access to variety of graded texts, pr imers and learning materials:  Teachers should have 
access to variety of graded material to enable them to teach different groups of children at their 
level. Instead of a single textbook, “catch up” of basic foundational skills in Std III -V requires a 
variety of simple, short graded texts with large font, simple language and content that children 
can connect to their everyday lives. If children have materials and activities appropriate to their 
current level and the flexibility and support to move to subsequ ent levels, then progress can be 
fast and accelerate further. In the last few years, when state governments have undertaken 
focused foundational learning programs, supplementary reading materials are produced by the 
state and its partners to help children learn to read. Rather than being “supplemental”, each school 
should have multiple copies of graded learning texts that can be used flexibly as needed by 
different grades in the primary school. In fact, a school repository or library of texts and books 
would be a good addition to the school’s resources. Graded workbooks can be designed such that 
children of different levels can use and benefit from the same materials. Similar interventions are 
needed in foundational numeracy as well. 
• Flexibility to States: Given the wide variations in reading levels for the same grade across 
states implies that each state should have the flexibility to examine their current reality and design 
their texts, books and other materials accordingly. To ensure universal foundational skills for all 
primary school children, the “catch up” plans for each state must start from their current reality 
and be developed according to the achievable learning pathways and milestones for the next few 
years. 

19 
 
Public Policy Research Centre, New Delhi  
2.4.8      The representatives of Public Policy Research Centre(  PPRC)  in their presentation 
before the Committee mentioned about their Research Report evaluating study on History 
Textbooks in India, its main objectives and the methodology followed. They also shared their 
findings and suggestions about the curricular framework of History teaching in India. Important 
substance of some of their important suggestions was as follows :   
(i) As far as the Mughal  period is concerned, invader Babur has been given too much 
importance and so have his ancestors who, like the Sultans before them, established a 
reign of terror in the country. As against this, Rajput kings like Maharana Pratap and 
Rana Sanga have not rec eived enough weightage. This needs to change immediately. 
The contributions of the Marathas, the Sikh Gurus, the Satnamis and others in opposing 
the Mughal Empire need to find a place in Indian history textbooks.  
(ii) As far as the Modern period is concerned, some leaders have received more weightage as 
compared to others. The role of Subhash Chandra Bose, Sardar Patel, Bhagat Singh, Ram 
Prasad Bismil, Lala Lajpat Rai, Khudiram Bose, Surya Sen, and even the women 
revolutionaries must be highlighted. The contribution of Veer Savarkar needs to be given 
enough weightage.  
(iii) Also, the contributions of mathematicians, astronomers, philosophers, etc., in the ancient 
period, needs to be adequately highlighted.  
 
Samvit Research Foundation, Bengaluru 
2.4.9.  The Samvit Research Foundation in their presentation before the Committee submitted 
that in today’s history textbooks, certain things are detrimental to the ideals espoused by the country. 
Far from informing our children about the rich legacy of our past and instill ing a sense of pride in 
them for their grand history, the textbooks gradually prepare them to bemoan it. The y proposed 
following solutions suggested to address the imbalances were as follows: 
 Proportionate representation across region, time period, and events  
 Cultural dimensions of the history of Bhāratavarṣa  
 Bhārata’s political/cultural influence on the world (from Southeast Asia to Europe) 
 
2.4.10.  The representatives pointed out that proportionate representation across Region, Time 
Period, and Events should be given in the Textbooks. South and East Indian dynasties have been 
highly under-represented. The history of great kingdoms like the Marāṭhas, Coḷas, and Vijayanagara 

20 
 
as well as the early Kāśmīra dynasties, Kali ṅgas, Ga ṅgas, Gajapatis, Kākatiyas, Ahoms, Ceras, 
Pallavas, Pāṇḍyas, Pālas, Senas, and Pratihāras either get a passing mention or not even that. The 
crucial role they played in our history must be elaborated. They further added that we must include 
these dynasties, which represent the very spirit of Bhāratīya Civilization that the Radhakrishnan 
Committee wanted every student to imbibe. 
2.4.11.  The Samvit Research Foundation  also pointed o ut that Cultural dimensions are as 
important as the political landscape in shaping the history of any nation and Bhārata is no exception. 
The history of art, music, dance, literature, architecture, agriculture, astronomy, industry, and 
science in general must be read along with dynastic history. They further added that the elements of 
our history that must be presented in a comprehensive manner in the textbooks should include the 
following: 
(a)   Bhāratīya sa ṃskṛti has been widespread from Mesopotamia in the West to 
Japan in the East, from the Himalayas in the North to Indonesia in the South 
 
(b)   The Zend Avesta has significant relationship with the late Ṛigvedic period 
 
(c)    Our Itihāsas and Purā ṇas, particularly the Rāmāya ṇa, have been an integral   
part of the culture of many regions of Southeast Asia. 
 
 
2.4.12. The representatives also added that the history curriculum hardly emphasizes the role played 
by women in our history. It is important for students to learn –  
 the importance our civilization has given to women and how women participated in 
all aspects of life over the centuries  
 the freedom and opportunities available to women in public life  
 the great achievements of women from ancient times until the present day  
 the temporary change in status of women in the wake of invasions  
 to progressively appreciate that our paramparā has a beautiful and holistic 
perspective of strītva that is far beyond modern formulations.  
 
They further suggested that this can best be accomplished by exposing the children to factual 
information from the past:- 
 Introduce the three great goddesses of the Vedas – Bhāratī, Ilā, Sarasvatī. Introduce a 
few Veda-suktas for which women are the mantra-draṣṭāriṇīs. In the Vedic period, 
mention woman scholars, brahmavādinīs, and mantra-draṣṭāriṇīs, including 
instances of where women learnt the Vedas.   
 Present the dynamic role played by women in the Rāmāyaṇa and Mahābhārata. Give 
a complete picture of women-related references in the smṛtis  
 
 Portrayal of women in various classical literary accounts (e.g. Kālidāsa’s 
Mālavikāgnimitra) that indirectly shows how the society was shaping up at that time 

21 
 
 
 The critical contributions of queens in every century and every region across 
communities. Prominent rājamātas who played a role in shaping their children as 
rulers; important women warriors, scholars, poetesses, philanthropists, public 
personalities, sanyāsinīs, philosophers, saints, and freedom fighters 
 
 In modern times women academicians, researchers, scientists, institution builders, 
administrators, and astronauts. 
 
2.4.13.  The Executive Director, Samvit Research Foundation, B engaluru highlighted the role 
played by Indian women in development of Indian culture and also threw light upon the women 
heroes. It was further suggested that respect and freedom should be given to women in public life in 
accordance with critical role that women have played since Vedic time in Indian society.  While 
emphasizing upon the women heroes, he cited the examples of Kakatiya Queen Rudrama Devi and 
Razia Sultan and stated that the facts have been presented in Indian Textbooks in a biased manner 
and lack clarity. He suggested that the facts should be aligned with the vision of the nation. It was 
also stated that the narrative should bridge the gap and it should help to repair the fault lines and not 
widen them further. Further, he stated that history is to be viewed from the Bhartiya perspective and 
not how America, Japan and other countries are looking  at it . Modernity is not merely about 
incorporating the Western viewpoint. 
Indian History Congress  
2.4.14.  The Indian History Congress in their submission emailed to the Committee stated that the 
School textbooks written for the NCERT by some of the tallest scholars in the country, like Romila 
Thapar, R.S. Sharma, Satish Chandra and Bipan Chandra were actually removed, and in their place 
books with a clear sectarian, majoritarian bi as were introduced in 2002. The textbooks of the 
NCERT have always been authored by eminent scholars in the field of Indian history with enormous 
research experience and expertise, and after considerable deliberation and discussion. The Indian 
History Congress submitted that while a review process is always necessary, this should be done 
involving recognized scholars from all over the country and with adequate attention to the academic 
content, derived from a research-based understanding of different histor ical periods. Further, the 
textbooks are meant to present a synoptic understanding of Indian history to school children, and 
hence must also keep pedagogical concerns in constant view. 
2.4.15.  It was stated that the argument about the presentation of 'unhistorical facts' is completely 

22 
 
incorrect. The column on primary sources clearly indicates that throughout the books, an attempt has 
been made to base the presentation of history on texts, epigraphic records, chroni cles, archival 
material and all pertinent sources necessary for the reconstruction of history.  Also, adequate 
discussion of over 120 national heroes is available in the existing textbooks and there is no 
deliberate neglect that may be imputed.  There is a mple representation of different periods of 
history and historical developments within the broad chronological periods of ancient, medieval and 
modern history. This proportionate discussion is in terms of political and socio -economic 
developments, the emer gence and flourishing of religious ideas and institutions, of civilizational 
achievements in the fields of art, science and technology, as well as the social and cultural 
movements in different periods of Indian history. And lastly, there are several refer ences to great 
women who contributed to different fields - political, religious and social.   
2.5. Subject Experts 
2.5.1. Prof. J.S. Rajput, Former Director, NCERT  in his submission before the Committee 
stated that Reforms in the content and design of Textbooks should focus on the following aspects: 
a. Distortion of historical facts where one ruler is remembered and other equally prominent 
one's finds no mention. 
b.  Not only periods, history must be just and objective to considerations of regional imbalances, 
historical contributions of the communities, people and practices. 
c. Social and cultural distortions must not be presented by those bound by prejudices and 
biases. 
2.5.2. He stated that the content and design of textbooks is a product of Policy on Education, 
Curriculum Framework to be developed after its sensitive comprehension, followed by the process 
of preparing detailed syllabus for each textbook; for each grade /class. The quality and content of the 
textbook shall depend on the quality of the authors; that include depth, seriousness, professional 
competence and commitment of individuals and institutions assigned the task. A good textbook can 
be authored only by those who are lifelong learners. 
2.5.3.  The Committee was informed that a good quality textbook inspires, elevates, fires ideas, 
imagination and ignites the curiosity to learn and explore ‘more’. It was added that NCERT is the 
lead National institution in the area of developing textbooks on modern lines, in accordance with the 
expectations of the National Policy on Education, which may be revised from time to time. 
Textbooks need a regular watch, review and revision. In this task, the NCERT is supported by  the 

23 
 
SCERTs, State Textbook Corporations, School Education Boards - National and State level; 
academics, experts and institutions of higher learning. 
2.5.4. It was emphasized that National level textbooks are essential for several reasons, but it must 
be remembered that local element of curriculum also cannot be ignored. A class three textbook on 
environmental education just cannot be same in Tripura and Thiruvananthapuram. He nce, it is 
necessary to strengthen expertise and institutions at the State level. We need high level experts in 
textbook writing, evaluation, assessment, growing up, guidance, and all that children could need.  
2.4.5. NCERT has developed an elaborate system of curriculum preparation, syllabi preparation and 
printing textbooks.  Its books are appreciated, as at each stage, the quality of professional inputs is 
of the highest order and caliber. The NCERT has worked dexterously on gender issues, education of 
the weaker sections, minorities, differently-abled children, tribal people, and also specific needs like 
multi-grade teaching, and others. One could safely infer that the NCERT and other institutions have 
already begun the process on all these aspec ts.  Incidentally, now education is not only 
about/through textbooks, but textual materials for online learning, self -learning, digital learning, 
open and distance learning, and a couple of other terms that are in vogue.  It has to be hybrid 
teaching and learning in future.  Things have changed drastically in 2020, and some of the impacts 
shall continue in future as well. 
2.5.6. He further Stated, “The future of India is being shaped in its classrooms” is a famous quote 
from the National Education Commissio n (1964 -66); also known as Kothari Commission.  He 
pointed out that the idea finds full reflection in the NEP -2020. Over the last fifty years, India has 
gained considerable experience at national level, and also at international level, in varied aspects of 
education. The title of the Report of the International Commission on Education for the 
Twenty-First Century, appointed by the UNESCO “Learning the Treasure Within” reminds one of 
the famous words of Swami Vivekananda: “Education is manifestation of perfe ction already in 
man”. This UNESCO Report identified four-pillars of education: Learning to know; Learning to do, 
learning to be, and learning to live together, and these are universally acceptable.  
2.5.7. The Committee was informed that everyone associat ed with curriculum development, 
syllabus preparation and textbook writing needs to be familiar with one sentence that was spoken at 
the release of the UNESCO Report: “Education in every country must be rooted to culture and 
committed to progress” . He opined that we have continued with the transplanted alien system of 

24 
 
education even after independence and a sincere effort was made by the Kothari Commission and 
the 1968 National Policy on Education. Now with considerable experience gained, it is time to set 
things right and ensure that all the four pillars are strengthened in the learning and growing up of our 
generations ahead.  
2.5.8. The fourth Pillar ‘Learning to live together’ brings a very special focus on India. Globally it is 
realized that we have the experience in respecting diversity and accepting diversity, of every 
conceivable kind. Countries new to changing demography that brings along diversity of faith, 
religion, culture, language and traditions are looking towards India and India just cannot aff ord to 
shy away from this responsibility. 
2.5.9. It was also pointed out to the Committee that in Indian context we have to consider few other 
aspects/ principles also which have contributed towards the growth and progress of India. In this 
regard, he stated that he has already highlighted the importance of such basic principles in the Para 8 
and Para 13 of the 86th Report of the Committee. Further, in order to improve the quality of school 
text-books and level of education in India, the importance of the Teacher Education Institutions for 
imparting quality professional training in the field of designing the contents of school text -books 
was also highlighted by him. 
2.5.10. Historians generally agree to a famous statement of eminent scholar E.H. Carr that history is 
a continuous dialogue between the present and past. New discoveries are taking place, new facts are 
coming up, and textbooks just cannot remain the same. This is worsened if the history is written with 
certain pre-conceived biases resulting out o f politically-constrained ideological bindings. History 
writing in India has suffered on these unacceptable considerations, and it must be extracted - and 
liberated -out of gross subjectivity and ideological bias to transparent objectivity, and openness of  
mind, willingness to enter into dialogue with those holding diametrically opposite views. New facts 
have emerged around us; say; Aryan Invasion theory, Saraswati River, Ram Setu, and so many more 
solely because of new scientific advancements and new tools that have led to new researches. These 
just cannot be ignored in preparing new textbooks.   
2.5.11. Because of ideological biases and political considerations suffered by it in past, Indian 
history writing needs a thorough professional review. As it was d etermined to highlight certain 
individuals, regimes and eras, it suffers from serious imbalances of every possible type. He further 
pointed out the British tried to downgrade the great contributions of ancient India in philosophy, 

25 
 
science, mathematics, spirituality, medicine and other fields and it was continued to be neglected in 
our textbooks. While considerable initiatives were taken for removing gender bias and caste 
discriminations, history writing remained confined to the hegemony of a select group of  few 
academics for over five decades. 
2.5.12. The post- independence history books are deficient on ‘linking Indians to India’; and this 
includes history, heritage and culture.  In fact, this aspect needs serious informed and scholarly 
deliberations before  textbooks are prepared in response to the NEP -2020.The importance of 
textbooks up to class X is to be appreciated as after standard X, children diversify and some of them 
may no more read history or even social studies.  
2.5.13. The second most important aspect that no textbook writer could ignore pertains to the need 
for strengthening social cohesion and religious amity. Racial discrimination and caste 
considerations - in varied connotations – have not vanished fully even in what are known as most 
advanced societies.  We must accept that these challenges still exist even before us; and these 
require an attitudinal transformation. Our Children must know that different religions are a reality, 
that no religion could claim superiority over any other.  
2.5.14. The Committee was informed that the Curriculum Framework of the NCERT released on 
November 14, 2000-postulated that children must learn the basics of all religions; they should know 
the commonalities and learn to respect differences wherever these exist.  No rituals and no dogmas 
are to be taken up in schools. This issue was taken to Supreme Court of India, and a Three Judge 
Bench ruled on September 12, 2002 that it should have been done fifty years ago and it would have 
strengthened secularism. 
2.5.15.  One should be convinced that textbooks should not hesitate to talk about equality of all 
religions; it should uniformly apply to every school, irrespective of its categorization or 
denomination.  Ekam sat Viprah Bahudha Vadantih is a great secular statement, it should not be a 
‘no-no’ to talk about it in India.  He also mentioned how this approach on religions was arrived at  
and  referred to in two paras of the DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT; EIGHTY -FIRST 
REPORT ON VALUE-BASED EDUCATION: 
 8.  Truth (Satya), Righteous Conduct (Dharma), Peace (Shanti), Love (Prema) and Non -
 violence (Ahimsa) are the core universal values which can be identified as the 
 foundation-stone on which the value -based education programme can be built up.  These 

26 
 
 five are indeed universal values and respectively represent the five domains of human 
 personality: intellectual, physical, emotional, psychological and spiritual. They also are 
 correspondingly co -related with the five m ajor objectives of education, namely, 
 knowledge, skill, balance, vision and identity. 
 13.  Another aspect that must be given some thought is religion, which is the most 
 misused and misunderstood concept. The process of making the students acquainted with 
 the basics of all religions, the values inherent therein and also a comparative study of the 
 philosophy of all religions should begin at the middle stage in schools and  continue up to 
 the university level. Students have to be made aware that the basic concept behind every 
 religion is common, only the practices differ. Even if there are differences of opinion in 
 certain areas, people have to learn to co-exist and carry no hatred against any religion. 
This Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee also referred to as Chavan Committee; 
strongly recommended education about religions as an instrument of social cohesion and social and 
religious harmony.   
2.5.16.  It was highlighted that even the best of textbook is of little worth if the teacher is not fully 
equipped professionally and culturally to perform his/her duties with self - assurance and does not 
derive a sense of satisfaction from the task performed.  
2.5.17.  Prof. Nachiketa Tiwari, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur  deposed before the 
Committee in its meeting held on 23 rd July, 2021 "We should write history books which help us 
make good decision-making capabilities, good judgment -making capabilities, which help us learn 
from our mistakes of the past.  For instance, in our history books, partition has not been analyzed.  
It was a big catastrophe for us, as a nation.  It has not been analyzed; it has not been understood.  
We should understand it.  We should figure out how to ensure that that does not get repeated.  It 
should identify models of good and responsible citizenship". 
While replying to a query related to Indian History Congress, he stated that " I actually read 
the entire statement which the Indian Historical Congress came up with. I think they released it 
yesterday or day-before-yesterday. I got a copy of that and I read it.  What they argue is that they 
have presented facts in the history textbooks.  That may be partly true.  You can present facts, but 
the adviser and under his advisership, have presented those facts in a particular way.  They 
themselves say that the choice of the historian is to select some facts, to erase some facts, to present 
some facts, to present them in a particular narrative.  So, technically the document which you are 
alluding to, IHC document, maybe technically correct".   
2.5.18. Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav, Ex -MP, Lok Sabha  emphasized the importance of the 

27 
 
subject and suggested for detailed discussion with more stakeholders and eminent educationists. He 
while quoting the example of write -up from the book written by Dr. Lohiya named as 'Interval 
during Politics, language' mentioned that focus should not 'be only on facts and figures while writing 
Indian history but it should focus on the deep essence of the nature of Indian history in order to make 
it more understandable. He also highlighted one of the important issue that at international level, 
Indian history is presented in different context which does not matches to that of the real events that 
occurred in Indian history. Therefore, he suggested for formulation of a Committee for reviewing 
such facts at international level. 
2.5.19.  Shri Shankar Sharan, Eminent Educatio nist also deposed before the Committee on the 
above subject and highlighted various topics for inclusion/ exclusion in NCERT text -books. He 
drew the attention of the Committee Members as to why the text -books had references to 
unhistorical/ distorted facts and why a section of intellectuals insisted on keeping it. Focusing on this 
will only help in removing such discrepancies.  Secondly, the Committee while recommending 
should deliberate on choosing the contents made available to them for proportionate representation. 
Thirdly, what is to be written about the forgotten heroes should also be deliberated upon. 
3. COMMENTS FROM STAKEHOLDERS/PUBLIC AT LARGE 
3.1. The Chairman, Committee on EWCY&S informed the Members in the meeting held on 23rd 
July, 2021 that in response to Notice issued by the Committee inviting comments/suggestions from 
public at large, scholars/institutions, as many as more than 20,000 e -mails were received. The 
Chairman of the Committee also informed the Members that although it was a herculean task to 
analyze each and every e-mail, an effort was made to prepare a gist of major topics covered. Based 
on key searches, an indicative number of e -mails on major topics h ave been arrived at which is 
summarized as under: 
Topics Total 
NCERT- class wise changes 3314 
Women Heroes 1732 
Sikh History 1568 
Chapter on Shrimad Rajchandraji 1177 
Vedas 1046 
Maratha Empire  838 
Sanskrit Language- made compulsory 643 
Gurjar - History 515 
Inclusion of kings like Raja Bhoj and Raja 490 

28 
 
Vikramadiya 
Buddhism 465 
Tribes- History and Leaders 334 
Jats- History and leaders 211 
Indian Epics 197 
About life of Dr APJ Abdul Kalam 108 
Sindhi revolutionaries like Hemu Kalani 35 
Chapter on Civic Sense 24 
Total Number of e -mails as per 
above categoriza tion out of the 
total e -mails received(around 
20000) 
12697 
 
3.2. A perusal of these e -mails reflect that most of them lack  the depth and seriousness with 
which a Parliamentary Committee should be responded to. A sizeable number of e-mails are blank 
i.e., without any content, any salutation or any reference to subject matter. Such e -mails have not 
only increased the ir total number, but made it difficult to locate more serious ones. Further , to 
compound the difficulties in identification of some meaningful contents, many individuals have 
expressed their wishful thinking and are based on hearsay. Such suggestions were not backed up by 
any concrete or satisfactory evidences. Approximately 3500 e -mails suggested changes in NCERT 
history textbooks of class es VI to XII. However, all the e -mails contained the same text of 
suggestion and have been forwarded by multiple people, schools and organizations. 
3.3. In the suggestions received from public at large it was suggested that a chapter on Ahilya 
Bhai Holkar and Rani Durgawati, their contributions to society and how they uplifted the status of 
women in that age should also be included in NCERT textbooks. 
3.4. The e-mails have also talked about regional disparities in the history from different eras across 
the country citing influence of local heroes being adversely or negligibly represented. Several 
e-mails have highlighted the poor representation of Sikh history and requested that the same may be 
given its due representation in the history textbooks. C ontrary to the suggestions received , many 
scholars, especially scholars from Indian History Congress (IHC), made suggestions that the history 
textbooks have been written after due deliberations and research based on all pertinent sources 
necessary for the reconstruction of history and IHC opposes any attempt to present a distorted 
understanding of the historical past. Based on the broad outline enumerated as above, the Committee 
decided that all the e-mails having some substances be forwarded to NCERT for further examination 
and inclusion of relevant materials based on scientific analysis and historical perspective and in the 

29 
 
light of mandate of notice issued.   
OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
4.1. The Committee observes that although students learn in different environment and through 
different ways and learning takes place beyond the boundary of textbooks and the classrooms 
through a diversity of learning materials and experiences; textbooks do play an important role.  
After all it is textbooks that are used as teaching material by teachers and also as a primary source 
of self- learning by students. It is therefore that development of Quality textbooks, including both 
printed and electronic textbooks (e-textbooks) becomes most important. The Committee also 
observes that such quality textbooks can help develop ability of students to learn through reading 
and arouse the interest of students enhancing their capacity to actively engage and involve them in 
the learning process. 
4.2. The Committee in its discussions with the stakeholders observes that the United Nations, 
through one of its most important agencies, namely UNESCO, had formulated comprehensive 
guidelines for history which would foster world peace, tolerance and advancement of universal 
values of democracy and human rights. They emphasized on the need for highlighting social, 
economic, cultural and scientific history and requirement for toning down the history of conflicts. 
Hitherto marginalized groups, especially women, and the values of 'Unity in Diversity' and 
'pluralism' should gain prominence in the teaching of history. UNESCO has emphasized the 
importance of learning about local cultural heritage and safeguarding of the same. In one of its 
recommendations concerning the safeguarding of as well as the contemporary role of historic 
areas, as recorded in the General Conference in Nairobi in 1976, it stated --- 
  "Awareness of the need for safeguarding work be encouraged by education in schools 
[....] The study of historic areas should be included in education at all levels, especially history 
teaching, so as to inculcate in young minds an understanding and respect for the works of the past 
and to demonstrate the role of heritage in modern lives. Education of this kind should make use of 
audio-visual media and visits to groups of historic buildings." 
4.3. The Committee in its discussions with the NCERT and Department of School Education & 
Literacy observes that there is no internal mechanism to verify mistakes, erroneous and debatable 
facts in the text books by NCERT. The Committee was of the considered opinion that any 
error/mistakes in the textbooks should be investigated thoroughly and should be rectified and the 

30 
 
controversial or erroneous facts should be removed or deleted by NCERT at the earliest.  
4.4. The Committee during its interaction noted that many of the historical figures and freedom 
fighters of Indian freedom struggle have been portrayed in an incorrect manner as offenders. 
Therefore, the Committee is of the view that wrong portrayal of our heroes of freedom struggle 
should be corrected and they should be given due respect in our history textbooks.  
4.5. The Committee, in the context of the unequal representation of various periods and dynasties in 
the history textbooks by the stakeholders, observe s that NCERT should take a relook at the 
guidelines for the writing of the history textbooks so that equal weightage and importance is given to 
the various eras, periods and events in the history textbooks. Similarly, it was observed that school 
textbooks do not give adequate coverage to some of the great Indian empires like th at of 
Vikramaditya, Cholas, Chalukyas, Vijaynagar, Gondwana  or that of Travancore  and Ahoms of 
North-Eastern region, whose contributions in expansion of India's standing on the world stage 
cannot be ignored. 
4.6. The Committee is of the view that there should be an appropriate comparison of the portrayal 
of women heroes like Rani Laxmi Bai, Zalkari Bai, Chand Bibi etc vis-a-vis their male 
counterparts. The Committee observes that the women heroes from different regions and eras 
should be given equal weightage highlighting their contributions in the history textbooks.   
4.7  The Committee also observes that notable women in all fields, and their contributions,  like 
that of Ahilyabai Holkar, Abala Bose, Anandi Gopal Joshi, Anasuya Sarabhai, Arati Saha, Aruna 
Asaf Ali, Kanaklata Deka, Rani Ma Guidinglu,  Asima Chatterjee, Captain Prem Mathur, 
Chandraprabha Saikini, Cornelia Sorabji, Durgavati Devi, Janaki Ammal, Mahasweta Devi, 
Kalpana Chawla, Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay, Kittur Chennamma, M. S. Subbulakshmi, Madam 
Bhikaiji Cama, Rukmini Devi Arundale, Savitribai Phule and many others have not found 
adequate mention in NCERT textbooks.   
4.8  The Committee observes that generally Women are underrepresented in school textbooks, 
many a times shown through images in traditional and voluntary roles, leading to formation of 
gender stereotypes in the impressionistic minds  of students and feels that there is a need to 
undertake an analysis of the textbooks from the Gender perspective as well.  
4.9 The Committee observes that in the suggestions received regarding updation of NCERT books, 
emphasis was laid on providing equal representation to the North-East Indian States and their 

31 
 
History. It was suggested that developmental models and economic policies should have sections 
dealing with and talking about the complex realities and demographics of the North-East along 
with the history of civilizations and tribal communities of the North-eastern region. Furthermore, 
the textbook content should also ensure adequate balance in representing Hill areas and Plains 
areas so as to recognise both communities adequately. The Committee also observes that there is 
also a sentiment in the public about poor representation of Sikh and Maratha history in the School 
textbooks and many have rightly suggested to give both, their due representation in the history 
textbooks. In this case a representation by a Class 9 student from Gurugram should be considered 
as a case in point.  
4.10 The Committee observes that in respect of NCERT History syllabus, it was proposed that 
brief information regarding other three Vedas i.e. Samaveda, Yajurveda and Atharvaveda, 
Bhagvad Gita, as also Agam Literature should also be included along with Rigveda as they are 
also important sacred books. Further, some of the important teachings of all religious scriptures 
should also be adequately included in the text books. In many countries abroad, there are full 
fledged University departments for religious studies while in India, we have ignored this discipline 
for whatever the reason. It may also be pointed out here that at the University of Tehran, Iran, 
Upanishad is taught as a subject but in India, very few Universities teach the same.  
4.11 The Committee also observes that the there is no uniformity in the  coverage of the 
development of different Indian regional languages and scripts in the NCERT history text book. 
For example, languages like Punjabi, with the Gurmukhi script, and Tamil, the first classical 
Indian language, do not find weightage commensurate to their importance. The journey of such 
languages should find place in the context of education on the development of Regional Cultures. 
The great Tamil literary treatise Thirukural by Thiruvalluvar, considered one of the best works on 
ethics and morality, is one of the varied such examples from regional literature which should get 
incorporated in the text books. 
4.12 The Committee observes that modifications suggested in updation of syllabus/ topics in 
NCERT books related to all the subjects should also be adopted by SCERT and the same should 
be reflected in their textbooks too and local/ vernacular languages should be used for proper 
dissemination of information in respective mother tongue.  

32 
 
4.13 The Committee also observes that the content of those books that are officially 
recommended for further reading published by private publishers/ authors should also be duly 
scrutinized at some level. This may ensure commonality of approach and thereby cause no 
confusion.  
4.14 The Committee noted the submissions made by Director, NCERT that different 
departments of NCERT conduct small studies on different aspects to evaluate the textbooks, taking 
feedback from stakeholders including students. However, it is also noteworthy that for the current 
textbooks no such study to evaluate psychological impact related with course material/ curriculum 
has been conducted. 
4.15 The Committee observes that feedback survey by CBSE on the quality of NCERT 
textbooks through its website in the year 2018-19, led to the revision of NCERT textbooks. 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS 
In view of the evidences gathered throughout the process, the Committee strongly 
recommends that: 
5.1.  While creating the content for textbooks, inputs from experts from multiple disciplines 
should be sought. This will ensure balance and diversity of views. It should also be ensured 
that books are free of biases. The textbooks should instill commitment to values enshrined in 
the constitution and should further promote national integration and unity. 
5.2. There is a pressing need to develop high -quality textbooks and effective teaching 
methods. Thus mandatory standards related to text -book content, graphics and layout, 
supplementary materials, and pedagogical approaches  should be developed. Such standards 
are needed for printed as well as digital textbooks. 
5.3. There is a need to have more child -friendly textbooks. This is possible through  
enhanced use of pictures, graphics, QR codes, and other audio -visual materials. Children 
should be taught through enhanced used of games, plays, dramas, workshops, visits to places 
of historical importance, museums etc. as such approaches will ignite their inquisitiveness and 
analytical abilities.    
5.4. The initiative of Maharashtra State Bureau of Textbook Production & Curriculum 
Research known as Ekatmik Pathya Pustak conceived in 2018 -19 to lighten the school bag  is 

33 
 
appreciable. Towards this, the Bure au has created quarter -specific integrated material for 
Marathi, English, Mathematics and 'Play, Do, Learn' for Class I students into a single book. A 
similar approach may be adopted by others. Such initiative will be aligned to the School Bag 
Policy of New Education Policy (NEP), 2020 as laid out in Section 4.33.  
5.5.   Education must be provided in the light of values enshrined in the constitution which 
cannot be taught by mere delivery of information. The pedagogy woven around textbooks has 
a lasting impact on the minds of the student and hence learning-by-experiment methodology 
should be compulsorily used by all teachers. Such an approach will enhance positive attitude 
towards learning amongst students. 
5.6.   The prioritization of development of foundational skills amongst primary students is 
required by the NEP -2020, and therefore necessitates the use of information technology and 
digital devices. Therefore, digital content should be created and disseminated  using satellite 
technology to enhance our students’ capabilities and potentials.  Such approaches will 
further curriculum reform and will also help develop more effective operational models for 
content delivery, and learning . Introduction of modern technologies/ methodologies for the 
dissemination of information as part of teaching strategies should be undertaken preferably 
after enabling the possibility of the same uniformly in every part of the country. Schools in 
remote corners of the country should be suitably equipped for the same.  
5.7.    The primary school textbooks should serve two purposes; provide strong foundation in 
core areas such as reading, writing and arithmetic, and provoke curiosity so that students can 
rapidly expand their knowledge in later years. This is also in alignment with NEP 2020's goal 
of promoting competency-based learning.   
5.8. The  NCERT and SCERTs should primarily focus on providing core content through 
their textbooks. Detailed information and supplementary materials may be provided through 
other texts, videos, reference books, A/V files, etc. Further, textbooks should be anchored  in 
facticity. Any presentation of data or survey results should be appropriately referenced. 
Textbooks should be designed to provoke curiosity and analytical abilities, should be tuned to 
cognitive capability of the student, and should employ simple langu age. Further, efforts 
should be made to design textbooks in ways such that project -based, art -integrated, and 
experiential learning models can be deployed for effective education. In this way, our 

34 
 
textbooks will promote scientific temper, innovation, and a lso the four Cs; Communication, 
Collaboration, Creativity, and Critical Thinking. 
5.9 The Ministry should exp lore the possibility of d eveloping a core class-wise common 
syllabus for various subjects for implementation by CBSE, CICSE and various other State 
education Boards as this will go a long way in maintaining uniformity in educational 
standards of school students across the country. 
5.10.   Our textbooks should highlight the lives of hitherto unknown men and women from 
different states and districts who have positively influenced our national history, honour, and 
one-ness. This may require content production teams to dig deeper into local source s of 
knowledge, including oral ones, and identify linkages between the local and the national. In 
this way, our textbooks should elicit “Unity in Diversity” of India emphasizing that diversity 
in India is in fact diverse manifestation of the innate one-ness or intrinsic unity. 
5.11.  The textbooks should include content on world history and India’s place in the same. 
In this regard, special emphasis must be placed on the histories of other countries of the 
world. This is aligned with international guidelines which argue for study of history through a 
multi-perspective approach. Further, sufficient emphasis must also be placed on the connects 
between histories of South -East Asia and India. This would be very useful in th e context of 
India’s Look East policy.  
5.12. Our history textbooks should be continually updated, and account for post -1947 
history as well. In addition, an option of conducting review of National Curricular 
Framework at regular intervals should be kept. 
5.13. The Department of School Education & Literacy and NCERT should carefully study 
how other ancient civilizations/ countries teach their own histories to their respective citizens 
through textbook content, and areas of emphasis. The results of such a study should be used to 
improve our own history textbooks and teaching methods taking into consideration history at 
the grassroots level preferably at the district levels.  Further, the State Boards may prepare 
district-wise history books that will impart knowledge about local historic al figures to the 
students. 
5.14. The NCERT should consider the suggestions received by this Committee, while 
framing the NCF and syllabus of the textbooks. For avoiding content overload on students, 

35 
 
NCERT in collaborat ion wi th SCERT should identify S tate-specific historical figures for 
inclusion in respective SCFs.  Efforts may also be made to incorporate and highlight the 
contributions of the numerous local personalities in various fields in State curriculum. 
5.15. The NCERT and SCERT should incorporate the ancient wisdom , knowledge and 
teachings about life and society from Vedas and other great Indian Texts/ Books in the school 
curriculum. Also, educational methodologies adopted in the ancient Universities like Nalanda, 
Vikramshila and Takshila should be studied and suitably modified to serve as a model 
reference for teachers so as to benefit them in improving their pedagogical skills for imparting 
education in the present day context. 
5.16. Contributions of ancient India in the fields of Philosophy, Science, Mathematics, 
Medicine, Ayurveda, Epistemology, Natural sciences, Politics, Economy, Ethics, Linguistics, 
Arts, etc may also be included in the textbooks. The traditional Indian knowledge s ystems 
should be linked with modern science and presented in the contemporary context in NCERT 
textbooks. 
5.17. New technologies should be adopted for better pedagogy for the education of History. 
Further a permanent mechanism to make suitable rectifications through additions or 
deletions in the textbooks in a structured manner needs to be established.  
5.18.  All books especially history books other than published by Government agencies  used 
for supplementary reading may be in consonance  with the structure/ content of NCERT 
books to avoid discrepancies. Also, Ministry of Education should develop a monitoring 
mechanism for ensuring the same. 
5.19. There is a need for discussing and reviewing, with leading historians, the manner in 
which Indian freedom fighters, from various regions/parts of the country and their 
contributions get place in History textbooks. This will result in more balanced and judi cious 
perception of the Indian freedom struggle . This will go a long way in giving due and proper 
space to the freedom fighters hitherto unknown and oblivious in the freedom movement.  
Review of representation of community identity based history as of Sikh and Maratha history 
and others and their adequate incorporation in the textbooks will help in a more judicious 
perspective of their contribution.  
5.20. In order to address the underrepresentation of Women and girls in school textbooks or 

36 
 
them being depicted only in traditional roles , a thorough analysis  from the view point of 
gender bias and stereotypes should be undertaken by NCERT and efforts be made to make 
content portrayal and visual depiction gender inclusive. The textbooks should have g reater 
portrayal of women in new and emerging professions, as role models with a focus on their 
contributions and pathway of achieving the same. This will help in inst illing self-esteem and 
self confidence among all, particularly girls. Also, while examining the textbooks, other issues 
like environment sensitivity, human values, issues of children with special needs etc can also 
be looked up for adequate inclusion in the School textbooks.  
5.21. The significant role played by women in the freedom movement and in various other 
fields needs adequate representation in the textbooks as it would go a long way in 
understanding the issues in a better way for the next generation of students. 
5.22. One of the major social ills afflicting our society in the present times is the malaise of 
drug addiction cutting across the class divide. It has far-reaching adverse effects on the 
socio-economic structure of the country, and that concerted efforts are required to be made 
by the government agencies as well as the civil society to combat this menace. As part of these 
efforts, the ill effects of such addiction must be adequately and suitably highlighted in strong 
words, in th e content of school text books to caution the impressionable young minds of 
students against falling prey to luring tactics of anti -social elements and resulting in 
waywardness. Similarly, the textbooks should have separate elements spreading awareness 
against internet addiction and other such aspects that are harmful to the society. 
5.23. Taking into account the voluminous number of suggestions received from teachers, 
students, Institutions for updating the syllabus of NCERT textbooks incorporating various 
subjects, an internal Committee be set up by Ministry of Education and NCERT to examine 
the suggestions so received and incorporate the same in curriculum as deem fit. 
5.24. All NCERT and SCERT textbooks must be published in all Eighth Schedule languages 
of the Constitution of India, besides Hindi and English. Further, efforts for develop ing 
textbooks in local languages (those not part of the Eighth Schedule) be also made. These will 
help the children in understanding the subjects better as the content will be in their mother 
tongue. 
5.25. To supplement the textbook content, field visits/ excursions should be introduced as a 

37 
 
compulsory part of learning experience. As an initiative in this regard, textbooks can 
introduce a "Box Format" near the name of the place being mentioned stating the importance 
of that pla ce whether religious, historical, etc. promoting the readers to visit it. This would 
further promote North-South and East-West integration. 
 
*** 

38 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 
10.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 13th January, 2021 in Committee Room 'A', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
         MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
6. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
7. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rajendra Agarwal 
9. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
10. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
11. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
12. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
13. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
14. Shri Balak Nath 
15. Shri T. N. Prathapan 
16. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
17. Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
    Dr.   Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
  Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director   

39 
 
Shri   Ashok K. Sahoo, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
  Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
   
  Witnesses 
 1. Prof.  J. S. Rajput, Former Director, NCERT & India's representative 
  on the UNESCO Executive Board 
 2. Shri Shankar Sharan, Eminent Author & Educationist 
   
  Bhartiya Shikshan Mandal, New Delhi 
 3. Shri Shankaranand, Joint Organising Secretary 
 4. Shrimati Aruna Saraswat, Joint Secretary 
 5. Dr. Raghavendra Prasad Tiwari, In-Charge Academic Cell 
 6. Dr. Amit Dashora, Assistant In-Charge, Academic Cell 
    
  Shiksha Sanskriti Uthan Nyas, New Delhi  
 7. Shri Desh Raj Sharma 
 8. Shri Edward Mende 
 
  Department of School Education and Literacy 
 9. Ms. Anita Karwal, Secretary 
 10. Ms. L.S.Changsan, Joint Secretary 
   
  Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), New Delhi. 
  
 11. Shri Manoj Ahuja, Chairman 
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)   
 
 12. Prof. Sridhar Srivastava, Director, NCERT 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members present in the sitting and 
apprised that two eminent educationists and three organizations have been invited for 
consultation on the Subject – “Reforms in Contents and Designs in School 
Textbooks” focusing on (a) Removing references to un-historical facts and distortions 
about our national heroes from the text books; (b) Ensuring equal or proportionate 

40 
 
references to all period of Indian history; and (c) Highlighting the role of great historic 
women achievers, including Gargi, Maitreyi, or rulers like Rani of Jhansi, Rani 
Channamma, Chand Bibi, Zhalkari Bai, etc. He acknowledged the presence of 
Secretary, School Education and Literacy, Chairman of CBSE and Director of 
NCERT in the sitting. 
3. Shri J.S. Rajput, Former Director, NCERT was invited as an expert to tender 
his views on the subject under consideration of the Committee. That expert submitted 
that domain experts may by associated by the NCERT in collaboration with SCERT, 
State Textbooks Corporation, School Education Boards at National and State levels, 
institution of higher learning to develop textbooks in alignment with New Education 
Policy, 2020. He submitted that contributions of ancient India in philosophy, science, 
mathematics, spirituality and medicine, etc. have been remained neglected in 
textbooks on Indian history; writing of history textbooks also remain confined to the 
hegemony of a select group of academicians for over five decades which now needs to 
be rectified in the larger interest of the country. He added that the curriculum 
framework of NCERT should focus on comparative study of philosophy of all regions 
which should commence from the school level upto university level to instill the idea 
of equality of all religions in the young mind. He was of the opinion that education 
must be rooted to the culture of the country. He emphasized upon the concept of 
'learning to know', 'learning to do', 'learning to be' and 'learning to live together'. The 
element of gender equality and regional imbalances in the syllabus of textbooks need 
to be removed. The curriculum should engender critical thinking, fraternity, national 
integrity, etc. among the students. Shri Shankar Sharan, another expert while 
submitting his views on the subject appealed the Committee to remove all historical 
distorted facts in the textbooks and the history books should cover hitherto neglected 
heroes and women achievers of the country.  
4. Thereafter Bhartiya Shikshan Mandal was invited to tender its views. In their 
submission they highlighted that history should be taught as continuum without 
ancient, medieval and modern era divisions; historiography to be done on the basis of 
scientific evidence; distortion and factual errors, regional imbalances, should be 
avoided in the new syllabus. They also laid emphasis on teacher's manual for quality 
teachers. 

41 
 
5. Thereafter, Shiksha Sanskriti Utthan Nyas tendered their evidence on the 
subject. In their power point presentations they suggested changes to remove 
distortion and factual errors in textbooks from class 6 to 12 published by NCERT. 
They were of the view that cultural history along with political history of the country 
need to be taught to students. The new syllabus should be designed so as to promote 
critical thinking, positive outlook, problem solving skill, evidence based thinking, 
scientific temper, innovation, gender sensitization, environment awareness and 
preservation, etc.  
6. Members suggested that the textbook revision should take into account holistic 
education offered by ancient universities at Nalanda and Takshila. It was suggested 
that content load in content development; content continuum from school to university 
level; caste less society for stronger nation; rectification of regional imbalances by 
accommodating regional aspirations while making revision of school history 
textbooks, may be factored into.  
7. The Secretary, School Education and Literacy briefed the Committee about the 
stages involved in textbook revision and submitted that National Curriculum 
Framework has been prepared by NCERT and it would take a couple of years to 
complete the textbook revision process. However, the suggestions of the Committee 
would be utilized during consultation process for revision of textbooks.  
8. The verbatim record of proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9. The meeting adjourned at 12.20 P.M. 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                      ASHOK K.SAHOO 
13th January, 2021.                                                             DIRECTOR  
  
 
 

 
42 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 
03.00 P.M. on Friday, the 23rd July, 2021 in Main Committee Room, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
       MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
3. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
4. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
6. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
7. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
8. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
9.Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
10. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
11. Shri Balak Nath 
12. Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
13.Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
14. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
16. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
     Shri K. Sudhakaran, Director 
    Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 

 
43 
 
    Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary  
    Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Deputy Director (LARRDIS) 
    Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
    Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
   
Witnesses 
 (I) SAMVIT RESEARCH FOUNDATION, BANGALORE 
   1.   Shri Gajanan Londhe, Executive Director 
   2.   Dr. V. Ramanathan 
(II)      1.  Prof. Nachiketa Tiwari, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 
  2.  Dr. Prerna Malhotra 
 (III) UNICEF INDIA 
  1. Mr. Terry Durnnian, Chief of Education 
  2. Ms. Sunisha Ahuja, Education Specialist 
  3. Ms. Zafrin Chowdhury, Chief of Communication, Advocacy and 
Partnerships 
  4. Ms. Amrita Singh, Communication Officer 
  (IV)       Shri  Hukmdev Narayan Yadav, Ex-MP, Lok Sabha 
(V) DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY 
  1.  Shri Santosh Kumar Sarangi, Additional Secretary 
  2.  Smt. L.S. Changsan, Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri Santosh Kumar Yadav, Joint Secretary 
  4.  Prof. Sridhar Srivastava, Director, NCERT 
  5.  Shri Pankaj Tripathi, Secretary,  CBSE 
 
  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting and 
congratulated the Committee for the having the maximum attendance in its meetings 
and also for the longest average duration of its meetings. He further informed that this 
was graciously acknowledged by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in his opening 
remarks on the first day of the Monsoon Session, 2021. 
2. The Chairman further informed that representatives of Indian History Congress 
was invited to the meeting to present their views. However, they have not been able to 
come to the meeting. He further informed the Members that consequent to an 
advertisement issued inviting representations from the public, on the subject "Reforms 
in the Content and Design of School Text Books" more than 20,000 emails had been 
received in a period of one month. He added that the representations received are 
being categorised for taking further view in the matter.  

 
44 
 
3. Thereafter, Executive Director, Samvit Research Foundation in his presentation 
briefed the Committee about the various steps taken by them to create text books 
based on recommendations in the NEP, 2020 and the various discrepancies observed 
in the present school text books like maligning queen Rudramadevi, veiled diatribes 
on Sanskrit language, under representation of critical dimensions of history and on the 
need to give prominence to women heroes and their contribution as recorded in 
ancient text. 
4. The Committee sought clarifications on the following issues; (i) How do other 
countries which have long civilizational history ensure that their school text-books are 
able to incorporate and present a balanced view point; (ii) What criteria need to be 
adopted for framing the course content of the school text books that are universally 
acceptable and free of bais; (iii) what is the research status of pre-historic civilizations 
found in the country; and (iv) steps taken to utilize audio-visual medium to educate 
the younger generation about history. 
5. The Chairman thereafter referred to the points submitted by Indian History 
Congress and informed that the same has been circulated to the Members of the 
Committee. 
6. Prof Nachiketa Tiwari, IIT-Kanpur in his presentation briefed the Committee 
about the issues and guiding principles that were involved when the school text-book 
were to be updated in 2005. The lacunae in the history books were also indicated. The 
history textbooks need to be re-written as facts were presented in a particular way, in a 
particular narrative. We should write history textbooks in such way that it may help us 
make good decision making capabilities, good judgment making capabilities etc. 
Attention was also drawn to the United Nations view on presenting history and the 
need to reframe the text-books based on a latest facts and unbiased narrative was 
stressed. 
7. The Committee noted that there will always be different interpretations of facts 
and history should be presented in an unbiased manner. The quest should be to 
develop parameters/guidelines which help frame a balanced view of the events/places. 
Further, the history of the country post-independence also needs to be incorporated in 
the books to help the students develop knowledge of major events that took place after 
1947. 

 
45 
 
8. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Shri  Hukmdev Narayan Yadav, Ex-MP, 
(Lok Sabha) to expresses his opinion and observations on the subject. Thanking the 
Committee, Shri Hukmdev Narayan Yadav informed the Committee that it was not 
possible to gain a proper perspective on the chosen subject or find a solution for it 
sitting at one place amongst few Members. He then spoke at length about the vision 
and thoughts of Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia, who had advocated that history should be 
written by specialist historians. 
9. He further stated that history needs to be understood from a perspective which 
is complete and correct. Incorrect and half truth will only lead to incorrect or half 
history. He further briefed the Committee about the efforts made by foreign historians 
to divide the people of India in to different races like Dravidian, Mongols, Aryan, 
non-Aryan etc. He emphasised that we are one and our history should also promote 
this concept of integration. Concluding his presentation, Shri  Hukmdev Narayan Yadav, 
emphasised the need to develop a framework that has to be built for ensuring that the 
school text-books are able to develop a critical evaluation of historical events and 
project the past in its proper perspective. 
(the witnesses then withdrew) 
10. The Chairman then welcomed the representatives of UNICEF, India to the 
meeting and informed the Committee about the pioneering work done by UNICEF in 
India and other countries so that a more balanced view can be taken on the effect of 
COVID-19 pandemic and school education. 
11. The representatives of UNICEF, India briefed the Committee about the studies 
conducted by them on the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on school education. It 
was informed that as per the study conducted by UNICEF, 1.5 million schools / 1.37 
million Anganwadi Centres closed, disrupting education of over 286 million students; 
only 24% households have access to the internet; 61.8% households own a smart 
phone;  40% of students had not accessed any remote learning; rural students were 
10%less likely to have accessed remote learning than urban peers; and  children 
faced psychosocial challenges due to school closures which is affecting learning. 
12. It was further informed that school closures have put children’s learning, 
nutrition, mental health, and overall development at risk and some students, 
particularly girls, are at risk of never returning to school. In fact, long closure of 

 
46 
 
schools will lead to children not returning to schools and has the potential for children 
getting engaged in labour and early marriage. Therefore, the immediate need is to 
bring children back to school.  
13. The Committee was also briefed about certain best practices adopted by 
different countries which may be adopted in India with suitable modifications like 
pproactive planning; clear protocols for re-opening and closing; flexibility in local 
decision making ssimplifying curriculum; adapting academic calendar, and supporting 
teachers, principals, & school staff on remediation and to manage new psychosocial 
needs. 
 
14. Concluding the meeting, the Chairman thanked the Members and the 
participants for their contribution and expressed the hope that the reports on the 
subjects would be drafted at the earliest for the consideration of the Committee in its 
next meeting. 
15.  The verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was 
kept. 
16. The meeting adjourned at 05.50 P.M. 
 
NEW DELHI.                                                                           K. SUDHAKARAN 
23RD JULY, 2021                                                                                  DIRECTOR 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 2:00 P.M on 
Friday, the 26th November, 2021 in Committee Room- ‘4’, Parliament House Annexe Extension 
Building, A- Block, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2.  Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya 
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev 
4. Shri Bhubaneshwar Kalita 
5. Shri. K.C. Ramamurthy 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
8. Shri Dhal Singh Bisen 
9. Shri Sadashiv Lokhande 
10.  Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
11. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
12. Shri Balak Nath 
13. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
14. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma 
15. Shri Dharambir Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Mallick, Director 
3.  Shri Har Prateek Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
6. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. He 
then informed them that the modifications as suggested by them in the draft Report on the 
subject “Reforms in Content and Design of School Textbooks” in the previous meeting had 
been incorporated and revised draft had been circulated. He then informed that the agenda for 
the meeting was to deliberate upon the following three draft Reports of the Committee: 
* Pertains to other matter 

48 
 
(i)  Report on the subject “Reforms in Content and Design of School Textbooks”; 
 
(ii)  *       * * 
(iii)  *       * * 
 
2.   Thereafter, the Chairman also informed the Committee that during deliberations on the 
draft Report on the subject “Reforms in Content and Design of School Textbooks”, 
several stakeholders from the Government and Non-Government sectors, including 
subject experts had been heard. However, one important stakeholder is the student 
community, which is also the target audience, and had not been heard by the Committee. 
The Chairman in this regard informed that a class 9 student, who has also written a book 
on Maratha history, has written to him expressing his desire to present his views before 
the Committee. Therefore, if found appropriate, the Committee could offer an 
opportunity to Master Tanish Venkatesh, a student of Class IX, to place his views before 
the Committee. The Committee then heard his views. He suggested some changes in the 
content of NCERT History Textbooks, alongwith the topics that need more emphasis.        
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
4. The Committee decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament during 
the upcoming Session of the Parliament. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Dr. 
Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe, Chairman of the Committee and in his absence, Shri Bikash 
Ranjan Bhattacharyya, M.P. to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha. Shri Rajendra 
Agrawal, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Dharambir Singh, M.P. were authorized to lay the 
above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5.   The meeting adjourned at 2:52 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                       A.K. Mallick  
26th November, 2021                                                                                           Director 
 
 
 
 
 * Pertains to other matter 