 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CH
  Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
              
THREE
 
Action Taken Note on 31
Standing Committee on HRD on 
(Presented to the Rajya 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020)
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Sixth Report on
“Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 in 
(Presented to the
(Laid on the Table of L
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
              August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
 
 
Report 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY SECOND REPORT
ON 
by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Sixth Report on
“Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 in 
Higher Education”  
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th August, 2025) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th August, 2025) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ORTS 
Report No. 
362  
Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
SECOND REPORT 
by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Three Hundred Fifty Sixth Report on 
“Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@sansad.nic.in 
  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN,
THREE HUNDRED 
Action Taken 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred 
Fifty Sixth Report on
Policy, 2020 in Higher Education”
(Presented to 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2025 / 
 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND 
 
HUNDRED AND SIXTY SECOND REPORT
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred 
Report on “Implementation of the National Education 
Policy, 2020 in Higher Education”  
 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th August, 2025) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th August, 2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2025 / Sravana, 1947 (Saka)  
 
 
  
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
REPORT 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred 
“Implementation of the National Education 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….................................................... (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.....................................................................................................     (iii)-(vi) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................ 1-32  
Chapter -I  -   Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... ..... 2-11 
Chapter -II  -  Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...........  12 
Chapter-III -  Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee.... 13-31 
 Chapter -IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..  32 
     
5. RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE.. ................... 33-35 
6. *MINUTES  
 
 
 
* 
To be annexed later 
 
 
 
  

 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th   September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Digvijaya Singh   Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya  
3. Ms. Sushmita Dev  
4. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
5. Shrimati Sunetra Ajit Pawar 
6. Shrimati Rekha Sharma* 
7. Dr.Bhim Singh 
8. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Shrimati SangeetaYadav 
LOK SABHA 
11.  Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
12 Dr.Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
13. Shrimati Rachna Banerjee 
14. Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
15. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
16. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
17. Prof.Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
18. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
19. Dr.Hemang Joshi 
20. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
21. Shri Kalipada Saren Kherwal 
22. Adv Dean Kuriakose 
23. Dr.Sambit Patra 
24. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
25. Dr. D. Purandeswari 
26. Shri Rajeev Rai 
27. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
28. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
29. Ms.Bansuri Swaraj 
30. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
31. Dr. T Sumathy alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri J. K. Mallick, Director  
Shri Devashish Sen, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Dilip Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer  
_______________________________ *Nominated w.e.f. 23.01.2025 
(i) 
 

 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Sixty Second Report of the 
Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Three Hundred and Fifty Sixth Report on “Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 
in Higher Education” which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha 
on 21st September, 2023. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education vide their 
communications dated 21st November, 2024 respectively.  
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
25th July, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
25th July , 2025                                                                                                   
Sravana,3,1947 (Saka)  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ABC Academic Bank of Credits  
ADEK Abu Dhabi Department of Education and Knowledge 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
ANRF Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
APH Approval Process Handbook 
APAAR Automated Permanent Academic Account Registry 
AWP&B Annual Work Plan and Budget 
BSNL Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited  
CAT Credit Accumulation and Transfer 
CBCS Choice Based Credit System 
CBSE Central Board of Secondary Education 
CoE Centres of Excellence 
CGFSEL Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Education Loan 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CSTT Commission for Scientific and Technical Terminology 
DBT Direct Benefit Transfer 
DGT Directorate General of Training 
DIKSHA Digital Infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing 
DIET District Institute of Education and Training 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DoSEL Department of School Education and Literacy 
DST Department of Science and Technology 
e-KUMBH Knowledge Unleashed in Multiple Bhartiya Languages 
ECCE Early Childhood Care and Education 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
ERP Enterprise Resource Planning 
EWS Economically Weaker Section 
FIP Faculty Induction Program 
FLN Foundational Literacy and Numeracy 
FTTH Fibre to the Home 
GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
GIFT  Gujarat International Finance Tec 
HEI Higher Education Institution 
HEFA Higher Education Financing Agency 
HRDC Human Resource Development Centre 
 
(iii) 
  

 
 
ICSC Islamia College of Science and Commerce 
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IDEA Idea Development, Evaluation & Application 
IGNOU Indira Gandhi National Open University 
IIC Institution’s Innovation Council 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
IIM Indian Institutes of Management 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IISER Indian Institute of Science Education and Research 
IIIT Indian Institute of Information Technology 
IKS Indian Knowledge System 
IMPRINT Impacting Research Innovation and Technology 
IMPRESS Impactful Policy Research in Social Science 
IRG Internal Revenue Generation 
IRMA Institute of Rural Management, Anand 
IUST Islamic University of Science & Technology 
LoI Letter of Intent 
MBBS Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery 
MeitY Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
MEME Multi Entry and Multiple Exit 
MERU Multi-Disciplinary Education and Research Universities 
MMER Management Monitoring Evaluation and Research 
MMTTC  Malaviya Mission Teacher Training Centre 
MMTTP Malaviya Mission Teacher Training Programme 
MoE Ministry of Education 
MoEVT Ministry of Education and Vocational Training 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MOOC Massive Open Online Course 
MSDE Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NCERT National Council of Education, Research & Training 
NCF National Curriculum Framework 
NCGTC National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company  
NCrF National Credit Framework 
NCTE National Council for Teacher Education 
NCVET National Council for Vocational Education & Training 
NDEAR National Digital Education Architecture 
NDLI National Digital Library of India 
 
(iv) 
  

 
 
NEP National Education Policy 
NETF National Educational Technology Forum 
NGO Non-Governmental Organization 
NHEQF National Higher Education Qualifications Framework 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NIDI National Initiative for Design Innovation 
NILP New India Literacy Programme 
NIOS National Institute of Open Schooling 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NKM National Knowledge Management 
NKN National Knowledge Network 
NMEICT 
 
National Mission on Education through Information and 
Communication Technology  
NISHTHA  National Initiative for School Heads' and Teachers' 
Holistic Advancement 
NPST National Professional Standards for Teacher 
NRF National Research Foundation 
NSP National Scholarships Portal 
NSQF National Skills Qualifications Framework 
OBC Other Backward Classes 
ODL Open and Distance Learning 
PAB Project Approval Board 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PM POSHAN Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman  
PM SHRI Prime Minister's Schools for Rising India 
PM-USHA Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
PMU Program Management Unit 
PM-USP Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Protsanhan 
PoP Point of Presence 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PTA Parent-Teacher Association 
PTR Pupil Teacher Ratio 
PWD Persons with Disabilities 
RC Refresher courses 
RCI Rehabilitation Council of India 
R&D Research and Development 
RIE Regional Institute of Education  
 
(v) 
  

 
 
RTE Right to Education  
RUSA Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
SAMARTH System for Assessment, Accreditation, and Rating of 
Transparency and Holistic Education 
SAARTHI Student Ambassador for Academic Reforms in 
Transforming Higher Education in India 
SARFAESI Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets 
and Enforcement of Security Interest 
SC Scheduled Caste(s) 
SEDG Socio-Economically Disadvantaged Group 
SLD Specific Learning Disabilities 
SMC School Management Committee 
SMDC School Management Development Committee 
SPA School of Planning and Architecture Delhi 
SPARC Scheme for promotion of Research and Academic 
Collaboration 
ST Scheduled Tribe(s) 
STARS Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research in 
Sciences 
STRIDE Scheme for Trans-Disciplinary Research for India’s 
Developing Economy 
STP Short Term Program 
SoP Standard Operating Procedure 
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics 
SWAYAM Study Webs of Active–Learning for Young Aspiring 
Minds 
SWAYAM 
PRABHA 
Study Webs of Active–Learning for Young Aspiring 
Minds- PRABHA 
UAY Uchchatar Avishkar Yojana 
UoS University of Southampton 
UDISE+ Unified District Information System for Education Plus 
UGC University Grants Commission 
ULBs Urban Local Bodies 
ULLAS Understanding of Lifelong Learning for All in Society 
UT Union Territory 
VC Vice Chancellor 
VSK Vidya Samiksha Kendra 
 
(vi) 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in its 356thReport on “Implementation of the National 
Education Policy, 2020 in Higher Education”, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Lok Sabha on 21st September, 2023. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations/Observations contained in the above 
mentioned Report were received from the Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education vide 
their communication dated 21st November, 2024. These have been categorized as follows:  
 
Chapter I: Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:  
Paras -  4.10.2, 4.10.3, 4.10.7, 4.10.9, 4.10.10, 4.10.11,  4.10.12,  4.10.13, 4.10.15, 4.10.16,  
4.10.20, 4.10.21, 4.10.23, 4.10.24, 4.10.26, 4.10.30 
Total - 16 
 
Chapter II: Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's 
replies: 
Paras - Nil 
Total - Nil 
 
Chapter III: Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee: 
Paras - 4.10.1, 4.10.4, 4.10.5, 4.10.6, 4.10.8, 4.10.14, 4.10.17-18, 4.10.19, 4.10.22, 
4.10.25, 4.10.27, 4.10.28, 4.10.29 
Total - 13 
 
Chapter-IV:  Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Paras - Nil 
Total - Nil 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee appreciates the manner in which the implementation of NEP and the vision it 
espouses is being taken forward by the UT of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee notes that the UT of 
J&K is one of the first in the country to implement NEP 2020 from the academic session 2022 in all the 
Higher Education Institutions. It also notes that it has been at the forefront in implementing NEP by 
bringing significant changes in the assessment system from rote learning to a competency based learning. 
Also, a paradigm shift in the methods of teaching in class room to learn from surroundings in order to 
give holistic and lifelong learning opportunities to students is being witnessed across J&K which will 
ensure sustained training of students as global citizens with 21st century skills and create a vibrant, 
innovative, practical and vocational skill set and research-oriented, learner-centric education system in 
our country. 
 (Para 4.10.2 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
2. The Committee is pleased to note that the University of Jammu has recently been designated as the 
nodal University by the University Grants Commission (UGC) to spearhead the implementation of the 
National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 in the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir as this distinction 
brings great pride and honour to the institution. Noting that the University of Jammu has been entrusted 
with the pivotal responsibility of executing the mandates set forth in the NEP, along with various 
recommendations and regulations outlined by the UGC, the Committee hopes that with this new role, the 
University of Jammu will be able play a central role in creating awareness, arranging programs, and 
offering guidance to higher education institutions within Jammu and Kashmir to effectively implement 
NEP, thereby providing a platform to exchange and adopt best practices.  
(Para 4.10.3 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Appreciation on the action taken by UT of J&K and University of Jammu is respectfully noted. 
 
Recommendation  
3. The Committee appreciates the steady progress in the field of higher education. The Committee 
recommends that the specific impetus is required to be assigned to factors which can help the country’s 
ranking in patent filing. Though the overall patent filing has improved significantly but more needs to be 
done by enhanced allocation for Anusandhan (Research). 
(Para 4.10.7 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 One of the principles of NEP 2020 is to develop culture of research and innovation in India HEIs. 
In order to achieve the global standard of quality and to foster the culture of research and innovation, 
several initiatives have been taken such as establishment of Research & Development Cell and 
Institution’s Innovation Councils (IIC) in the campus of HEIs which will enable attainment of targets of 
Atma-Nirbhar Bharat and is expected to play a pivotal role in catalysing multidisciplinary/ trans-
disciplinary and translational research culture. Around 2500 HEIs and 300 Universities have established 
R&D Cells at their campuses and 14518 IICs have been set up in 28 States and 9 UTs.   
IDEA Labs (Idea Development, Evaluation & Application) are also being set up for promoting 
multidisciplinary education & research, strong societal and industry linkage, new age learning and 

3 
 
encouraging STEM, experiential learning among faculty members and students. Around 113 HEIs funded 
for IDEA labs.  
Filing of patents increased by more than 93.65% in since 2014-15, rising to 82,811 in 2023 from 
42,763 in 2014 (IPO Annual Reports). 
Total Number of patents filed by Educational Institutes has risen to 19,430 in 2022-23 from 7501 
in 2021-22, which is an increase of around 159%.  
Number of patents filed by HEIs constitutes 23% of total patents filed.  
IITs collectively tops with 803 patent applications. 
CAR-T Cell Therapy - accessible & affordable cancer therapy has been developed by IITB & Tata 
Memorial Hospital in association with industry partner with Immune ACT and inaugurated on April 04, 
2024. 
Furthermore, under the Start-Up Indian Initiative in Higher Educational Institutions, Research 
Parks are being established at IITs. These Research Parks act as a focal point for Research and Incubation 
activities. 
Recommendation  
4. The Committee appreciates that the freedom being given to Indian universities to set up campuses 
in other countries and initiate start-up incubation centers, technology development centers and centers in 
frontier areas of research helps foster knowledge creation and innovation which will contribute to the 
growing national economy. In this regard the Committee also takes note of G20 New Delhi declarations 
that supported promoting open, equitable, and secure scientific collaboration and encouraging mobility 
of students, scholars, researchers and scientists across research and higher education institutions. The 
Declaration also emphasized on expanding access to high-quality technical and vocational education and 
training. The Committee is of the view that the expected benefits through these initiatives call for 
commitment of all stakeholders, be it the Department, regulatory bodies or Universities, educationists, 
and industries, so that, these innovative strategies in the areas of skill development, up-skilling and 
entrepreneurship bring the expected boost to create a knowledge society that contributes to global 
education, hence global good. The Committee further recommends that efforts, in unison, by both the 
Central and State Governments, would be necessary for successful implementation and sustenance of 
these policies and schemes. 
(Para 4.10.9 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 NEP 2020 envisions an education system rooted in Indian ethos that contributes directly to 
transforming India, that is Bharat, sustainably into an equitable and vibrant knowledge society, by 
providing high-quality education to all, and thereby making India a global knowledge superpower.  
NEP 2020 also envisions making the education student-centric. This is expected to be achieved by 
providing students with opportunities for multi-disciplinary and flexible education which gives them the 
ability to transition across courses as per their requirements. 
In order to enable HEIs to work with industry experts in developing courses and curriculum to 
meet the industry and societal needs, initiatives have been taken such as Guidelines on Professor of 
Practice; MoUs with Cisco/IBM/Meta/Adobe/Microsoft/Sales force etc. to create industry-aligned 
courses; offering Apprenticeship / Internship embedded Degree Programme by HEIs; Single Unified 
online portal for internship with total registration of around 10578 HEIs and 75585 industries so far. For 

4 
 
promotion of research and innovation, around 14518 Institutions’ Innovation Councils and around 113 
Idea Development, Evaluation and Application Labs (IDEA) have been set up. 
Recommendation  
5. Noting that the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 initiates several significant reforms to 
transform higher education in the country by promoting quality, relevance, and innovation in higher 
education, the Committee appreciates the various steps to promote the use of digital technologies in 
education, including the development of digital libraries& SWAYAM PRABHA portal. It is of the view 
that the recommendation for the creation of a National Educational Technology Forum (NETF) to equip 
students with the skills and knowledge necessary to contribute to the nation’s development and compete in 
the global job market can go a long way in expansion of digital infrastructure to make the country a 
Global Knowledge Hub thereby enhancing domain area of digital infrastructure, content and capacity 
building. 
 (Para 4.10.10 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
The foundation of the NEP 2020 framework rests upon ensuring education of high quality that is 
both affordable and accessible, while also promoting equity and accountability. The recommendations 
within NEP aim to revamp the regulatory structure, propelling India’s progression towards becoming a 
‘Global Knowledge Superpower’.  
The National Educational Technology Forum (NETF) operates as a specialized unit dedicated to 
e-Education. Its primary focus is to enhance digital infrastructure, develop digital content, and facilitate 
capacity building. By creating multilingual learning materials in various Indian regional languages and 
providing online technology solutions tailored to individual learner preferences, NETF aims to remove 
language and location barriers.  
NETF endeavours to establish an educational products and services marketplace. This platform 
will foster the exchange of ideas regarding technology’s role in improving learning, assessment, planning, 
and administration for School Education, Higher Education, and Skilling Initiatives. 
NETF aims to fulfil several pivotal roles within the Education Ecosystem, including serving as an 
advisor on critical issues aligned with NEP guidelines. Acting as a Think Tank, it will advise both the 
central and state governments on utilizing emerging technologies to achieve the goals set out by NEP 
2020. Additionally, it will facilitate the planning and execution of NEP objectives, oversee the 
fundamental components/modules of NDEAR (National Digital Education Architecture), and manage the 
adoption and lifecycle of educational digital infrastructure. Furthermore, it will take charge of the 
Operations & Maintenance of ongoing initiatives under larger educational schemes like NMEICT and 
DIKSHA.  
Recommendation  
6. The Committee observes that there is going to be significant impact of Digital Libraries on 
Knowledge Ecosystem as part of the NEP’s digitization agenda, digital libraries will play a crucial role 
in providing online access to an extensive range of digital resources, such as e-books, journals, articles, 
and multimedia content. These online platforms will enable students and educators to conveniently 
connect with educational materials at any time and from any location, while also offering a cost-effective 
means of providing the permit to top-notch educational content. The committee recommends that the 
department must ensure that the content on digital library should also be available in regional languages 
for better reach out and learning outcome.  
 (Para 4.10.11 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 

5 
 
Action Taken 
 Taking forward National Education Policy’s digitization agenda The National Digital Library of 
India (NDLI) stands as a flagship initiative under the National Mission on Education through Information 
and Communication Technology (NMEICT) Project, crafted by the Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur in collaboration with the Ministry of Education. Functioning as a comprehensive repository, 
NDLI is an invaluable asset benefiting students, scholars, and enthusiastic learners, offering a diverse 
array of digital resources encompassing books, articles, journals, and educational videos. By 
consolidating digitized and digital content from various educational institutions nationwide, NDLI 
furnishes a unified platform facilitating e-learning. Its scope extends to delivering educational materials in 
multiple languages, across all academic disciplines, accessible through various devices, with plans in the 
pipeline to accommodate learners with different abilities.  
Presently, NDLI’s user interface accommodates English and ten additional Indian languages, 
including Hindi, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu, among others, with ongoing efforts to 
incorporate more languages into its interface.  
Further, an initiative i.e. e-KUMBH (Knowledge Unleashed in Multiple Bhartiya Languages) 
Portal has been launched by AICTE. It is a repository of Engineering Books in different Indian 
Languages. 
Also Bhartiya Bhasha Sansthan is developing App named “Bhasha Sagar’ for language learning 
(270 Indian languages). 
Recommendation  
7. The Committee recommends that the Department and related stakeholders should prioritize the 
implementation of digital initiatives to ensure that every student, regardless of their background or 
location, has reach to quality education. In addition, policies that encourage the adoption of digital 
technologies in education should be framed, and both students and teachers should be provided adequate 
training for their use. 
 (Para 4.10.12 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Dedicated efforts for student learning support have been undertaken by NCERT such as 
ePathshala portal (https://epathshala.nic.in/) and mobile app platform to provide free access to the 
NCERT books and e-content for students, teachers and parents. NCERT textbooks are also available in 
audio format (https://ciet.nic.in/pages.php?id=audiobook&ln=en&ln=en). Supplementary reading material 
has also been developed by NCERT. 
In order to promote digital learning by leveraging technology, at present, 95 HEIs are offering 
1149 ODL programmes and 78 Higher Educational Institutions are offering 544 online programmes. 
More than 19 lakh students are availing these facilities.  
Technology enabled Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) based Solutions for Governance of HEIs 
starting from admission to grant of Degree – Smarter Automation Engine for Universities (SAMARTH) is 
being extensively used by   around 5300 Universities & HEIs covering 32 States/UTs. 7 State Higher 
Education Departments are also on boarded. In addition, The National Digital Library of India (NDLI) is 
providing e-learning content in form of books, articles, journals and educational videos in English and ten 
additional Indian languages including Hindi, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu among others 
to provide excess to quality education to students from every part of the country. 
 

6 
 
Recommendation  
8. The Committee also recommends that requisite efforts be made so that these knowledge 
ecosystems carry flexibility so that it can be tailored to fit the unique learning requirements of individual 
students, allowing them to learn at their own pace and in a style that suits them best, so that, Digital 
libraries offer a cost-effective means of accessing high-quality educational content, which can help to 
lower the overall cost of education and make it more accessible and affordable to a wider range of 
students. 
(Para 4.10.13 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 The National Digital Library of India (NDLI) stands as a flagship initiative under the National 
Mission on Education through Information and Communication Technology (NMEICT) Project, crafted 
by the Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur in collaboration with the Ministry of Education. 
Functioning as a comprehensive repository, NDLI is an invaluable asset benefiting students, scholars, and 
enthusiastic learners, offering a diverse array of digital resources encompassing books, articles, journals, 
and educational videos. By consolidating digitized and digital content from various educational 
institutions nationwide, NDLI furnishes a unified platform facilitating e-learning. Its scope extends to 
delivering educational materials in multiple languages, across all academic disciplines, accessible through 
various devices, with plans in the pipeline to accommodate learners with different abilities.  
Presently, NDLI’s user interface accommodates English and ten additional Indian languages, 
including Hindi, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Marathi, Telugu, among others, with ongoing efforts to 
incorporate more languages into its interface. 
UGC has also notified (Credit Framework for Online Learning Courses through Study Webs of 
Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) Regulations, 2021 on 25th March, 2021. Through these 
regulations, which now facilitate an institution to allow upto 40% (forty per cent.) of the total courses 
being offered in a particular programme in a semester through the online learning courses offered through 
SWAYAM Platform. The credits/marks obtained by the candidate enrolled in universities for SWAYAM 
Certificate will be counted in the transcript of the Candidate, only if the University has adopted MOOCs 
Courses offered on SWAYAM Platform for Credit Transfer as per the UGC (Credit Framework for 
Online Learning Courses through Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) 
Regulations, 2021. 
Recommendation  
9. The Committee is of the view that technology can play a pivotal role in accelerating the 
implementation of initiatives outlined in NEP 2020 in higher education institutions in India. The 
Committee recommends that by adopting and harnessing the power of modern cloud based technologies 
with amalgamation of data, higher education institutions can create a more efficient, transparent, and 
student-centric ecosystem. These technologies have the potential to revolutionize credentialing, 
personalize learning, improve student outcomes, streamline administrative processes, enhance research 
capabilities, and foster innovation. Integrating technology aligns with the vision of NEP 2020, promoting 
a future-ready education system that equips students with the skills and knowledge needed in the 21st 
century.      
(Para 4.10.15 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
 
 
 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 Adoption of the technology in the teaching learning and for administration of the Higher 
Education as recommended by the Committee is underway.  
SWAYAM Courses are designed and delivered by faculty members from the best institutions 
(CUs, IITs, IIMs), ensuring a high standard of education. Most of the SWAYAM Courses are of 1 to 4 
Credits, and are aligned to National Credit Framework for online learning courses.  
UGC has notified (Credit Framework for Online Learning Courses through Study Webs of Active 
Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) Regulations, 2021 on 25th March, 2021. Through these regulations, 
which now facilitate an institution to allow upto 40% (forty per cent.) of the total courses being offered in 
a particular programme in a semester through the online learning courses offered through SWAYAM 
Platform. The credits/marks obtained by the candidate enrolled in universities for SWAYAM Certificate 
will be counted in the transcript of the Candidate, only if the University has adopted MOOCs Courses 
offered on SWAYAM Platform for Credit Transfer as per the UGC (Credit Framework for Online 
Learning Courses through Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) Regulations, 2021. 
In order to promote digital learning by leveraging technology, at present, 95 HEIs are offering 
1149 ODL programmes and 78 Higher Educational Institutions are offering 544 online programmes. 
More than 19 lakh students are availing these facilities.  
Technology enabled Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP based Solutions for Governance of HEIs 
starting from admission to grant of Degree – Smarter Automation Engine for Universities (SAMARTH) is 
being extensively used by   around 5300 Universities & HEIs covering 32 States/UTs. 7 State Higher 
Education Departments are also onboarded. 
SWAYAM+ has also been launched 27.02.2024 which is the extended arm of the SWAYAM Platform to 
offer the Industry aligned credit courses curated and delivered by Industry Professionals, enabling 
Industry Academia Collaboration. More than 1.10 Lakh students across 231 courses are registered on the 
platform; SWAYAM Plus has MoUs with 54 Industry Partners covering emerging areas such as Artificial 
Intelligence, Manufacturing, Healthcare etc. More than 11,500 Internships also offered on the platform in 
collaboration with Internshala. 
Recommendation  
10. The Committee notes and appreciates the emphasis that the National Education Policy 2020 
(NEP) places on internationalisation stating that ‘High performing Indian universities will be encouraged 
to set up campuses in other countries, and similarly, selected universities e.g., those from among the top 
100 universities in the world will be facilitated to operate in India’. Further the Committee appreciates 
that the UGC’s draft regulations on ‘Setting up and Operation of Foreign Higher Educational Institutions 
in India’ have been issued which is a good step forward in the entire reform process. 
(Para 4.10.16 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Appreciation by the Committee is received and noted. 
It is further added that to promote internationalization, Regulation on Setting up and Operation of 
Campuses of Foreign Higher Educational Institutions in India, 2023 have been issued by UGC in 
November, 2023. Also, Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for setting up of campus of IIT Madras in 
Zanzibar-Tanzania was signed on 05.07.2023 between the Ministry of Education, Govt. of India, IIT 
Madras and Ministry of Education and Vocational Training (MoEVT) Zanzibar-Tanzania. Classes have 
commenced in campus of IIT Madras at Zanzibar-Tanzania. Another MoU was signed on 15.07.2023 
between the Ministry of Education, Abu Dhabi Department of Education and Knowledge (ADEK), and 

8 
 
the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi (IIT Delhi) to establish 1st Campus of IIT Delhi in Abu Dhabi.  
Classes commenced in January, 2024. 
Similarly, Letter of Intent (LoI) was issued to the University of Southampton (UoS), UK, to 
establish their first-ever campus in India. UoS is ranked among the top 100 Higher Educational 
Institutions globally.  
Setting up of campus in GIFT City, Gandhinagar - Campuses of Deakins and Wollongong 
Universities from Australia established in GIFT City. (Coventry University from UK being explored) 
Recommendation  
11. The Committee observes that implementation of the Multi Entry and Multiple Exit (MEME) 
options within the framework of the National Education Policy (NEP) is a vital component of NEP 2020, 
offering students greater flexibility and choice in their educational pathways. In order to ensure its 
smooth operation, the Committee recommends that the Department should develop comprehensive 
guidelines and a well-defined framework for MEME options including specific eligibility criteria, credit 
transfer mechanisms providing clear roadmap for students pursuing different exit points. Also, 
implementation of a standardized Credit Accumulation and Transfer (CAT) system that allows students to 
earn and transfer credits seamlessly across institutions would facilitate smooth transitions between 
different levels of education, from certificate courses to doctoral programs. In this regard the Committee 
appreciates the introduction of Academic Bank of Credit (ABC) in the higher education system. It is 
commendable that already more than 50% of the Universities in the country are now on- board. The 
Committee recommends the Department to strive for bringing on-board the remaining Universities and 
other Higher Education Institutions of the country under Academic Bank of Credit. 
(Para 4.10.20 of  the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Guidelines for Multiple Entry and Exit in Academic Programmes offered in the HEIs issued on 
28.07.2021, Regulation on Academic Bank of Credit issued on 28.07.2021 and further amended on 
28.12.2021, National Credit Framework (NCrF) released on 10.04.2023, National Higher Education 
Qualification Framework (NHEQF) released on 11.05.2023, Guidelines for Transforming Higher 
Education Institutions into Multidisciplinary Institutions issued on 02.09.2022  and Curriculum and 
Credit Framework for Undergraduate Programs issued on 12.12.2022, in conjunction with each other 
provides a framework for  multi-disciplinary holistic education at the undergraduate level with 
imaginative and flexible curricular structures, creative combinations of study, integration of vocational 
education, enabling education system, that nurtures and optimises individual potentials, provides multiple 
pathways and learning trajectories, lifelong learning etc. 
For Operationalisation of National Credit Framework (NCrF) in Higher Education, Standard 
Operating Procedure (SoP) has been issued.  The SOPs provides a clear guideline to facilitate the 
assignment, accumulation, storage, transfer, and redemption of such credits across school, higher, and 
vocational education and training and also advocates for multiple entry and exit points, recognition of 
prior learning, and work-embedded programs, enabling learners to acquire skills that integrate smoothly 
into formal education. The SOPs will empower educational institutions to serve as hubs for skill 
development, offering diverse learning pathways for students. 
2157 HEIs have onboarded ABC platform and more than 30 crore students have created 
APAARIDs on ABC platform to avail its benefits. 
 

9 
 
Recommendation  
12. The Committee is of the view that efforts towards improving the effectiveness and impact of the 
Higher Education Financing Agency (HEFA) in playing a crucial role in funding and supporting higher 
education institutions would prove beneficial. Towards this aim, the Committee recommends that HEFA 
can consider diversifying its funding sources beyond Government allocations, explore partnerships with 
private sector organizations, philanthropic foundations, and international financial institutions to 
increase the available funds. Also, collaboration with higher education institutions to create long-term 
investment plans that align with their strategic goals and national educational priorities besides ensuring 
that investments are directed toward areas that enhance academic quality, research capabilities, and 
student outcomes can be promoted.  
(Para 4.10.21 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 To widen the scope of HEFA, the existing Window structure has been modified and all types of 
institutions, including IIMs and IIIT (PPP), have been brought under the scope of HEFA.  
HEFA has been mandated to mobilise the fund from the market as per the actual requirements 
through debt from financial institutions and equity from the market. Depending upon the requirement, 
HEFA borrow money from the financial institutions like Public Sector Banks from time to time.  
In order to hand hold the institution in formulating the DPR for creation of infrastructure, HEFA 
has established a dedicated PMU which will help the institution in preparation of the DPR. 
Recommendation  
13. The Committee recommends the Department and UGC to expedite the process of engagement of 
"Professor of Practice" in HEIs as envisaged in the National Education Policy 2020 to ensure greater 
collaboration between academia and industry for promoting holistic and multidisciplinary education with 
focus on creativity, innovation and employability. 
 (Para 4.10.23 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
UGC has issued Guidelines for Engaging Professor of Practice in Universities and Colleges as 
envisaged in the National Education Policy 2020 to bring the industry and other professional expertise 
into the academic institutions. This will help to take real world practices and experiences into the class 
rooms and also augment the faculty resources in higher education institutions. In turn, the industry and 
society will benefit from trained graduates equipped with the relevant skills.  
UGC has also developed a portal for Professor of Practice for the benefit of potential aspirants and 
institutes looking for professor of practice. So far 15560 domain Experts and 465 Higher Education 
Institutions have registered on the Professor of Practice Portal of the UGC. 696 PoPs have been appointed 
by 422 HEIs.   
Recommendation  
14. The Committee appreciates the following efforts taken by department to introduce Indian 
Knowledge System (IKS) in higher education as envisaged by NEP 2020.  
(i)  AICTE has permitted 41 Engineering Courses in 8 regional languages  
(ii)  MBBS Course has been started in Hindi  

10 
 
(iii)  Common University Entrance Test conducted in 13 Languages and participated by 90 
Universities.  
(iv)  JEE (Mains) and NEET (UG) conducted in 13 languages across the country.  
(v)  Provision of awarding minor degree to students who completes 18 to 20 credits in IKS has 
been made.  
(vi)  Funded 36 high end interdisciplinary research projects (Calls for up to 70 research 
projects in 9 thematic areas are out now and results will be declared on 30th November, 
2022).  
(vii)  More than 25 IKS Centers have been established  
(viii)  64 high end interdisciplinary research projects are undergoing  
(ix)  More than 8000 HEIs have started adopting IKS into their curriculum and digitization of 
1.5 lakh books. 
(Para 4.10.24 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 It is submitted that apart from these stated initiatives, UGC has launched a training program to 
integrate Bharatiya Jnana Parampara (IKS) into classroom teaching and research for HEI faculty. 
Around 1000 faculty members have already been trained in six HRDC/MMTTCs of UGC 
concerning this matter. 
Out of the 1000 faculty members, 250 have been selected for Masters’ training through an 
examination. 
1.45 lakh faculty members have undertaken capacity building programs in 136 MMTTCs across 
India under NEP Orientation and Sensitization, Faculty Induction Program (FIP) / Short Term Program 
(STP) / Refresher courses (RC) & other components. 
The faculty members who attended Masters' Training will be involved in training IKS for other 
HEI faculty members across the country. 
The no. of IKS Centers has increased to 51.   
 
Recommendation  
15. The Committee observes and appreciates that there has been a gradual increase in the Gross 
Enrollment Ratio (GER) for all students and it has risen from 24.1% in 2016-17 to 27.3% in 2020-21. 
The Committee further observes that GER for ST and SC students has also risen from 2016-17 to 2020-
21.The GER for ST students also increased from 20.3% to 23.1%, while the GER for SC students 
increased from 14.8% to 18.9%. The committee also appreciates the efforts of the department like 
SWAYAM PRABHA & Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) in order to achieve a robust GER. 
(Para 4.10.26 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee respectfully noted. 
Recommendation  
16. The Committee takes note of the fact that banks cannot enforce SARFAESI Act in case of default 
by borrower as same may jeopardize the careers of students (As per the submission given by the banks). 
The Committee, recommends that banks must take note of the Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for 
Education Loan (CGFSEL) launched by the Department of Higher Education, Govt. of India in 2015 
which provides a guarantee of education loan up to INR 7.5 lakhs. The Committee also recommends that 

11 
 
the Ministry of Education in consultation with the Ministry of Finance should look into a proposal to 
increase the guarantee amount under this scheme. 
(Para 4.10.30 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 The “Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for Education Loans (CGFSEL)” was notified on 
16.09.2015. Under the CGFSEL, Central Government gives guarantee for the education loans availed by 
students without any collateral security and third-party guarantee for a maximum loan limit of Rs. 7.5 
Lakh. The Fund provides guarantee cover to the extent of 75% of the amount in default through the 
National Credit Guarantee Trustee Company Ltd. (NCGTC). For this, the banks disbursing education 
loans need to register them with the NCGTC as per scheme guidelines. 
New Initiative: To spread out reach of the scheme, Department of Higher Education vide notification 
dated 18.04.2023, has included 27 Regional Rural Banks under the scheme. 

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
 
-NIL-

13 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee observes that through various appreciable activities, the implementation of the 
National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 is progressing on course which would surely fructify its vision to 
transform the higher education system to be more inclusive, flexible, and aligned with global standards. 
The Committee notes that one of the primary keys to ensure successful implementation of NEP would be 
synergized collaboration between Government bodies, universities, industry partners, and civil society.  
(Para 4.10.1 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Education being in the concurrent list of Constitution, Centre and States are equally responsible 
for providing quality education to all. To discuss innovative ideas for NEP implementation, a series of 
workshops / consultation-cum-review meetings have been held with States/UTs from time to time and 
also implementation of NEP 2020 was discussed in National Education Ministers' Conference held in 
Gujarat in June 2022; National Conference of Chief Secretaries held in June 2022; 7th Governing Council 
Meeting of NITI Aayog held in August 2022; Akhil Bharatiya Shiksha Samagam 2022, 2023 and 2024 
etc.  
National Workshop on Higher and Technical Education with the Secretaries of States / UTs 
covering various themes of NEP, 2020 was organised on 12th and 13th November 2024 in New Delhi 
NEP, 2020 inter-alia stipulates implementation of various aims, objects and goals with the active 
participation of stakeholders viz. local community, social workers, counsellors, educators, NGOs, peers 
and parents, senior citizens, students, alumni, principals, serving and retired faculty & teachers, 
vocational experts, local artists, industry, philanthropic organisations etc. 
In order to facilitate the universities to develop a road map for the effective implementation of 
NEP 2020, UGC has constituted five zonal Committees (Southern, Northern, Western, North Eastern and 
Eastern and Central Zone) having Vice Chancellors of Central Universities, State Universities, Private 
Universities and Deemed to be Universities. The Committees coordinate with HEIs of the Zones and 
guide them to adopt various initiatives for qualitative transformation of higher education, deliberate upon 
the strategies for implementation of NEP and challenges therein and share best practices. 
So far, VC’s conferences have been conducted in Western, Northern, Southern zone and Central 
Zone. As a special case, a conference was held at IIM Jammu, Jammu, on 23.2.2024 specifically for the 
UTs of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh. 
Several initiatives have been taken for implementation of NEP 2020 to revamp the School 
Education as well as Higher Education system have been appreciated and widely accepted by the States / 
UTs, Schools / Colleges / Universities / HEIs. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee has observed that a “synergized collaboration” between stakeholders is 
required for the successful implementation of the NEP. In response, the Ministry has rightly noted 
that Education is in the concurrent list of the Constitution. It is therefore critical to have the 
complete confidence of the States to successfully advance the vision of the NEP. However, the 

14 
 
Ministry’s answer has not touched on the modalities as to how the Union Government is working 
with State Governments that have expressed reservations about various elements of the NEP in 
Higher Education. Hence, the Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry must develop a 
mechanism to coordinate with the States on any such concerns that they may have shared.  
The Committee desires that the Ministry should share a report of the Zonal Committee’s 
operations, including the Conferences held in various zones, with the Committee. 
The Committee recommends that a centralized nationwide tracker at the university-level 
should be developed to track progress on NEP implementation in higher education.  
Recommendation  
2. The Committee takes note and appreciates the introduction of “Design Your Degree” based on 
Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) launched by Jammu University under which students will be offered 
an opportunity to craft a personalized, interdisciplinary learning experience. The Committee further 
observes that “Design Your Degree” will also be introduced in Kashmir University, IUST Awantipora, 
ICSC Srinagar, GCW Parade Jammu, which is commendable. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Department should take initiatives for introduction of “Design Your Degree” programme in 
various other HEIs in the country, as a model contemporary and futuristic in the interest of the student 
community and nation readiness. It will enable the students to craft a personalized, interdisciplinary 
learning experience.  
(Para 4.10.4 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 One of the fundamental principles of the National Education Policy 2020 (NEP 2020) is 
flexibility, so that learners have the ability to choose their learning trajectories and programmes, and 
thereby choose their own paths in life according to their talents and interests. 
Accordingly, UGC has framed the Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate 
Programmes which promotes holistic and multidisciplinary education. It allows students to explore 
different subjects in the first year and provides an opportunity to continue with the same subject or change 
of subject at the end of 2nd semester. All universities and colleges have been requested to adopt 
Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate Programmes 
Also, National Credit Framework jointly developed by University Grants Commission (UGC), All 
India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), National Council for Vocational Education & Training 
(NCVET), National Institute of Open Schooling(NIOS), Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), 
National Council of Education, Research & Training (NCERT), Directorate General of Training (DGT), 
Ministry of Education (MoE) and Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship(MSDE) is a 
comprehensive credit framework encompassing elementary, school, higher and vocational education and 
training incorporating creditization of various dimensions of learning i.e. academics, vocational skills and 
Experiential learning including relevant experience and proficiency/professional levels acquired. It 
encompasses qualifications frameworks as prescribed in National Higher Education Qualifications 
Framework (NHEQF), National Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) and National Curriculum 
Framework (NCF), thereby providing broad-based multi-disciplinary / inter-disciplinary, holistic 
education with flexible curricula, creative combination of subjects, multiple pathways, establishing 
equivalence, facilitate national and international mobility. 
Several other initiatives to ensure flexibility have been taken such as setting up of Academic Bank 
of Credit, Guidelines for Multiple Entry and Exit in Academic Programmes offered in the HEIs to pave 
the way for seamless student mobility, between or within degree-granting HEIs and facilitate students to 

15 
 
choose their learning trajectory; Guidelines for pursuing two Academic Programmes simultaneously to 
facilitate multiple pathways to learning involving both formal and non-formal education modes trajectory; 
Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate Programs to facilitate flexibility to move from one 
discipline of study to another, one institution to another, switch to alternative modes of learning (offline, 
ODL, and Online learning, and hybrid modes of learning). 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee had specifically recommended that the Design Your Degree programme be 
adopted in other HEIs in the country. The Ministry’s response has neglected to express the extent 
to which this has been followed. The Committee therefore, suggest the Ministry to share a 
compliance report regarding the same at the earliest.  
Recommendation  
3. The Committee is of the view that under the Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) 
Scheme, strategic funding to higher educational institutions based on critical appraisal of State’s higher 
educational plans which describe each State’s strategy to address issues of equity, access and excellence 
in higher education can go a long way in pushing NEP’s aims. Key features of the Scheme like up-
gradation of existing autonomous colleges to universities, conversion of colleges to cluster colleges with 
revamping the curriculum, skill development, examination reform, upgrading institutions to higher level 
and strategic funding should be the special focus of the UGC. 
(Para 4.10.5 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Under the Scheme of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA), a total number of 208 
Universities have been approved for support under various components. The third phase of Rashtriya 
Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) has been approved in the form of Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha 
Abhiyan (PM-USHA) with an outlay of Rs. 12926.10 crore for the period 2023-24 to 2025-26.  
An amount of Rs. 5,613.12Crore approved for 440 projects by the 1st and 2nd PAB of PM-USHA. 
So far, 31 States/ UTs signed MoU under PM-USHA. 
As per the guidelines of the scheme of Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (PM-USHA), 
for each component, various criteria have been given on the basis of which scoring of the proposals can 
be done. Among the list of such indicators, percentage of faculty positions filled in regular mode are 
included where institutions with more than 75% positions filled will get the highest score under the 
components of Multi-Disciplinary Education and Research Universities (MERU) and Grants to 
Strengthen Universities. Institutions with more than 85% positions filled will get the highest score under 
the component of Grants to Strengthen Colleges. However, other institutions which have lesser faculty 
positions filled are also eligible under the components but will get their corresponding score. Currently 
there is no proposal under consideration to change this criterion. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee’s recommendations had called for “up-gradation of existing autonomous 
colleges to universities, conversion of colleges to cluster colleges with revamping the curriculum, 
skill development, examination reform, upgrading institutions to higher level. Given the PM-USHA 
Scheme’s budget allocations, it doesn’t appear that current funding is sufficient to meet these goals. 
Therefore, an enhanced budget is necessary to meet the goals of the NEP in higher education. 
Furthermore, as mentioned, only rewards the HEIs have adequate staff and enable them to make 
even greater investments at a time when there is a need for broader-based investments across the 

16 
 
spectrum of HEIs. The Committee therefore, recommends that a parallel scheme to support HEIs, 
particularly those in Aspirational districts and catering to marginalised communities, with faculty 
recruitment and other investments should be formulated. The Committee also desires that details 
on the States/UTs which have not signed the PM-USHA MoU and what action the Ministry has 
taken to support HEIs in such states should be furnished at the earliest for its consideration.  
Recommendation  
4. The Committee hopes that the steps that the Department is taking as per NEP will be able to 
actively enhance engagement and find a connect with the industry and Higher Educational Institutions 
(HEIs), through which they can experiment, pitch ideas and deploy them bringing a close alignment in the 
practices of academia thereby synchronizing innovation and research with the need of the time and 
industry to achieve objective of real change. 
(Para 4.10.6 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 To benefit for India’s demographic dividend, the focus is on making Indian population skill ready 
by enhancing greater linkages between industry and academia. To this effect, guidelines on ‘Professor of 
Practice’ through which industry experts are being engaged with HEIs in developing courses and 
curriculum to meet the industry as well as societal needs. A portal to facilitate engagement of Professor of 
Practice in HEIs has been developed. Under this, 15560 domain experts across 23 domains and 465 HEIs 
have registered on the portal. 696 PoPs have been appointed by 422 HEIs. MoUs have been signed with 
leading companies such as CISCO/ IBM/ Meta/ Adobe/ Microsoft/Sales force to create industry aligned 
courses. 
SWAYAM Courses are designed and delivered by faculty members from the best institutions 
(CUs, IITs, IIMs), ensuring a high standard of education. Most of the SWAYAM Courses are of 1 to 4 
Credits, and are aligned to National Credit Framework for online learning courses.  
UGC has notified (Credit Framework for Online Learning Courses through Study Webs of Active 
Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) Regulations, 2021 on 25th March, 2021. Through these regulations, 
which now facilitate an institution to allow up to 40% (forty per cent.) of the total courses being offered in 
a particular programme in a semester through the online learning courses offered through SWAYAM 
Platform. The credits/marks obtained by the candidate enrolled in universities for SWAYAM Certificate 
will be counted in the transcript of the Candidate, only if the University has adopted MOOCs Courses 
offered on SWAYAM Platform for Credit Transfer as per the UGC (Credit Framework for Online 
Learning Courses through Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds) Regulations, 2021. 
SWAYAM+ has also been launched 27.02.2024 which is the extended arm of the SWAYAM 
Platform to offer the Industry aligned credit courses curated and delivered by Industry Professionals, 
enabling Industry Academia Collaboration. More than 1.10 lakh students across 231 courses are 
registered on the platform; SWAYAM Plus has MoUs with 54 Industry Partners covering emerging areas 
such as Artificial Intelligence, Manufacturing, Healthcare etc. More than 11,500 Internships also offered 
on the platform in collaboration with internshala. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee notes the various steps taken by the Ministry to support industry-academia 
participation. It further notes that many of these initiatives however center on digital platforms and 
learning. Such a reliance on digital learning requires substantial and regular quality checks and 
impact assessments to ensure these interventions are having the anticipated effect on students. The 

17 
 
Committee desires that the Ministry should share a report of any assessments or feedback 
gathering that has been conducted on the platforms mentioned in its response for its consideration.  
Recommendation  
5. The Committee appreciates the manner in which the NEP 2020 places thrust on developing a 
student’s ‘Creative Potential’ based on higher-order cognitive capacities and to cultivate innovation and 
creativity in learners through industry-institution linkages and collaborative programme. Noting that the 
NEP prioritizes research and innovation with financial commitment to academic research, the Committee 
observes that promoting thought-provoking research is a pre-requisite for outstanding education and will 
surely transform India into a vibrant knowledge society. 
(Para 4.10.8 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 NEP 2020 inter-alia envisions a complete overhaul and re-energising of the higher education 
system to provide high-quality higher education, with equity and inclusion. One of its visions is to 
develop culture of research and innovation in India by establishing a National Research Foundation to 
fund outstanding peer-reviewed research and to actively seed research in universities and colleges. To 
propel Bharat towards scientific & technology leadership Anusandhan National Research Foundation 
(ANRF) has been set up under ANRF Act 2023 under Deptt. of Science & Technology. 
Also, UGC has finalized guidelines on Sustainable and Vibrant University-Industry Linkage 
System for Indian Universities. UGC has also requested all the Higher Education Institutions in its 
purview to take necessary action for the implementation of the guidelines in letter and spirit. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee notes the setting up the ANRF to support research and innovation in higher 
education. However, it is concerned by the ANRF’s limited focus on science, technology, 
agriculture, and health technology. The Committee’s recommendation on support research was 
broad-based in its spirit, and included humanities and social sciences research which play an 
extremely important role in social, cultural, and economic progress. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends a parallel initiative to support humanities and social sciences research in higher 
education.  
Recommendation  
6. The Committee is of the view that proper involvement of the student community, incorporation of 
their feedback and suggestions towards the changes proposed in NEP will help institutions in orienting 
students faster and in a more effective way which will be helpful in creating institutional mechanisms to 
handle student’s queries on issues such as Academic Bank of Credits (ABC), Multiple Entry and Exit 
system and generate beneficial results in terms of acceptance and smoother implementation. In the early 
stages the learning has to be a both way process for a substantive evolution and successful 
implementation. 
(Para 4.10.14 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Government has been undertaking comprehensive consultation process with the stake holders after 
announcement of NEP, 2020 to address various issues.  

18 
 
UGC has announced NEP-SAARTHI – Student Ambassador for Academic Reforms in 
Transforming Higher Education in India with a view to bring students together as active participants in 
implementing NEP 2020.  Through NEP SAARTHI, the UGC aims to foster an environment where 
students can engage meaningfully with the reforms undertaken by the UGC. 
Presently, 855 NEP SAARTHIs from 309 Higher Educational Institutions have been selected.  
The list of the NEP SAARTHIs has been posted on the website. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee notes the identification of the NEP Saarthis as a positive development in 
implementing the NEP. The Committee desires that the Ministry should share a report on the 
activities undertaken by the NEP Saarthis and would recommend the use of the NEP Saarthis to 
collect feedback on the implementation of the NEP.  
Recommendation  
7. Taking note of some of the observations of IRMA, the Committee is of the view that the successful 
implementation of initiatives to enhance access to education for marginalized communities is not only a 
moral imperative but also essential for the inclusive and sustainable development so that education 
becomes a powerful tool for uplifting all segments of society, regardless of their socio-economic status or 
background. The Committee, therefore, recommends for implementation of certain specific initiatives 
aimed at enhancing access to education for marginalized communities in accordance with the National 
Education Policy (NEP) 2020 so that its thrust on inclusivity and equitability for all segments of society 
gets requisite boost:  
i.  Comprehensive Awareness Campaigns: Launch comprehensive awareness campaigns 
targeting marginalized communities to inform them about the importance of education and 
the opportunities provided by the NEP 2020. These campaigns should be conducted in 
local languages and dialects, utilizing various media channels including television, radio, 
print, and social media. Collaboration with local community leaders and organizations to 
maximize outreach would also be helpful.  
ii.  Infrastructure Development: Invest in buildings and upgrading educational infrastructure 
in underserved areas, with particular focus on remote villages and urban slums. Ensure 
that schools are accessible, safe, and well-equipped to provide quality education. Allocate 
sufficient funds to address the specific needs of schools catering to marginalized 
communities.  
iii.  Teacher Training and Recruitment: Develop specialized training programs for teachers 
who work in marginalized communities. These programs should emphasize inclusive and 
culturally sensitive teaching methods, as well as provide incentives to attract qualified 
educators to these areas. Implement a transparent and efficient teacher recruitment 
process that prioritizes diversity.  
iv.  Scholarship and Financial Support: Establish a robust scholarship and financial support 
system to mitigate economic barriers to education. Scholarships should be designed to 
address the unique needs of marginalized communities, including those from economically 
disadvantaged backgrounds, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, and other vulnerable 
groups. Streamline the application process to make it user-friendly and accessible.  
v.  Digital Inclusivity: Recognize the importance of digital education in the current context 
and work towards providing marginalized communities with access to digital resources. 

19 
 
Equip schools with computer labs and ensure affordable internet connectivity in these 
areas. 
vi.  Develop and distribute educational content tailored to local needs and languages.  
vii.  Community Engagement: Encourage active involvement of the local community in the 
education process. Establish Parent-Teacher Associations (PTAs) and involve them in 
institution decision-making. Promote community-driven initiatives to support education, 
such as adult literacy programs and community libraries.  
viii.  Monitoring and Evaluation: Implement a robust monitoring and evaluation system to track 
the progress and impact of initiatives aimed at enhancing access to education for 
marginalized communities. Regularly collect data on enrollment, attendance, and learning 
outcomes, disaggregated by demographic factors, and disseminate it to identify areas 
needing improvement.  
ix.  Policy Adaptation: Continuously review and adapt policies to address the evolving needs 
and challenges faced by marginalized communities. Establish a feedback mechanism that 
allows stakeholders from these communities to provide input and suggestions for policy 
improvements.  
x.  Collaboration and Partnerships: Foster collaborations with Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs), civil society organizations, and international agencies that have 
expertise in promoting education for marginalized communities. Leverage their resources 
and knowledge to enhance the effectiveness of education initiatives.  
xi.  Research and Innovation: Encourage research and innovation in the field of education for 
marginalized communities. Support studies that identify best practices and innovative 
approaches to address the unique challenges faced by these communities in accessing 
quality education. 
(Para 4.10.17-18 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
(i)  A number of outreach activities have been undertaken for awareness about National 
Education Policy 2020 by different implementing and regulatory bodies under Ministry of 
Education. Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education organized a short 
Video competition on the implementation of NEP, titled "NEP ki Samajh" from 
15.06.2023 to 14.07.2023, aiming to encourage young people to tap into their creativity to 
compose and submit short videos about their experiences with NEP 2020. 
(ii)  Samagra Shiksha scheme is an integrated scheme for school education covering the entire 
gamut from pre-school to class XII as a continuum. The scheme not only provides support 
for the implementation of the RTE Act but has also been aligned with the 
recommendations of NEP 2020 to ensure that all children have access to quality education 
with an equitable and inclusive classroom environment which should take care of their 
diverse background, multilingual needs, different academic abilities and make them active 
participants in the learning process. 
The major interventions, across all levels of school education, under the Samagra Shiksha scheme 
are: (a) Early Childhood Care and Education (b) Foundational Literacy and Numeracy (c) Universal 
Access including Infrastructure Development and Retention; (d) RTE Entitlements including uniforms, 
textbooks etc. (e) Quality and Innovation (f) Financial support for Teacher Salary (g) Appointment of 
language Teachers (h) Gender and Equity (i) Inclusive Education (j) Strengthening of Teacher Education 

20 
 
Institutions and Training (k) Vocational Education (l) ICT and Digital Initiatives (m) Sports and Physical 
Education (n) Monitoring and Programme Management and (o) National Component. 
In order to meet the RTE norms and to minimize the gaps in Schools, the Central Government, 
through integrated centrally sponsored scheme of Samagra Shiksha, provides support to the States and 
UTs for creation of school infrastructure facilities and opening/ upgradation of schools as per gaps 
identified from school mapping. As per norms of the Samagra Shiksha scheme, the annual plan are 
prepared by the States and UTs as per their requirements/priority and is reflected in their respective 
Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWP&B) Proposals. These plans are then appraised and 
approved/estimated by the Project Approval Board (PAB) in the Department of School Education and 
Literacy in consultation with the States and UTs as per the programmatic and financial norms of the 
scheme and physical and financial progress of the State for the interventions approved earlier. 
(iii)  With regard to Teacher Education and Training, All 613 functional DIETs in the country 
will be upgraded into DIETs of Excellence in a phased manner in the next five years, 
through Samagra Shiksha at an estimated cost of ₹ 9,195/- crore. The scheme started with 
125 DIETs in FY 2023-24 with an estimated outlay of ₹ 921.62 crores. 
Also, NCTE has prepared Integrated Teacher Education Programme Curriculum Framework and 
Stage Specific Pedagogy Courses. Recognition granted to 42 institutions including IITs, NITs, RIEs, 
IGNOU and Government Colleges for the Academic Session 2023-24. 
Further, National Professional Standards for Teachers (NPST) guiding document has been 
launched on 9th March 2024. It outlines the competencies that teachers should possess to effectively 
perform their roles. 
Bluebook on National Mission for Mentoring has been launched on 9th March 2024. It underlines 
the importance of short and long-term mentoring/professional support. 
Digital Teacher Training leveraging DIKSHA infrastructure has enabled capability building at a National 
scale. 42 lakh teachers have completed 18 courses for NISHTHA (Elementary Level), 7.97 lakh teachers 
have completed 68 courses for NISHTHA (Secondary Level), 12.97 lakh teachers have completed 12 
courses NISHTHA (FLN) and 1.26 lakh teachers are undergoing 6 courses for NISHTHA (ECCE). 
Also ‘Capacity Building on Specific Learning Disabilities’ is conceptualized under the aegis of the 
Malaviya Mission Teacher Training Program (MMTTP) by the Department of Higher Education, 
Ministry of Education. It is part of the regular capacity-building program for faculty and institutions as 
envisioned in the National Education Policy 2020. This program focuses on specific learning disabilities, 
where resource persons/experts dealing with the various kinds of learning disabilities equip the 
institutions with the capacity to foster inclusion of students with SLDs in their institutions effectively. The 
program includes different sessions like Orientation Session, Sensitization Session, Masterclasses for each 
department, In-Person Zone-wise Workshops, Monitoring of Implementation, and Conclusion of the 
Phase. 
The First Cycle of the program was conducted from January to July 2024 in which a cohort of 27 
Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs) participated in the program including Central Universities, IITs, 
IIITs, IIMs, IISERs, SPAs, and NITs. More than 400 faculty members from different departments of these 
institutions benefited. Recently, the Second Cycle of the CBSLD Program commenced with a new set of 
44 identified HEIs from August 2024 onwards. 
Also to develop leadership skills in the faculty at all level of Higher Education program like 
‘Nurturing Future Leadership Program’ is being conducted by the top IIMs / IITs. Similarly ‘Academic 

21 
 
Leadership Program’ targeting Vice- Chancellors/Directors/Heads Universities/Institutions have been 
rolled out.   
(iv)  The Union Cabinet vide its decision dated 19.01.2022, conveyed vide Cabinet Secretariat 
letter No. 2/CM/2022(i) dated 28.01.2022 approved continuation of the Scheme –Student 
Financial Aid (Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Protsanhan [PM-USP] Yojana” till 
31.03.2026 or till further review, whichever is earlier, comprising of 3 Central Sector sub- 
schemes namely - 
a)  PM-USP Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship for College and University Students; aims 
to address the needs of marginalized communities by offering scholarships to students from 
reserved categories and economically weaker sections. The application process is streamlined 
through the National Scholarships Portal (NSP), with online verification by the institute and the 
State Higher Education Department. 
b)  PM-USP Special Scholarship Scheme for Jammu &Kashmir and Ladakh; extends 
reservation benefits to various categories such as SC, ST, socially and economically backward 
classes, and economically weaker sections. The application process is managed through the 
AICTE online portal, ensuring real-time monitoring, transparency, and ease of process. 
c)  PM-USP Central Sector Interest Subsidy Scheme and Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme for 
Education Loan; focuses on providing financial assistance to students, including minorities, 
SCs/STs, women, and disabled individuals, to facilitate access to professional higher education. 
The ceiling for education loans covered under the scheme has been raised to Rs. 10 lakhs from the 
financial year 2022-23. Disbursement of interest subsidy claims is carried out through Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) into students' education loan accounts, and the application process is 
facilitated through an online portal managed by Canara Bank, the nodal bank for this purpose. 
Recently Union Cabinet approved PM Vidyalaxmi scheme to provide financial support to 
meritorious students so that financial constraints do not prevent any youth of India from pursuing quality 
higher education. A mission mode mechanism will facilitate and drive the extension of education loans to 
meritorious students who get admission in the top 860 quality higher educational institutions of the nation, 
translating to covering more than 22 lakh students every year. This special loan product will enable for 
collateral free, guarantor free education loans; made accessible through a simple, transparent, student-
friendly and entirely digital application process. Under this scheme loan amounts up to ₹ 7.5 lakhs will be 
provided a 75% credit guarantee by the Government of India, to support banks to expand coverage. 
Furthermore, for students with up to Rs. 8 lakhs annual family income, the scheme will also provide for 
3% interest subvention on loans up to Rs 10 lakh. This is in addition to the full interest subvention already 
offered to students with up to Rs. 4.5 lakhs annual family income. PM Vidyalaxmi will build on the scope 
and reach of initiatives taken over the last decade for maximizing access to quality higher education for 
the youth 
Apart from above, UGC is also implementing various scholarship/fellowship schemes to 
encourage students/research scholars to pursue higher education by providing financial assistance. The 
details of the schemes are as under: 
(a).  Junior Research Fellowship in Science, Humanities and Social Sciences: The objective of 
the scheme is to provide financial assistance to NET/JRF-qualified candidates to undertake 
advanced studies and research leading to M.Phil./Ph. D. Degree in Humanities and Social Sciences 
including Languages and Sciences. During the selection process of JRF candidates, the reservation 
policy as per the Govt. of India norms is followed, providing a fair chance to the marginal 
communities. 

22 
 
(b).  Savitribai Jyotirao Phule Single Girl Child Fellowship – The objective of the scheme is to 
provide financial assistance to single girl child of the family for pursuing Ph.D. There is no cap on 
the number of slots. All eligible applications are considered for fellowship. As per the eligibility 
criteria of the scheme, the students of reserved categories i.e. SC/ST/OBC and PWD (Persons with 
Disabilities) are given age relaxation of 5 years i.e. students up to the age of 40 years for general 
category and 45 years for reserved categories are eligible to apply. 
(c).  National Scholarship for Postgraduate Studies – The objective of the scheme is to provide 
financial assistance to Indian students leading to award of Postgraduate Degree. The slots are 
allocated as per Govt. of India reservation policy. Also, 30% slots are reserved for the women 
candidates. 
(d).  “Ishan Uday” Special Scholarship Scheme for North-Eastern Region–The scheme 
promotes higher education in the North-Eastern Region by providing financial assistance to 
students of the region pursuing Under Graduation. There are 10,000 slots under the scheme. The 
North-Eastern states have higher concentration of Scheduled Tribe population. Therefore, the 
scheme is providing benefit to the ST students by helping them in pursuing higher education. 
(v).  All the States and UTs have been advised to enter into an MoU/Agreement with BSNL and 
provide FTTH Internet connection to all the Government Schools which have computing devices. 
States / UTs have also been advised that the Internet Charges can be met from the following:  
•  For ICT Labs / Smart Class rooms sanctioned under Samagra Shiksha, internet 
charges can be met from the recurring charges being released under Samagra 
Shiksha.  
•  For Schools in which ICT/ Smart Class room are not sanctioned under Samagra 
Shiksha and which have computing devices, internet charges can be met from the 
Management Monitoring Evaluation and Research (MMER) funds being released 
under Samagra Shiksha or can be met from any other State/UT Govt. funds. 
(vi)  The following major initiatives have been taken in order to make contents available to the 
students in regional/Indian languages which will facilitate greater participation through 
eliminating language barriers in the way of accessibility. These initiatives will benefit all students 
who face challenges in absence of availability of contents in regional/Indian languages including 
tribals and SEDGs. 
(a)  UGC to allow teaching-learning and examination in 22 Indian Languages 
(b)  UGC to make available books of all subjects in 22 Indian Languages 
(c)  100 Books for UG Students for Arts, Science and Humanities launched in 12 Indian 
Languages by UGC.  
(d)  20 Technical Books of the First year translated in 12 Indian Languages by AICTE. 87 
Technical Books for 2nd Year in 12 Indian Languages is under translation by AICTE. 
(e)  AICTE has permitted 41 Engineering Institutes across 13 States in 8 regional languages. 
(f)  AICTE has developed Machine Translation Tool namely ‘Anuvadini’. 
(g)  MBBS Course has been started in Hindi 
(h)  Common University Entrance Test conducted in 13 Languages and participated by 242 
Universities. 
(i)  JEE (Mains) and NEET (UG) conducted in 13 languages involving about more than 30 
lakhs students 
(j)  Bhartiya Bhasha Sansthan is developing App named “Bhasha Sagar’ for language learning 
[it will include 270 Indian languages] 

23 
 
(k)  Commission for Scientific and Technical Terminology (CSTT) has compiled 30 lakhs 
technical and scientific words in 22 Indian Languages – 16 lakhs words already digitized. 
Department of School Education and Literacy, MoE is implementing Samagra Shiksha, a centrally 
sponsored scheme, effective from 2018-19, in coordination with all States/UTs. Community 
Mobilization is one of the provisions under Quality and Innovation component of Samagra 
Shiksha. The objectives of Community Mobilization are: 
(i) Enhance community participation in school management. 
(ii) Foster a sense of ownership and accountability towards schools among community 
members. 
(iii) Utilise community resources and expertise to improve the quality of education. 
(iv) Promote enrolment, retention attendance and reduce dropouts in schools. 
Constitution of School Management Committee (SMC)/School Management Development 
Committee (SMDC) in Schools is one of the provisions of Community mobilization component. As 
reflected in the Unified District Information System for Education Plus (UDISE+) UDISE+ 2021-22, 
82.41% elementary schools and 74.77% secondary schools have constituted SMCs/SMDCs. Financial 
support of Rs 1500 per school for community mobilization and Rs.3000 per school for training of 
SMC/SMDCs is provided under Samagra Shiksha, on the basis of the proposals received from States/UTs. 
The PM SHRI scheme promotes community engagement in education through Parent-Teacher 
Associations (PTAs), community libraries, volunteer tutoring, and celebrating school milestones. It 
integrates vocational education with local businesses, and collaborates with Panchayati Raj and Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs) to improve school infrastructure, transforming schools into "Samajik Chetna 
Kendras" for social and intellectual activities.  
"Tithi Bhojan," part of the PM Poshan Scheme, encourages community members to provide 
nutritious meals to children on special occasions voluntarily. It supplements the PM POSHAN initiative, 
with guidelines issued for implementation across States and UTs. Eleven States/UTs have adopted similar 
concepts, like Assam’s Sampriti Bhojan and Punjab’s Priti Bhojan. 
The Vidyanjali initiative, launched by India's Ministry of Education, connects schools with 
volunteers from various backgrounds, including professionals and community members, to improve 
access to education. The initiative operates through an online portal, enabling direct interactions and 
contributions to schools. The portal can be accessed at https://vidyanjali.education.gov.in/en. As of 
August 6, 2024, there are 7,61,615 schools and 4,84,572 volunteers have registered on the Vidyanjali 
portal, showcasing significant community engagement and support. 
ULLAS - Nav Bharat Saaksharta Karyakram, also known as the New India Literacy Programme 
(NILP) promotes adult literacy and lifelong learning, integrating volunteerism and community 
involvement. It provides digital resources for learners and rewards student volunteers with certificates and 
credits, fostering a movement toward universal literacy. Under the scheme, Training, orientations, and 
workshops for stakeholders are organised in face-to-face/online mode. 
The monitoring system under Samgra Shiksha consists of: 
 Regular meetings with Education Secretaries/SPDs 
 Visits to State and UTs 
 National Workshop/Review Meeting on Physical and Financial Progress 
 Monitoring through PRABANDH System 
 Review of UTs by Hon’ble Home Minister with Lt. Governors and Administrators 
 Social Audit 

24 
 
 UDISE+: Data bank of Education Indicators, Linkages with School GIS portal 
 Monitoring through Public Financial Management System (PFMS) 
To monitor the impact of its umbrella scheme, Samagra Shiksha, the Department of School 
Education and Literacy (DoSEL) has developed a Management Information System, Unified District 
Information System for Education Plus (UDISE+) starting from the reference year 2018-19.Tofurther 
revolutionize the school data collection mechanism and to monitor learning outcomes and track dropped-
out students, starting from 2022-23, UDISE+ was again revitalized to collect individual student-wise data. 
Similarly, individual teacher-wise data is also being collected and maintained to promote Good 
Governance. 
The PM SHRI scheme focuses on a strong monitoring and evaluation system to track student 
enrollment, attendance, and learning levels, ensuring re-entry for those lagging behind. It aims for a 100% 
Gross Enrollment Ratio (GER) by 2030. Additionally, Geotagging and tech-based monitoring, utilizing 
tools like UDISE, PRABANDH, and Vidya Samiksha Kendra, enhance quality oversight in schools. 
The Vidya Samiksha Kendra (VSK) has been launched to track the objectives of the NEP through the 
National Digital Educational Architecture (NDEAR). It monitors dropout rates, student migration, 
learning outcomes, and teachers' accountability. The APAAR system, a 12-digit lifelong student ID linked 
to Aadhar, enhances tracking and personalized learning interventions. VSK includes centralized 
dashboards and a data-driven approach to assess school education, contributing to a robust monitoring 
ecosystem. 
(vii)  The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 in India emphasizes inclusivity and equity in 
education, particularly focusing on marginalized communities. NEP 2020 emphasizes the inclusion of 
marginalized communities such as SCs, STs, OBCs, and socio-economically disadvantaged groups. The 
UGC has been proactive in encouraging universities to develop inclusive policies that cater to the needs of 
these communities. 
To ensure policies are responsive to the needs of marginalized communities, the UGC has 
promoted the establishment of feedback mechanisms. These mechanisms allow stakeholders, including 
members of marginalized communities, to provide input and suggestions. This feedback is crucial for 
adapting policies to address evolving challenges effectively. 
The UGC has encouraged universities to regularly review and adapt their policies in light of 
feedback and changing circumstances. 
The Department of School Education & Literacy has partnered with a number of NGOs and civil 
society organizations to improve access, equity, and quality in school education. Under Samagra Shiksha 
Abhiyan, collaborations with grassroots organizations are aimed at improving enrollment, retention, and 
learning outcomes, especially for children from marginalized groups such as Scheduled Castes (SCs), 
Scheduled Tribes (STs), and economically weaker sections (EWS). 
For Special Training Programs, NGOs working with out-of-school children have been roped in for 
special bridge courses and remedial classes, with an emphasis on girls and children in rural and remote 
areas. 
Through collaboration with ed-tech NGOs and international education bodies, DIKSHA offers 
multi-lingual educational resources. 
In collaboration with local NGOs, the Beti Bachao Beti Padhao program promotes girl child 
education in regions with low female literacy rates. 
In partnership with tribal development NGOs, the government has expanded the Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools program to provide quality education to tribal children, including support for 
culturally relevant pedagogy. 

25 
 
Under the Scheme Malaviya Mission Teacher Training Program, one of the schemes of 
Department of Higher Education, a Capacity Building on Specific Learning Disabilities (SLDs) has been 
conceptualised with an aim to address the issues of students related to learning disabilities. In this 
program, resource persons/experts from NGOs organise capacity building program which help in dealing 
with various kinds of learning disabilities and equip the institution with the capacity to foster inclusion of 
students with SLDs in their institution effectively. 
Union Cabinet on 28th of June, 2023 approved the introduction of NRF Bill in the Parliament. 
Accordingly, the Anusandhan National Research Foundation Bill, 2023 has been passed by both the 
Houses of the Parliament in the Twelfth Session of the Parliament. The Department of Science and 
Technology (DST) is the administrative department for the same. Government is planning a unique Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) entity for which Rs. 36,000 Cr of the research funding is to come from the 
private sector, mostly industry whereas Government will put Rs.14, 000 Cr for the same, to ensure greater 
participation of industry. ANRF aims to prioritize funding for regional issues that improve quality of life 
in rural areas in context of social sciences, hygiene, gender related issues, etc.   
Further, the Ministry of Education has also taken the initiative of establishment of Research Parks 
at IIT Madras, IIT Bombay, IIT Kharagpur, IIT Delhi, IIT Guwahati, IIT Hyderabad, IIT Gandhinagar 
and IISc Bangalore and implemented various schemes such as Uchchatar Avishkar Yojana (UAY), 
Impacting Research Innovation and Technology (IMPRINT), Impactful Policy Research in Social 
Science(IMPRESS), Scheme for Trans-Disciplinary Research for India’s Developing Economy 
(STRIDE), Scheme for promotion of Research and Academic Collaboration (SPARC), National Initiative 
for Design Innovation (NIDI),Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research in Sciences 
(STARS)etc.  
For realizing the vision of "Make AI in India and Make Al work for India", three Centres of 
Excellence for Artificial Intelligence (AI) will be setup in top educational institutions.  Leading industry 
players will partner in conducting interdisciplinary research, develop cutting-edge applications and 
scalable problem solutions in the areas of agriculture, health, and sustainable cities.  Government has 
approved establishment of three Centres of Excellence (CoE) in Artificial intelligence (Al) with a total 
financial outlay of Rs. 990.00 Cr over the period of FY 2023-24 to FY 2027-28. An Apex Committee 
consisting of Industry leaders and experts examined all proposals from academic institutions. Based on 
the recommendation of the Apex Committee, Ministry of Education approved three academic institution 
for establishment of three Centre of Excellence (CoE) – CoE of AI in Health at AIIMS Delhi – IIT Delhi, 
CoE of AI in Agriculture at IIT Ropar and CoE of AI in Sustainable Cities at IIT Kanpur. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee had recommended comprehensive awareness campaigns, including mass 
media and social media and outreach to local community leaders. The action taken by the Ministry 
– which appears to be limited to the NEP ki Samajh video competition - is manifestly insufficient 
given the scope of the original recommendations.  
The Committee had recommended training programs, including culturally sensitive 
teaching methods and incentives for educators working in marginalized communities. The 
Ministry’s response has shown no cognizance of this very specific recommendation. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation that the training material for teachers working in marginalized 
communities should be tailored to their specific requirements and that incentives be given to 
teachers working with such communities.  
The Committee takes note of the scholarship schemes run by the Ministry. In keeping with 
the spirit of its recommendation, however, it would direct the Ministry to share details on the caste 

26 
 
and economic breakdown of the beneficiaries of such scholarships. The Committee recommends 
that there should be a single integrated APAAR-id linked portal for all such schemes, and proactive 
outreach to eligible beneficiaries from marginalized communities rather than an application 
process.  
Further, the response of the Ministry demonstrates an absence of an organized institutional 
mechanism to gather feedback on the NEP’s implementation – it has been left entirely to 
universities and no clear channel appears to be identified for universities to share this feedback. 
This is an uncalled for given the importance of the NEP in shaping the future of the country. The 
Committee reiterates, in the strongest possible terms, the need for a formal feedback mechanism 
from all stakeholders to provide input and suggest policy improvements.  
The Committee had recommended specifically for research and innovation in the field of 
education for marginalized communities. Unfortunately, none of the various schemes and efforts 
mentioned by the Ministry in its response appears to be directed towards this purpose. Given the 
importance of such community-centered education research in a country of such socio-cultural 
diversity, steps should have been taken accordingly. The Committee therefore, recommends for 
formation of a specific center to conduct such research, which can in turn inform education policy, 
curriculum design, and teacher training – particularly for educational institutions catering to 
marginalized communities.  
Recommendation  
8. The Committee notes that addressing the issue of technological readiness and digital 
infrastructure is necessary for complying with the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020's requirements 
related to credit transfer, multidisciplinary learning, and ensuring inclusive education, especially for 
differently-abled children. As NEP 2020 envisions a digitally empowered society through education, it is 
imperative that technology plays a pivotal role in facilitating these goals. In order to address the issue, 
the Committee recommends that the Department should set up a monitoring group, drawing experts from 
all stakeholders to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the current technological infrastructure in 
higher education institutions across the country, identify gaps in terms of hardware, software, internet 
connectivity, digital literacy among students and faculty and suggest solution to bridge any issue relating 
to Technological Gaps, Investment in Digital Infrastructure, Faculty, Training and Development, 
Learning Resources, Tech Integration etc. 
(Para 4.10.19 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 A meeting was held on 30.01.2024 with all Regulatory Authorities and their representatives under 
the Chairpersonship of Hon’ble Chairman, UGC, to deliberate on the current implementation status along 
with challenges faced during the effective implementation of NEP 2020. It was inter-alia decided that- 
 
 A Monitoring Committee will be constituted to address the issues related to Deemed-to-be 
Universities and Private Universities, having representation of relevant regulators, as suggested by 
the Parliamentary Committee. 
 Weightage is proposed to be given to the universities/institutions having facilities for the person 
with disability(s) as per the RCI Guidelines in the NAAC accreditation criteria. 
 All the Regulatory Authorities will ensure that the institutions under their domain register on the 
ABC portal and upload the credit details. 
The AICTE will provide support to the willing Regulators for the creation of joint programs/courses 
such as Engineering and Medicine and also for the creation of a technology-driven teaching-learning 
environment. 

27 
 
All Regulatory authorities will explore the feasibility of implementing NEP 2020 to the extent 
possible. 
Also ‘Capacity Building on Specific Learning Disabilities’ is conceptualized under the aegis of the 
Malaviya Mission Teacher Training Program (MMTTP) by the Department of Higher Education, 
Ministry of Education. It is part of the regular capacity-building program for faculty and institutions as 
envisioned in the National Education Policy 2020.  
This program focuses on specific learning disabilities, where resource persons/experts dealing with 
the various kinds of learning disabilities equip the institutions with the capacity to foster inclusion of 
students with SLDs in their institutions effectively. The program includes different sessions like 
Orientation Session, Sensitization Session, Masterclasses for each department, In-Person Zone-wise 
Workshops, Monitoring of Implementation, and Conclusion of the Phase. 
The First Cycle of the program was conducted from January to July 2024 in which a cohort of 27 
Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs) participated in the program including Central Universities, IITs, 
IIITs, IIMs, IISERs, SPAs, and NITs. More than 400 faculty members from different departments of these 
institutions benefited. 
Recently, The Second Cycle of the CBSLD Program commenced with a new set of 44 identified HEIs 
from August 2024 onwards. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee notes the decision taken by the UGC Chairman to set up a Monitoring 
Committee. However, it appears that the scope of the Monitoring Committee extends to the whole 
of the NEP rather than the technological and digital aspects of its implementation. Given the 
importance of technology in the working of NEP, it is critical that a more focused and well-
resourced Monitoring Committee be set up for the same. The Committee notes that the NETF may 
be well-suited to such an endeavor.  
Recommendation  
9.  The Committee also recommends reviewing and adjusting the interest rates on loans provided by 
HEFA to make them more competitive and affordable for institutions so that grace periods or lower 
interest rates can be offered for institutions facing financial challenges. The Committee further suggests 
for allocating a portion of HEFA funds specifically for research and innovation grants to incentivize 
institutions to undertake cutting-edge research and development projects and foster a culture of 
innovation within higher education. 
(Para 4.10.22 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has recommended new Window structure of HEFA. 
Institutions with higher Internal Revenue Generation (IRG) capacity are required to pay up to 10% of the 
interest portion. The interest rate of HEFA as on date is 5.5% which is lower than the market rate. 
HEFA also funds for creation of research facilities including setting up and equipping laboratories 
and such other facilities required for conducting high quality research. 
Under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) HEFA provides research grants to Higher 
Educational Institutions 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee in its recommendation had specifically asked that a portion of HEFA funds 
be dedicated to research and innovation grants so as to ensure that consistent funding is made 

28 
 
available for this purpose. The Ministry has unfortunately not acknowledged this recommendation 
in its response. The Committee therefore, reiterates this recommendation.   
Recommendation  
10. The Committee observes that in order to attain the targets of Atma Nirbhar Bharat and to develop 
an Institutional Research Information System for sharing the status of ongoing/completed 
projects/programmes, expertise and resources etc. making effective use of Information and 
Communication Technology for preparing the database of in-house experts to provide industrial 
consultancy and services, 542 Higher Education Institutions including 244 Universities and 298 colleges 
have established R&D cells at their campuses. The Committee recommends the Department to take 
special efforts and provide budgetary and infrastructure support to set up R&D cells in all Universities of 
the country and other Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) in a time-bound manner to contribute in the 
making of Atma Nirbhar Bharat.  
(Para 4.10.25of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Union Cabinet on 28th of June, 2023 approved the introduction of NRF Bill in the Parliament. 
Accordingly, The Anusandhan National Research Foundation Bill, 2023 has been passed by both the 
Houses of the Parliament in the Twelfth Session of the Parliament. The Department of Science and 
Technology (DST) is the administrative department for the same. Government is planning a unique Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) entity for which Rs. 36,000 Cr of the research funding is to come from the 
private sector, mostly industry whereas Government will put Rs.14, 000 Cr for the same, to ensure greater 
participation of industry. 
Further, the Ministry of Education has also taken the initiative of establishment of Research Parks 
at IIT Madras, IIT Bombay, IIT Kharagpur, IIT Delhi, IIT Guwahati, IIT Hyderabad, IIT Gandhinagar 
and IISc Bangalore and implemented various schemes such as Uchchatar Avishkar Yojana (UAY), 
Impacting Research Innovation and Technology (IMPRINT), Impactful Policy Research in Social 
Science(IMPRESS), Scheme for Trans-Disciplinary Research for India’s Developing Economy 
(STRIDE), Scheme for promotion of Research and Academic Collaboration (SPARC), National Initiative 
for Design Innovation (NIDI),Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research in Sciences 
(STARS)etc.  
For realizing the vision of "Make AI in India and Make Al work for India", three Centres of 
Excellence for Artificial Intelligence (AI) will be setup in top educational institutions.  Leading industry 
players will partner in conducting interdisciplinary research, develop cutting-edge applications and 
scalable problem solutions in the areas of agriculture, health, and sustainable cities.  Government has 
approved establishment of three Centres of Excellence (CoE) in Artificial intelligence (Al) with a total 
financial outlay of Rs. 990.00 Cr over the period of FY 2023-24 to FY 2027-28. An Apex Committee 
consisting of Industry leaders and experts examined all proposals from academic institutions. Based on 
the recommendation of the Apex Committee, Ministry of Education approved three academic institution 
for establishment of three Centre of Excellence (CoE) – CoE of AI in Health at AIIMS Delhi – IIT Delhi, 
CoE of AI in Agriculture at IIT Ropar and CoE of AI in Sustainable Cities at IIT Kanpur. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The response of the Ministry makes no mention of R&D cells, despite the Committee’s 
specific recommendation to make “special efforts and provide budgetary and infrastructure 
support to set up R&D cells in all Universities…and other Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)”.  
The Committee therefore, desires the Ministry to provide a report on the progress made in 

29 
 
universal establishment of R&D cells in all HEIs, and what activities it has specifically undertaken 
to support this endeavour.  
Recommendation  
11. The Committee observes that 42 percent of universities, 36 percent of colleges and 22 percent of 
stand-alone institutions have connectivity with National Mission on Education through Information and 
Communication Technology (NMEICT) and their connectivity with 53 National Knowledge Network 
(NKN) is 56, 89, and 24percent respectively. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should 
be made to ensure connectivity with the NKM and NMEICT for all remaining Universities& Higher 
Education Institutes (HEIs) in the country. 
(Para 4.10.27of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Ministry of Education (formerly known HRD) initiated project NMEICT (National Mission on 
Education through Information and Communication Technology) in 2009 and started many education 
centric schemes under this project.  
NKN (National Knowledge Network) connectivity is one scheme under NMEICT, to provide 
NKN connectivity through 1 Gbps optical fiber to universities/higher educational institutes. NKN is a 
product of MeitY. NIC under MeitY is an implementing agency with BSNL/MTNL was service 
providers. 
A total of 685 higher education institutions are connected with NKN. Out of these 378 connections 
are funded by the Ministry of Education and 307 are funded by MeitY. These include various types 
of institutes like university, IIT, IIIT, NIT, IIM, SPA, IISER etc. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee in its recommendation had specifically mentioned to cover all remaining 
HEIs with NKN and NMEICT. The Ministry’s response only provides more statistics on current 
coverage without sharing any efforts taken by it to support further uptake of the NMEICT. The 
Committee therefore directs the Ministry to share a compliance report regarding the same at the 
earliest. 
 
Recommendation  
12. As per the NEP 2020, regulatory bodies i.e. UGC and AICTE, the Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) in 
higher education is required to be kept at healthy level. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
department should fulfil the vacancies in a time bound manner to maintain the prescribed PTR. 
(Para 4.10.28 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 AICTE has set the norms of Faculty to Student ratio for all the levels/ Programmes under its 
purview and also has provisions for penal action against the institutions not maintaining the prescribed 
norms [Approval Process Handbook (APH) 2024-25 to 2026-27]. In situations wherein, lesser number of 
faculties is employed, Council will reduce the approved intake of the Technical Institution, so that Pupil 
Teacher Ratio is maintained.  
UGC (Institutions Deemed to be Universities) Regulations, 2023 was published and notified on 
2nd June, 2023 was published and notified on 2nd June, 2023. 

30 
 
The Objective of these regulations is to uplift Higher Education by adopting the provision of NEP 
2020. One of the eligibility criteria for an Institution to be declared as an Institution Deemed to be 
University is that the student-teacher ratio must be at least 1:20. 
UGC has also been urging universities to collaborate and expedite the process of filling vacancies 
promptly. 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee notes the actions taken by the Ministry to ensure prescribed PTR is met. 
However, it finds that there is no nodal agency or officer who has been assigned to investigate the 
difficulties HEIs may face in meeting them. The Committee therefore, recommends the creation of 
a task force to investigate the same, the findings of which could be brought to the notice of the 
Ministry, which will help in its policymaking. 
Recommendation  
13. The Committee takes note of the issues and difficulties in implementing the Multi Entry and 
Multiple Exit (MEME) Options. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to have wider 
consultation with various Universities/Institutions, their regulatory bodies and other stakeholders to 
devise out way in view of the difficulties being faced in implementing Multi Entry and Multiple Exit 
(MEME) Options and apprise the Committee of the same. 
(Para 4.10.29 of the 356th Report of the Committee) 
Action Taken 
 Multiple Entry and Exit (MEME) Guidelines issued on 27.07.2021 in conjunction with ABC 
Regulations, Guidelines on National Credit Framework (NCrF), Guidelines on National Higher Education 
Framework (NHEQF), Guidelines on Curriculum and Credit Framework for Undergraduate Programmes, 
Guidelines for Transforming Higher Education Institutions and Universities etc. aims to achieve 
objectives of NEP, 2020.  MEME Guidelines address several issues which were expected to be raised 
such as – in and out traffic in institutions; uneven geographical distribution of higher education 
institutions etc. 
After announcement of the NEP, 2020 and rolling out of MEME, HEIs are in the process of 
implementing the same and at present there is no empirical evidence to suggest that implementation of 
MEME will face hurdle. It is expected that with the passage of time and with more clarity emerging after 
rolling out of MEME with a dynamic regulatory intervention, the issue of exit and entry will even out and 
this transformative reform will be smoothly implemented in long term. 
Subsequently, UGC notified the National Credit Framework to enable the integration of vocational 
education with general education, multiple entry and exit etc. To develop SOPs for the implementation of 
NCrF and to remove difficulties in the implementation, a high-level committee was constituted by the 
Ministry of Education. The SOPs has been notified by UGC on 07.08.2024.  
For Operationalisation of National Credit Framework (NCrF) in Higher Education Standard 
Operating Procedure (SoP) has been issued.  The SOPs provides a clear guideline to facilitate the 
assignment, accumulation, storage, transfer, and redemption of such credits across school, higher, and 
vocational education and training and also advocates for multiple entry and exit points, recognition of 
prior learning, and work-embedded programs, enabling learners to acquire skills that integrate smoothly 
into formal education. The SOPs will empower educational institutions to serve as hubs for skill 
development, offering diverse learning pathways for students. 
Moreover, Government has been undertaking comprehensive consultation process with the stake 
holders after announcement of NEP, 2020 to address various issues. The recommendation of the Hon’ble 
Committee respectfully noted for further compliance. 

31 
 
Further recommendation of the Committee 
The Committee notes the Ministry’s anticipation that “there is no empirical evidence to 
suggest that implementation of MEME will face hurdle.” However, the Committee also notes that 
there appears to be no structured feedback mechanism to communicate with stakeholders about the 
hurdles that MEME or any other initiative under the NEP may face. The Committee therefore, 
reiterates, in the strongest possible terms, the need for a formal feedback mechanism for all 
stakeholders to provide input and suggest policy improvements. 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

33 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE -AT A GLANCE 
***** 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. The Committee has observed that a “synergized collaboration” between stakeholders is 
required for the successful implementation of the NEP. In response, the Ministry has rightly noted 
that Education is in the concurrent list of the Constitution. It is therefore critical to have the 
complete confidence of the States to successfully advance the vision of the NEP. However, the 
Ministry’s answer has not touched on the modalities as to how the Union Government is working 
with State Governments that have expressed reservations about various elements of the NEP in 
Higher Education. Hence, the Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry must develop a 
mechanism to coordinate with the States on any such concerns that they may have shared.  
The Committee desires that the Ministry should share a report of the Zonal Committee’s 
operations, including the Conferences held in various zones, with the Committee. 
The Committee recommends that a centralized nationwide tracker at the university-level 
should be developed to track progress on NEP implementation in higher education.  
(Para 4.10.1) 
2. The Committee had specifically recommended that the Design Your Degree programme be 
adopted in other HEIs in the country. The Ministry’s response has neglected to express the extent 
to which this has been followed. The Committee therefore, suggest the Ministry to share a 
compliance report regarding the same at the earliest.  
(Para 4.10.4) 
3. The Committee’s recommendations had called for “up-gradation of existing autonomous 
colleges to universities, conversion of colleges to cluster colleges with revamping the curriculum, 
skill development, examination reform, upgrading institutions to higher level. Given the PM-USHA 
Scheme’s budget allocations, it doesn’t appear that current funding is sufficient to meet these goals. 
Therefore, an enhanced budget is necessary to meet the goals of the NEP in higher education. 
Furthermore, as mentioned, only rewards the HEIs have adequate staff and enable them to make 
even greater investments at a time when there is a need for broader-based investments across the 
spectrum of HEIs. The Committee therefore, recommends that a parallel scheme to support HEIs, 
particularly those in Aspirational districts and catering to marginalised communities, with faculty 
recruitment and other investments should be formulated. The Committee also desires that details 
on the States/UTs which have not signed the PM-USHA MoU and what action the Ministry has 
taken to support HEIs in such states should be furnished at the earliest for its consideration.  
(Para 4.10.5) 
4. The Committee notes the various steps taken by the Ministry to support industry-academia 
participation. It further notes that many of these initiatives however center on digital platforms and 
learning. Such a reliance on digital learning requires substantial and regular quality checks and 
impact assessments to ensure these interventions are having the anticipated effect on students. The 
Committee desires that the Ministry should share a report of any assessments or feedback 
gathering that has been conducted on the platforms mentioned in its response for its consideration.  
(Para 4.10.6) 
5. The Committee notes the setting up the ANRF to support research and innovation in higher 
education. However, it is concerned by the ANRF’s limited focus on science, technology, 

34 
 
agriculture, and health technology. The Committee’s recommendation on support research was 
broad-based in its spirit, and included humanities and social sciences research which play an 
extremely important role in social, cultural, and economic progress. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends a parallel initiative to support humanities and social sciences research in higher 
education.   
(Para 4.10.8) 
6. The Committee notes the identification of the NEP Saarthis as a positive development in 
implementing the NEP. The Committee desires that the Ministry should share a report on the 
activities undertaken by the NEP Saarthis and would recommend the use of the NEP Saarthis to 
collect feedback on the implementation of the NEP.   
(Para 4.10.14) 
7. The Committee had recommended comprehensive awareness campaigns, including mass 
media and social media and outreach to local community leaders. The action taken by the Ministry 
– which appears to be limited to the NEP ki Samajh video competition - is manifestly insufficient 
given the scope of the original recommendations.  
The Committee had recommended training programs, including culturally sensitive 
teaching methods and incentives for educators working in marginalized communities. The 
Ministry’s response has shown no cognizance of this very specific recommendation. The Committee 
reiterates its recommendation that the training material for teachers working in marginalized 
communities should be tailored to their specific requirements and that incentives be given to 
teachers working with such communities.  
The Committee takes note of the scholarship schemes run by the Ministry. In keeping with 
the spirit of its recommendation, however, it would direct the Ministry to share details on the caste 
and economic breakdown of the beneficiaries of such scholarships. The Committee recommends 
that there should be a single integrated APAAR-id linked portal for all such schemes, and proactive 
outreach to eligible beneficiaries from marginalized communities rather than an application 
process.  
Further, the response of the Ministry demonstrates an absence of an organized institutional 
mechanism to gather feedback on the NEP’s implementation – it has been left entirely to 
universities and no clear channel appears to be identified for universities to share this feedback. 
This is an uncalled for given the importance of the NEP in shaping the future of the country. The 
Committee reiterates, in the strongest possible terms, the need for a formal feedback mechanism 
from all stakeholders to provide input and suggest policy improvements.  
The Committee had recommended specifically for research and innovation in the field of 
education for marginalized communities. Unfortunately, none of the various schemes and efforts 
mentioned by the Ministry in its response appears to be directed towards this purpose. Given the 
importance of such community-centered education research in a country of such socio-cultural 
diversity, steps should have been taken accordingly. The Committee therefore, recommends for 
formation of a specific center to conduct such research, which can in turn inform education policy, 
curriculum design, and teacher training – particularly for educational institutions catering to 
marginalized communities.   
(Para 4.10.17 & 18) 
8. The Committee notes the decision taken by the UGC Chairman to set up a Monitoring 
Committee. However, it appears that the scope of the Monitoring Committee extends to the whole 
of the NEP rather than the technological and digital aspects of its implementation. Given the 
importance of technology in the working of NEP, it is critical that a more focused and well-

35 
 
resourced Monitoring Committee be set up for the same. The Committee notes that the NETF may 
be well-suited to such an endeavor.  
(Para 4.10.19) 
9. The Committee in its recommendation had specifically asked that a portion of HEFA funds 
be dedicated to research and innovation grants so as to ensure that consistent funding is made 
available for this purpose. The Ministry has unfortunately not acknowledged this recommendation 
in its response. The Committee therefore, reiterates this recommendation.   
(Para 4.10.22) 
10. The response of the Ministry makes no mention of R&D cells, despite the Committee’s 
specific recommendation to make “special efforts and provide budgetary and infrastructure 
support to set up R&D cells in all Universities…and other Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)”.  
The Committee therefore, desires the Ministry to provide a report on the progress made in 
universal establishment of R&D cells in all HEIs, and what activities it has specifically undertaken 
to support this endeavour.  
(Para 4.10.25) 
11. The Committee in its recommendation had specifically mentioned to cover all remaining 
HEIs with NKN and NMEICT. The Ministry’s response only provides more statistics on current 
coverage without sharing any efforts taken by it to support further uptake of the NMEICT. The 
Committee therefore directs the Ministry to share a compliance report regarding the same at the 
earliest. 
(Para 4.10.27) 
12. The Committee notes the actions taken by the Ministry to ensure prescribed PTR is met. 
However, it finds that there is no nodal agency or officer who has been assigned to investigate the 
difficulties HEIs may face in meeting them. The Committee therefore, recommends the creation of 
a task force to investigate the same, the findings of which could be brought to the notice of the 
Ministry, which will help in its policymaking. 
(Para 4.10.28) 
13. The Committee notes the Ministry’s anticipation that “there is no empirical evidence to 
suggest that implementation of MEME will face hurdle.” However, the Committee also notes that 
there appears to be no structured feedback mechanism to communicate with stakeholders about the 
hurdles that MEME or any other initiative under the NEP may face. The Committee therefore, 
reiterates, in the strongest possible terms, the need for a formal feedback mechanism for all 
stakeholders to provide input and suggest policy improvements. 
(Para 4.10.29) 
 
 
 
 