4 
• 

RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
FOURTH REPORT 
ON 
NATIONAL HEALTH PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY \VELFARE) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 21st December, 1993) 
(Laid in Lok Sabha on the 21st December, 1993) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 1993/AGRAHAYANA, 1915 (SAKA) 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
CONTENTS 
Composition of the Committee 
Introduction 
An Overview 
National Malaria Eradication Programme; Kala-azar and National Filaria 
Control Programme 
National Leprosy Eradication Programme 
National Programme for Control of Blindness 
National AIDS Control Programme 
Minutes of the meetings of the Committee 
P,\GES 
(iii)-(iv) 
(v) 
1 
2--6 
6-10 
10-12 
12-14 
17-20 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav-Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Dr. Jinendra Kumar Jain 
5. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
6. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
* 7. Vacant 
8. Shri Md. Salim 
9. Shri . Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
10. Prof. I. G. Sanadi 
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
13. Shri P. Upendra 
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
15. Dr. Viswanathan Kanithi 
16. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
17. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
18. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
19. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
20. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
21. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
22. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
23. Shri Z.M. Kahandole 
24. Shri Datta Meghe 
25. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
26. Shri K. Thulasiah Vandayar 
27. Shri As lam Sher Khan 
28. Shri Inder Jit 
29. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
30. Shri Chinmayanand Swami 
31. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi : 
32. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda 
33. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
(1993-94) 
•vacan cy caused due to expiry of Shri T. Chandrasekhar Reddy on 15-9-1993. 
(iii) 

34. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
35. Dr. G .L. Kanaujia 
**36. Shri Anna Joshi 
37. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
38. Shri Rambadan 
39. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
40. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
41. Shri Brahma Nand Mandai 
42. Prof. Ummareddy Venkateswarlu 
43. Shri Suraj Mandai 
44. Shri Kanshi Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Vanaja N . Sarna, Director 
Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
(iv) 
**Nominated w.c.f. 26-8-1993 in the vacancy caused by the resignation of Shri Chandrajeet Yadav w.c.f. 13-3-1993. 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, do hereby present the Fourth· Report of the Committee on the National Health 
Programme s of the Department of Health (Ministry of Health & Family Welfare). 
The Committee considered various documents and papers received from the Department of 
Health and also heard its Secretary and other officials to elicit further information at its meetings 
held on the lOth & 11th June, 1993. 
The details of the working, targets, achievements, allocations and expe nditur e regarding 
major Nationa l Health Programmes of the Department viz. National Malaria Eradication 
Programme; Kala-azar; National Filaria Control Progr amme; Nationa l Lepr0sy Eradicat ion 
Programme; National Programme for Co'1trol of Blindness and National AIDS Control 
Programme were discussed by the Committee and have been included in the Report. 
The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its sitting held on the 16th December, 
1993. 
NEW DELHI ; 
16th December, 1993 
25 Agrahayana, 1915 (Saka) 
RAM NARESH YADAV 
Chairman 
Departm ent-Related Parliamentary Standing 
Commiffee on Human Resource De1·e/npment 

An Overview 
1. 'Health is Wealth' is a well-known proverb and it is an axiomatic fact that only healthy 
citizens can make a nation prosperous and healthy. Health plays a vital role in the making of a 
nation great and strong. Development and maintenance of good health is not only a personal or 
an individual effort but a Welfare State also plays a very important role in it. 
2. It is expressly mentioned in our Constitution in Article 47, which relates to the Directive 
Principles of State Policy, that 'The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the 
standard of living of its people an~ the improvement of public health among its primary duties ... ' 
The improvement of health and ritilrition on national basis is the respon sibility of the Central 
Council of Health. Since the inception of planning process in 1952, various health programmes 
have been introduced in the country. In pursuance of its commitment, Government also 
formulated a national Policy on Health in 1983. 
3. But, the dimensions that health problems have acquired in our country are really complex 
and alarming. Majority of diseases people suffer from are poverty-related , while some have their 
origin in the utter Jack of cleanliness and awareness or consciousness towards health. Rapid 
increase in environmental pollution , increasing population, cropping up of new diseases like 
AIDS and cancer are some of the challenges that the nation is facing today. To fight on all these 
fronts simultaneously is, of course, a formidable task, particularly when the resources at hand are 
limited. 
4. As per World Bank estimates, in India only 1.3% of the Gross Domestic Product is spent 
on health which is perhaps the lowest amongst the developing countries. It is flabbergasting to 
f~rther note that the alloca tion has shown a gradual diminishing trend in the successive Five Y car 
Plans. For instance, 3.3% of the total outlay in the First Five Year Plan has come down to a 
dismal 2:74% during the Eighth Five Year Plan. In the face of the financial constraints foreign 
assistance was sought. Some traditional diseases like Leprosy, Tuberculosis, Malaria, Blindness, 
~tc. still persist affecting the majority of our population. In such a situation, it is to be seen if 
Government's commitment to attain the goal of health for all by 2000 A.D. could possibly be 
fulfilled. 
5. World Bank assistance to the scale of 100 to 200 million dollars per year has been cleared 
for Health sector throughout the Eighth Five Year Plan. The first project taken up under this 
project is the AIDS Control Programme. A<>sistance is also expected for Leprosy and Blindness 
Control Programmes. 
6. In an effort to fight the menace of major diseases Government is implementing various 
National Health Programmes. The Committee had detailed deliberations on some of them 
namely; National Malaria Eradication Programme; Kala-azar; National Filaria Control Prog­
ramme; National Leprosy Eradication Programme; National Programm e for Contro l of Blindness 
and the National AIDS Control Jirogramme . 

I. National Malaria Eradication Programme 
7. It is estimated that at the time of country's Independence in 1947, there were over 75 
million malaria cases and about one million deaths had occured due to it. For its control, a 
national strategy was formulated in the year 1953. DDT proved to be a very effective insecticide 
and a great success was achieved in controlling this disesase. Encouraged by this initial success, 
the National Malaria Control was renamed as 'National Malaria Eradication Programme ' in the 
year 1958. By the year 1965, the incidence of malaria witnessed a downward trend, with nil 
mortality rat e which was, in itself, a great achievement. But this success was short-lived as in the 
mid-seventies recurrence of malaria was visible. There was a sharp increase in the number of 
reported malaria cases to the tune of 6.47 million per year. The strategy was revised once again 
named Modified Plan of Operation (MPO) ·with the objective of elimination of mortality rate, 
effective control of malaria and maintaining the gains achieved so far in its eradication. The 
objectives were sought to be achieved by prompt case- detection through active and passive 
surveillance and vector control by residual insecticidal spraying. 
8. Since 1984, the incidence of malaria has stabi lized at around 2 million cases per year. It is 
reported that during the year 1991, there were 1.81 million positive cases of malaria and around 
400 deaths. During the year 1992, there were approximately 1.4 million reported malaria cases. 
Though tribals constitute only 8% of the total population, yet they account for over 30% of the 
malaria cases and 60% of the deaths on account of P. Falciparum. Similarly, there was a sharp 
increase in the number of cases detected in urban slums from 1,39,057 in 1989 to 2,11,890 in 
1991. Studies and surveys conducted in this regard have shown the presence of resistance to DDT 
and a combination of anti-malaria insecticides. 
9. There are Seven States in the country namely, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan which are more vulnerable and most of the malaria 
deaths have occured there. According to the Annual Report of the Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare for the year 1992-93, Malaria cases during the last five years indicated that in the year 
1988, ther( have been 1.85 million cases with 0.68 million P. Falciparum cases and 209 deaths. In 
1989, there were 2.05 malaria cases with 0.76 million P. Falciparum cases and 268 deaths, in 1990 
out of the 2.02 million malaria cases there have been 0.75 million P. Falciparum cases with 353 
deaths, in 1991 out of 2.11 million malaria cases there were 0.91 million P. Falciparum cases with 
421 deaths and in 1992, there were 1.42 million cases with 0.45 million P. Falciparum cases and 
246 deaths. 
10. The National Malaria Eradication Programme is being implemented as a centrally 
sponsored category-11 on a 50:50 cost sharing basis between the States and the Central 
Government. Under this Programme, the Central Government meet s the cost of entire quantity 
of DDT and partially of BHC and Malathion, antimalaria drugs like Chloroquine, Primaquine 
and Pyrenthamine, etc. The State Governments are expected to meet the expenditure on staff 
and other operational costs for successful implementation of the Programme. 
11. During his oral evidence tendered before the Committee , the Secretary, Department of 
Health , informed that malaria has taken an endemic turn because of the fact that the health 
infrastructure in the most affected States is'ex tremely weak. The Dcptt. has also reali sed that the 
tribal and hilly areas where malaria infection cases are high, have to be dealt with on a different 
footing from the rest of the country. Fifty per cent share of the States has to be reviewed and the 

Central Government is thinking to have the central scheme implemented by taking assistance 
from World Bank to fight this menance. Keeping this in view, it is proposed to intensify the 
efforts for the full containment of malaria during the Eighth Five Year Plan. Accordingly, major 
attention is proposed to be given to the tribal sub-plan areas of Seven States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan, the urban population and 
population living in the project areas and rest of the country. This control strategy is a balanced 
mixture of preventive and curative measures for elective spraying for vector control, larviciding 
and source reduction in urban areas and early detection and treatment. 
12. During his oral evidence tendered before the Committee, the Secretary, Department of 
Health, informed that they had achieved a great initial success in controlling malaria, but when 
the incidence reached a figure of 1,00,000 in the entire country in the seventies, they liad a 
rebound and the incidence rose to about 6.5 million. Thereafter, the programme was started in 
1977 and they were able to bring this figure down to 2 million in 1984. After that, this figure has 
more or less ramained stable. It means there has been n0 further improvement after 1984. This 
was due to a very high level of infection in the tribal areas of North-East. The migrant labour 
iorce from these areas going to different parts of the country also contributes to the spread of 
Malaria. A lot of on going construction activities contribute to the cause of stagnation of water 
and pollute environment leading to breeding of mosquitoes, hence the incidence of malaria. 
13. The Committee was informed that for this purpose, a sum of Rs. 86 corres was spent 
during the year 1991-92. In 1992-93, Rs. 65 crores were allocated for malaria control programme 
which also included other vector diseases like Kala-azar and Filaria. Now, this amount has been 
increased to Rs. 87 crores for procuring insecticides, larvicides and drugs. For the year 1993-94, a 
sum of Rs. 110 crores has been allotted. It is also proposed to provide 100% Central assistance to 
the North Eastern States and the tribal sub-plan areas. For the tribal areas, it is also proposed to 
mobilise resourc es from the World Bank as well. 
14. The Committee was informed that there was mainly three reasons for the resurgence of 
malaria, namely:-
(i) Administrative reasons-complacency shown by the administration after getting some 
initial success. 
(ii) Technical reasons-
(a) Mosquitoes became immune to many insecticides and the insecticides which were 
very effective in the past became ineffective; 
(b) the parasites have been irresistable to certain drugs; 
(c) New drugs were tried out which also contributed in non-effectiveness of the 
programme to some extent. 
(iii) Financial reasons- The programme was integrated into the Primary Health Centres after 
getting initial success in the sixties. The Primary Health Centres being very busy in their 
own programmes, could . not provide attention and time which was very necessary for 
controlling malaria. Even financial allocation required for filling up the posts which were 
available in the sub-centres for eradication of malaria remained unfilled; the supply of 
PLO, etc. was not available because of financial constraints. All these factors 
contributed to the failure of the programme. Even financial allocations were reduced. 

Kala-Azar 
15. Kala-azar is another deadly disease which has become a serious Public Health Problem in 
Bihar and West Bengal. It is observed that after its resurgence in Bihar in early 70s, the disease 
has spread over from 4 districts to adjoining areas and now 30 districts in Bihar and 9 districts in 
West Bengal are the most affected. This estimate is based on cases reported in Government 
hospitals only. Some cases go to private practitioners and thus remain unreported. The disease is 
on the increase and has assumed serious dimensions in the above two States. 
16. According to the estimates, there were 14079 Kala-azar cases in the year 1986 with 47 
deaths and in West-Bengal there were 3718 cases with 25 deaths in the same year. There has 
be~n a rap id increase both in its incidence as weB as deaths in Bihar. In the year 1989, there 
were 30903 cases with 477 deaths in Bihar and 3575 cases with 20 deaths in West Bengal. In t~e 
year 1992 there were 66959 Kala-azar cases in Bihar with 1266 deaths (provisional upto October). 
So there has been alarming increase, both in the incidence and the death cases in Bihar which 
requires immediate remedial steps. 
17. Organised control measures have been initiated to control Kala-azar. Upto 1990-91, 
financial assistance for its control was being provided by the Central Government out of the 
NMEP budget provisions. However, separate funds amounting to Rs. 4.06 crores were madt: 
available during 1990-91 for control of this disease in Bihar and West Bengal. 
18. The Committee was informed that in order to check the menace, efforts are being made 
for interruption of transmission, for reducing vector population by undertaking indoor residual 
insecticidal spray twice annually. Early diagnosis and treatment of Kala-azar cases and providing 
health education for community awareness, are also being undertaken in this connection. 
19. The Committee was also informed that in view of the financial constrai nts, the Central 
Government decided to meet the total cost of medicines and insecticides for Kala-azar control in 
Bihar. Under the district action plan development, State Governments have agreed to deploy 
exclusive infrastructure for Kala-azar control and adequate material with strict superv ision, 
monitoring and evaluation. The concept of making different functionarie s at various levels 
responsible and accountable for success of the programme is likely to make a good impact on 
reduction of the incidence of Kala-azar. 
20. The Central Government is providing insecticides and imported anti Kala-azar drug i.e. 
Pentamidine Isothionate to the West Bengal Government. The Central Government has also 
provided assistance to the Bihar Government in cash and kind during the last two years i.e. in 
1990-91 and 1991-92, to the tune of Rs. 389.49 and Rs. 1535.99, respectively. 
21. A budget provision of Rs. 1500.00 lakhs has been made to provide material assistance for 
Kala-azar control. However, in view of the seriousness of the problem, commitment of the 
Central Government to ensure availability of material for effective control, a Revised Estimates 
for Rs. 2376.55 lakh has been proposed to meet the cost of insecticides and anti Kala-azar drugs. 
22. In addition UNICEF assistance of Rs. 15.55 lakh had been provided for 1990-91 to the 
State Governments for public information, education, communication activities and orientation 
training of medical professionals. UNICEF is providing assistance on continuing basis directly to 
the State Government of Bihar. Material assistance including the insecticides, DDT and the 
imported drug Pentamidine lsothionate is also provided. 

National Filaria Control Programme 
23. Filaria, like Malaria is also a deadly disease which has become a major health problem in 
our country. The disease has been prevalent throughout India except the States of Jammu & 
Kashmir, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh. ~liwram, Meghalaya, Tripura, Manipur, Rajasthan, 
Arunachal Pradesh. Delhi, Chandig~uh . f L .. :yana, Sikkim & Nagaland. Present estimates indicate 
that about 389 million people are li\·,ng in 175 endemic districts of which about 103 million are 
living in urban areas and the rest in rural areas. 
24. In order to control this disease, the National Filaria Control Programme was taken up in 
the year 1955 with the following action plan:-
(i) Delimitation of the problem in hither-to unsurveyed area; 
(ii) Control in Urban Areas through : 
a) Recurrent anti-larval measures; and 
b) Antiparasitic measure~. 
25. For this purpose about 206 Central Units, 27 Survey Units and 195 Clinks are working in 
the country. About 43.43 million people in urban areas are being protected through anti-larval 
measures by 206 control units and 195 clinics are giving treatment with Diethy I Uarbanarine to 
clinical cases and microfilaria. 
26. During the course of his oral evidence tendered before the Committee, the Secretary, 
Department of Health informed that efforts made in this connection have shown remarkable 
results . It is observed that about 73 per cent of the towns in microfilaria rate and about 69 per 
cent of towns in the disease rates where control measures are in operation for more than five 
years. have shown marked reduction in the filaria cases. 
Monitoring 
27. The Programme is being monitored by the Directorate of Malaria Eradication 
Programme and this organisation has got a good number of people spread all over the country. In 
addition to this, there are about 17 Regional Directors of Health posted in different States. 
Observations I recommendations 
28. The Committee is unhappy to note the sense of complacency shown by Government in 
eradication and control of malaria, resu lting in resurgence of malaria cases, especially after 
achieving initial success to a great extent during the fifties and the sixties. 
29. The Committee feels th;Jt a~sistance of World Bank be obtained expeditiously and new 
methods and technology should be useJ for the purpose. 
30. The Committee recommends that State Governments should be asked to be more 
vigilant, prompt, to strengthen the infrastructure including adequate staff anJ to make it 
obligatory for the private practitioner<: 10 report all the ca<;es to the authorities concerned. 
Malaria Research Centres should be provided requisite infrasrntcttJrc and staff to act as watch­
clogs. 
31. The Committee observes that the allocations for .\l daria are combined with the 
allocations for filaria and Kala-azar, which means that when there is an increase in filaria and 
Kala-azar part of allocations may be accordingly shifted to these areas, reducing the actual 
allocation for mahuia. The Committee recommends separate allocations for all the three wings 
namely Malaria, Kala-azar and Filaria respectively. The Committee further observes that in view 
of all three diseases having common aiiocai1ons . it is quite dear tiw L rhae bas been no actual 

increase in funds for anti-malaria programme in spite of the fact that the number of malaria cases 
have not come down since 1984. Not only that, there has been an increase in malaria cases, 
particularly cases of Malaria falciparum in tribal areas and in urban slums. The fact that majority 
of deaths from malaria being in tribal areas (60% of total cases) was found shocking by 
Committee. It is recommended that the recently-cleared proposal of making malaria eradication 
programme in tribal and other malaria-prone areas where health service is weak a 100% 
centrally-sponsored Scheme should be immediately implemented. Regular monitoring must also 
be done through cooperation with State Governments and local bodies. 
32. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the shortage of some effective and 
potent medicines to cure malaria particularly P. Falciparum and recommends that steps should be 
taken to ensure that the requisite medicines arc easily available in all the Hospitals/Dispensaries 
and in the open market. Government should also supply such medicines under National Malaria 
Eradication Programme to all the States so that all the State Government Hospitals could have 
the medicine. Arrangements should also be made to supply these medicines through Mobile 
dispensaries in the areas most affected by Malaria. Regular spray in the affected areas should also 
be undertaken. Inpregnated bed nets duly dipped in synthetic chemicals which not only kill the 
mosquitoes but also acts a repellent be provided wherever possible. 
33. As per the annual report (1992-93) of the Ministry of Health &. family Welfare, budget 
provisions and expenditure, both in cash and kind, is not adequate. Instead of increase, there has 
been decrease both in the allocations and the actual expenditure incurred on filaria Eradication 
Programmes. 
34. The Committee recommends that adequate funds, separate from the Malaria Eradication 
Programme, may be provided for controVEradication of Filaria and Kala-azar. 
35. The Committee also recommends that concerted efforts should be made to use new 
techniques and no laxity be shown in this regard. The Committee also recommends that both 
urban and rural areas be covered under Filaria Eradication Programme and awareness 
Programme should be given wide publicity through print and electronic media. Adequate supply 
of anti-filaria drugs in hospitals, dispensaries and in the open market be ensured apart from the 
usual spraying. 
II. National Leprosy Eradication Programme 
36. India has a very high rate of incidence of leprosy, which is widespread all over the 
country, and is one of the major health problems. 
37. The magnitude of the disease can be judged by the fact that as per the Ministry's Annual 
Report (1992-93), out of 10 million cases of leprosy in the world, 2.5 million are estimated to be 
found in India. The prevalance rate of leprosy exists above 5 per 1000 population in 201 districts 
out of 468 districts and about 15% of the leprosy sufferers arc children below 15 years of age. 
38. The leprosy control Programme, which was in existence since 1955, was given priority 
and redesignated as National Leprosy Eradication Programme in 1983. It is one of the centrally 
sponsored Health Schemes financed 100% by the Central government and implemented through 
State governments. 
39. During the course of his oral evidence tendered by the Secretary, Department of Health, 
the Committee was informed that the programme has been launched in 135 districts which are 
considered endemic i.e. where the prevalence rate is more than 5 per thousand. The Programme 
remains to be launched in 66 other districts which are in the same category. Then 

there are 77 other districts which are moderately endemic i.e. having a prevalance rate of 2 to 5 
per thousand. If these 143 districts are covered over and above 135 districts that are already 
covered then 95% of the leprosy patil·nts will be covered. 
40. The Committee was also informed that in the last 5-6 years, since the introduction of 
Multi-drug Therapy there has been a major breakthrough in bringing down the incidence of 
leprosy as out of estimated 4 million cases in 1981, the number has come down to 1.4 million by 
the end of february, 1993. Wherever the Multi-drug Therapy Programme has been in operation 
for more than 5 years, there is 80% reduction in incidence. 
41. The Secretary of the Health department stated that the programme has produced 
dramatic results and it is expected that leprosy would be eliminated from the country by the turn 
of the century, i.e. when the prevalence rate will be below 1 per 10,000 population. 
42. The Secretary of the department admitted that in an effort to cure more and more cases 
sufficient attention had not been paid to rehabilitation and reconstructive surgery and to help the 
patients lead a normal life after they are cured. 
43. Therefore, it is very necessary to have centres of reconstructive smgery and rehabilitation 
and a sustained health eduction campaign to make people understand that the patients who are 
cured or have undergone treatment for the disease arc absolutely safe and infection free. 
44. The Committee was informed that under the programme of major reconstructive surgery 
there is no plan to create new institutions instead under the world Bank project institutes where 
reconstructive surgery is available will be revamped and provided with equipments and appliances 
free of cost. 
45. These institutes will also be provided Rs. 250CY- for each major surgery and package of 
services which include full cost of operation service, OPD and total care of the patient. If an 
institute is not available within a district then the patient will be referred to any such institute 
established in a nearby district. In that case, the amount will be Rs. 250()1.. plus the 
reimbursement of travel expenses of the patient. 
46. It was informed that there are district Leprosy Officers in 105 districts in which Multi­
drug Therapy Programme has been taken up and also there is one doctor for every 4-5 lakhs of 
population. To ensure that the programme reaches every village there are village level workers 
for every 20,000 population who are supposed to go around and find out the cases and see that 
the services reach them for their treatment. 
47. The Secretary conceded that some posts of doctors are lying vacant in some districts and 
the State Governments have been urged to fill them up. 
48. There arc also District Leprosy Societies in all the districts where the programme has 
been taken-up. In the societies there are local representatives, members of Legislatures, 
panchayats etc. with whom various aspects of the programme are discussed. 
49. As regard role of Voluntary organisations it was informed that out of about 285 
voluntary organisations, 55 are receiving assistance from Central Government. The grants-in-aid 
are given under the Survey, Education and Treatment (S.E.T) Scheme and are released through 
the State Governments. 
50. The performance of the voluntary organisations are being closely monitored by the 
Central Government and also by the State Governments themselves. However, the Secretary 
admitted that it is possible that some voluntary organisations may not be performing upto the 
expectations but by and large they are doing commendable work. It was also informed that there 

s 
< ... 
are some international voluntary organisations also who have covered the entire districts and 
done extremely good work. 
51. The NLEP is given high priority and for the Eighth Five Year Plan it has been allocated 
Rs. 140.00 crores as agamst actual expenditure of Rs. 40.00 crores during the Sixth Plan (1980-
85) and Rs. 85.82 crores during Seventh Plan (1985-90) The expediture for the 8th Five Year 
Plan is constantly increasing on yearly basis from 17.58 crores irt 1990-91. to 24.38 crorcs in 1990-
91, and Rs. 35.00 crores as per revised estimates of 1992-9~. The Budget estimates for 1993-94 is 
also Rs. 35.00 crores. In reply to query as to why the budget provision of Rs. 35 crores for 1993-
94 has been kept at the same level as that of the last year, it was informed that after negotiations 
with the World Bank a loan of Rs. 332 crores, ove1 a period of 6 years, for the expansion of the 
programme has been approved and the formal approval by the Board of World Bank is likely to 
come in June-July. This additional amount will substantially add to the financial resources for this 
programme. 
52. The external aid component earlier wa-; as meagre a<> Rs. l.OS crores in 1990-91. Rs. 1. 78 
crores in 191Jl-92 and Rs. 1.10 crores in 1992-93. Hm•\.:n:r. til• aid ha-.; sub~taniia:Iy innea~cd to 
Rs. 11.00 crores in 1993-94 due to major contribution of Rs. 9.50 crorcs by the World Bank. 
53. The evaluation of the programme was done in December, 1991 through 15 ~pecially 
created teams of experts each, one of the members of which was International <'Xfh!rt on Jep10sy. 
Observations/recommendations 
1. The reported data has been validakd. 
2. The progress of programme is slow in littJr Pradr~h. Madhya Pradesh. Bihar. Oris;;a 
and West Bengal. 
3. A good number of posts of .Medical Officers. Non-t\1edical Supervisors are vacant in 
some states. Such vacancies are 20% to 30''l'o in Uttar Pradesh. Madhya Pradesh. Bihar 
and West Bengal. 
4. There is need for further toning up of logistic arrangements i.e. drugs. vehicle'i and 
equipments. 
5. Temporary Hospitalization wards are not being utilised to their capacity. 
6. There is need to further tone-up the training acti\ ities. 
7. M.D.T . has been found to he very effective. 
54. The Committee appreciates the optimism of the Mini~try thJt they will be uble to 
eliminate leprosy from the country by the turn of the century and hopes that th<.. Ministry will 
make all out effo rts to achieve the target. 
55. The Committee also hopes that the Ministry will learn k~son from their mistakes in 
Malar ia Eradication Programme and will not repeat them in this pt ogramme <;nC. recommends 
that foolp roof steps be taken not only t.)r the elimination of the leprosy hut also for rehabilitation 
of the people who are inflicted \\ith the disease and the programme be continued '' tth same 
vigour till leprosy is curnpletely eraJicated. 
56. The Committee reco mmends that M.D.T. programme, which has produced dramatic 
results, be expanded to such an ex tent that all the distnct s of the country whe re the prevalence 
rate of leprosy is more than 2 per 1000 population and pockets of districts which have endemic 
leprosy , are brought under it immediately. The Committee also recommend s that rural and 
backward areas which have endemic leprosy be given special attention. 

57. The Committee expresses its deep anguish over the fact that Department has done 
almost nothing for so many years for the rehabilitation of the patients which virtually negates the 
objective of the programme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that rehabilitation and 
reconstructive surgery be given utmost priority and centres of reconstructive surgery and 
rehabilitation be opened in all the districts where prevalence rate is more than 2 per 1000 
population. 
58. The Committee takes strong exception to the approach of the Department to treat cases 
in which disease starts eating up fingers and nose, as burn put cases for whom nothing much can 
be done except rehabilitation to a limited extent. 
59. The Committee is of the view that if the explanation of the Department is accepted no 
treatment is to be provided to the advance cases of AIDS and Cancer as they are not curable. 
The Committee feels that no case is a burn out case and every patient deserves the best 
treatment and rehabilitation even if he cannot be cured. 
60. The Committee, therefore, recommends that for the so called burnt out cases more 
humanistic approach be adopted and they be provided best possible treatment and he kept in the 
hospitals as long as it is required. 
61. The Committee also recommends that some scheme be formulated for the poor patients 
who are living on the river banks of religious places, begging on the streets or living in isolated 
places for whom even their families do not care and they may be provided food, clothing, shelter 
and all other medical attention. 
62. The Committee is not convinced with the claim made by the Secretary during the course 
of his oral evidence that they have one doctor for every 4 to 5 Jakhs of population and 
recommends that it should be ensured that there are doctors for every 4-5 lakhs of population 
and also recommends that Committee be informed of number of doctors in position in each 
district. 
63. The Committee fails to understand the rationale for having District Leprosy Officers in 
105 districts only when the programme has been launched in 135 districts. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that post of District Leprosy Offi.;ers be immediately created in remaining 
30 districts and also recommends that District Leprosy Officers be appointed in all the districts of 
the country, in phases, where the prevalence rate is more than 2 per 1000 population. The 
Committee is of the considered view that only doctors as District Leprosy Officer can properly 
monitor the progress of programme and recommends that only medical men be appointed as 
District Leprosy Officers. 
64. The Committee also recommends that wherever the post of District Leprosy Officer is 
vacant it should be immediately filled up and it should also be ensured that posts of District 
Leprosy Officers are not kept vacant for long durations. In case it is not possible to fill up the 
post for some reasons the alternative arrangements be made. 
65. The Committee feels that budget allocation of Rs. 35.00 crores for NLEP for the year 
1993-94 is inadequate and it should have been increased substantially keeping in view the 
importance of the programme arid rate of inflation, irrespective of the fact that World Bank grant 
worth Rs. 68 crores was expected to be released from August, 1994. In the course of oral 
evidence before the Committee, the Health Secretary said that refampicin, needed for both 
leprosy and tuberculosis, is now likely to be produced in the country from the basic stage. This 
would lead to the reduction of the cost of Refampicin, which is a costly drug now. The 
Committee thinks that instead of the price of drugs being primarily within the purview of the 

Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Health Ministry be also involved in this particularly in the 
case of basic drugs needed for national programmes. 
III. National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB) 
66. Eye is the most beautiful and invaluable gift of nature. Without eyes world is nothing but 
darkness. India being the second most populous country in the world, has at present 14 per 
thousand cases of blindnes s. Government in its first effort to meet the backlog of blindness on a 
national scale, launched a National Programme for Trachorma Control in 1963. This Programme 
was subsequently merged into the National Programme for control of Visual impairment and 
prevention of blindness which was re-named in 1976 as National Programme for Control of 
Blindness (NPCB). Thi s is 100% a Central Government sponsored scheme. 
67. As per the evaluation of blindness done by All India Survey 1988-89, cataract is found to 
be responsible for 81% of blindness in India. 
68. National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCll ) aims at providing intensive health 
education for eye care through the mass media and extension education methods; extension of 
ophthalmic servic es in rural areas through mobile units and eye camps and establishment of 
permanent infrastructure for eye care as an integral part of general heallh services. Government 
claims that it is engaged in the control of blindness since 1963 but the Committee is surprised to 
note the fluctuation in the funds released, expenditure incurred and actual cataract operations 
performecVproposcd to be performed during the period 1985-94 as illustrated in the following 
statistics:-
Year 
1985-86 
1986-87 
1987-88 
1988-89 
1989-90 
1990-91 
1991-92 
1992-93 
1993-94 
Amount released 
on the NPCB 
(in crores) 
6.16 
5.56 
6.05 
5.44 
5.70 
5.67 
9.70 
20.00 
25.00 
Expcnuitu re 
incurred 
(in crorcs) 
6.76 
6.88 
8.50 
7.65 
9.82 
8.12 
9.70 
Cataract 
operations 
performed 
(in Jakhs) 
12.24 
12.09 
12.09 
11.90 
10.70 
11.98 
15.13 
12.25 
(provisional till 
Feb. 1993) 
69. The Committee finds no plausible reason to the variations in the above figures and 
therefore, recommends that there should not be any let up in the efforts to achieve the target of 
reducing the blindness from the present 14 per thousand to 3 per thousand by the turn of the 
century i.e. 2000 A.D. 
70. The Secretary, Dcpa1tment of Health, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, in his oral 
evidence tendered bef0re the Committee, has stated that at least two million people are being 
added every year to the number of persons requiring cataract operations whereas the 
performance has been to the tune of 1.5 million operations per year. In other words at least 
50,000 people are being added to the list of patients requiring cataract surgery every year. 
71. The Committee takes it seriously that the achievement rate of cataract operations is 
declining steadily. For instance, in the year 1990-91, the percentage of achievement for cataract 

operations was 92.53% but in the year 1991-92 it was only 73.47% and in 1992-93 it is 
expected still to go down as against the target of 20.00 lakhs, only 12.25 lakh operations have 
been performed till February, 1993. Therefore, this is a matter of great concern and anxiety. 
72. The Committee strongly recommends that Government should find out the reasons of 
this fall in the cataract operations and devise some programmes so that more and more 
cataract operations can be performed at a greater speed and if not more, at least targets fixed 
should be achieved every year. The Committee also puts a word of caution that in its urge to 
achieve the targets , Government should ensure that no quacks are used in such operations 
and that the number of casualities should be eliminated completely. It should also be ensured 
that post-operations care should be given high priority and benefits given to the poor families 
undergoing such operations should reach them immediately such as grant of Rupees Sixty for 
spectacles and the like. 
73. The Committee is surprised to find that no foolproof method has been adopted in 
calculating the cataract operations done by the private and non-Government organisations 
(NGOs) and recommends that supply of information to the PHC or CHO at the district level 
should be made mandatory for all such organisations engaged in the cataract operations. 
74. The Secretary , Department of Health informed the Committee that corneal blindness 
is not a major reason for blind nor a contributory factor. But, the Committee feels that there 
is a need to set up eye-banks in the country and therefore recommends that Government 
should persue, educate and encourage people through mass media to donate eyes voluntarily 
on a large scale. Simultaneously, Government should also develop adequate infrastructu re and 
facilities in order to successfully procure the eye of each and every donor. 
75. Voluntary Organisations play a significant role to make Nation~! Programm e for 
Control of Blindness (NPCB) , successful, especially in t he field of Education, Prevention, 
Rehabilitation and Surgical services, etc. Government have been giving emphasis in the recent 
past to form District Blindness Contr ol Societies in all the States and Union Territori es which 
are to be registered under the Societies Registration A ct of 1860, under the control of Deputy 
Commissioneli'District Magistrate by involving voluntar y organisations of the area and raising 
funds from local sources. In this connection , t he District Ophthalmic Surgeon is the Member 
Secretary of the Society apart from the repr esentatives of the local and voluntary organisations 
and as per the oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the Secretary, Deptt. of 
Health 174 such societies have been formed so far and are functioning. 
76. The Committee feels that it is a very good step taken by Government in order to 
achieve targets fixed for cataract operations and making National Programme for Contr ol of 
Blindness a success and recommends that a mechanism may be evolved to hold meetings of 
such societies at least once in three months and all concerned should be asked to attend the 
meetings and also monitor the cataract operations performed in their district invariably. The 
Committee also recommends that concerted efforts should be made to form such societies in 
all the remaining distircts all over the country as soon as possible. 
77. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for the year 
1992-93 funds allocations under Eighth Plan for the National Programme for Control of 
Blindness has been fixed at rupees 120 crores apart from the foreign aid agreed upon between 
the Government of India and Government of Denmark which is Rupees 22.25 crores over a 
period of five years 1989-94 under phase-11, the funds for which are to be released in a 
phased manner depending upon the actual expenditure incurred by the various State Govern­
ments under the scheme. The Committee recommends that indigenous allocation may be 

enhanced in order to achieve the targets fixed for National Programme for Control of 
Blindness apart from exploring funds from such foreign agencies. 
National AIDS Control Programme 
78. Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) has emerge d as one of the major 
public health problems in recent years. It is caused by human immuno deficiency virus (HIV). 
AIDS virus destroys the body's immune system i.e. strength to fight against disease. Hence 
the person becomes susceptible to all kinds of diseases and slowly and slowly goes down and 
dies. The virus spreads primarily through sexual intercourse, but can also be transmitted by 
sharing drug injecting needles, through transfusion of infected blood, and from infected 
mothers to their unborn and new born children. 
79. According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) estimate, there are about one 
million people infected with HIV in India. HIV infection in the country has been reported 
from as many as 23 States/Union Territories of which Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Delhi and 
Manipur have the highest incidence. 
80. The first HIV infection case in India was detected in Madras in 1986, in a survey 
conducted by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). Subsequently, the AIDS 
Control Programme was formulated in 1987, which has following components: (i) Surveillance; 
(ii) Safety of blood and blood products; and (iii) Health Education. 
81. A separate wing known as AIDS Control Organisation has been established in the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare from September/October, 1992, in order to co-ordinate 
the programme effectively. Since AIDS has no cure as of now, the thrust of the whole 
programme is on creation of awareness through information, communication and education for 
promotion of safe practices including safe sex, use of sterilised/disposable needles, use of 
uninfected blood and blood products etc. 
82. The Committee feels that proper and effective implementation of the National AIDS 
Control Programme is possible only when there exists essential infrastructure. In a country 
like India where a large number of population is illiterate, it is a challenging task to educate 
and arouse awareness to make them understand the causes of the disease and advise them on 
taking necessary precautions. In the absence of a vaccine, it is necessary to inform people as 
to how HIV is transmitted and educate them to protect themselves and their loved ones from 
the deadly disease. As the number of AIDS cases increase education aimed at preventing the 
syndrome becomes more important and imperative. 
83. During the course of his oral evidence tendered before the Committee, the Secretary, 
Department of Health informed that efforts are being made to educate people in order to 
control Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD) because it is one of the major factors for 
transmission of HIV infection. There are 332 STD clinics spread all over the country. Efforts 
are also being made to impart training to rural doctors so that they can identify the symptoms 
and refer the persons suffering from the disease to STD clinics. Alarming and rapid increase 
in IUV positive cases in our country has necessiated utmost and precautionary measure in the 
field of AIDS control. The Committee, therefore, recommends that it should be made 
mandatory to carry out HIV tests of persons who undergo normal blood tests in hospitals. It 
will in this way be easier to detect and screen out the AIDS cases. 
84. The Committee observes that services available in some of the STD clinics are not 
being properly utilised. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to utilise the 
STD clinics fully for the treatment of the afflicted persons. 

85. The Committee feels the need tc launch a massive programme to promote public 
awareness and community support. So that myths and misconceptions about the disease could be 
obliterated. In this regard the Committee recommends that:-
(i) An advertisement campaign should be designed to reach large number of people with 
messages about prevention of AIDS. Television and radio spots may also be used. 
(ii) Leaflets should be published for distribution in various public forums and in health care 
facilities. Such material must contain latest medical information, reach new target popula­
tion, and should stress matters that survey results have indicated to be of special importance. 
This material may also be prepared in regional languages for distribution among local 
population. 
(iii) Forums should be set up and workshops, classes and seminars should be organised from time 
to time in different areas to enable members of the general public to interact with the 
experts. This will allay the fears and wrong notions which exist in society about the disease. 
(iv) Journalists and specialists should prepare articles to enhance readers' general knowledge and 
arouse awareness and understanding about AIDS. 
(v) The programme should be designed not only to inform the target population about the 
disease but also to motivate them to act on information they already possess. 
(vi) The programme should not rely entirely on printed and broadcast messages. Face to face 
education may also help people to clarify their misconceptions. More and more voluntary 
organisations may be encouraged to take up the challenging task of enlightening the people 
through the use of different media viz. drama, street plays, exhibitions and videos. 
(vii) W}lile educating people about the disease and its control, public sensibilities should be 
considered carefully . in order to make the programme acceptable to them. 
86. The Committee emphasises on the need to evolve broad AIDS Control Strategy covering 
all major aspects such as revamping of STD Control Programme, safe blood transfusion and 
streamlining infection control in hospitals. There should be a stricter enforcement of Screening of 
blood donors. Besides this, a responsible system of primary health care centres should also be 
established for providing psycho-social care to infected persons and to counter social ostracism 
against them. 
87. The Committee also stresses the need to encourage extensive grass-root participation of 
general public and voluntary organisations in the AIDS prevention and control programme. 
88. The indigenous systems of medicine contain a reservoir of wisdom which concerns public 
health. The Committee recommends that efforts may be made to revive and strengthen the 
traditional systems. Ayurveda and other indigenous systems of medicine may be encouraged to 
find treatment of the AIDS. 
89. Neem is found in abundance in India. Many International investigations and research 
studies have proved beyond doubt that it is very effective and safe in the cure of deadly diseases 
like AIDS and Cancer, etc. Therefore, the Committee recommends that concerted efforts should 
be made to harness the use of Neem and its products in the cure of AIDS and cancer in addition 
·to other such diseases. The Committee also recommends that more and more emphasis should be 
laid on research in this regard for which adequate funds should be provided. 
90. While the Committee agrees that proper precautionary measures should be taken to 
check the spread of HIV infection which might lead to AIDS, the Committee recommends for an 
indigenous study of AIDS cases in the country, for proper assessment of its extent, instead of 

relying on World Health Organisation report alone. The Committee fails to understand the 
reasons for the priority given to the anti-AIDS programme in the World Bank assisted scheme. 
While assistance is still to come for most of the other national programmes (e.g. Malaria 
Eradication Programme) and hardly any real increase in budgetary allocations has been made. 
The enormous quantum of World Bank assistance for the anti-AIDS programme seems to be 
totally lop-sided, to say the least. The Committee feels that instead of this lavishness, 
enhancement of allocation in basic health services like Anti-Malaria, Anti-Tuberculosrs Program­
mes, etc. would also have pre-empted spread of AIDS. 

MINUTES 

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMA N 
RESOURCE DEVELOP\1ENT 
vn 
*SEVENTH MEETING 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Develop­
ment met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the lOth June, 1993, in Committee Room 'A', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
4. Shri Md. Salim 
5. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
6. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
7. Shri P. Upendra 
8. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
9. Dr. Viswanatham Kanithi 
10. Dr. V. Raje shwaran 
11. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
12. Shri Ishwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
13. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
14. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
15. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
16. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
17. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
18. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
19. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
20. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
21. Shri Suraj Mandal 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFAPE 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH) 
Shri R.L. Misra, Secretary 
Shri I. Chaudhari, Additional Secretary (Health) 
Shri P.R. Das Gupta, Additional Secretary (AIDS) 
Dr. A.K. Mukerjee, Director-General , Health Services 
Shri T.K. Das, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati S. Chandra, Joint Secretary 
Shri Pawan Chopra, Joint Secretary 
*Minutes of I to VI meetings relate to matters not included in this report. 

Shri I.S. Bist. Joint Secretary 
Shri B.S. Lamba, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati A.P. Ahluwalia, Financial Advisor & Jt. Secretary 
Dr. C. H S. Shastri, Advisor (ISM) 
Dr. V.T. Augustus, Advisor (.Homoeopathy) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C. Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Om Prakash, Und~r Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee heard the Secretary ~Health), Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
regarding Annual Report for the year, 1992-93 concerning Department of Health. 
The Committee adjourned at 1.25 P.M. and re-assembled at 4.00 P.M. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.45 P.M. to meet again on the 11th June, 1993 at 
11.00 A.M. 
Vlll 
EIGHTH MEETING 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Develop­
ment met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 11th June, 1993, in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, 
Parliament I louse Annexe. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Ynda\' -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Miss Saroj Khaparde 
5. Shri Md. Salim 
6. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
7. Shri P. Upendra 
/ 
LOK SABHA 
8. Dr. Yiswanatham Kanithi 
9. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
10. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
11. Shri Dau Dayal )(l'\hi 
12. Dr. K.D. Jeswani 
13. Dr. Mahadeepak Smgh Shakya 
14. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
15. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
16. Shrimatl Malini Bhattacharya 
17. Shri Brahmanand Mand~l 
18. Shri Suraj Mandai 

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH) 
Shri R.L. Misra, Secretary 
Slui I. Chauclhari, Additional Secretary (Health) 
Shri P.R. Das Gupta, Additional Secretary (AIDS) 
Dr. A.K. Mukerjee, Director-General, Health Services 
Shri T.K. Das, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati S. Chandra, Joint Secretary 
Shri Pawan Chopra, Joint Secretary 
Shri I.S. Bist, Joint Secretary 
Slui B.S. Lamba, Joint Secretary 
Shrimnti A.P. Ahluwalia, Financial Advisor & Joint Secretary 
Dr. C H.S. Shastri, Advisor (ISM) 
Dr. V.T. Augustus, Advisor (llomoeopathy) 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R.C Soperna, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Om Prakash, Onder Secretary 
Shri A.K. Singh, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee heard the Secretary (Hcc lth), Ministry of Ht ,tlth & Family Welfare 
regardmg Annual Report for the year, 1992-93 concernmg Department of Health. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 2.25 P.:M. 
XXI 
*TWENTY -FIRST MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 16th December, 1993 in Committee Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Anncxe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Slui Ram Naresh Yadav -- Chairmall 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Shri Mel. Salim 
5. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
7. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
8. Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
• Minutes of IX to XX meetings relate to matters not included in this report. 

9. Shri Bapu Hari Chaure 
10. Shri A. Thulasian Vandayar 
11. Dr. G.L. Kanaujia 
12. Shri Anna Joshi 
13. Smt. Malini Bhattacharya 
14. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Ram Krishan, Under Secretary 
Shri Rohtas, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee considered and unanimously adopted the Draft Fourth Report with some 
modifications. The Committee decided to resent the Report in the Rajya Sabha and to day the 
same on the Table of Lok Sabha on Tuesday, the 1st December, 1993 and authorised the 
Chairman and in his absence Shri Md. Salim and Prof. !.G. Sanadi to present the Report in the 
Rajya Sabha and also authorised Dr. Vasant Niwrutti Pawar and Shri Dau Dayal Joshi to lay the 
Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha. The Committee decided to hold its next meetings at 3.00 
P.M. on Monday, the 10th January, 1994 and at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11th January, 1994 
to take up for consideration the National Culture Policy, 1992. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 