 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
June, 2026 / Jyeshtha, 1948, (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
Report No 
380 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred and 
Sixty Eighth Report on Review of functioning of National Council for 
Teacher Education (NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of 
teachers in light of NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers 
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 16th June, 2026)  
(Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 16th June, 2026) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rsc_hrd@rss.sansad.in

 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also 
available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY REPORT 
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred 
and Sixty Eighth Report on Review of functioning of National Council 
for Teacher Education (NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training 
of teachers in light of NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers 
 
 
 
(Presented to Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 16th June, 2026)  
(Forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 16th June, 2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
June, 2026 / Jyeshtha, 1948, (Saka)  
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGES 
 
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...............................................             (i) 
2.        PREFACE..........................................................................................................  (ii) 
3.  ACRONYMS.................................................................................................. (iii) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…................  1-23 
Chapter-I  Recommendations which have been accepted  
 by the Government ............................................................... ..... 2-9 
Chapter -II   Recommendations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies........... 10-21 
Chapter-III   Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee.... 22 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government are still awaited…..  23 
  
6. MINUTES.................................................................................................     24 -27 
7. ANNEXURES.................................................................................................     28 -152 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025) 
 
1.  Shri Digvijaya Singh    - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. $ 
3. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
4. Shri C. Sadanandan Master 
5. # 
6. @ 
7. Shrimati Rekha Sharma 
8. Dr. Bhim Singh 
9. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
10. Ms Swati Maliwal* 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
12. Dr. Angomcha Bimol Akoijam 
13. Shrimati Rachna Banerjee 
14. Shrimati Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
15. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
16. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
17. Prof. Varsha Eknath Gaikwad 
18. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
19. Dr. Hemang Joshi 
20. Shri Amar Sharadrao Kale 
21. Shri Kalipada Saren Kherwal 
22. Adv Dean Kuriakose 
23.  Dr. Sambit Patra 
24.  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
25.  Dr. D Purandeswari 
26.  Shri Rajeev Rai 
27. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
28. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
29.  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
30. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
31. Dr. T Sumathy alias Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Secretary 
Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri Jayanta Kumar Mallick, Director  
Shri Devashish Sen, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ashwani Yadav, Senior Secretariat Assistant 
  *Nominated w.e.f. 16.10.2025 
# Vacant w.e.f. 05.01.2026 
$ Vacant w.e.f. 02.04.2026 
@ Vacant w.e.f. 06.05.2026 
(i) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and Seventy Third Report 
of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in 
the Three Hundred and Sixty Eighth Report of the Committee on "Review of functioning of 
National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of 
teachers in light of NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers", which was presented to 
the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Recommendations contained in above mentioned 
Report were received from the Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of 
Education vide their communication dated 16th February, 2026. 
3.  The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
21st May, 2026. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
21st May, 2026 
Vaishakha 31,1948 (Saka)  
 
  
 
 
 
Shri Digvijaya Singh 
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary  
              Standing Committee on Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

 
 
 
ACRONMYS  
 
 
AWP&B Annual Work Plan and Budget 
BA Bachelor of Arts 
B.Ed Bachelor of Education  
B.El.Ed Bachelor of Elementary Education 
B.Sc. Bachelor of Science 
BRCs Block Resource Centres 
CPD Continuous Professional Development 
CRCs Cluster Resource Coordinators 
CTET Central Teacher Eligibility Test 
DIET District Institutes for Education and Training 
DoSE&L Department of School Education and Literacy 
EWS Economically Weaker Section  
ICT Information and Communication Technology 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
ITEP Integrated Teacher Education Programme 
JPC Joint Parliamentary Committee 
KVS Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan 
MoWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training 
NCFs National Curriculum Frameworks 
NCTE National Council for Teacher Education 
NEP 2020 National Education Policy 2020 
NHEQF  National Higher Education Qualifications Framework 
NIT National Institute of Technology 
OBCs Other Backward Classes 
PAB Project Approval Board 
PRABANDH PRoject Appraisal, Budgeting, Achievements and Data 
Handling 
PTR Pupil-Teacher Ratio 
PwD Person with disability  
RIE Regional Institute of Education 
RTE Act, 2009 Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 
RR Recruitment Rules 
SCERTs State Councils for Educational Research and Training 
SCs Scheduled Castes 
SSA Samagra Shiksha Abhiyan  
STET State Teacher Eligibility Test 
STs Scheduled Tribes 
TEIs Teacher Education Institutions 
UDISE+ Unified District Information System for Education Plus 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UTs Union Territories  
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, 
Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in its 368th  Report on " Review of functioning of 
National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of 
teachers in light of NEP 2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers ", which was presented to 
the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2025. 
2. The Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in above 
mentioned Report were received from the Department of School Education and Literacy, Ministry 
of Education vide their communication received on 16th February, 2026. These have been 
categorized as follows.  
Chapter I: Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
Paras –  3.8, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14, 3.17, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 5.16, 5.19, 5.20 and 
5.21. 
Total - 15 
Chapter II: Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's replies:- 
Paras – 2.7, 2.10, 2.12, 2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 2.23, 2.24, 2.25, 2.26, 2.27, 2.28, 2.29, 3.9, 
3.10, 3.15, 3.16, 3.18, 4.8, 4.10, 4.12, 4.14, 4.18, 4.20, 4.21, 5.15, 5.17 and 5.18. 
Total - 29 
Chapter III: Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:- 
Paras – Nil. 
 
Chapter-IV: Observation/recommendations in respect of which replies of the              
Government is still awaited:-  
Paras –  Nil. 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) 
 
Recommendation  
1. The Committee acknowledges the smoother transition from old system of teachers' training to 
new one i.e. ITEP. However, the Committee notes that many institutions, particularly private and 
non-multidisciplinary ones, lack the infrastructure, trained faculty, and resources to implement 
ITEP effectively. The requirement for composite institutions offering multidisciplinary programs 
limits scalability, as not all colleges meet this criterion. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Department/NCTE should establish a phased support system, including grants and 
training programs, to upgrade infrastructure and faculty qualifications in eligible institutions. 
Further, it should also partner with premier institutions like IITs and Central Universities to 
create model ITEP programs that others can emulate. Additionally, a faculty development 
program focusing on interdisciplinary teaching and 21st-century pedagogy should be mandated. 
(Para 3.8) 
Action Taken 
In terms of the recommendations of NEP 2020, promotion of teacher education within 
multidisciplinary institutions, and expansion of Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) 
institutions across the country have been undertaken in a phased manner. 
NCTE Regulations 2014 and 2021 (revised from time to time) outline norms and 
standards for granting recognition to higher education institutions for teacher education 
programs, along with infrastructure, faculty requirements and eligibility, available in the public 
domain. 
NCTE has released the Curriculum Framework along with suggestive syllabi for the 
Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP), which is being implemented by premier 
institutions such as IITs, NITs, RIEs, and others. The Curriculum Framework incorporates 21st-
century curricular and pedagogical perspectives to ensure contemporary, multidisciplinary, and 
learner- centric teacher preparation.                  
 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee observes that the ITEP curriculum, while aiming to integrate general studies 
i.e. Mathematics, Sciences, Humanities with professional teacher training, lacks clarity on how it 
differs from existing four-year programs like B.A./B.Sc. B.Ed. or B.El.Ed. This ambiguity leads to 
overlapping content and confusion among stakeholders about its unique value. Hence, the 
Committee recommends that the Department/ NCTE should 
(i) develop a clear, modular curriculum framework that balances general education, pedagogical 
training, and practical experience. The curriculum should explicitly outline learning 

3 
 
outcomes for each stage (Foundational, Preparatory, Middle, Secondary) as per NEP 2020’s 
5+3+3+4 structure; 
(ii) integrate international benchmarks, such as inquiry-based learning and technology enabled 
teaching, to prepare teachers for 21st-century classrooms which would align with ITEP’s 
aim to adopt global standards; and 
(iii) establish a review committee to periodically update the ITEP curriculum based on feedback 
from educators, students, and schools to ensure relevance and effectiveness. 
(Para 3.11) 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee notes that the quality of teacher education programme depends upon the 
quality of institutions. The proliferation of substandard private institution driven by commercial 
interests can significantly undermine the ITEP' s goal and objective of NEP-2020 to produce 
high quality teachers, as many institutions prioritize profit over quality. The Committee 
therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to:- 
(iv) enforce rigorous norms for recognition of ITEP-offering institutions, including mandatory 
compliance with infrastructure, faculty, and curriculum standards. Noncompliant institutions 
should face de-recognition; 
(v) make inspection reports and compliance data publicly available on NCTE’s website to ensure 
accountability and check commercialization; and 
(vi) increase funding for Public Universities and Government Colleges offering ITEP to reduce 
reliance on private institutions and ensure affordable access for students. 
(Para 3.12) 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee observes that ITEP mandates that a significant portion of the program, at least 
25%, be dedicated to school-based activities and internships. However, many institutions lack 
partnerships with quality schools for internships, leading to inconsistent practical training 
experiences. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to develop 
partnerships with diverse schools (Government, private, rural, urban) to provide varied teaching 
experiences. NCTE should also create a framework for internship evaluation, including mentor 
feedback and student performance metrics. The Committee also recommends to introduce 
technology-driven simulations and micro-teaching modules to supplement real-world 
internships, especially in institutions with limited access to quality schools. Further, NCTE 
should ensure that internships include exposure to inclusive classrooms, addressing diverse 
learner needs including learners' with special needs, gender, disadvantaged section of society 
etc., as mandated in NCTE regulations. 
(Para 3.13) 
Recommendation 
5. The Committee notes that ITEP emphasizes on technology integration. However, a 
number of TEIs lack the infrastructure or trained faculty to incorporate digital tools effectively. 
Additionally, there is insufficient focus on Continuous Professional Development (CPD) post-
training/education. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of School Education 
and Literacy to provide for sufficient grants to State Governments and TEIs to develop digital 

4 
 
labs and train faculty in using educational technologies, such as learning management systems 
and virtual classrooms etc. The Committee also recommends that CPD modules for ITEP 
graduates, focusing on emerging pedagogical trends, technology integration, and inclusive 
education be introduced on mandatory basis. Further, NCTE should collaborate with NCERT to 
offer online CPD courses to ITEP graduates. 
(Para 3.14) 
Action Taken 
The detailed curricular framework, explicitly outlining the learning outcomes for each 
stage(Foundational, Preparatory, Middle, Secondary) as per NEP 2020’s 5+3+3+4 structure, has 
already been developed by incorporating general education, pedagogical training and practical 
experience in ITEP and other teacher education programs under revision. 
The curriculum framework of ITEP incorporates inquiry-based learning as an integral 
pedagogical approach, along with technology-enabled teaching, to prepare teachers for 21st-
century classrooms in alignment with global standards. Further, under the Ability Enhancement 
and Value Added Courses, a dedicated 2-credit course on technology-enabled Teaching, ICT in 
Education, is offered in the 5th semester. 
An ITEP review committee has already been constituted for periodic updation based on 
feedback from educators, students, and schools, ensuring continued relevance and effectiveness. 
Suggestions furnished by the Committee will be considered by NCTE in consultation 
with all stakeholders, including NCERT. 
 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee also recommends that linguistic and cultural diversity in curriculum, local 
relevant pedagogies such as folk arts, classical regional literature and state level learning 
practices etc. should be given utmost importance and priority under the ITEP and education 
being a Concurrent-list subject in the Constitution, the State Governments should be given 
sufficient time and autonomy to evaluate its feasibility, cost implication and teacher workforce 
alignment. Further, the Department of School Education and Literacy should provide with 
institutional and financial support to the State Governments for upgrading public colleges/TEIs 
to meet the rigorous norms required for ITEP accreditation. 
(Para 3.17) 
Action Taken 
In alignment with NEP 2020, the curriculum of ITEP promotes multilingual pedagogy. 
Under the stage –specific Content cum Pedagogy component of ITEP, two courses on Languages 
are offered- Language I and Language II. 
Language I will be a language selected from the list of languages included in the 8th 
schedule of the Constitution of India. Language II will be a language other than Language I. 
These courses aim at enabling students to acquire and demonstrate language proficiency and 
linguistic abilities including critical reading and writing that will help them understand and 
articulate ideas and arguments clearly and coherently. The courses would also help students 
appreciate India's rich linguistic diversity and the value of multilingualism in the school 
classroom. 
 

5 
 
 
District Institute of Education and Training (DIETs) 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee appreciates the upgradation of DIETs into DIETs of Excellence. However, the 
Committee takes note of the submission of the Department of School Education & Literacy 
regarding the variation in DIETs' score which suggests inconsistent infrastructure and HR 
quality across the DIETs. Further, the States are encouraged to improve DIETs to meet the 60-
point threshold by the Department but the effectiveness of this encouragement is unclear. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to encourage the State Governments to 
develop action plans for DIET improvement, with incentives for achieving higher scores within a 
stipulated timeframe. 
(Para 5.9) 
Action Taken 
Comprehensive baseline assessment of all existing functional DIETs in the country has 
been undertaken, considering key parameters such as availability of infrastructure facilities and 
resources, including classrooms, libraries, laboratories, ICT facilities and residential hostels. The 
assessment was carried out through a structured Google Form to ensure uniformity and 
objectivity across States/UTs. Based on this assessment, DIETs with relatively better 
infrastructure and resources have been prioritized for transformation. 
The criteria for assessment and selection of DIETs for upgradation as DIETs of 
Excellence is detailed in the Concept note on Empowering DIETs as Centers of Excellence 
(Annexure-I). DIETs securing a score of 60 points and above are being considered eligible for 
upgradation under the scheme. This benchmark ensures that the DIET has attained a minimum 
level of preparedness and functionality before receiving central support. 
DIETs scoring below the prescribed benchmark are required to be strengthened through 
State-level interventions to achieve the minimum score of 60. States have accordingly been 
encouraged to undertake targeted improvements in infrastructure and human resources so that 
such DIETs may qualify for consideration under the scheme. This approach enables a gradual, 
systematic and equitable transformation of DIETs into DIETs of Excellence, while addressing 
variations in infrastructure and HR quality across States. 
Recommendation  
8. The Committee recommends the Department to prioritize DIETs with scores closer to 60 
points in earlier phases to balance costs, as higher-scoring DIETs require less investment and it 
should introduce a tiered funding model where DIETs with lower scores receive additional 
support for foundational improvements before full upgradation. The Committee further 
recommends that the Department should provide technical assistance to States with lower-
scoring DIETs to help them reach the 60-point threshold through targeted interventions. 
(Para 5.10) 
Action Taken 
Other than the DIETs of Excellence scheme, States/UTs receive financial support for 
Teacher Education institutions under the Strengthening of Teacher Education component of 
Samagra Shiksha. Funds are approved to States/UTs after appraisal of proposals received from 

6 
 
them and in accordance with the prescribed programmatic and financial norms of Samagra 
Shiksha. 
Under Samagra Shiksha, financial assistance is provided to States/UTs for major and 
minor repair works, as well as for new construction and expansion of existing Teacher Education 
Institutions (TEIs), including DIETs, as per approved norms. Financial support is also available 
for establishment of new DIETs. The existing norm of establishing DIETs in districts created up 
to March, 2017 has been modified to include districts created up to 31st March, 2020. 
Salary support is provided to DIETs for academic and para-academic posts filled as per Samagra 
Shiksha guidelines. In respect of para-academic posts in DIETs, salary support is provided to 
approved posts, namely Work Education Teacher, Librarian, Laboratory Assistant and 
Statistician/Accountant. Salary support is not provided for posts filled through deputation of 
officials or faculty from other Departments. 
Further, financial support is provided for programmes and activities such as capacity 
building, professional development programmes, exchange programmes, material development 
and specific research projects for DIETs, as per approved proposals. 
DIETs are also provided flexibility to procure ICT hardware and digital infrastructure, 
including tablets, laptops, integrated teaching-learning devices, open-source operating systems, 
and associated software, training and resource support. This includes support for smart 
classrooms, virtual classrooms, digital boards and DTH channels to strengthen teaching-learning 
processes. 
In addition, DIETs are provided annual grants under Samagra Shiksha to meet day-to-day 
operational expenses, including engagement of resource persons and experts for teacher training, 
procurement of library books and periodicals, development and maintenance of institutional 
websites, purchase of small office and library equipment, stationery and other essential office 
expenses. 
The assessment scores of DIETs have been shared with the respective States/UTs to 
enable them to identify gaps and undertake targeted interventions for strengthening infrastructure 
and human resource capacities, with a view to achieving the prescribed 60-point benchmark. The 
recommendation of the Committee regarding provision of technical assistance to States with 
lower-scoring DIETs is noted and such technical assistance will also be provided, as required, to 
support States in reaching the prescribed benchmark. 
 
Recommendation  
9. The Committee feels that the Department should develop a detailed cost estimation framework 
for each DIET, specifying allocations for infrastructure, ICT integration, and HR development to 
bring uniformity in upgraded DIETs. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to 
implement a real-time monitoring system to track DIET upgradation progress, including 
infrastructure development, ICT integration, and training outcomes and to conduct periodic 
audits by Central teams to ensure funds are utilized efficiently and align with the goals of 
innovative pedagogy and professional development. 
(Para 5.11) 
Action Taken 
The Department regularly reviews the progress of activities undertaken by DIETs against the 
approvals accorded by the Project Approval Board (PAB) under the DIETs of Excellence scheme. 

7 
 
Progress is also monitored through the PRABANDH portal, which captures physical and financial 
progress of approved interventions on a real-time basis. 
A detailed cost estimation framework for DIETs has been prepared State/UT-wise and is 
provided in the Concept note on Empowering DIETs as Centers of Excellence (Annexure-I). 
Further, the specific areas of upgradation for each DIET have been identified and detailed in the 
said Concept Note (Annexure-I). Within the approved framework, DIETs are provided flexibility 
to select interventions based on their assessed needs and priorities, ensuring both uniformity in 
standards and responsiveness to local requirements. 
In addition, field visits are undertaken to review the progress of implementation, identify 
operational challenges and provide necessary guidance to ensure effective utilization of funds and 
timely completion of approved activities. 
 
Recommendation  
10. The Committee takes note of the creation of model Balvatikas in each DIET of Excellence and 
appreciates the efforts of the Department in this regard. The Committee recommends the 
Department to ensure completion of model Balvatikas in a time-bound manner in each districts of 
the country. 
(Para 5.12) 
Action Taken 
The Department regularly reviews the progress of activities undertaken by DIETs against the 
approvals accorded by the Project Approval Board (PAB) under the DIETs of Excellence scheme, 
including the establishment of model Balvatikas. States/UTs are being monitored to ensure timely 
implementation of approved interventions, and completion of model Balvatikas is being pursued 
in a time-bound manner as per the approved proposals. 
 
Recommendation  
11. The Committee observes from the submission of the Department that a number of DIETs could 
not conduct trainings due to lack of residential hostel facilities, libraries and resource centres. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to equip each DIETs of Excellence with 
residential hostels, libraries and resource centres as well as sports and recreational facilities at 
the earliest and in a time-bound manner. 
(Para 5.13) 
Action Taken 
The specific areas of upgradation for each DIET have been identified and detailed in the Concept 
Note (Annexure-I), which include provision for residential hostel facilities, libraries, resource 
centres, etc. in line with the recommendations of the Committee. Implementation of these 
approved components is being monitored to ensure timely completion as per the sanctioned 
proposals. 
 
Recommendation  
12. The Committee notes that there is a significant shortage of both trainers and permanent 
faculty in District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) across India. Some DIETs are 
losing their relevance due to shortage of teaching staffs at alarming level. This shortage impacts 
the quality of teacher training and, consequently, the overall quality of education in schools. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of School Education and Literacy to pursue 
with the State Governments with respect to the recruitment of both trainers and permanent faculty 
in DIETs in various States on permanent basis instead of contractual appointments and ensure 
that all the States fill the vacancies of trainers and permanent faculty in DIETs in a time-bound 

8 
 
manner and not later than 31st March, 2026. The Committee further recommends the Department 
to provide sufficient funds to State Governments for filling up of these vacancies in a time bound 
manner. 
(Para 5.16) 
Action Taken 
Under the DIETs of Excellence scheme, one of the key pre-requisites for release of funds is that 
States/UTs earmark dedicated space for the Skill Lab and Model Balvatika and ensure that 
academic vacancies in DIETs are filled, preferably through regular recruitment. 
The Department is regularly pursuing the matter with State/UT Governments through 
review meetings and official communications, encouraging them to fill vacancies in DIETs in a 
time-bound manner. The vacancies are reviewed during PAB meetings and the release of funds 
under DIET – CoE scheme is linked to filling up of vacancies. 
Further, salary support is provided to DIETs for academic and para-academic posts filled 
in accordance with Samagra Shiksha guidelines. In respect of para-academic posts in DIETs, 
salary support is restricted to approved posts, namely Work Education Teacher, Librarian, 
Laboratory Assistant and Statistician/Accountant. Salary support is not provided for posts filled 
through the deputation of officials or faculty from other Departments. 
 
Recommendation  
13. The Committee observes that some States face acute faculty shortages and infrastructure 
challenges, while some States have made progress. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to conduct State-specific audits to identify and address regional disparities in DIET 
functioning, focusing on faculty and infrastructure gaps and to allocate additional central funding 
to under-resourced states to strengthen DIETs in those States. The successful models in respect of 
DIETs should be implemented in lagging States and the regions. 
(Para 5.19) 
Action Taken 
The Department has done a comprehensive baseline assessment of all existing functional 
DIETs in the country, considering key parameters such as availability of infrastructure facilities 
and resources, including classrooms, libraries, laboratories, ICT facilities and residential hostels. 
The assessment was carried out through a structured Google Form to ensure uniformity and 
objectivity across States/UTs. 
 
Recommendation  
14. The Committee observes that there is limited/ineffective evaluation and monitoring of the 
impact of training programs conducted by DIETS. The Committee is of the view that the 
Department should implement robust monitoring and evaluation system to assess their impact of 
training on teaching practices and student outcomes. Periodic evaluation should be done to refine 
training programs based on data-driven insights and feedback mechanisms involving teachers, 
students, and district education officers should be appointed to ensure training meets practical 
classroom needs. Department should also create a database to track trainee progress and 
program outcomes, enabling continuous improvement. 
(Para 5.20) 
Recommendation 
15. The Committee observes that limited professional development for DIET faculty hinders their 
ability to deliver high-quality training. The Committee recommends the Department to ensure 
annual professional development programs for DIET faculty, including Continuous Professional 
Development (CPD) as proposed by NEP 2020. Further, participation in workshops, seminars, 
and research projects in collaboration with universities and research institutions should also be 

9 
 
facilitated. Training on educational technology should be provided to ensure that faculty at DIETs 
can effectively integrate digital tools into their programs. 
(Para 5.21) 
Action Taken 
States/UTs receive financial support for Teacher Education institutions under the 
Strengthening of Teacher Education component of Samagra Shiksha. Funds are approved to 
States/UTs after appraisal of proposals received from them and in accordance with the prescribed 
programmatic and financial norms of Samagra Shiksha. 
Financial support is provided for programmes and activities such as capacity building, 
professional development programmes, exchange programmes, material development and specific 
research projects for DIETs, as per approved proposals. 
DIETs are also provided flexibility to procure ICT hardware and digital infrastructure, 
including tablets, laptops, integrated teaching-learning devices, open-source operating systems, 
and associated software, training and resource support. This includes support for smart 
classrooms, virtual classrooms, digital boards and DTH channels to strengthen teaching-learning 
processes. 
In addition, DIETs are provided annual grants under Samagra Shiksha to meet day-to-day 
operational expenses, including engagement of resource persons and experts for teacher training, 
procurement of library books and periodicals, development and maintenance of institutional 
websites, purchase of small office and library equipment, stationery and other essential office 
expenses. 

10 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
National Council of Teacher's Education (NCTE) 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee observes that as on 15th June, 2025, out of total 24 sanctioned strength in 
Group A in NCTE, there are only 11 Group A officers are in-position including the deputationists 
and 13 posts in Group A are lying vacant. Similarly, out of 46 and 53sanctioned strength in 
Group B and C respectively, only 26 and 28 persons are deployed including those on deputation. 
The Committee further notes that there are 54%, 43% and89% vacancies in Group A, B and C 
posts in NCTE, respectively excluding those officials who have been deployed against deputation 
vacancies. The Committee feels that any organisation cannot function properly nor can do justice 
with the mandate and responsibilities, it has been conferred by an Act of Parliament in absence of 
sufficient manpower/human resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department/ 
NCTE to fill up the vacancies in Group A, B and C in a time-bound manner and latest by 
31stMarch, 2026 for effective realisation of objectives of NEP, 2020 and teachers' training in the 
country. 
 (Para 2.7) 
Recommendation 
2. The Committee takes note of the submission of Department/NCTE which states that "to 
mitigate the shortage, temporary measures have been taken by employing consultants on short-
term contracts." The Committee also takes serious note that no recruitments of permanent 
teaching, non-teaching and administrative staffs have been made by NCTE since 2019 till 15th 
June, 2025. The Committee further observes that number of contractual appointments on non-
teaching staffs in NCTE is 04 during 2019, Nil during 2020, 03 during2021, 15 during 2022, 20 
during 2023, 34 during 2024 and 13 in 2025 till 15th June, 2025,which shows increasing trend in 
contractual appointments in NCTE. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of 
School Education and Literacy and NCTE to fill up the vacancies at the earliest on 
permanent/regular basis to ensure Constitutional Rights of SC, ST, OBC, EWS and PwD etc. 
(Para 2.10) 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee takes note of the letter of the Department dated 23.01.2025 to NCTE for 
carrying out an assessment about requirement of staff at every level and consider implementation 
of Mission Recruitment and appreciates the Department of School Education and Literacy for 
withdrawal of directives of Secretary, DoSEL given in September 2020, during a meeting on NEP, 
for stoppage of recruitment in NCTE. The Committee also recommends the Department to take 
follow-up actions with NCTE in this regard and to ensure that all the vacant posts in NCTE are 
filled up by March, 2026 on permanent/regular employment basis instead of contractual or 
deputation basis to achieve the goal of NEP 2020 and teachers' training. 
(Para 2.12) 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Secretary, DoSEL that around10 lakhs posts 
of teachers in schools education are lying vacant in the country. The Committee also notes that 
out of 14.8 lakh schools, Government of India administers just about 3,000 schools. In this 

11 
 
regard, the Committee is constrained to note that level of vacancies in Government of India 
administered schools like Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs),Navodaya Vidyalayas (NVs) etc. are also 
alarming. There are overall 30 to 50% vacancies in KVs and NVs also and contractual 
appointments of teachers are being done in spite of repeated recommendation of the Committee to 
fill-up the vacancies. The Committee, therefore, re-iterates its recommendations contained in its 
349th and 363rd Reports and directs the Department of School Education and Literacy to fill-up 
vacancies of teachers in Government of India administered schools like Kendriya Vidyalayas 
(KVs), Navodaya Vidyalayas (NVs) etc. through appointment of regular/permanent teachers 
instead of contractual teachers at the earliest and not later than 31st March, 2026 and apprise the 
Committee in this regard. 
(Para 2.18) 
Action Taken 
 Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhisthan Bill, 2025 has been introduced in the Parliament. 
Functions and role of NCTE in the new organisation may undergo change and, therefore, it would 
be appropriate to assess requirement of direct recruitment after formation of the new organisation. 
Vacancies keep arising due to the opening of new KendriyaVidyalayas, retirement, 
resignation, promotion of employees, transfer, employees going on lien to another department and 
up-gradation of schools.  
A notification has been issued on 14.11.2025 for filling up vacancies of various teaching 
and non-teaching posts through direct recruitment in KVS as per details given below: - 
Post UR SC ST OBC EWS Total PwD 
Teaching 
Staff 3620 1292 634 2336 832 8714 794 
Non-
Teaching 
Staff 
481 180 114 319 113 1207 86 
Total 4101 1472 748 2655 945 9921 880 
 
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan has a provision of engaging teachers, who possess 
requisite qualifications as stipulated in the recruitment rules of KVS on contractual basis for a 
temporary duration against vacant sanctioned post to ensure that the teaching-learning process is 
not hampered.  
In NVS recruitment process for the following posts are on 
Year Teaching Non- teaching Total 
2025 5045 796 5841* 
 
Recommendation  
5. The Committee also recommends the Department to stop contractual appointments of teachers 
in these schools which adversely impact the overall school education and undermines the 
Constitutional provision of reservation in Government jobs to SC, ST,OBC, EWS, PwD etc. 
(Para 2.19) 
Recommendation 
6. The Committee observes that there are around 10 lakhs vacancies of teachers in Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) funded schools in various States and there are around 7.5lakh vacancies 
at elementary and primary levels. The Committee notes that there is no improvement in filling up 
of vacancy positions in these SSA funded schools of the State Governments inspite of repeated 

12 
 
recommendations of the Committee contained in its 349thand 363rd Reports to fill up the 
vacancies in a time bound manner, rather it is worsening day by day due to retirements of 
teachers and due to absence of a permanent recruitment policy. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to take up the matter of vacancies of teachers in SSA funded schools 
of the State Governments strongly and teachers' salary component of SSA funds of those States 
which do not comply with the directions of the Department to fill up the vacancies with 
regular/permanent teachers, should be kept in abeyance till the respective States comply with the 
directives of the Central Government. 
(Para 2.20) 
Recommendation 
7. The Committee also recommends the Department to take up the issue of appointment of 
teachers on contractual basis which violates the Constitutional provision of reservation in 
Government jobs to SC, ST, OBC, PwD and EWS category. The Committee recommends for 
stoppage of teachers on contractual basis in SSA funded schools. 
(Para 2.21) 
Action Taken 
 Recruitment of teachers in schools is a continuous process as vacancies keep arising due to 
factors such as retirement, resignation, creation of new posts consequent to increased student 
enrolment, and establishment of new institutions. Education being a subject in the Concurrent 
List of the Constitution, the recruitment, deployment, and other service conditions of teachers in 
the vast majority of schools fall under the purview of the respective State Governments and 
Union Territory Administrations. Accordingly, the advertisement of posts, conduct of selection 
processes, and filling up of vacancies are undertaken by the concerned States/UTs. 
The Government of India regularly reviews the progress of filling up teacher vacancies with the 
States/UTs through meetings and advisories, emphasizing recruitment through transparent and 
competitive selection examinations conducted by autonomous teacher recruitment boards, 
supported by technology-based teacher requirement planning and forecasting exercises. 
Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Samagra Shiksha, financial assistance is provided to 
States/UTs to maintain the prescribed Pupil-Teacher Ratio (PTR) at various schooling levels, in 
accordance with the norms laid down under the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009, as amended from time to 
time. 
 The position of sanctioned strength, teachers in position and vacancies, as reported by 
States/UTs during the Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B) 2025-26, is as under: 
Head State/U
T 
Sanctio
ned 
State/
UT In-
positio
n 
State/
UT 
Vacan
t 
Vacanc
y % 
(State/
UT) 
Samagr
a 
Sanctio
ned 
Samag
ra In-
positio
n 
Sama
gra 
Vacan
t 
Vacanc
y % 
(Samag
ra) 
Element
ary 
28,94,5
35 
25,16,
834 
3,77,7
01 
13.05% 15,66,8
29 
12,70,
324 
2,96,5
05 
18.92% 
Seconda
ry 
8,53,01
9 
7,51,4
81 
1,01,5
38 
11.90% 2,11,03
8 
1,72,9
08 
38,130 18.07% 

13 
 
Senior 
Seconda
ry 
8,15,62
9 
7,18,6
21 
97,008 11.89% 1,91,40
5 
1,67,6
26 
23,779 12.42% 
Total 45,63,1
83 
39,86,
936 
5,76,2
47 
12.63% 19,69,2
72 
16,10,
858 
3,58,4
14 
18.20% 
  Further, vide D.O. No. 1-10/2023-IS.20 dated 28.10.2023, States/UTs were advised to 
constitute Autonomous Teacher Recruitment Boards for ensuring streamlined, transparent and 
time-bound recruitment processes. They were reiterated their responsibility to achieve the NEP-
2020 targets of maintaining a 30:1 Pupil-Teacher Ratio (25:1 in disadvantaged areas), prepare 
detailed action plans, expedite recruitment, rationally deploy teachers and periodically review the 
recruitment progress. 
 Subsequently, vide D.O. No. 7-2/2025-IS.20 dated 24.03.2025, States/UTs were informed 
about the updated Recruitment Rules (RRs) issued by the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, 
developed as a model framework aligned with NCTE norms and CTET eligibility requirements. 
States/UTs were requested to review and update their own Recruitment Rules on similar lines 
and keep the Ministry informed of the actions taken. 
 Further, vide D.O. No. 1-10/2023-IS.20 dated 28.07.2025, States/UTs were reminded of 
the continued Parliamentary scrutiny regarding unfilled posts and of the recommendations of the 
Standing Committee to complete recruitment of permanent teaching and non-teaching staff by 
the end of 2025. It was reiterated that financial support under Samagra Shiksha is linked to 
maintaining a permanent, professionally qualified, subject-wise cadre of teachers. Temporary 
appointments were discouraged, and recruitment through competitive examinations in line with 
NCTE guidelines and CTET/STET qualifications was emphasized to ensure quality and 
transparency in teacher selection. 
 
 National Education Policy (NEP), 2020 emphasizes maintenance of a pupil-teacher ratio of 
under 30:1 in each school and under 25:1 for areas having large numbers of socio-economically 
disadvantaged students. 
 Some of the norms for teacher salary support under Samagra Shiksha are given below: - 
 Teachers will be recruited as per the terms and conditions of the respective States/UTs. 
 Salary Structure will be determined by the State norms for salaries. The entitlement 
would be determined after an assessment of the requirement of the posts and adequate 
deployment of teachers as per the PTR norms. This will be based on the data provided by 
the State for teachers under UDISE+. There will be no separate cadre of teachers 
sanctioned by the Centre.  All teachers are ultimately the responsibility of the State 
Government.  
 Teachers will be adequately deployed to ensure that all schools follow the PTR norms. 
 The vacancies in the State cadre of teachers should not be more than 10% of the total 
sanctioned posts. 
 As per UDISE+ 2024-25, the stage-wise PTR has been reported as 10 at the Foundational 
stage, 13 at the Preparatory stage, 17 at the Middle stage and 21 at the Secondary stage. This has 
improved from the overall PTR of 27:1 as per the UDISE+ 2022-23 reports. 
 

14 
 
Recommendation 
8. The Committee notes that separate set of teachers for pre-primary and Class 1 &2and another 
set of teachers for class 3, 4 & 5 are not practically feasible due to recruitment rules of various 
States. The Committee feels that two broad levels of teacher education should be in place for 
effective implementation of teacher education i.e. Pre-Primary/Primary level teachers for pre-
primary and primary who can teach all subjects at this stage and Middle and Secondary level for 
subject specific teachers. This approach would allow teachers to work across multiple stages and 
subjects, which will reduce deployment inflexibilities and imbalances in demand/supply of 
teachers. A primary teacher can teach classes 1–5 with a focus on foundational skills, while 
secondary teachers can cover classes6–12 with subject expertise. The Committee therefore, 
recommends the Department/NCTE to review the Draft NCTE Regulation, 2025 in view of 
various concerns regarding hyperspecialization and segmentation of teachers' education. 
(Para 2.23) 
Recommendation 
9. The Committee recommends the Department/ NCTE to allow staggered choice for students 
where by students can be allowed to choose their level of specialisation later after completing 
introductory courses and field experience, which will help them make informed choices based on 
their strengths and interests. Further, the Department should also allow for both consecutive and 
concurrent models to thrive, without making ITEP a prerequisite/mandatory condition. TEIs 
should be permitted to apply for recognition to offer ITEP at either level, and across a range of 
liberal disciplines and students should be allowed to be enrolled in any liberal programme of 
their choice, with relevance to school education curriculum. 
(Para 2.24) 
Recommendation 
10. The Committee recommends that the NCTE should follow UGC’s approach i.e. it should 
provide broad guidelines, credit frameworks, leaving the task of specific curriculum design to 
universities. Besides, Model curricula may be developed and used by Universities as a reference, 
without prescription. A supportive, non-prescriptive role of the NCTE will help strengthen the 
academic and autonomous functioning of universities and strengthen the quality of teacher 
education. 
(Para2.25) 
Recommendation 
11. The Committee is of the view that Universities should be given increased flexibility to design 
their Curriculum instead of only 30% flexibility allowed to these Universities. The Committee 
therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to revise the curriculum framework to allow 
universities at least 50% control over designing their teacher education curricula, which would 
enable the institutions to incorporate local needs, multi disciplinary perspectives, and research-
driven innovations, aligning with NEP 2020’s emphasis on university-led teacher education. 
(Para 2.26) 
Recommendation 
12. The Committee observes that the subject of education finds mention in the Concurrent List of 
the Constitution, as the Committee feels that the Department of School Education and Literacy 
should uphold the federal nature of teacher education and it should hold extensive, consultative 
meetings with the State Governments before arriving at the any change in the structure of 
teacher education. The Committee is of the view that the Department should work in tandem with 
the teacher education systems and recruitment rules of the different States. 
(Para 2.27) 

15 
 
Recommendation 
13. The Committee observes that each programme of teacher education has its own history and 
has taken decades to establish its structure, teacher educators, labour-demand ratios. The 
Committee recommends the Department to support growth of good quality teacher education 
programs in autonomous higher education institutions with proven track records like B. El. Ed. 
etc. and withdraw recognition to poor quality teacher education institutions and also strengthen 
faculty of education. It is also recommended to allow multiple programmes and models of 
teacher education and not to shut down successful existing programmes. 
(Para 2.28) 
Recommendation 
14. The Committee takes note of the concerns regarding recruitment related legal complications 
and observes that the new teachers will be qualified not in accordance with the recruitment rules 
of the different State Governments which will lead to litigations. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department/NCTE to hold consultations with various stakeholders including the 
State Governments and to review NCTE's Draft Regulation, 2025 and align it with the 
recruitment rules of various States in order to avoid litigation. 
(Para 2.29) 
Action Taken 
The suggestion furnished by the Committee will be considered by NCTE in consultation with all 
stakeholders. 
 
Integrated Teacher Education Programme (ITEP) 
Recommendation  
15. The Committee observes that as per Para 2.2 of NCTE's Gazette Notification of 2021 which 
states that "in a semester, there shall be at least 125 (one hundred and twenty five) working days, 
excluding the period of admissions but including the period of examinations." This clause of the 
said notification is in conflict with the University Grants Commission’s (UGC) standard of 14–
15 weeks per semester. This discrepancy creates scheduling conflicts within universities, 
disrupting alignment with other programs. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department/NCTE to make ITEP’s academic calendar in sync with UGC guidelines to ensure 
compatibility with university systems. NCTE should also collaborate with UGC to standardize 
semester durations across multidisciplinary programs, potentially adopting a 16–18-week 
semester to balance teaching and practicum requirements. 
(Para 3.9) 
Action Taken 
ITEP has been fully aligned with NEP 2020, NHEQF, NCrF, in terms of standards, 
duration, etc. Other teacher education programs are in the process of revision. 
 
Recommendation 
16. The Committee observes that ITEP mandates that programs be offered in composite 
institutions with multidisciplinary academic environments. However, the Committee notes that 
92% of Teachers Education Institutions (TEIs) are private institutions. Many public as well as 
private institutions offering teacher education programs lack the infrastructure, faculty expertise, 
or academic rigour to deliver a truly multidisciplinary curriculum, which compromises the 

16 
 
quality of education and the integration of liberal arts, sciences, and pedagogical training. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends as under:- 
(i) the Department/NCTE should ensure that each district of the country has at least one public 
sector multi-disciplinary quality Teachers Education Institution equipped with sufficient 
infrastructure, faculty expertise and academic rigour for multi-disciplinary training and 
education under ITEP; 
(ii) the Department/NCTE should implement stricter accreditation criteria for composite 
institutions, ensuring they have robust departments in liberal arts, humanities, social sciences, 
and sciences. Regular audits and inspections by NCTE’s Inspection and Visiting Committees 
should verify the availability of qualified faculty and resources; 
(iii) the Department/NCTE should encourage collaborations between smaller institutions and 
reputed multidisciplinary universities including IITs, Central Universities etc. to share resources, 
faculty, and expertise, on the lines of IIT Bhubaneswar’s ITEP initiative; and 
(iv) the Department/NCTE should ensure continuous professional development for faculty to 
ensure they are equipped to teach interdisciplinary courses that blend subject knowledge with 
pedagogy. 
 (Para 3.10) 
 
Action Taken 
Suggestions furnished by the Committee will be considered by NCTE in consultation 
with all stakeholders. An ITEP review committee has already been constituted for periodic 
updation based on feedback from educators, students, and schools, ensuring continued relevance 
and effectiveness. 
 
Recommendation  
17. The Committee feels that success of any teachers' education/training program depends 
largely on the monitoring and evaluation of program outcomes. The Committee recommends the 
Department to evolve robust mechanisms to evaluate ITEP’s effectiveness in producing 
competent teachers and its impact on school education. Also, Department should conduct 
regular studies/audit by third party to assess ITEP graduates’ performance in schools, focusing 
on student outcomes, teaching effectiveness, and retention rates. The Committee further 
recommends that the Department should establish a feedback loop involving schools, students, 
and ITEP graduates to identify gaps and refine the program accordingly. A centralized database 
should be set up to track ITEP outcomes, including graduation rates, their employment statistics, 
and teacher performance for effective outcomes. 
(Para 3.15) 
Recommendation 
18. The Committee in its 363rd Report had recommended for convergence of Early Childhood 
Care and Education (ECCE) with primary education and integration of pre-primary/ nursery 
education within Anganwadi centers and schools, with the formal primary school system. The 
Committee feels that Anganwadi worker and helpers should also be incorporated under ITEP for 
their training. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to ensure that Anganwadi 
workers and pre-primary teachers are trained with similar standards to provide consistent 
quality ECCE, potentially through joint training programs under ITEP. The Committee also 
reiterates its recommendation contained in 363rd Report for convergence of ECCE with primary 
education. 
(Para 3.16) 
Action Taken 

17 
 
Suggestions furnished by the Committee will be considered by NCTE in consultation with all 
stakeholders. An ITEP review committee has already been constituted for periodic updation 
based on feedback from educators, students, and schools, ensuring continued relevance and 
effectiveness. 
The Ministry of Women and Child Development (MoWCD), in collaboration with the 
Department of School Education and Literacy (DoSE&L), has released the Guidelines for Co-
location of Anganwadi Centres with Schools on 3 rd September 2025 
(https://dsel.education.gov.in/sites/default/files/guidelines/Guidelines_co-
location_Anganwadi_Centers_en.pdf) 
 
Recommendation  
19. The Committee recommends that the existing minimum qualification to teach elementary 
education continue to be 12th grade plus a 2-year diploma. The Committee observes that 
requiring teachers to have a four-year degree before teaching 3-year-oldstudents is a very high 
bar, which may be logistically hard to meet and very expensive for prospective teachers. The 
Committee further observes that pre-schooling will also be occurring in Anganwadis, where the 
eligibility requirements for AWCs are a lot less stringent as compared to the four-year ITEP 
degree. The Committee recommends that the qualifications for teaching with elementary 
education must be developed with this larger system in mind. 
(Para 3.18) 
Action Taken 
Suggestions furnished by the Committee will be considered by NCTE in consultation with all 
stakeholders. An ITEP review committee has already been constituted for periodic updation based 
on feedback from educators, students, and schools, ensuring continued relevance and 
effectiveness. 
 
Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.EI.Ed) Program 
Recommendation 
20. The Committee observes that ITEP divides teacher training into two distinct programs for the 
foundational stage covering pre-school to Grade 2 and the preparatory stage covering Grades 3 
to 5. This bifurcation creates two types of teachers with specialized training that does not reflect 
the integrated nature of school structures, where teachers often handle multiple grades or 
overlapping roles. The separation of training lacks continuity. The Committee further notes that 
the rigid division of teacher training into foundational and preparatory programs fails to prepare 
teachers for versatile roles in school settings. While NEP 2020 introduces a new curricular 
structure (5+3+3+4), it emphasizes a seamless progression in learning. ITEP’s bifurcated 
training model contradicts this by creating artificial distinctions in teacher preparation that do 
not correspond to practical school requirements and the rigid division of teachers' training into 
foundational and preparatory programs fails to prepare teachers for versatile roles in school 
settings. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to integrate Foundational and 
Preparatory Stage Training from pre-school to Grade 5 to ensure continuity and also to 
incorporate cross-stage training modules that equip teachers to handle multi-grade classrooms, 
reflecting the reality of many schools in the country where teachers work across grades. 
(Para 4.8) 
Recommendation 
21. The Committee takes note of multiple exit options under ITEP and observes that the current 
structure of ITEP, with its fragmented exit options and limited pedagogical focus in early years, 

18 
 
risks producing under qualified candidates and wasting resources. These early exit options do not 
equip candidates with the necessary skills to serve as teachers, rendering them ineffective for 
employment in school education. Government's expenditure on candidates who exit early after 
first or second or third year, is largely wasted, as these individuals are not qualified to teach. 
They lack practical teaching skills in early exit certifications which undermines the program's 
objective of producing competent educators. The Committee, therefore, recommends, that the 
Department should eliminate the first, second and third year exit options to ensure that candidates 
gain meaningful exposure to pedagogy and teacher training before exiting and also to ensure that 
ITEP aligns with NEP 2020’s emphasis on holistic and rigorous teacher preparation by 
integrating multidisciplinary education with robust pedagogical training across all four years. 
(Para 4.10) 
Recommendation 
22. The Committee observes that ITEP course has been implemented in self-financing mode and 
students from rural and humble backgrounds have to bear around Rupees Four Lakh for 
completion of the course which is not affordable for majority of youth population aspiring for 
ITEP courses. The Committee further observes that Directive Principles of the State Policy 
contained in Part-IV of the Constitution declares the 'State' as a 'Welfare State.' The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department to implement ITEP on public financing mode instead of 
self-financing mode, so that, students from rural, poor, economically and socially backward 
sections of the society can pursue the ITEP course easily and to ensure that Directive Principles 
of State Policy are given due importance while framing the policies regarding teacher training. 
(Para 4.12) 
Recommendation 
23. The Committee notes that only five (05) State Universities and Government Colleges have 
applied for preparatory courses in ITEP, whereas only one (01) Government College of Jammu 
and Kashmir has requested for foundational courses in ITEP, out of 64institutions are running 
114 programs. Out of the 114 programs being run, 99 programs are being run for secondary 
education, 9 programs are for middle education and the remaining 9 programs are being run for 
the foundational and preparatory stage which shows that demand the ITEP course at 
Foundational and Preparatory stage is abysmally very low. Similarly, demand at middle 
education level is also very poor. The Committee further observes that maximum number of 
children get enrolled at Foundational, Preparatory and Middle levels. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to assess the demand gap and redress it effectively to ensure 
potential implementation of ITEP. 
(Para 4.14) 
Recommendation 
24. The Committee notes that the NEP, 2020 emphasizes transformative reforms in teacher 
education, focusing on multidisciplinary education, experiential learning, andholistic 
development. The Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.El.Ed.) program aligns closely with these 
objectives, demonstrating a robust framework for preparing teachers for diverse educational 
settings. The B.El.Ed. program incorporates multilingual education, mother tongue-based 
instruction, digital education, and holistic development, all of which are central to NEP 2020’s 
vision. The Committee further observes that the program’s effectiveness is evident in its high 
demand from schools and many B.El.Ed. students secure placements by their fourth year, 
reflecting the program’s strong reputation and alignment with elementary education's needs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends for continuation of the B.EL.ED program and promotion of the 
replication of the B.El.Ed. program in additional institutions under ITEP. 

19 
 
(Para 4.18) 
Recommendation 
25. The Committee observes that B. El. Ed program is proposed for transition into the ITEP 
because it is limited to elementary level teaching, class I to VIII, offered by less than100 
institutions. The Committee further notes that B. El. Ed is a specialized four-year degree with 
focus on elementary education pedagogy, a crucial developmental stage for children, and it 
discontinuation based on factors like the number of institutions or structural alignment a short-
sighted approach that risks dismantling a proven program instead of strengthening and expanding 
it to meet the demand for qualified elementary teachers across the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Department/NCTE to redress the limitations, if any, under B. El. Ed 
program by upgrading its curriculum and encouraging more institutions to offer it, leveraging its 
established history and expertise in elementary teacher training instead of scraping or 
discontinuing a reputed, well established and internationally acclaimed program like B. El. Ed. 
which is being run effectively for more than 30 years. 
(Para 4.20) 
 
 
Recommendation 
26. The Committee notes that the B.El.Ed. programme has for decades served as a rigorous, 
research-based, and socially conscious route for training generalist elementary school teachers, 
especially for urban poor and rural students. Given the diversity of educational needs across the 
country, the Committee recommends the Department to consider allowing States to continue 
offering B. El. Ed. where institutional ecosystems support it like State-run universities and 
women's colleges in certain States across the country. The Committee further recommends that the 
existing faculty and infrastructure developed under B. El. Ed. programme over the years to 
support this programme, especially in public-funded women's colleges and SC/ST/minority-
serving institutions should be preserved. 
(Para 4.21) 
Action Taken 
Suggestions furnished by the Committee will be considered by NCTE in consultation with 
all stakeholders. An ITEP review committee has already been constituted for periodic updation 
based on feedback from educators, students, and schools, ensuring continued relevance and 
effectiveness. 
 
District Institute of Education and Training (DIETs) 
Recommendation  
27. The Committee observes that only 613 districts of the country have functional DIETs out of 
total 780 districts in the country. The Committee recommends the Department of School 
Education and Literacy to encourage the State Governments/ UT Administration to set up at least 
one DIET in each district of State/UT and provide sufficient financial assistance to State 
Governments/ UT-Administrations for setting up of DIETs in each district. The Committee also 
notes that there should be greater clarity on the future of the DIETs with the introduction of the 
ITEP. The Committee notes that the Ministry has spent many years and substantial resources for 
setting up and resourcing these DIETs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that any future 
Regulations should protect, preserve and empower these DIETs on mandatory basis. 
 (Para 5.15) 
Action Taken 

20 
 
Under Samagra Shiksha, financial support is available for the establishment of new 
DIETs. The existing norm of establishing DIETs in districts created up to March, 2017 has been 
modified to include districts created up to 31st March, 2020. 
 
Recommendation  
29. The Committee observes that many DIETs lack adequate infrastructure and resources, 
hindering effective training delivery. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department of 
School Education and Literacy to allocate additional funds under  Samagra Shiksha for 
upgrading DIET facilities, including modern classrooms, computer labs, and audio-visual 
equipment and ensure reliable internet connectivity and access to digital tools to support online 
and hybrid training models. Also, Department should provide low-cost teaching aids and locally 
relevant materials to enhance resource availability at DIETs. 
(Para 5.17) 
Action Taken 
Other than the DIETs of Excellence scheme, States/UTs receive financial support for 
Teacher Education institutions under the Strengthening of Teacher Education component of 
Samagra Shiksha. Funds are approved to States/UTs after appraisal of proposals received from 
them and in accordance with the prescribed programmatic and financial norms of Samagra 
Shiksha. 
Under Samagra Shiksha, financial assistance is provided to States/UTs for major and 
minor repair works, as well as for new construction and expansion of existing Teacher Education 
Institutions (TEIs), including DIETs, as per approved norms. Financial support is also available 
for the establishment of new DIETs. The existing norm of establishing DIETs in districts created 
up to March 2017 has been modified to include districts created up to 31st March 2020. 
Salary support is provided to DIETs for academic and para-academic posts filled as per 
Samagra Shiksha guidelines. In respect of para-academic posts in DIETs, salary support is 
provided to approved posts, namely Work Education Teacher, Librarian, Laboratory Assistant and 
Statistician/Accountant. Salary support is not provided for posts filled through deputation of 
officials or faculty from other Departments. 
Further, financial support is provided for programmes and activities such as capacity 
building, professional development programmes, exchange programmes, material development 
and specific research projects for DIETs, as per approved proposals. 
DIETs are also provided flexibility to procure ICT hardware and digital infrastructure, 
including tablets, laptops, integrated teaching-learning devices, open-source operating systems, 
and associated software, training and resource support. This includes support for smart 
classrooms, virtual classrooms, digital boards and DTH channels to strengthen teaching-learning 
processes. 
In addition, DIETs are provided annual grants under Samagra Shiksha to meet day-to-day 
operational expenses, including engagement of resource persons and experts for teacher training, 
procurement of library books and periodicals, development and maintenance of institutional 
websites, purchase of small office and library equipment, stationery and other essential office 
expenses. 
 
Recommendation  
29. The Committee further observes that most of the DIETs operate in isolation, limiting their 
access to expertise and resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to 
ensure handholding and collaborations with SCERTs, universities, NGOs, and local education 
authorities to share resources and expertise. Further, the Department should establish formal 
linkages with Block Resource Centres (BRCs) and Cluster Resource Centres (CRCs) to ensure 

21 
 
grassroots-level support and feedback. Sincere efforts should also be taken to create a network of 
DIETs for sharing best practices and resources, promoting innovation and consistency. 
(Para 5.18) 
Action Taken 
The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 envisages DIETs, BRCs and CRCs as vibrant 
institutions of excellence functioning in a coordinated and synergistic manner under the academic 
leadership of the SCERT. In line with NEP 2020 and the conceptual framework of the DIETs of 
Excellence scheme, the role of DIETs is being expanded to support all stages of schooling, in 
consonance with the 5+3+3+4 curricular structure. 
The conceptual framework of the DIETs of Excellence scheme explicitly provides for 
strengthening institutional linkages between DIETs and BRCs/CRCs. DIETs are expected to work 
closely with BRCs, CRCs and school complexes to build their capacity for providing field-level 
academic support, leadership development for school heads and teachers, and effective sharing of 
resources and expertise. SCERTs are mandated to lead a change management process for the 
reinvigoration of DIETs, BRCs and CRCs, with a view to developing them into vibrant and 
collaborative institutions of excellence within a defined timeframe. 
Accordingly, DIETs function under the academic guidance of SCERTs, while BRCs and 
CRCs operate under the overall academic supervision of DIETs, ensuring alignment, coordination 
and synergy across institutional levels. These linkages are intended to facilitate continuous 
professional development of teachers and school heads, strengthen on-site academic support, 
enable effective feedback from the grassroots level, and promote sharing of best practices and 
innovations across districts. 
Through this structured institutional framework, DIETs are being positioned as nodal 
academic institutions at the district level, fostering collaboration with SCERTs, BRCs, CRCs and 
other relevant stakeholders to address isolation, enhance resource sharing and ensure consistency 
and quality in teacher education and professional development. 
 
 
**** 

22 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
-NIL- 
**** 
 
 
 

23 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
IS STILL AWAITED 
 
-NIL- 
**** 
  

24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 

25 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & 
SPORTS (EWCY&S)  
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met on 
Thursday, the 21st May, 2026 at 11:00 A.M. in Committee Room ‘3’, Block-A, First 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Digvijaya Singh  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Dr. Sikander Kumar 
3. Smt. Rekha Sharma 
4. Dr. Bhim Singh 
5. Shri Ghanshyam Tiwari 
6. Ms. Swati Maliwal 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
8. Smt. Shobhanaben Mahendrasinh Baraiya 
9. Shri Darshan Singh Choudhary 
10. Shri Jitendra Kumar Dohare 
11. Shri Abhijit Gangopadhyay 
12. Dr. Hemang Joshi 
13. Adv. Dean Kuriakose 
14. Dr. Sambit Patra 
15. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
16. Shri Rajeev Rai 
17. Shri Zia Ur Rehman 
18. Shri Karan Bhushan Singh 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Kamakhya Prasad Tasa 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vimal Kumar, Joint Secretary                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2. Shri J. K. Mallick, Director 
3. Smt. Leela Sarna, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Devashish Sen, Deputy Secretary  

26 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
*** 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended warm welcome to the Members of the Committee 
and informed that the agenda for the meeting was to consider and adopt the following reports: 
(i) ***; and 
(ii) 380th Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
contained in the 368th  Report on Review of functioning of National Council for Teacher 
Education (NCTE) and initiatives taken to support training of teachers in the light of NEP 
2020's thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers pertaining to the Department of School 
Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education. 
3. The Committee, accordingly, considered the aforesaid Draft Reports one by one and 
adopted the *** and 380th Report unanimously with few minor modifications. The Committee 
also authorized the Chairman, to correct any patent errors or make consequential changes, if any, 
in the Report. 
4. *** 
 
5. *** 
(After the Witnesses have taken their seats) 
6. *** 
7. *** 
8. *** 
(***) 
9. *** 
(***) 
10. *** 
11. *** 
12. ***  
13. *** 
(***) 
14. *** 
15. *** 
16. *** 
           *** Pertains to other matters 

27 
 
17. *** 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
18. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept. 
19. The Committee, then, adjourned at 05:15 P.M.  
 
New Delhi,                                                                                              J.K. Mallick 
21st May, 2026                                                                                             Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           *** Pertains to other matters 
 

 
 
 
 
28

 
 
 
 
 
Concept Note 
on  
Empowering DIETs  
as  
Centres of Excellence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Education 
Department of School Education and Literacy 
July 2023 
 
  
29

 
 
 
Table of contents 
Sl. No. Content Page 
No. 
1) Background 1 
 a) Key Activities and Functions 1 
 b) Linkages of DIETs with the schemes of SSA, RMSA and Samagra 
Shiksha 1 
 c) National Education Policy 2020 and DIETs 2 
2) Status of DIETs 3 
3) Focus areas of DIETs 3 
4) Issues and Challenges 4 
5) Status of Funds approved for DIETs in Teacher Education component 
under Samagra Shiksha since 2018-19 5 
6) Gist of Announcement 6 
7) DIET of Excellence: The Concept 6 
8) Rational for DIET of Excellence 7 
9) Aims & Objectives 7 
10) Vision Statement of DIET of Excellence 7 
11) Beneficiaries 7 
12) Six Major Pillars of DIETs of Excellence 8 
13) Major Action Points for the Way Forward 9 
 i) Appropriate infrastructure DIET of Excellence including staff 
requirement 9 
 ii) Expanding the role and responsibilities of DIETs to cover all levels of 
schooling 16 
 iii) Strengthen the institutional linkages between the DIETs and BRCs & 
CRCs 18 
14) Strategy for Selection of DIET of Excellence 19 
 a) Year wise details of DIETs of Excellence over the 5 years period 19 
30

 
 
 
Sl. No. Content Page 
No. 
 b) State/UT-wise details of DIETs converted into DIET of Excellence 
with Estimated outlay in a period of 5 years 20 
 c) Tentative Benchmarks for selection of DIETs as DIET of Excellence 21 
 d) Identification and Selection Process for converting all the functional 
DIETs into DIET of Excellence 22 
15) Tentative Budget 23 
 a) The Fund Sharing Pattern for States and UTs under the 
Implementation of the DIET of Excellence 23 
16) Role of State/ UT and National level 24 
17) Timelines for Implementation 25 
 Core Drafting Team 26 
 Annexures  
Annexure-I Status of DIETs Sanctioned & Functional details as on 2023-24 27 
Annexure-II Status of Funds Approved (Fresh Outlay) for DIETs in Teacher 
Education Component under Samagra Shiskha since 2018-19 28 
Annexure-III Suggestive Infrastructure Norms for DIET of Excellence 30 
Annexure-IV 
The state/UT wise distribution of DIETs to be converted into DIET of 
Excellence in phase manner with estimated outlay (2023-24-25 to 2027-
28) 
39 
Annexure-V District Institutes of Education & Training (DIET): 
Questionnaire to assess the Infrastructural Facilities in DIETs-June 2023 42 
Annexure-VI Summary Of Analysis: Infrastructure Facilities In District Institutes Of 
Education And Training (DIETs), 2023 51 
31

 
1 | P a g e  
 
Empowering DIETs as Centres of Excellence 
 
1) Background 
District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) were envisioned in the National Policy 
of Education, 1986, and were created by the Government of India in the early 1990s to 
strengthen elementary education and support the decentralization of education  to the 
district level. DIETs were conceived as the third addition - district level- tier to the support 
system, which would be closer to the field, and therefore more alive to its problems and 
needs. The core institutional focus of a DIET was Continuous Te acher Professional 
Development, which would directly/indirectly impact on school improvement programmes.  
Subsequently, to address the gap in the continuum between elementary education and 
secondary education, under Samagra Shiksha, DIETs are envisaged as a strong district 
institution that would prepare and support teachers at the school level.  
 
a) Key Activities and Functions 
 
b) Linkages of DIETs with the schemes of SSA, RMSA and Samagra Shiksha 
The core institutional focus of a DIET was Continuous Teacher Pr ofessional Development, 
which would directly/indirectly impact on school improvement programmes. It fed into the 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) to strengthen its delivery. SSA was a comprehensive and 
integrated flagship programme of Government of India to att ain Universal Elementary 
Key Activities and Functions
Pre-service Teacher Education (PSTE)
In-service teacher education (ISTE)
Direct Field Interventions and School 
Improvement
Studies on Education
Annual Academic Planning and Review
Resource Centre/ Teacher Learning 
Centres and Material Development
32

 
2 | P a g e  
 
Education (UEE), covering the entire country in a mission mode. SSA was launched in 2001-
2002 in partnership with the State Governments and Local Self Governments. In 2009, the 
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan  (RMSA) another flagship scheme of Government of 
India was launched to enhance access to secondary education and improve its quality. 
However, the role of DIETs 1 remained restricted to its linkage with the SSA for elementary 
education.  
Subsequently, to ad dress the gap in the continuum between elementary education and 
secondary education, a new scheme, Samagra Shiksha came into effect from 1st April, 2018. 
It is an integrated scheme of School Education formulated by subsuming the existing 
centrally sponsored schemes of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha 
Abhiyan (RMSA) and Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Teacher Education (CSSTE). Samagra 
Shiksha envisages a strong district institution that would prepare and support teachers at 
the school level. 
One of the major objectives of Samagra Shiksha is strengthening and upgradation of State 
Councils of Educational Research and Training (SCERTs)/ State Institutes of Education 
(SIEs) and District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) as nodal agencies for teacher 
training. Accordingly, provisions are provided for strengthening of Physical Infrastructure, 
Establishment of new DIETs, Salaries for Teacher Educators, and Technology Support to 
Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs) such as SCERTs, DI ETs and BITEs, Annual Grant for 
TEIs, Programme and Activities including Faculty Development, Specific Projects for 
Research activities. 
c) National Education Policy 2020 and DIETs 
In the present context, with the recommendations of the National Education Policy 2020, the 
role of DIETs is critical in providing quality Pre -service and In -service teacher training to 
student trainees and in -service teachers. The NEP has further envisaged that DIETs, BITEs, 
BRCs and CRCs will become vibrant institutes of excellence under SCERT. It is also expected 
that DIET’s role be expanded to cover secondary schools as well, instead of only elementary 
schools at present, especially after the introduction of 5+3+3+4 structure in school education 
under NEP 2020. Para 8.5 (c) of NE P 2020 calls for instituting a n effective quality self -
regulation or accreditation system for all stages of education including pre-school education 
- private, public, and philanthropic - to ensure compliance with essential quality standards. 
It implies th at private schools cannot be left to fend for themselves. Hence, DIETs should 
emerge as a robust unit for professional development of teachers and models for the other 
private institutions in the districts as well.  Also, there is a need to devise suggesti ve 
                                                           
1 Restructuring and Reorganization of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Teacher Education: 
Guideline for Implementation (2012) 
 
33

 
3 | P a g e  
 
measures on how to strengthen the relationship between the DIETs and Block Resource  
Centres (BRCs) and Cluster Resource Centres (CRCs). 
2) Status of DIETs 
Currently, there are 748 districts (As per UDISE+ 2021-22) in the country and there is a DIET 
sanctioned in 672 of the total districts, out of which 613 DIETs are functional. The State/UT-
wise details of DIETs sanctioned and functional are at Annexure-I. 
 
3) Focus areas of DIETs 
Samagra Shiksha envisaged a strong district institution that would support pre -service and 
in-service work with teachers at the school education level. To support the universalisation 
of quality education and achieve quality in adult a nd life -long education under Samagra 
Shiksha, the DIETs were visualized as a way to infuse the system with the following essential 
inputs: 
 
 
Provision of Pre-service and In-service Teacher Education Programmes
Organizing District Level Educational Researches on issues pertaining to
enrollment, retention, achievement, gender parity, proficiency and Drop
outs.
Facilitating Collaborative Action Researches to enable practicing
teachers to address class room issues.
Scouting Innovative Practices of Primary/Upper primary teachers and
disseminating them among their colleagues by organizing periodical
District Level Seminars and releasing News bulletins which carry
information on Innovative class room processes.
Providing Resource Support to Non-Formal Education Sector by
extending DIET expertise in developing curriculum and supplementary
Learning Materials to adult learners.
Designing and developing trainer manuals for Anganwadi workers and for
addressing Social concerns such as Crisis and Disaster Management, Gender
Sensitivity, Leadership Manual for School Heads etc.
34

 
4 | P a g e  
 
4) Issues and Challenges  
a) Human Resources: There is pressing need to ensure that all posts in DIETs are filled. 
Creating a cadre of teacher educators could help to retain and nurture academically 
qualified people who also understand and develop expertise for various activities in 
education. There h as been improvement in filling up of vacancies in DIETs. However, a 
lot still needs to be done in this regard as having sufficient manpower in the DIETs is the 
key to conduct of successful programmes. At present, the status of vacancies of academic 
positions in DIETs at the national level is around 52%. 
b) Inadequate physical infrastructure:  Many DIETs suffer from inadequate physical 
infrastructure, including classrooms, administrative offices, libraries, and laboratories. 
This lack of proper infrastructure ha mpers the overall functioning of the institute and 
affects the quality of training and education imparted. 
c) Insufficient funding: DIETs often struggle with insufficient funding, which limits their 
ability to upgrade infrastructure and acquire necessary resources. This leads to a scarcity 
of teaching aids, learning materials, laboratory instruments and equipment and other 
modern educational technologies. 
d) Lack of modern technology integration:  Many DIETs struggle with the integration of 
modern technologies int o their training program mes. This includes the absence of 
functional computer labs, limited internet connectivity, and insufficient training for 
teachers on using technology for teaching and learning purposes. 
e) Limited research and development facilities: DIETs should ideally serve as centre for 
research and development in the field of education. However, due to infrastructure 
limitations, they often lack the necessary facilities and resources to conduct research, 
leading to a gap between theoretical knowledge and practical implementation. 
f) Inadequate library resources: DIETs may face challenges in maintaining well -stocked 
libraries with updated and relevant books, journals, and educational resources. This 
limits the availability of reference materials for both trainees and teachers.  
g) Convergence & Linkages with Higher Education Institutions: Moreover, it has been 
observed that there is lack of provisions for pursuing different career paths based on own 
interest and aptitude or for pursuing higher education for  career growth for which due 
convergence with institutes of higher education would need to be encouraged. 
h) Continuous Professional Development: Presently, there is lack of individualization in 
training with these programmes administered using a one-size-fits-all approach without 
a detailed need assessment. Further, trainings are usually administered year on year with 
limited tracking of data on (1) Effectiveness and (2) their impact on specific teacher 
competencies/ teacher professional growth. 
 
35

 
5 | P a g e  
 
5) Status of Funds approved for DIETs in Teacher Education component under 
Samagra Shiksha since 2018-19  
(Rs. In lakh) 
 
Source: PRABANDH 
 
Years % of Funds approved for 
Recurring Activities for DIEYs 
% of Funds approved for Non-
Recurring Activities for DIETs 
2018-19 83.86 16.14 
2019-20 96.68 3.32 
2020-21 98.57 1.43 
2021-22 95.92 4.08 
2022-23 92.04 7.96 
2023-24 77.84 22.16 
 
As can be inferred from the above data, majority of the funds approved since the inception 
of the scheme in 2018 -19 for DIETs under the teacher education component of  Samagra 
Shiksha is for recurring activities with a major chunk going to the salary of teacher educators’ 
component. . The State/UT-wise detail of funds approved (Fresh Outlay) for DIETs in Teacher 
Education Component under Samagra Shiskha since 2018-19 are at Annexure-II. 
96432.24
81611.47
73958.72
71158.99
77335.61
96269.63
80867.84
78902.87
72902.57
68256.67
71180.11
74937.97
15564.4
2708.6
1056.15
2902.32
6155.5
21331.66
2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Funds Approved for DIETs under Samagra Shiksha
Total (N+R) Recurring Non Recurring
36

 
6 | P a g e  
 
6) Gist of Announcement 
“The NEP 2020 recognises that change management process for the reinvigoration of DIETs 
is a must to change the capacity and work culture of these institutions and develop them into 
vibrant institutions of excellence. Besides, NEP 2020 emphasizes that all stages of school 
education will require the highest -quality teachers, and no stage will be considered more 
important than any other. Accordingly, the re -envisioned DIETs will ensure that student 
trainees and in -service teachers receive high -quality pre -service and in -service teac her 
preparation in line with NEP 2020.  DIET's role will include secondary schools as well 
following the implementation of the 5+3+3+4 framework in schooling. Thus, Government 
aims to strongly focus on strengthening DIETs through critical interventions in 
infrastructure development, innovative research, continuous professional development, 
dipstick surveys and ICT implementation.” 
 
7) DIET of Excellence: The Concept 
The idea of "DIET of Excellence" is to turn the functional DIETs (District Institutes of 
Education and Training) in the country into district-level educational hubs of innovation and 
excellence. These organizations would be strengthened as  centres for curriculum creation, 
teacher preparation, research, and innovation, enhancing elementary, secondary, and senior 
secondary education while assisting decentralization initiatives. 
 
A "DIET of Excellence" will focus  on empowering teachers through in -depth training 
programmes that improve their topic knowledge, pedagogical abilities, and teaching 
approaches. Additionally, this “DIET of Excellenc”e will also be  committed to creating and 
upgrading curricular frameworks, textbooks, and teaching -learning materials to adhere to 
state or national standards and satisfy the different requirements of students. 
 
As DI ETs traditionally perform studies and action researches  to investigate successful 
teaching practices and educational initiatives, a “DIET of Excellence” will have research and 
innovation as crucial components that support evidence -based decision -making and  
ongoing development. “DIET of Excellence” will propagate  knowledge sharing, resource 
mobilization, and the exchange of best practice s and collaboration among universities , 
schools, government agencies and CSOs. 
 
It is envisaged that t hese district -level institutions will be adequately strengthened to 
become models of high-quality education by exemplifying the "DIET of Excellence," through 
empowering educators and improving student learning outcomes. In other words, it will 
make a subst antial contribution to the overall development of both students , teachers, 
schools and the community at large. 
 
 
37

 
7 | P a g e  
 
8) Rational for DIET of Excellence 
The rationale for c onverting existing DIETs into “DIETs of Excellence ” would encompass  
upgraded and modernized infrastructure, fully equipped with the latest ICT and Technology 
facilities. These upgraded facilities would include  smart classrooms, well -equipped labs, 
latest and digitized library facilities, and digital content. Integration of ICT enables dynamic 
teaching methods and personalized learning, supporting inclusive education for diverse 
learners. Thus, DIETs of Excellence would aim to elevate teacher quality, foster innovation, 
and prepare students to compete in this  digital and knowledge -driven society,  thereby 
becoming pivotal pillars of educational transformation at the district level. 
 
9) Aims & Objectives 
 Providing state -of-the-art classrooms, well -equipped laboratories, and cutting -edge 
digitized library facilities would improve the learning environment. 
 Include the most recent ICT and technology tools to enable creative teaching strategies 
and individualized learning techniques. 
 Promote use of technology in education to promote a culture of research and practice. 
 Provide teachers with opportunity for continuous professional development so they can 
adjust to contemporary teaching methods. 
 Through the use of cutting -edge technology in education, prepare students for a digital 
and knowledge-driven society. 
 Establish a supportive atmosphere for learning through provision of adequate  
infrastructure and technological resources. 
 Promote networking and collaboration among those involved in education for the 
purpose of sharing information and mobilizing resources. 
 
10) Vision Statement of DIET of Excellence 
The visio n of a “ DIET of Excellence ” is to become an exemplar centre of innovation and 
educational excellence, which would empower both students and teachers with tech enabled 
infrastructure. These centres will lead the way in providing quality school education through 
continuous professional development program mes, innovation, and transformative 
practices. 
 
11) Beneficiaries  
A "DIET of Excellence" benefits educators, teachers, students, schools, academic institutions, 
and the community at large. Through specialized training, these DIETs will equip instructors 
to provide high -quality instruction by advancing their skills and knowledge. Students will 
gain from creative teaching methods and welcoming learning environments, which support 
their entir e growth. Schools will be  given assistance and resources to raise academic 
38

 
8 | P a g e  
 
standards. Finally, by addressing their unique educational needs and advancing their general 
development, local communities can gain from the engagement and collaboration of the DIET 
of Excellence. 
 
12) Six Major Pillars of DIETs of Excellence 
i) Infrastructure and Resource Support:  The creation and upkeep of suitable 
infrastructure facilities is the first major pillar of the DIET of Excellence. The focus will 
be on offering adequately furnished infrastructure, digitized libraries and labs, hi-tech 
technological resources, and other facilities required to establish ment of a favorable 
learning environment. It will also provide knowledge, technical tools, and access to 
educational resources to promote teachers' professional development and the 
adoption of cutting-edge teaching techniques. 
ii) Empowering teachers: The second major pillar of DIETs of Excellence is empowering 
teachers through continuous professional development  in the form of specialized 
training, workshops, and capacity building programmes. The focus is on enhancing 
their pedagogical skills, subject knowledge, teaching methodologies, competencies 
required for school leadership and management, equipping them to deliver high -
quality education effectively. 
iii) Research and Evidence-Based Practices: DIETs of Excellence emphasizes research 
studies, pilot projects, and innovative initiatives to identify effective teaching 
methodologies, educational practices, and strategi es for addressing local educational 
challenges. The findings from these studies will contribute to evidence-based decision-
making and overall improvement in the education system. 
iv) Inclusive Education and Support: Ensuring inclusive education is another key pillar 
of DIETs of Excellence. They will work towards addressing the needs of diverse 
learners, including students with disabilities and special educational needs. These 
DIETs will provide support, resources, and guidance to create an accessible and 
equitable learning environment for all students.  
v) Focus on Vocational Education:  DIET of Excellence will also prioritize Vocational 
Education program mes by fostering skill development and thorough vocational 
training programmes that promote local professions, kn owledge, and skills, e.g., local 
art, music, agriculture, business, sports, carpentry, and other vocational crafts. 
vi) Collaboration and Networking: DIETs of Excellence foster collaboration among 
educational institutions, government agencies, CSOs, community organizations, and 
industry experts. They will create platforms for knowledge sharing, joint initiatives, 
and resource mobilization to enhance the overall quality of education through 
collective expertise and resources.  
 
39

 
9 | P a g e  
 
13) Major Action Points for the Way Forward 
i) Appropriate infrastructure DIET of Excellence including staff requirement 
 
a) Provision for Infrastructure Facilities . Suggestive Infrastructure Norms for DIET of 
Excellence are at Annexure-III 
Sl.No Category Remarks 
1) Administrative Block 
1) Principal/HoD Room  Room with PA’s cabin, providing a private area for 
administrative tasks, meetings, and decision-making 
2) Vice- Principal Room Room serves as an administrative space to carry out their 
responsibilities. 
3) 
Academic faculty Rooms  
(1 Room for 2 faculty 
member on sharing 
bases) 
These rooms provide a space for faculty members to gather, 
collaborate, and engage in professional discussions. Staff 
rooms may have individual workstations or shared desks 
for teachers to work on lesson planning, grading, and 
administrative tasks 
4) 
Administrative Offices 
for administrative 
personnel 
Administrative Offices for administrative personnel, such as 
the administrative officer, accounts officer and other 
administrative staff members. These offices serve as 
workspaces for managing various administrative tasks and 
handling day-to-day operations. 
5) Meeting Hall (Approx. 
50 Capacity) 
A well-equipped staff meeting room, provide enough space 
to comfortably accommodate around 50 staff members, 
considering a mix of seating options and additional 
amenities 
6) Reception Area 
A welcoming reception area where visitors can be received 
and assisted. It serves as a point of contact for inquiries, 
directions, and information about the DIET. 
7) Record Room 
A designated room for storing and managing official 
records, documents, and files related to administration, 
finance, personnel, and other administrative functions. This 
room should have appropriate storage facilities and 
organizational systems. 
8) Waiting Area/Visitors 
Room 
A waiting area for visitors and guests, providing a 
comfortable space with seating arrangements and possibly 
some reading materials. 
2) Administrative Block 
1)  Classrooms  Upto  8 
(Approx. 50 Capacity) 
Spacious and well -equipped classrooms with modern 
teaching aids, audio -visual equipment, and interactive 
whiteboards or smart boards; Flexible seating 
arrangements that accommodate different teaching and 
learning styles; Accessibility features for individuals with 
disabilities, such as ramps, wide doorways, and appropriate 
seating arrangements 
 2) 
Library/Resource 
centre (Approx. 50 to 75 
Capacity) 
Library with a wide range of books, reference materials, 
textbooks, and digital resources for teachers, students, and 
researchers equipp ed with computers, internet 
40

 
10 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Remarks 
connectivity, and access to educational software, online 
databases, and e-learning platforms. 
 3) Laboratories 
Equipped with modern apparatus, audio -visual facilities, 
language learning software, interactive tools , chemicals, 
and safety equipment to support practical experiments and 
demonstrations 
 4) Computer Room Sufficient computers, high-speed internet connectivity, and 
access to educational software and digital resources. 
 5) Multimedia-equipped 
room 
For conducting webinars, online training sessions, and 
video-based instructional activities. 
 6) Seminar halls (50 
Capacity) 
With seating capacity to accommodate large gatherings for 
conferences, workshops, and professional development 
programmes. Equipped with audio-visual systems, 
projection screens, and sound systems 
 7) Auditoriums (100 
Capacity)  
With seating capacity to accommodate large gatherings for 
conferences, workshops, and professional development 
programmes. Equipped with audio -visual systems, 
projection screens, and sound systems 
 8) Special Education Units 
Dedicated spaces for special education units to support the 
learning needs of students with disabilities. Specialized 
rooms equipped with assistive technologies, sensory 
materials, and resources for individualized instruction and 
therapy. 
 9) Research and 
Innovation Centre 
A dedicated centre or space for research and innovation 
activities, providing resources and facilities for conducting 
educational research, developing educational models, and 
piloting innovative initiatives 
3) Residential Hostel Facilities For Boys & Girls (50 Capacity 
Separate Hostels: There are separate hostels for boys and girls with well-designed rooms 
to ensure privacy and a safe living space. 
1)  Rooms for Resident 
The rooms are designed to accommodate multiple students 
(6 Person) in a dormitory -style setup. Each room is 
furnished with essential amenities, including beds, storage 
facilities, and adequate ventilation 
 2) Common Area 
Include common areas such as lounges or recreation rooms 
where students can socialize, relax, and engage in 
extracurricular activities. 
 3) Study Area Dedicate study hall or quiet spaces within the hostel where 
students can focus on their academic work. 
 4) Dining Facility Establish a dining hall or cafeteria within the hostel to 
provide meals for resident students 
 5) Kitchenette 
Allocate a common kitchenette with basic amenities where 
students can prepare their own snacks or meals, if 
necessary. 
 6) Bathroom Facility  For a 50 -seater hostel in DIET of Excellence, the ideal 
number of bathrooms based on number of enrolment 1:15  
41

 
11 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Remarks 
 7) Laundry Facility Provide laundry room or facilities where students can 
conveniently wash their clothes. 
 8) Warden's Office 
Warden office m ay be located in a central and accessible 
location within the hostel, allowing the warden to oversee 
the activities and ensure the safety and well -being of the 
hostel residents 
 9) Warden's Room  Allocate a warden's room within the hostel premises to 
address any concerns or issues raised by the students. 
10)  Wi-Fi Access Facility Offer internet connectivity in the hostel to support students' 
academic and recreational needs. 
11) Safety and Security  Implement security measures, such as controlled access,  
CCTV surveillance, and the presence of trained hostel staff. 
4) Toilet Facilities 
Separate toilets for Male Students, Female Students, Male staff, and female staff to ensure privacy 
and comfort 
1) Adequate Number of 
Restrooms/Toilets 
Determine the number of restrooms required based on the 
expected occupancy of the DIET. Consider separate 
restrooms for male and female students, staff, and visitors 
to maintain privacy and convenience. 
2) Accessibility 
Ensure that restrooms are designed and equipped to be 
accessible for individuals with disabilities. Include features 
such as grab bars, wider doorways, lower sinks, and 
wheelchair accessibility to promote inclusivity. 
3) Hygiene and Cleanliness 
Regularly clean and maintain the restrooms to ensure 
proper hygiene standards. Provide sufficient trash bins and 
regular waste disposal to keep the restrooms clean and free 
from litter. 
4) Sanitary Fixtures 
Install functional and high -quality sanitary fixtures, 
including toilets, urinals, sinks, and hand dryers or  paper 
towel dispensers. Ensure that they are properly maintained 
and in good working condition 
5) Hand washing Facilities 
Provide adequate hand washing facilities with running 
water, soap dispensers, and hand dryers or paper towels. 
Promote and encourage  regular hand washing for proper 
hygiene. 
6) Ventilation and Odor 
Control 
Install proper ventilation systems to ensure good air 
circulation and minimize odors. Consider the use of air 
fresheners or natural ventilation methods to maintain a 
pleasant environment. 
7) Regular Maintenance 
Assign dedicated staff or cleaning personnel to regularly 
monitor and maintain the restroom facilities. Promptly 
address any repairs or issues to ensure uninterrupted 
availability. 
8) Safety Measures  
Implement safety measures such as non -slip flooring, 
appropriate lighting, and emergency systems. Ensure clear 
signage for restroom locations and emergency procedures. 
5) ICT and Technology facilities 
42

 
12 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Remarks 
1) Computer Labs 
Well-equipped computer labs with the latest hardware and 
software to provide hands -on experience in using 
technology for various educational purposes. 
2) Smart classrooms 
classrooms are equipped with audio -visual aids such as 
projectors, interactive whiteboards, smart TVs, and audio 
systems that enable multime dia presentations and 
interactive teaching 
3) Internet Connectivity 
High-speed internet connectivity to enable access to online 
resources, research materials, and digital learning 
platforms 
4) Audio-Visual Aids 
Provision of audio -visual aids like projectors, interactive 
whiteboards, and multimedia tools to facilitate dynamic and 
interactive teaching 
5) Digital Content Creation 
Encouraging teachers to create digital content such as 
videos, animations, and presentations to enrich their 
lessons 
6) ICT Support 
Establishing an ICT support team to provide technical 
assistance and troubleshoot issues related to technology 
integration 
7) Data Management 
Utilizing technology for effective data management and 
analysis to inform decision -making and policy 
implementation 
6) Safety And Security Facilities 
1) Security Personnel  
Employ trained security personnel to patrol the DIET 
premises, monitor entrances and exits, and ensure the 
safety of individuals on campus. 
2) Access Control  
Implement access control systems, such as electronic key 
cards or ID badges, to regulate entry and exit points. 
Restrict access to authorized personnel and visitors and 
monitor visitors' entry through sign-in procedures. 
3) CCTV Surveillance 
Install closed -circuit television (CCT V) cameras 
strategically throughout the DIET campus, including 
entrances, common areas, corridors, and parking lots. 
Ensure proper monitoring and recording of the camera 
footage. 
4) Emergency Response 
Plan  
Develop a comprehensive emergency response plan that 
includes protocols for various emergency situations, such 
as fires, natural disasters, medical emergencies, or security 
threats. Conduct regular drills and trainings to familiarize 
staff and students with emergency procedures. 
5) Safety Audits and 
Inspections 
Conduct regular safety audits and inspections of the DIET 
premises to identify and address potential hazards, such as 
faulty electrical wiring, uneven flooring, or inadequate 
lighting. Promptly address any identified safety concerns. 
6) Fire Safety Measures  
Install fire safety equipment, including fire extinguishers, 
smoke detectors, and fire alarms, in accordance with local 
fire safety regulations. Regularly inspect and maintain fire 
43

 
13 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Remarks 
safety systems, and conduct fire drills to ensure 
preparedness. 
7) First Aid Facility 
Establish well-equipped first aid stations or rooms within 
the DIET campus. Ensure that staff members are trained in 
basic first aid and have access to necessary medical supplies 
to provide immediate assistance in case of injuri es or 
medical emergencies. 
8) Boundary wall 
The boundary wall should be high enough to provide 
security and privacy for the institute. It is typically 
recommended to have a boundary wall with a height of at 
least 6 to 8 feet. It may be constructed using durable and 
secure materials, such as brick or concrete, to ensure 
longevity and resistance to external elements. 
9) 
Safe and Well -
maintained 
Infrastructure  
Ensure that buildings, classrooms, laboratories, and other 
facilities meet safety standards. Regu larly maintain 
infrastructure, including electrical systems, plumbing, and 
structural integrity, to ensure a safe environment. 
7) Residential Facilities DIETs Staffs (As Per State Specific Need) 
1) Single and Family 
Quarters 
Establishment and strengthening residential quarters for 
faculties, especially female teachers in sparsely populated 
or hilly and densely forested areas with difficult 
geographical terrain and border areas.  
Construction of residential quarters for faculti es in 
remote/hilly areas/in areas with difficult terrain 
2) Furnishings 
Ensure that each staff quarter is adequately furnished with 
basic amenities such as beds, tables, chairs, cupboards, and 
kitchen appliances (if applicable). These furnishings should 
be comfortable and functional 
3) Essential Facilities 
Each staff quarter should have essential facilities, including 
a bedroom, living room, kitchen, and bathroom. The size 
and layout of the quarters can vary based designation. 
4) Maintenance and 
Upkeep 
Regularly maintain and repair the staff quarters to ensure 
that they are in good condition. Allocate dedicated staff or 
resources for maintenance tasks, including electrical, 
plumbing, and general upkeep. 
5) Community Spaces 
Develop communal spaces or recreational areas within the 
staff quarters premises where staff members can socialize, 
relax, and engage in community-building activities 
6) Infrastructure Support 
Ensure that the staff quarters are well-connected with basic 
infrastructure such as electricity, water supply, and sewage 
systems. Adequate parking space should also be provided. 
7) Green Spaces 
Incorporate green spaces, gardens, or parks within the staff 
quarters area to create a pleasant and serene environment 
for residents. 
8) Provision of Functional Website 
1) Information Hub The website should contain in-depth details about the DIET, 
including its vision, mission, and objectives. 
44

 
14 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Remarks 
2) Program Details  
The website should have detailed information about the 
various, courses, training programmes, information about 
enrollment as per the running programmes, research 
initiatives etc offered by the DIET should be easily 
accessible. 
3) Faculty Profiles 
Profiles of the Academic, Para and Non Academic faculties 
and staff, along with their qua lifications and areas of 
expertise, should be featured on the website. 
4) Infrastructure and 
Facilities 
The website should highlight the upgraded infrastructure 
facilities, laboratories, library, ICT resources, and other 
amenities available at the DIET. 
5) Admission and 
Application Process 
Information about admission criteria, application 
procedures, and important dates for prospective students 
should be clearly outlined 
5) Events and News 
The website should regularly update upcoming events, 
workshops, seminars, and other important news related to 
the DIE 
6) Online Resources 
A dedicated section for online resources, including e-books, 
research papers, and teaching materials, should be made 
available to students and faculty 
7) Best Practices  A dedicated section for various best practices conducted by 
the DIET with good Photographs and Videos  
8) Alumni Corner The website can feature an alumni corner, showcasing the 
achievements and success stories of former students 
9) Interactive Features 
Incorporating interactive features like feedback forms, 
online inquiries, and chat support can enhance user 
engagement and provide better support to visitors. 
10) Photo & Video gallery 
A separate section for the Photographs and Videos for 
various activitie s, training, capacity building, community 
awareness programmers etc conducted by the DIET.   
11) Contact Information 
Contact details, including address, phone numbers, and 
email, should be prominently displayed for easy 
communication 
9) Other Facilities 
1) Outdoor Learning Areas  
Designate specific areas within the green spaces for outdoor 
learning activities, such as open -air classrooms, 
amphitheaters, or seating arrangements that can facilitate 
interactive and experiential learning. 
2) Environmental Features 
Incorporate environmentally friendly features such as 
rainwater harvesting systems, composting facilities, or 
solar-powered lighting within the green spaces. 
3) Biodiversity 
Conservation  
Promote biodiversity by incorporating native plants, trees , 
and shrubs within the green spaces. This can attract local 
wildlife, provide educational opportunities about 
ecosystems, and create a sense of ecological balance. 
45

 
15 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Remarks 
4) Seating Areas and 
Shaded Spaces 
Install benches, seating areas, or shaded structures wi thin 
the green spaces to provide comfortable spaces for students 
and staff to rest, study, or engage in group discussions. 
5) Recreational Facilities 
Integrate recreational facilities within the green spaces, 
such as sports fields, outdoor exercise stations, or play 
areas for physical activities and leisure. 
6) Educational Signage  
Install informative signage or placards within the green 
spaces to provide educational information about the plants, 
trees, and environmental concepts. This can enhance the 
learning experience and foster environmental awareness. 
7) Gardens and Lawns 
Allocate areas for gardens and lawns where plants, flowers, 
and trees can be cultivated. These green spaces can serve as 
serene areas for relaxation, outdoor learning, and aesthetic 
appeal. 
8) Parking Facility Sufficient parking space for staff, students, and visitors to 
accommodate vehicles safely within the DIET premises. 
9) Canteen/Cafeteria:  
A canteen or cafeteria that offers hygienic and nutritious 
meals for students, staff, and visitors, ensuring access to 
food within the DIET premises. 
10) Provision of safe and 
clean drinking water 
 Place water dispensers strategically in various areas of 
the institute, such as classrooms, corridors, common 
areas, and the canteen, to provide easy access to 
drinking water for students, staff, and visitors 
 Install water filtration systems to ensure that the 
drinking water is free from impurities and 
contaminants, making it safe for consumption. 
 Ensure that the drinking water supply is su fficient to 
meet the needs of all students, staff, and visitors 
throughout the day 
 In larger campuses, consider setting up multiple 
drinking water points to avoid overcrowding and 
ensure convenient access. 
 Implement a regular water quality testing and 
monitoring system to ensure that the drinking water 
remains safe and meets the required standards. 
11) Borewell Facility  
 Provision of borewell facility, is essential to ensure a 
sustainable and reliable water supply 
 Schedule regular maintenance and servicing of the 
borewell and the pump to keep the facility in optimal 
working condition. 
 
b) Provision for Staff Facilities 2: The staff  strength of a DIET would be the same as 
recommended in the DIET Guidelines of 1989, which are as detailed below: 
Post Number 
Academic  
                                                           
2 Staffing strength as specified in the Guidelines of DIETs (1989) 
46

 
16 | P a g e  
 
Post Number 
Principal 1 
Vice Principal 1 
Senior Lecturers 6 
Lecturers 17 
Total-A 25 
Para Academic  
Work Experience/Work Education Teacher 1 
Librarian 1 
ICT Support Staff 1 
Statistician 1 
Total-B 4 
Non-Academic3 
Office Superintendent 1 
Lab. Assistant 1 
P.A./Steno (to Principal) 1 
Clerk (including one for hostel) 8 
Steno Typist/Data Entry Operator 2 
Accountant 1 
Maintenance Support Staff/Group D 6 
Total-C 20 
 
ii) Expanding the role and responsibilities of DIETs to cover all levels of schooling4 
a) Pedagogy, Curriculum and Material development: As per NEP 2020, a new and 
comprehensive National Curriculum Frameworks on ECCE, School Education, Teacher 
Education and Adult Education are bein g devised based on the locally contextualized 
inputs of the State Curriculum Frameworks developed by each State and UT. Henceforth, 
DIETs will be responsible for curricular literacy of CRC/BRC, school leadership and 
teachers of all stages of school educati on i.e., Foundational, Preparatory, Middle and 
Secondary. It will also be responsible for providing training in innovative pedagogies for 
the 5+3+3+4 pedagogical and curricular structure (Foundational, Preparatory, Middle 
and Secondary), including through lecture-demonstrations.  
b) Foundational Literacy and Numeracy (FLN): Under the FLN Mission, each DIET is 
expected to develop an Academic Resource Pool specifically for FLN, comprising of 
teachers, teacher educators, district education planners and faculty from University 
Department of Education. Accordingly, DIETs sh all be responsible for monitoring the 
planning, implementation and achievements under FLN programmes. For this, the 
                                                           
3 Financial provision for non-academic/para-academic staff would be as per the norms of Samagra Shiksha 
for 4 positions i.e., 1) Work Education Teacher; 2) Librarian; 3) Laboratory Assistant and 4) 
Statistician/Accountant. 
4 Draft Guidelines on Re-envisioning and Strengthening of DIETs, Ministry of Education (2023)  
47

 
17 | P a g e  
 
capacity of DIET faculties would need to be augmented to enable them to provide 
academic support so that learning outcomes of students can be improved. 
c) In-service education:  The mandate of DIETs would be enhanced for preparation of 
teachers for all levels of school education through in-service education i.e., Foundational, 
Preparatory, Middle to Secondary stages. This would include providing at least 50 hours 
of Continuous Professional Development to all School Leaders and Teachers; Tracking of 
training of every teacher through Teachers’ Registry; and Training of teachers with 
demonstrated leadership and management skills to take on academic le adership 
positions in schools, school complexes, BRCs, CRCs. Special shorter local teacher 
education programmes may also be introduced in DIETs for eminent local persons who 
can be hired to teach at schools or school complexes as ‘master instructors’, for the 
purpose of promoting local professions, knowledge, and skills, e.g., local art, music, 
agriculture, business, sports, carpentry, and other vocational crafts. 
d) Pre-service education: In line with the recommendation of NEP 2020, 4 Year Integrated 
Teacher Education Program (ITEP) would be the minimum qualification required for 
teacher recruitment by 2030 and all D.El.Ed programs would have to be phased out 
gradually by 2027 -28 (with last admission by 2024 -25). Accordingly, states and UTs 
would initially need to carefully assess whether the DIETs in their State/UT will be in a 
position to run 4 -year ITEP by fulfilling the requirements for setting up a 
multidisciplinary institution as specified by the UGC. Further, it would be viable to 
continue the pre -service element in the form of two years B.Ed programmes after 
completing bachelor’s degree in a specialized subject. These B.Ed. programmes may also 
be suitably adapted as 1 -year B.Ed. programmes and offered only to those who have 
completed the equivalent of 4 -year multidisciplinary Bachelor’s Degrees or who have 
obtained a Master’s degree in a specialized subject.  
e) District Planning: DIETs would develop and monitor the implementation of perspective 
school education plans from pre-school to secondary stage (of all stages – Foundational, 
Preparatory, Middle and Secondary) for district based on school and block plans. Under 
this, capacities of schools would be built to develop a culture to work through a plan e.g., 
an overall plan district can be prepared by school s under guidance of DIETs/CRC/BRC 
for increasing GER, Adjusted NET, preventing drop outs, identifying OOSC and 
mainstreaming them, retention and transition. Further, DIETs would build the capacities 
of CRC/BRC to help schools plan for teaching and learning by the learners identified with 
Specific Learning Disabilities. It would also be responsible for handholding, supporting 
and building capacities of schools to undertake post-NAS remediation. 
f) Research, action research and dipsticks:  DIET as an institution and DIET faculty as 
individuals should be encouraged to take up studies of the education of the district. For 
this, the DIET faculty would need to work in collaboration with SCERTs and other Higher 
48

 
18 | P a g e  
 
Education Institutions to undertake District Level Educati onal Researches and Action 
researches for all stages of school education i.e., Foundational, Preparatory, Middle and 
Secondary. DIETs would also continuously undertake dipstick studies to feed back into 
the system for course correction of all stages of school education as per new pedagogical 
and curricular structure of 5+3+3+4. 
g) Supporting and monitoring CRC/BRC: DIETs shall work closely with BRCs and school 
complexes/CRCs to build their capacity to offer field support and leadership to Head 
Masters and teac hers and facilitate sharing of resources. As per NEP 2020, SCERT will 
lead a “change management process” for the reinvigoration of CRCs, BRCs and DIETs to 
change the capacity and work culture of these institutions within 3 years, developing 
them into vibrant institutes of excellence. Accordingly, DIETs would work under SCERTs, 
and CRC/BRCs would work under overall supervision of DIETs in a hierarchical manner 
so that there is synergy and collaboration and coordination at all levels. Further, DIETs, 
CRCs and  BRCs would be responsible for functioning for all stages of schooling i.e., 
Foundational, Preparatory, Middle and Secondary.  
h) Education for All:  DIETs would undertake complete monitoring of implementation 
“New India Literacy Programme or ULLAS (Understanding of Lifelong Learning for All in 
Society)” and capacity building of schools, Teacher Education Institutions and youth 
volunteers from NYKS and NSS. For this purpose, DIETs shall organize online/digital and 
offline learning activities at Adult Education Centres, as well as coordinate with volunteer 
instructors for the practical aspects of learning. DIETs shall also prepare supplementary 
Learning Materials to adult learners in accordance with local context and languages. 
i) Use of Technology:  DIETs will be re sponsible for ensuring appropriate digital literacy 
of all school leaders and teachers. In other words, DIETs would need to leverage 
technology for teaching learning to effectively and efficiently carry forward the mandate 
of quality teachers’ education, research, development of curriculum/ textbooks/ various 
TLM and other online/offline resources for school education. This would involve 
promoting use of smart & virtual classrooms and DTH channels, etc., for improvement in 
in-service training of teacher and use of ICT by the teachers in the classroom processes.  
 
iii) Strengthen the institutional linkages between the DIETs and BRCs & CRCs5 
DIETs are located at an important level of decentralization i.e., the districts and the role of 
DIETs is critical in providing quality Pre -service and In -service teacher training to student 
trainees and in service teachers. The linkages of DIETs with the B RCs and CRCs are also 
critical for effective monitoring and supervision at the school level. As per the 
recommendation of NEP 2020, the SCERT will also lead a “change management process” for 
the reinvigoration of CRCs, BRCs, and DIETs which must change the  capacity and work 
                                                           
5 Draft Framework for roles, responsibilities and monitoring of BRCs/CRCs, Minis try of Education (2023) 
49

 
19 | P a g e  
 
culture of these institutions in 3 years, developing them into vibrant institutions of 
excellence. Accordingly, the most pivotal task of the BRCs and CRCs would be providing 
onsite support through tracking of teacher competencies, fillin g of gaps and establishing 
training needs. At the same time, these institutions would also need to provide continuous 
professional development to teachers, school heads and other education officials, under the 
guidance of the DIETs. Hence, the DIETs could support school improvement through the 
following measures: 
 Design and Delivery of Training: DIETs would be linked closely to the BRCs and CRCs 
so that the design and delivery of training is as per the teachers’ requirement and need. 
This requirement can be  collaboratively defined by the DIET, the BRC Training Co -
ordination Unit, the CRPs, Expert Groups and the Teachers.  
 Database of Experts: DIET may become the nodal centre that maintains a data base of 
experts available at the District, Block or Cluster le vel that can be called on from time to 
time. These data base should also include the details of mater trainers who were already 
trained under the National Initiatives for School Heads and Teachers Holistic 
Advancement (NISHTHA) and other related programmes.  
 Monitoring of Schools in close coordination with DIETs: Each DIET faculty could be 
assigned schools in the district for regular visit and support, which would also 
supplement the onsite support being provided by the resource persons in the block and 
cluster level. 
 
14) Strategy for Selection of DIET of Excellence 
All 613 functional DIETs will be converted into the DIET of Excellence  in a phase manner 
under the scheme.  Over a period of 5 years, 125 existing DIETs will be covered every year 
starting from the financial year 2023-24. 
 
a) Year wise details of DIETs of Excellence over the 5 years period.  
Sl.No Financial Year  
Number of Existing 
DIETs converted into 
DIET of Excellence in a 
phase manner  
Estimated Funds for DIET of 
Excellence in a 5 Years Plan 
Period @ Rs.15.00 Crore per 
DIET 
1 2023-24 125 1875.00 Crore 
2 2024-25 125 1875.00 Crore 
3 2025-26 125 1875.00 Crore 
4 2026-27 125 1875.00 Crore 
5 2027-28 113 1695.00 Crore 
Total  613 9195.00 Crore 
 
 
 
 
50

 
20 | P a g e  
 
 
b) State/UT-wise details of DIETs converted into DIET of Excellence with Estimated 
outlay in a period of 5 years 
(Rs. In Crore) 
Sl.No State/UT 
Total No. of 
DIETs 
Functional (As 
on 2023-24) 
Over a period of 5 years  
(FY: 2023-24 to 2027-28) 
Total No. of 
DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of 
Excellence  
Total Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence in a 5 
Years Plan Period @ 
Rs.15.00 Crore per DIET 
1 A&N Islands 1 1 15.00 
2 Andhra Pradesh 13 13 195.00 
3 Arunachal Pradesh  11 11 165.00 
4 Assam 23 23 345.00 
5 Bihar 33 33 495.00 
6 Chandigarh* 0 0 0.00 
7 Chhattisgarh 19 19 285.00 
8 Delhi 9 9 135.00 
9 DnD-DnH 1 1 15.00 
10 Goa 1 1 15.00 
11 Gujarat 30 30 450.00 
12 Haryana 21 21 315.00 
13 Himachal Pradesh 12 12 180.00 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 20 20 300.00 
15 Jharkhand 24 24 360.00 
16 Karnataka 30 30 450.00 
17 Kerala 14 14 210.00 
18 Ladakh 2 2 30.00 
19 Lakshadweep 1 1 15.00 
20 Madhya Pradesh  50 50 750.00 
21 Maharashtra 33 33 495.00 
22 Manipur 9 9 135.00 
23 Meghalaya 7 7 105.00 
24 Mizoram  8 8 120.00 
25 Nagaland 8 8 120.00 
26 Odisha 30 30 450.00 
27 Puducherry 1 1 15.00 
28 Punjab  17 17 255.00 
29 Rajasthan 33 33 495.00 
30 Sikkim  3 3 45.00 
31 Tamil Nadu 32 32 480.00 
51

 
21 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No State/UT 
Total No. of 
DIETs 
Functional (As 
on 2023-24) 
Over a period of 5 years  
(FY: 2023-24 to 2027-28) 
Total No. of 
DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of 
Excellence  
Total Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence in a 5 
Years Plan Period @ 
Rs.15.00 Crore per DIET 
32 Telangana 10 10 150.00 
33 Tripura 4 4 60.00 
34 Uttar Pradesh  70 70 1050.00 
35 Uttarakhand 13 13 195.00 
36 West Bengal 20 20 300.00 
  Total  613 613 9195.00 
*Note: No DIET in Chandigarh 
The state/UT wise distribution of DIETs to be converted into DIET of Excellence in phase 
manner with estimated outlay (2023-24-25 to 2027-28) are at Annexure IV 
 
c) Criteria for assessment and selection of DIETs as DIET of Excellence: 
Sl.No Indicator Weightage 
I Recognition and Programmes (Weightage: 15) 
  Regular conduct of Full-time pre-service programme 10 points 
  Regular conduct of other programmes 5 points 
                                                                                                         Sub -Total 15 points 
II Infrastructure Facilities (Weightage: 60)   
  College/University located within the district/neighboring district 10 points 
  Own land and building (2.5 points) and whether renovated in the 
last five years (2.5 points) 5points 
  Availability of an adequate number of classrooms (minimum 4) 5 points 
  Availability of Library 5 points 
  Availability of hostel (2.5 points) and standard as per Self-ranking 
(If excellent – 2.5 points) 5 points 
  Having internet facility (2.5 points) and functional website (2.5 
points) 5 points 
  
Having a functional ICT lab (2.5 points) with self-ranking of 
availability of software and hardware (Standard – “ Yes”) (2.5 
points) 
5 points 
  Functional toilet facilities  5 points 
  Self-ranking of over-all cleanliness of DIET building (If excellent – 5 
points, if Good - 2.5 points) 5 points 
  
Self-ranking of Infrastructure for students (one point each) 
(i). If all classrooms are usable; 
(ii). If 1 or more classrooms have smart board and whiteboard etc; 
(iii). Provision for differently abled like ramp, etc;  
5 points 
52

 
22 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Indicator Weightage 
(iv). Availability of computers for students (“very available” 
standard); 
(v). Availability of amenities in Hostel facility like common rooms, 
etc  
  Availability of Seminar Hall/auditorium 5 points 
                                                                                                              Sub Total 60 points 
III Human Resources (Weightage: 25)   
  Principal in position 5 points 
  Percentage of academic posts filled against the sanctioned strength 
(60 - 69%:  5 points, 70 – 79%: 7.5 points, > 80% 10 points) 10 points 
  
Percentage of non-academic posts filled against the sanctioned 
strength (60 - 69%:  5 points, 70 – 79%: 7.5 points, > 80% 10 
points) 
5 points 
  
Any faculty member is a National Award for Teachers (NAT) 
awardee or has received any other recognition/award including 
designated as a mentee under the National Mentoring mission 
5 points 
                                                                                                            Sub Total 25 points 
                                                                                                         Grand total 100 points 
 
Selection Criteria:  
 
d) Identification and Selection Process for converting all the functional DIETs into 
DIET of Excellence:  
 Comprehensive base-line assessment of all existing functional DIETs  in the country, 
considering factors such as infrastructure facilities and resources ava ilable at each 
DIET. These include: classrooms, libraries, laboratories, ICT facilities, and residential 
hostels etc. DIETs with better infrastructure and resources will be prioritized for 
transformation.  This has been done through a Google form, analysis of which is 
annexed. 
 Involve stakeholders, such as education experts, government officials, and 
representatives from educational institutions, to provide valuable insi ghts and 
ensure a collaborative approach.   Expert Committee was set up for this task, which 
has given its recommendations, which are incorporated into report. 
 Based on the above, minimum benchmark for selection  is to be established. 
Accordingly, it has been decided that only DIETS scoring 60 and above points may 
be considered in for upgradation.  This implies that the status of any DIET must 
reach this bench-mark level, through State interventions, before it can be considered for 
upgradation through these funds.   The minimum benchmarks established will allow 
for a gradual and systematic transformation process, ensuring that only those 
institutions with adequate resources are selected. 
53

 
23 | P a g e  
 
 States / UTs may utilize the results of the Google form (results of which will be 
shared) and other data to assess  the existing DIETs  in their State / UT and allocate 
marks based upon the points system and assessment criteria given above. 
  A yearly quota for each State / UT has been done for converting a certain number of 
eligible DIETs into DIETs of Excellence.   
 All the 35 States and UTs (except the UT of Chandigarh where there is no DIET) in the 
country where there are functional DIETs will submit applications for eligible DIETs 
based upon the yearly quota and bench -mark.  Based on the minimum benchmarks, 
these existing DIETs meeting the standards and performance indicators can be 
chosen for transformation into DIETs of Excellence in a p hased manner, as per year 
wise quota.    
 In case, a State / UT is unable to utilize its quota / meet its dead -lines, then its quota 
may be transferred to another State / UT with eligible DIET, by approval of the 
competent authority.  
 DSEL / Ministry is exp ected to c onduct on-site visits and field verification of a few  
random shortlisted DIETs to validate t he information provided in the  applications 
and assess their potential for becoming a DIET of excellence. In addition, a system for 
online performance appraisal on the lines of the Performance Appraisal Report (PAR) 
of NCTE will be explored. 
 The annual selection list will be finalized by a committee chaired by Secretary (SE&L), 
MoE. The final selected list of DIET of excellence will be intimated to the resp ective 
States/UTs.   
 Separate PABs will be held for this intervention and the funds so allocated may 
be used only for the specific purpose of upgrading the selected DIET.   PAB 
proposal for the upgradation will have specific time -lines capturing ALL 
necessary activities from initiation to completion, to be completed within an 18 
– 24 month time-frame. 
 
 DSEL / Ministry to establish a monitoring mechanism to track the progress of the se 
DIETs selected for conversion into DIETs of excellence. NIC may create the dashboard 
on the website of the Department where the  State / UT will upload its progress.  
 
15) Tentative Budget 
 There is a requirement of an estimated outlay of Rs. 9195, 00 crore for the total 613  
functional DIETs in the country.  
 There will be a provision for a n amount of up to Rs 15.00 crores per DIET for 
strengthening of all DIETs in the country as DIET of Excellence over a period of 5 years 
in phases, starting from the FY 2023-24. 
 Focus will be on the following interventions: 
54

 
24 | P a g e  
 
 
 
a) The Fund Sharing Pattern for States and UTs under the Implementation of the 
DIET of Excellence, which are as detailed in the table below:  
Sl. No.  Fund Sharing Pattern  Number of 
States/UTs Name of States and UTs 
1. General States-(60:40) 18 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and 
West Bengal 
2. UTs with Legislature 
(60:40) 3 Delhi, Jammu and Kashmir and 
Puducherry 
3. North Eastern States 
(90:10) 8 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura 
4. Hill States (90:10) 2 Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand 
5. UTs (100%) 5 A & N Islands, Chandigarh, Dnd-
Dnh, Ladakh and Lakshadweep 
 
16) Role of State/ UT and National level 
a) State & UT Level: 
 Identification and Application:  Encourage the functional DIETs  to apply for the 
DIET of Excellence selection process. 
High end 
Infrastructure
Modern Smart 
Classrooms
Advanced 
Laboratories
State-of-the-
Art Library
ICT and 
Technology 
Integration
Auditorium 
and Seminar 
Halls
Resource 
Centres
Residential 
Hostel
Sports and 
Recreational 
Facilities
Accessibility 
and 
Inclusivity
Digital 
Resource 
Repository
Counseling 
and Guidance 
Centres
Green 
Campus 
Initiatives.
Safety and 
Security 
Adequate 
Number of  
Toilets
Residential 
Facilities DIETs 
Staffs 
Safe and clean 
drinking water
Repair & 
Maintenance Furniture Etc.
55

 
25 | P a g e  
 
 Field Verification: Assist in the field verification process, wherein on -site visits will 
be conducted to validate the information submitted by the DIETs during the selection 
process. 
 Funding and Resource Allocation: Provide necessary funding and resources for the 
transformation and upgradation of identified institutions into DIETs of Excellence. 
 Policy Support:  Provide state/UT specific policy support and create an enabling 
environment for the functioning of DIETs of Excel lence, ensuring alignment with 
National and State-level education policies. 
 Collaborative Efforts:  States and UTs collaborate with the central government, 
education experts, and other stakeholders to streamline the conversion process for 
overall improvement of the quality of teacher education. 
b) National Level: 
 Framework Development: Ministry of Education to formulate the framework and 
guidelines for the establishment  including minimum benchmarks for selection and 
functioning of DIETs of Excellence. 
 Setting up an Expert Committee : A national level committee under the 
chairpersonship of Secretary (SE&L) to finalize the yearly list of DIETs for 
transformation into DIETs of Excellence.  
 Capacity Building: National-level institutions such as the NCERT, NCTE and experts 
in the subject area will do the handholding for capacity building of DIETs of Excellence 
i.e., assisting them in upgrading their infrastructure and facilities to meet the desired 
standards. 
 Funding Support:  The central government will provide financial support for 
transformation of selected institutions into DIETs of Excellence. 
 Monitoring and Evaluation: A monitoring and evaluation standard to be developed 
to evaluate the progress of DIETs of Excellence to ensure they meet the desired 
standards and objectives. 
 
17) Timelines for Implementation 
Activities Timeline 
Approval of Draft Concept N ote and its circulation to all 
stakeholders/experts  
 
Orientation workshops with SCERT directors and DIET principals 
for orientation on the Concept, Objectives and Procedure of DIET 
of Excellence 
 
25th August, 2023
By 15th September, 2023
56

 
26 | P a g e  
 
Activities Timeline 
Dissemination of Self-Ranking results and finalization of 
assessment points for all DIETs by Sttaes / UTs  
 
Submission of proposals for DIET of Excellence in line with the 
Concept Note by States and UT  
Supplementary PABs (Project Approval Board)   
Release the funds as 1st Installment to all the States and UTs for 
DIET of Excellence under Samagra Shiksha   
 
 
***** 
  
28th September, 2023
By 15th October, 2023
23rd October 2023
by 31st October, 2023
57

 
27 | P a g e  
 
Core Drafting Team 
 
1. Sh. Sanjay Kumar, Secretary (SE&L),  
Department of School Education & Literacy,  
Ministry of Education, Govt. of India. 
 
2. Smt. Prachi Pandey - Joint Secretary, Samagra Shiksha Department of 
School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education, Govt. of India. 
 
3. Sh. Sankha Roy- Deputy Secretary, Samagra Shiksha Department of School 
Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education, Govt. of India. 
 
4. Ms. Tara Naorem- Principal Chief Consultant, Samagra Shiksha Department 
of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education, Govt. of India. 
 
5. Mr. Wamiq Towhid - Senior Consultant, Samagra Shiksha Department of 
School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Education Govt. of India 
 
  
58

 
28 | P a g e  
 
Annexure-I 
Status of DIETs Sanctioned & Functional details as on 2023-24 
Sl. No. State/UT No. of 
Districts* 
DIETs 
Sanctioned  
DIETs 
Functional 
Non-
Functional 
DIETs 
1 A&N Islands 3 1 1 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh 13 13 13 0 
3 Arunachal Pradesh  26 13 11 2 
4 Assam 35 27 23 4 
5 Bihar 38 38 33 5 
6 Chandigarh 1 0 0 0 
7 Chhattisgarh 28 24 19 5 
8 Delhi 13 9 9 0 
9 D&D and DNH 3 1 1 0 
10 Goa 2 1 1 0 
11 Gujarat 33 34 30 4 
12 Haryana 22 22 21 1 
13 Himachal Pradesh 12 12 12 0 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 20 20 20 0 
15 Jharkhand 24 24 24 0 
16 Karnataka 35 30 30 0 
17 Kerala 14 14 14 0 
18 Ladakh 2 2 2 0 
19 Lakshadweep 1 1 1 0 
20 Madhya Pradesh  52 52 50 2 
21 Maharashtra 36 35 33 2 
22 Manipur 16 16 9 7 
23 Meghalaya 11 8 7 1 
24 Mizoram  11 10 8 2 
25 Nagaland 11 11 8 3 
26 Odisha 30 30 30 0 
27 Puducherry 4 1 1 0 
28 Punjab  23 22 17 5 
29 Rajasthan 33 33 33 0 
30 Sikkim  6 4 3 1 
31 Tamil Nadu 37 32 32 0 
32 Telangana 33 14 10 4 
33 Tripura 8 8 4 4 
34 Uttar Pradesh  75 75 70 5 
35 Uttarakhand 13 13 13 0 
36 West Bengal 24 22 20 2 
  Total  748 672 613 59 
 
 
 
 
59

 
29 | P a g e  
 
Annexure-II 
Status of Funds Approved (Fresh Outlay) for DIETs in Teacher Education Component under Samagra Shiskha since 
2018-19 
(Rs.In lakh) 
State/UT 
2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 2018-19 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand 
Total 
A & N 
Islands 0.00 22.40 22.40 0.00 22.40 22.40 0.00 22.40 22.40 0.00 20.00 20.00 0.00 20.00 20.00 0.00 20.48 20.48 
Andhra 
Pradesh 161.85 978.96 1140.81 0.00 917.26 917.26 0.00 819.58 819.58 0.00 765.30 765.30 160.00 1155.97 1315.97 78.00 1447.89 1525.89 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 1097.00 1176.11 2273.11 0.00 1356.46 1356.46 0.00 1114.49 1114.4
9 515.15 904.66 1419.81 120.00 1048.11 1168.11 100.00 1173.04 1273.04 
Assam 2313.41 4333.35 6646.75 19.98 4308.39 4328.37 226.09 3890.08 4116.1
7 0.00 4400.74 4400.74 0.00 4565.71 4565.71 115.00 3858.11 3973.11 
Bihar 0.00 654.60 654.60 70.40 396.00 466.40 0.00 396.00 396.00 0.00 99.00 99.00 0.00 1386.00 1386.00 110.00 1822.30 1932.30 
Chhattisgar
h 0.00 2553.55 2553.55 0.00 2208.78 2208.78 475.49 2055.64 2531.1
3 0.00 1731.87 1731.87 0.00 2214.84 2214.84 380.00 2364.34 2744.34 
Delhi 0.00 1320.19 1320.19 0.00 1371.04 1371.04 0.00 1001.61 1001.6
1 0.00 1964.69 1964.69 0.00 2118.15 2118.15 110.00 1960.01 2070.01 
DnD-DnH 0.00 110.46 110.46 0.00 78.40 78.40 0.00 85.64 85.64 0.00 45.56 45.56 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Goa 0.00 105.40 105.40 0.00 131.88 131.88 0.00 116.06 116.06 0.00 132.30 132.30 0.00 156.12 156.12 20.00 180.14 200.14 
Gujarat  1695.00 3383.25 5078.25 1695.00 3310.73 5005.73 19.20 3115.30 3134.5
0 0.00 3698.97 3698.97 0.00 4134.84 4134.84 1820.00 4605.19 6425.19 
Haryana 452.00 2785.93 3237.93 0.00 3002.88 3002.88 0.00 3299.37 3299.3
7 0.00 3638.35 3638.35 0.00 4024.36 4024.36 440.00 4059.89 4499.89 
Himachal 
Pradesh 0.00 2033.58 2033.58 96.55 1762.05 1858.60 0.00 1561.68 1561.6
8 0.00 1597.53 1597.53 0.00 2037.81 2037.81 180.00 2260.65 2440.65 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 128.00 1010.80 1138.80 54.01 1276.88 1330.89 0.00 2260.58 2260.5
8 0.00 2184.67 2184.67 0.00 2000.00 2000.00 100.00 3020.90 3120.90 
Jharkhand 252.28 408.00 660.28 0.00 539.38 539.38 423.86 755.24 1179.1
0 0.00 422.77 422.77 110.00 711.60 821.60 888.23 597.00 1485.23 
Karnataka 0.00 4298.80 4298.80 0.00 4253.14 4253.14 0.00 3465.18 3465.1
8 0.00 3159.82 3159.82 0.00 3244.15 3244.15 150.00 4294.14 4444.14 
Kerala 0.00 1730.82 1730.82 90.00 1728.14 1818.14 0.00 2274.64 2274.6
4 0.00 2616.61 2616.61 540.00 2583.41 3123.41 0.00 2965.28 2965.28 
Ladakh 0.00 92.05 92.05 0.00 80.00 80.00 0.00 90.00 90.00 0.00 70.00 70.00 0.00 200.00 200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Lakshadwee
p 0.00 32.00 32.00 0.00 34.40 34.40 0.00 34.40 34.40 0.00 32.00 32.00 20.00 30.00 50.00 0.00 9.83 9.83 
Madhya 
Pradesh 1800.00 4440.12 6240.12 19.20 3673.19 3692.39 0.00 3719.82 3719.8
2 150.00 2980.02 3130.02 160.00 3755.70 3915.70 160.00 3520.21 3680.21 
Maharashtr
a 183.00 4108.87 4291.87 216.57 4064.49 4281.06 44.80 2977.22 3022.0
2 0.00 3256.24 3256.24 0.00 4255.07 4255.07 450.62 4505.86 4956.48 
60

 
30 | P a g e  
 
State/UT 
2023-24 2022-23 2021-22 2020-21 2019-20 2018-19 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand Total 
Non-
Recurring 
Recurring 
Grand 
Total 
Manipur 1260.00 1231.41 2491.41 894.00 1189.60 2083.60 0.00 1167.40 1167.4
0 40.00 1488.15 1528.15 80.00 1895.27 1975.27 420.00 1780.97 2200.97 
Meghalaya 685.50 1012.37 1697.87 0.00 891.44 891.44 0.00 799.20 799.20 0.00 1132.12 1132.12 0.00 1078.31 1078.31 105.00 1011.40 1116.40 
Mizoram 1282.00 1541.26 2823.26 55.36 1728.62 1783.98 0.00 1506.04 1506.0
4 0.00 1821.55 1821.55 0.00 1670.23 1670.23 120.00 1802.66 1922.66 
Nagaland 2125.02 2075.13 4200.15 1437.91 2305.56 3743.47 948.68 2123.97 3072.6
5 0.00 2526.57 2526.57 0.00 2474.00 2474.00 80.00 2037.52 2117.52 
Odisha 0.00 4541.99 4541.99 0.00 3712.24 3712.24 0.00 3156.53 3156.5
3 100.00 2926.73 3026.73 100.00 2711.25 2811.25 150.00 3017.55 3167.55 
Puducherry 0.00 120.54 120.54 0.00 129.17 129.17 0.00 100.00 100.00 0.00 129.35 129.35 0.00 142.07 142.07 370.00 165.09 535.09 
Punjab 62.34 1228.32 1290.66 88.40 1039.15 1127.55 0.00 2062.26 2062.2
6 0.00 1332.02 1332.02 0.00 1865.30 1865.30 2272.55 1552.13 3824.68 
Rajasthan 492.68 4172.89 4665.57 0.00 4210.62 4210.62 0.00 3816.26 3816.2
6 0.00 5081.87 5081.87 0.00 5630.54 5630.54 110.00 6155.86 6265.86 
Sikkim 835.00 396.07 1231.07 0.00 355.53 355.53 0.00 325.78 325.78 0.00 303.47 303.47 0.00 386.70 386.70 30.00 497.12 527.12 
Tamil Nadu 565.74 6443.53 7009.27 143.66 6363.60 6507.26 0.00 5862.29 5862.2
9 251.00 5875.37 6126.37 150.60 5983.37 6133.97 0.00 5178.50 5178.50 
Telangana 364.74 638.46 1003.20 0.00 569.12 569.12 0.00 556.42 556.42 0.00 1265.97 1265.97 0.00 1565.35 1565.35 1600.00 842.08 2442.08 
Tripura 0.00 780.69 780.69 162.00 479.98 641.98 322.06 445.06 767.12 0.00 424.19 424.19 518.00 543.26 1061.26 480.00 709.29 1189.29 
Uttar 
Pradesh 4517.40 11272.60 15790.0
0 0.00 10337.70 10337.7
0 0.00 9805.22 9805.2
2 0.00 10563.8
6 
10563.8
6 750.00 9401.70 10151.7
0 4401.00 9123.07 13524.0
7 
Uttarakhand 1052.30 2634.99 3687.29 826.94 2051.35 2878.29 442.14 2042.56 2484.7
0 0.00 2733.40 2733.40 0.00 2588.95 2588.95 234.00 3004.00 3238.00 
West Bengal 6.40 1268.48 1274.88 285.52 1300.53 1586.05 0.00 1432.75 1432.7
5 0.00 1576.85 1576.85 0.00 1324.73 1324.73 90.00 1325.34 1415.34 
Total 21331.
66 
74937.9
7 
96269.6
3 
6155.5
0 
71180.1
1 
77335.6
1 
2902.3
2 
68256.
67 
71158.
99 
1056.1
5 
72902.
57 
73958.7
2 
2708.6
0 
78902.8
7 
81611.4
7 
15564.4
0 
80867.8
4 
96432.2
4 
NR & Rec 
Approval  
% 
22.16 77.84  7.96 92.04  4.08 95.92  1.43 98.57  3.32 96.68  16.14 83.86  
Source: PRABANDH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61

 
31 | P a g e  
 
Annexure-III 
Suggestive Infrastructure Norms for DIET of Excellence 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
1) Administrative Block 
1) Principal/HoD Room  1 Room Approx. 300 Sq. ft Room with PA’s cabin, providing a private area for 
administrative tasks, meetings, and decision-making 
2) Vice- Principal Room 1 Room  Approx.  200 Sq. ft Room serves as an administrative space to carry out their 
responsibilities. 
3) 
Academic faculty 
Rooms  
(1 Room for 2 faculty 
member on sharing 
bases) 
Upto 12 
Rooms   Approx.  200 Sq. ft 
These rooms provide a space for faculty members to gather, 
collaborate, and engage in professional discussions. Staff 
rooms may have individual workst ations or shared desks for 
teachers to work on lesson planning, grading, and 
administrative tasks 
4) 
Administrative 
Offices for 
administrative 
personnel 
 
1 Room Approx.  600 Sq. ft 
Administrative Offices for administrative personnel, such as 
the administrative officer, accounts officer and other 
administrative staff members. These offices serve as 
workspaces for managing various administrative tasks and 
handling day-to-day operations. 
5)  Meeting Hall (Approx. 
50 Capacity) 1 Room Approx. 700 Sq. ft 
A well-equipped staff meeting room, provide enough space to 
comfortably accommodate around 50 staff members, 
considering a mix of seating options and additional amenities 
6) Reception Area 1 Approx. 200 Sq. ft 
A welcoming reception area where visitors can be received and 
assisted. It serves as a point of contact for inquiries, directions, 
and information about the DIET. 
7) Record Room 1 Room Approx. 250 Sq. ft 
A designated room for storing and managing official records, 
documents, and files related to administration, finance, 
personnel, and other administrative functions. This room 
should have appropriate storage facilities and organizational 
systems. 
62

 
32 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
8) Waiting Area/Visitors 
Room 1 Room Approx. 300 Sq. ft 
A waiting area for visitors and guests, providing a comfortable 
space with seating arrangements and possibly some reading 
materials. 
2) Administrative Block 
1) Classrooms  Upto  8 
(Approx. 50 Capacity) 
Upto 8 
depending on 
the Pre-service 
and Other 
Running 
Programme 
enrollment   
Approx. 800 Sq. ft 
(Per Classroom) 
Spacious and well-equipped classrooms with modern teaching 
aids, audio-visual equipment, and interactive whiteboards or 
smart boards; Flexible seating arrangements that 
accommodate different teaching and learning styles; 
Accessibility features for individuals with disabilities, such as 
ramps, wide doorways, and appropriate seating arrangements 
2) 
Library/Resource 
centres (Approx. 50 
to 75 Capacity) 
1 Room Approx. 1500  Sq. 
ft. 
Library with a wide range of books, reference materials, 
textbooks, and digital resources for teachers, students, and 
researchers equipped with computers, internet connectivity, 
and access to educational software, online databases, and e -
learning platforms. 
3) Laboratories Upto 5 Room Approx. 800 Sq. ft. 
Equipped wit h modern apparatus, audio -visual facilities, 
language learning software, interactive tools , chemicals, and 
safety equipment to support practical experiments and 
demonstrations 
4) Computer Room 1 Room Approx. 800 Sq. ft Sufficient computers, high -speed internet connectivity, and 
access to educational software and digital resources. 
5) Multimedia-equipped 
room 1 Room Approx. 800 Sq. ft For conducting webinars, online training sessions, and video -
based instructional activities. 
6) Seminar halls (50 
Capacity) 1 Room Approx. 1500  Sq. 
ft. 
With seating capacity to accommodate large gatherings for 
conferences, workshops, and professional development 
programmes. Equipped with audio -visual systems, projection 
screens, and sound systems 
63

 
33 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
7) Auditoriums (100 
Capacity)  1 Room Approx. 2500 Sq. ft. 
With seating capacity to accommodate large gatherings for 
conferences, workshops, and professional development 
programmes. Equipped with audio -visual systems, projection 
screens, and sound systems 
8) Special Education 
Units 1 Room Approx. 500 Sq. ft. 
Dedicated spaces for special education units to support the 
learning needs of students with disabilities. Specialized rooms 
equipped with assistive technologies, sensory materials, and 
resources for individualized instruction and therapy. 
9) Research and 
Innovation Centre 1 Room Approx. 500 Sq. ft. 
A dedicated centre or space for research and innovation 
activities, providing resources and facilities for conducting 
educational research, developing educational models, and 
piloting innovative initiatives 
3) Residential Hostel Facilities For Boys & Girls (50 Seat Capacity) 
1) Rooms for Resident 
Upto 5 
depending on 
the Pre-service 
enrollment in 
the Hostel   
Approx. 500 Sq. Ft 
The rooms are designed to accommodate multiple students (6 
Person) in a dormitory-style setup. Each room is furnished 
with essential amenities, including beds, storage facilities, and 
adequate ventilation 
2) Common Area 1 Approx. 400 Sq. ft 
Include common areas such as lounges or recreation rooms 
where students can socialize, relax, and engage in 
extracurricular activities. 
3) Study Area 1 Approx. 400 Sq. ft Dedicate study hall or quiet spaces within the hostel where 
students can focus on their academic work. 
4) Dining Facility 1 Approx. 500 Sq. Ft Establish a dining hall or cafeteria within the hostel to provide 
meals for resident students 
5) Kitchenette 1 Approx. 300 Sq. ft Allocate a common kitchenette with basic amenities where 
students can prepare their own snacks or meals, if necessary. 
6) Bathroom Facility  (1:15 Ratio) Approx. 50 Sq. ft 
each 
For a 50-seater hostel in DIET of Excellence, the ideal number 
of bathrooms based on number of enrolment 1:15  
64

 
34 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
7) Laundry Facility 1 Approx. 100 Sq. ft 
each 
Provide laundry room or facilities where students can 
conveniently wash their clothes. 
8) Warden's Office 1 Approx. 150 Sq. ft  
Warden office may be located in a central and accessible 
location within the hostel, allowing the warden to oversee the 
activities and ensure the safety and well -being of the hostel 
residents 
9) Warden's Room  1 Approx. 150 Sq. ft Allocate a warden's room within the hostel premises to 
address any concerns or issues raised by the students. 
10) Wi-Fi Access Facility Offer internet connectivity in the hostel to support students' academic and recreational needs. 
11) Safety and Security  Implement security measures, such as controlled access, CCTV surveillance, and the presence of trained 
hostel staff. 
4) Rest Room/Toilet Facilities 
1) Adequate Number of 
Restrooms/Toilets: 1:15  (Ratio) 35 Sq. ft 
Determine the number of  restrooms required based on the 
expected occupancy of the DIET. Consider separate restrooms 
for male and female students, staff, and visitors to maintain 
privacy and convenience. 
2) Accessibility: 
Ensure that restrooms are designed and equipped to be acc essible for individuals with disabilities. 
Include features such as grab bars, wider doorways, lower sinks, and wheelchair accessibility to 
promote inclusivity. 
3) Hygiene and 
Cleanliness 
Regularly clean and maintain the restrooms to ensure proper hygiene  standards. Provide sufficient 
trash bins and regular waste disposal to keep the restrooms clean and free from litter. 
4) Sanitary Fixtures Install functional and high-quality sanitary fixtures, including toilets, urinals, sinks, and hand dryers or 
paper towel dispensers. Ensure that they are properly maintained and in good working condition 
5) Hand washing 
Facilities 
Provide adequate hand washing facilities with running water, soap dispensers, and hand dryers or 
paper towels. Promote and encourage regular hand washing for proper hygiene. 
6) Ventilation and Odor 
Control 
Install proper ventilation systems to ensure good air circulation and minimize odors. Consider the use 
of air fresheners or natural ventilation methods to maintain a pleasant environment. 
7) Regular Maintenance Assign dedicated staff or cleaning personnel to regularly monitor and maintain the restroom facilities. 
Promptly address any repairs or issues to ensure uninterrupted availability. 
65

 
35 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
8) Safety Measures  Implement safety measures such  as non-slip flooring, appropriate lighting, and emergency systems. 
Ensure clear signage for restroom locations and emergency procedures. 
5) ICT and Technology facilities 
1) 
Computer Labs: 
would depend on 
various factors such 
as the total number of 
students and 
teachers, the 
curriculum's ICT 
requirements 
Upto 3 Unit of 
ICT lab 
As Per Samagra 
Shiskha Norms  
Well-equipped computer labs with the latest hardware and 
software to provide hands -on experience in using technology 
for various educational purposes. 
2) Smart classrooms All Classrooms  As Per Samagra 
Shiskha Norms 
classrooms are equipped with audio -visual aids such as 
projectors, interactive whiteboards, smart TVs, and audio 
systems that enable multimedia presentations and interactive 
teaching 
3) Internet Connectivity High-speed internet connectivity to enable access to online resources, research materials, and digital 
learning platforms 
4) Audio-Visual Aids Provision of audio-visual aids like projectors, interactive whiteboards, and multimedia tools to facilitate 
dynamic and interactive teaching 
5) Digital Content 
Creation 
Encouraging teachers to create digital content such as videos, animations, and presentations to enrich 
their lessons 
6) ICT Support Establishing an ICT support team to provide  technical assistance and troubleshoot issues related to 
technology integration 
7) Data Management Utilizing technology for effective data management and analysis to inform decision-making and policy 
implementation 
6) Safety And Security Facilities 
1) Security Personnel  Employ trained security personnel to patrol the DIET premises, monitor entrances and exits, and 
ensure the safety of individuals on campus. 
66

 
36 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
2) Access Control  
Implement access control systems, such as electronic key cards or ID badges, to regulate entry and exit 
points. Restrict access to authorized personnel and visitors and monitor visitors' entry through sign-in 
procedures. 
3) CCTV Surveillance 
Install closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras strategically throughout the DIET campus, including 
entrances, common areas, corridors, and parking lots. Ensure proper monitoring and recording of the 
camera footage. 
4) Emergency Response 
Plan  
Develop a comprehensive emergency response plan that includes protocols for various emergency  
situations, such as fires, natural disasters, medical emergencies, or security threats. Conduct regular 
drills and trainings to familiarize staff and students with emergency procedures. 
5) Safety Audits and 
Inspections 
Conduct regular safety audits and i nspections of the DIET premises to identify and address potential 
hazards, such as faulty electrical wiring, uneven flooring, or inadequate lighting. Promptly address any 
identified safety concerns. 
6) Fire Safety Measures  
Install fire safety equipment, including fire extinguishers, smoke detectors, and fire alarms, in 
accordance with local fire safety regulations. Regularly inspect and maintain fire safety systems, and 
conduct fire drills to ensure preparedness. 
7) First Aid Facility 1 Room  Approx. 150 Sq. ft 
Establish well-equipped first aid stations or rooms within the 
DIET campus. Ensure that staff members are trained in basic 
first aid and have access to necessary medical supplies to 
provide immediate assistance in case of injuries or medical 
emergencies. 
8) Boundary wall 
The boundary wall should be high enough to provide security and privacy for the institute. It is typically 
recommended to have a boundary wall with a height of at least 6 to 8 feet. It may be constructed using 
durable and secure materials, such as brick or concrete, to ensure longevity and resistance to external 
elements. 
9) 
Safe and Well -
maintained 
Infrastructure  
Ensure that buildings, classrooms, laboratories, and other facilities meet safety standards. Regularly 
maintain infrastructure, including electrical systems, plumbing, and structural integrity, to ensure a 
safe environment. 
7) Residential Facilities DIETs Staffs (As Per State Specific Need) 
67

 
37 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
1) Single and Family 
Quarters 
Establishment and strengthening residential quarters for faculties, especially female teachers in 
sparsely populated or hilly and densely forested areas with difficult geographical terrain and border 
areas. Construction of residential quarters for faculties in remote/hilly areas/in areas with diffic ult 
terrain 
2) Furnishings 
Ensure that each staff quarter is adequately furnished with basic amenities such as beds, tables, chairs, 
cupboards, and kitchen appliances (if applicable). These furnishings should be comfortable and 
functional 
3) Essential Facilities Each staff quarter should have essential facilities, including a bedroom, living room, kitchen, and 
bathroom. The size and layout of the quarters can vary based designation. 
4) Maintenance and 
Upkeep 
Regularly maintain and repair the staff quarte rs to ensure that they are in good condition. Allocate 
dedicated staff or resources for maintenance tasks, including electrical, plumbing, and general upkeep. 
5) Community Spaces Develop communal spaces or recreational areas within the staff quarters premises where staff 
members can socialize, relax, and engage in community-building activities 
6) Infrastructure 
Support 
Ensure that the staff quarters are well -connected with basic infrastructure such as electricity, water 
supply, and sewage systems. Adequate parking space should also be provided. 
7) Green Spaces Incorporate green spaces, gardens, or parks within the staff quarters area to create a pleasant and 
serene environment for residents. 
8) Provision of Functional Website 
1) Information Hub The website should contain in -depth details about the DIET, including its vision, mission, and 
objectives. 
2) Program Details  
The website should have detailed information about the various, courses, training programmes, 
information about enrollment as per th e running programmes, research initiatives etc offered by the 
DIET should be easily accessible. 
3) Faculty Profiles Profiles of the Academic, Para and Non Academic faculties and staff, along with their qualifications and 
areas of expertise, should be featured on the website. 
4) Infrastructure and 
Facilities 
The website should highlight the upgraded infrastructure facilities, laboratories, library, ICT resources, 
and other amenities available at the DIET. 
5) Admission and 
Application Process 
Information about admission criteria, application procedures, and important dates for prospective 
students should be clearly outlined 
68

 
38 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
5) Events and News The website should regularly update upcoming events, workshops, seminars, and other important 
news related to the DIE 
6) Online Resources A dedicated section for online resources, including e -books, research papers, and teaching materials, 
should be made available to students and faculty 
7) Best Practices  A dedicated section for various best practices conducted by the DIET with good Photographs and Videos  
8) Alumni Corner The website can feature an alumni corner, showcasing the achievements and success stories of former 
students 
9) Interactive Features Incorporating interactive features like feedback forms, online inquiries, and chat support can enhance 
user engagement and provide better support to visitors. 
10) Photo & Video gallery A separate section for the Photographs and Videos for various activities, training, capacity building, 
community awareness programmers etc conducted by the DIET.   
11) Contact Information Contact details, including address, phone numbers, and email, should be prominently displayed for easy 
communication 
9) Other Facilities 
1) Outdoor Learning 
Areas  
Designate specific areas within the green spaces for outdoor learning activities, such as open -air 
classrooms, amphitheaters, or seating arrangements that can facilitate interactive and experiential 
learning. 
2) Environmental 
Features 
Incorporate environmentally friendly features such as rainwater harvesting systems, composting 
facilities, or solar-powered lighting within the green spaces. 
3) Biodiversity 
Conservation  
Promote biodiversity by incorporating native plants, trees, and shrubs within the green spaces. This 
can attract local wildlife, provide educational opportunities about ecosystems, and create a sense of 
ecological balance. 
4) Seating Areas and 
Shaded Spaces 
Install benches, seating areas, or shaded structures within the green spaces to provide comfortable 
spaces for students and staff to rest, study, or engage in group discussions. 
5) Recreational 
Facilities 
Integrate recreational facilities within the green spaces, such as sports fields, outdoor exercise stations, 
or play areas for physical activities and leisure. 
6) Educational Signage  
Install informative signage or placards within the green spaces to provide educational information 
about th e plants, trees, and environmental concepts. This can enhance the learning experience and 
foster environmental awareness. 
69

 
39 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No Category Adequate 
Number 
Appropriate 
estimated Size Remarks 
7) Gardens and Lawns Allocate areas for gardens and lawns where plants, flowers, and trees can be cultivated. These green 
spaces can serve as serene areas for relaxation, outdoor learning, and aesthetic appeal. 
8) Parking Facility Sufficient parking space for staff, students, and visitors to accommodate vehicles safely within the DIET 
premises. 
9) Canteen/Cafeteria:  1 Approx. 600 Sq. ft 
A canteen or cafeteria that offers hygienic and nutritious meals 
for students, staff, and visitors, ensuring access to food within 
the DIET premises. 
10) Provision of safe and 
clean drinking water 
 Place water dispensers strategically in various areas of the institute, such as classrooms, corridors, 
common areas, and the canteen, to provide easy access to drinking water for students, staff, and 
visitors 
 Install water filtration systems to ensure that the drinking water is free from impuri ties and 
contaminants, making it safe for consumption. 
 Ensure that the drinking water supply is sufficient to meet the needs of all students, staff, and 
visitors throughout the day 
 In larger campuses, consider setting up multiple drinking water points to avoid overcrowding and 
ensure convenient access. 
 Implement a regular water quality testing and monitoring system to ensure that the drinking water 
remains safe and meets the required standards. 
11) Borewell Facility  
 Provision of borewell facility, is essential to ensure a sustainable and reliable water supply 
 Schedule regular maintenance and servicing of the borewell and the pump to keep the facility in 
optimal working condition. 
 
  
70

 
40 | P a g e  
 
Annexure –IV  
The state/UT wise distribution of DIETs to be converted into DIET of Excellence in phase manner with estimated 
outlay (2023-24-25 to 2027-28) 
Sl.No State/UT 
2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27 2027-28 
Total No. of DIETs 
Converting into DIET of 
Excellence  
Total Estimated Funds 
for DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore per 
DIET in Plan period 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
1 A&N Islands 1 15.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 15.00 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 3 45.00 3 45.00 2 30.00 3 45.00 2 30.00 13 195.00 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh  2 30.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 3 45.00 2 30.00 11 165.00 
4 Assam 5 75.00 5 75.00 4 60.00 5 75.00 4 60.00 23 345.00 
5 Bihar 6 90.00 7 105.00 7 105.00 6 90.00 7 105.00 33 495.00 
6 Chandigarh 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
7 Chhattisgarh 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 3 45.00 19 285.00 
8 Delhi 2 30.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 1 15.00 9 135.00 
9 DnD-DnH 1 15.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 15.00 
10 Goa 1 15.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 15.00 
11 Gujarat 6 90.00 6 90.00 6 90.00 5 75.00 7 105.00 30 450.00 
12 Haryana 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 5 75.00 4 60.00 21 315.00 
13 Himachal 
Pradesh 2 30.00 2 30.00 3 45.00 3 45.00 2 30.00 12 180.00 
71

 
41 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No State/UT 
2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27 2027-28 
Total No. of DIETs 
Converting into DIET of 
Excellence  
Total Estimated Funds 
for DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore per 
DIET in Plan period 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
14 Jammu & 
Kashmir 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 20 300.00 
15 Jharkhand 5 75.00 5 75.00 5 75.00 5 75.00 4 60.00 24 360.00 
16 Karnataka 6 90.00 6 90.00 6 90.00 6 90.00 6 90.00 30 450.00 
17 Kerala 3 45.00 3 45.00 3 45.00 3 45.00 2 30.00 14 210.00 
18 Ladakh 2 30.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 2 30.00 
19 Lakshadweep 1 15.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 15.00 
20 Madhya 
Pradesh  8 120.00 10 150.00 11 165.00 10 150.00 11 165.00 50 750.00 
21 Maharashtra 6 90.00 7 105.00 7 105.00 6 90.00 7 105.00 33 495.00 
22 Manipur 2 30.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 1 15.00 9 135.00 
23 Meghalaya 1 15.00 1 15.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 1 15.00 7 105.00 
24 Mizoram  2 30.00 2 30.00 1 15.00 2 30.00 1 15.00 8 120.00 
25 Nagaland 2 30.00 2 30.00 1 15.00 2 30.00 1 15.00 8 120.00 
26 Odisha 6 90.00 6 90.00 7 105.00 6 90.00 5 75.00 30 450.00 
27 Puducherry 1 15.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 1 15.00 
28 Punjab  3 45.00 3 45.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 3 45.00 17 255.00 
72

 
42 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No State/UT 
2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27 2027-28 
Total No. of DIETs 
Converting into DIET of 
Excellence  
Total Estimated Funds 
for DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore per 
DIET in Plan period 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
No. of DIETs 
Converting into 
DIET of Excellence  
Estimated Funds for 
DIET of Excellence 
@ Rs.15.00 Crore 
per DIET 
29 Rajasthan 6 90.00 7 105.00 7 105.00 6 90.00 7 105.00 33 495.00 
30 Sikkim  1 15.00 1 15.00 0 0.00 1 15.00 0 0.00 3 45.00 
31 Tamil Nadu 6 90.00 7 105.00 7 105.00 6 90.00 6 90.00 32 480.00 
32 Telangana 2 30.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 2 30.00 10 150.00 
33 Tripura 1 15.00 1 15.00 1 15.00 1 15.00 0 0.00 4 60.00 
34 Uttar 
Pradesh  13 195.00 14 210.00 15 225.00 14 210.00 14 210.00 70 1050.00 
35 Uttarakhand 3 45.00 3 45.00 2 30.00 3 45.00 2 30.00 13 195.00 
36 West Bengal 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 4 60.00 20 300.00 
  Total  125 1875.00 125 1875.00 125 1875.00 125 1875.00 113 1695.00 613 9195.00 
 
73

 
43 | P a g e  
 
Annexure-V 
District Institutes of Education & Training (DIET): 
Questionnaire to assess the Infrastructural Facilities in DIETs-June 2023 
 
Instructions:  
This is survey is being conducted to assess the working conditions and overall infrastructural 
requirement of DIET s. The data collated will be used for planning corrective measures. 
Hence, you are requested to attempt each and every question. Question wise instructions are 
given within the question itself, wherever required.  Majority of the questions have a table 
or list to be filled -in. For some questions, your responses in the long text form maybe 
required. Please write you response clearly within the specified word limit. If you are not 
able to complete the form at one go, it can be saved as a draft and completed l ater on. After 
completing the form, please press the submit button. 
 
Section Information 
Section-1 General Information 
Section-2 Building, Classroom and Toilet Facilities in DIET 
Section-3 Library Facilities in DIET 
Section-4 Computer and Internet Facilities in DIET 
Section-5 Hostel and Residential Facilities in DIET 
Section-6 Sports and Recreational Facilities in DIET 
Section-7 Other Facilities in DIET 
 
 
All questions which appear are mandatory and no question should be left blank. 
  
74

 
44 | P a g e  
 
QUESTIONAIRE FOR DISTRICT INSTITUTE OF EDUCATION & TRAINING (DIET) 
 
SECTION-1: GENERAL INFORMATION 
a) Name of the State/UT:    ________________________________________________________ 
b) Name of the District:    ________________________________________________________ 
c) Name of DIET:     ________________________________________________________ 
d) Year of DIET Establishment:   ________________________________________________________ 
e) Type of DIET (Urban/Rural):  ________________________________________________________ 
f) Name of the DIET Principal  ________________________________________________________ 
g) Mobile Number of the DIET Principal _______________________________________________________ 
h) DIET official Contact Number:  ________________________________________________________ 
i) DIET official Email ID:   ________________________________________________________ 
j) DIET Website:    ________________________________________________________ 
k) Pin code:     ________________________________________________________ 
     
SECTION-2: BUILDING, CLASSROOM AND TOILET FACILITIES 
 
1) Does the DIET have their own land?             Yes/No 
 
2) Total Land Area of the DIET (in square meter) 
 
3) Total build up area of the DIET (in square meter)  
 
4) Status of the DIET building. 
 Own building 
 Rented 
 Building under construction 
 DIET running in other Department building 
 
5) Is there a regular maintenance schedule for the DIET building?  
 Yes 
 No 
 Very Rarely 
 
6)  How would you rate the overall condition and cleanliness of the DIET building? 
 Excellent, with well-maintained and clean facilities 
75

 
45 | P a g e  
 
 Good, with generally satisfactory condition and cleanliness 
 Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or cleanliness 
 Poor, with significant issues in the condition or cleanliness of the building 
 
7) Status of Classrooms in the DIET 
 Total no. of Classrooms in the DIET 
 No. of Classrooms used for instructional purposes 
 No. of Classrooms used for other purpose 
 No. of classrooms in usable condition but not in use 
 No. of classrooms in Un-usable condition but not in use 
8) When the last time renovation was carried out in Classrooms of the DIET? 
 Month & Year  
 
9) Are the classrooms in the DIET building furnished with desks and chairs for 
students?                       
 Yes, all necessary furniture is provided 
 Partially, some furniture may be lacking or in poor condition 
 No, the classrooms lack essential furniture 
 
10) Are the classroom equipped with interactive whiteboards, multimedia projectors 
or smart boards 
• Yes, interactive whiteboards or multimedia projectors in every classroom 
• Some classrooms have interactive whiteboards or multimedia projectors 
• No interactive whiteboards or multimedia projectors available 
11) How would you rate the overall condition of the Classrooms in the DIET 
 Excellent, with well-maintained and comfortable classrooms 
 Good, with generally satisfactory condition and functionality 
 Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or functionality 
 Poor, with significant issues in the condition or functionality of the classrooms 
12) Details of Toilets facility.  
Category No. of toilets units 
Available 
No. of toilets units 
Functional 
For Male Faculties   
For Female Faculties   
For Male Students   
For Female Students   
76

 
46 | P a g e  
 
(Definition of functional toilet: water available in the toilet, minimal odor (no foul smell), unbroken 
seat, regularly cleaned, dry, with working drainage system, accessible to users, closable door)  
 
13) Whether accessible toilet facilities for Differently abled student/faculty are 
available.                                                                                                                 (Yes/No)  
 
14) How would you rate the overall condition of the Toilets in the DIET 
 Excellent, with well-maintained and clean toilets 
 Good, with generally satisfactory condition and cleanliness 
 Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or cleanliness 
 Poor, with significant issues in the condition or cleanliness of the toilets 
15) Whether Ramp with handrail is available for Differently abled student/faculty to 
access the DIET building.                                                                               (Yes/No) 
 
16) Is there a provision of clean drinking water in the DIET?            (Yes/No) 
 
17)  Number of clean drinking water unit working in the DIET 
 
SECTION 3: LIBRARY FACILITIES 
 
18) Is there a library available at the DIET?                  (Yes/No)  
 
19) Are the library materials organized and easily accessible to the students and 
faculty?    
 Well-organized, with most materials easily accessible 
 Moderately organized, with occasional difficulty in finding materials 
 Somewhat disorganized and requires effort to locate materials 
 Poorly organized and difficult to find materials 
20) How would you describe the accessibility of library resources (books, journals, 
databases, etc.) to students and faculty? 
 Very accessible, with a wide range of resources available 
 Moderately accessible, with some limitations in resource availability 
 Somewhat accessible, with significant limitations in resource availability 
 Not accessible, with limited or no access to necessary resources 
 
21) Are there comfortable seating arrangements and study spaces available in the 
library for students and faculty? 
77

 
47 | P a g e  
 
 Yes, there are comfortable seating arrangements and study spaces 
 Partially, there may be limited seating or insufficient study spaces 
 No, there is a lack of comfortable seating arrangements and study spaces 
22) Is there a dedicated librarian available to assist users and manage the library?  
             (Yes/No) 
23) When Last time the renovation of the library facilities was carried out 
 Month & Year 
24) How would you rate the overall condition of the library facilities in the DIET?  
 Excellent, with well-maintained and modern library facilities 
 Good, with generally satisfactory condition and functionality 
 Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or functionality 
 Poor, with significant issues in the condition or functionality of the library facilities 
 
SECTION 4: COMPUTER AND INTERNET FACILITIES 
 
25) Are there computer labs available for students' use?                       (Yes/No)  
 
26)  Are there an adequate number of computers available for students and faculty?  
 Very available, with sufficient number of computers for all students 
 Moderately available, with occasional difficulty in finding a vacant computers  
 Somewhat available, with significant limitations in computers availability 
 No computer labs in DIET 
27) Are the computers equipped with the necessary software and hardware for 
educational purposes?                                                                                    
 Yes, all necessary software and tools are provided 
 Partially, some software or tools may be missing or outdated 
 No, the computer labs lack essential software and tools 
28) Average ratio of the number of the computer systems installed to the number of 
the trainees.  
 
29) What is the current status of DIET network connectivity? 
 High-speed broadband internet available in all classrooms 
 Limited internet access in specific areas 
 No internet connectivity 
78

 
48 | P a g e  
 
 
 
30) When was the Last time the renovation of computer and internet facility was 
carried out in the DIET 
 Month & Year 
 
31) How would you rate the overall condition of the Computer and Internet facilities 
in the DIET?  
 Excellent, with well-maintained and up-to-date computer and internet facilities 
 Good, with generally satisfactory condition and functionality 
 Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or functionality 
 Poor, with significant issues in the condition or functionality of the computer and 
internet facilities 
SECTION 5: HOSTEL AND RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES (IF APPLICABLE) 
 
32) Is there a hostel facility available for students or trainees?         (Yes/No)  
 
33) Are there separate hostels for male and female students/trainees?  
 Male (Yes/No/ No Hostel Facility available) 
 Female (Yes/No/ No Hostel Facility available)          
 
34) How would you rate the overall condition and cleanliness of the hostel facilities? 
(If Hostel facility available)             
 Excellent, with well-maintained and clean hostel facilities 
 Good, with generally satisfactory condition and cleanliness 
 Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or cleanliness 
 Poor, with significant issues in the condition or cleanliness of the hostel facilities 
 No hostel facilities 
35) Are there sufficient amenities provided in the hostel, such as study areas, 
common rooms, and recreational facilities? (If Hostel facility available)                                           
 Yes 
 No 
 No hostel facilities 
36) Average ratio of the number of the separate hostels to the number  
of the male trainees. 
 
37) Average ratio of the number of the separate hostels to the number of  
the female trainees. 
79

 
49 | P a g e  
 
  
38) How would you rate the overall condition of the Hostel facilities in the 
DIET?  (If Hostel facility available) 
 Excellent, with well-maintained and modern hostel facilities 
 Good, with generally satisfactory condition and functionality 
 Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or functionality 
 Poor, with significant issues in the condition or functionality of the hostel facilities 
 No Hostel Facility 
39) Whether Faculty Residence/Quarters(working) provision in the DIET  
                          (Yes/No) 
40) When the last time renovation was carried out of hostel/faculty residence 
facilities was carried out 
• Month & Year 
 
SECTION 6: SPORTS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 
 
41) Are there sports facilities available at the DIET?           (Yes/No) 
 
42) Are there outdoor sports facilities such as a playground or sports field available 
at DIET?          (Yes/No)  
 
43) Are there indoor sports facilities such as a gymnasium or sports hall available at 
DIET?           (Yes/No) 
 
44) Are there provisions for organizing extracurricular activities and events?  
 Yes, regular 
 Very rarely 
 No 
 
45) How would you rate the quality and maintenance of the sports facilities at the 
DIET? 
 Excellent, with well-maintained facilities and equipment 
 Good, with generally satisfactory facilities and equipment 
 Average, with some areas needing improvement in quality or maintenance 
 Poor, with significant issues in the quality or maintenance of facilities 
46) Are the sports facilities accessible to students and faculty members on a regular 
basis? 
 Yes, they are readily accessible 
 Partially, with limited access or specific time restrictions 
80

 
50 | P a g e  
 
 No, the sports facilities have restricted or no access for students and faculty 
47) When was the last time the renovation of sports facilities was carried out? 
 Month & Year 
 
SECTION 7: OTHER FACILITIES 
48) Status of registration of DIETs under Public Finance Management System (PFMS) 
 Yes                     
 No    
 Under Process 
 
49) Whether regular electricity is available in the DIET.        Yes/No 
 
50) Does the DIET have an auditorium or seminar halls for conducting workshops, 
seminars, and conferences?          Yes/No 
 
51)  What is the sitting capacity of the auditorium or seminar halls in DEIT? 
 
52) How would you rate the capacity of the auditorium or seminar halls at the DIET? 
 Excellent, with sufficient seating capacity for large gatherings 
 Good, with satisfactory seating capacity for most events 
 Average, with limited seating capacity for smaller events 
 Poor, with inadequate seating capacity for most events 
 
53) Are the auditorium and seminar halls equipped with audio-visual systems and 
other necessary equipment?   
 Yes, all necessary audio-visual equipment is available 
 Partially, some equipment may be missing or outdated 
  No, the auditorium or seminar halls lack essential audio-visual equipment 
 
54) Whether the DIET has rain water harvesting or any such facility for water 
conservation.            Yes/No  
 
55) Whether the DIET has a solar system facility.        Yes/No  
 
56) Whether the DIET have boundary wall? 
a) No boundary wall 
b) Pakka (Concrete) 
c) Barbed Wire 
d) Fencing Hedges 
 
81

 
51 | P a g e  
 
57) Is there a provision for fire safety in the DIET (e.g., fire extinguishers, fire alarms, 
evacuation plans, etc.)?  
 
58) When the last time Overall renovation was carried out in the DIET?  
 Month & Year  
 
59) Details of Academic/Para Academic and Non Academic positions in the DIET 
Posts Details Sanctioned 
Posts 
Filled 
Posts 
Vacant 
Posts 
Academic Posts  
a) Principal (1)       
b) Vice Principal (1)       
c) Senior Lecturers (6)       
d) Lecturers (17)       
e) Any other    
Total        
Para- Academic Posts   
a) Work Education Teacher (1)      
b) Librarian (1)      
c) Laboratory Assistant  including ICT Support Staff (1)      
d) Statistician/Accountant (1)      
Total    
Non- Academic Posts   
a) Office Superintendent (1)       
b) P.A./Steno (to Principal) (1)       
c) Clerk (including one for hostel) (8)       
d) Steno Typist/Data Entry Operator (2)       
e) Maintenance Support Staff/Group D (6)       
Total        
 
60) Status of In-service & Pre-service training programmes: 
a) Pre-service programme 
b) In-service Programme  
c) Both  
 
61) Please rate the current infrastructure of the DIET? 
  Excellent 
 Good 
 Average  
 Poor 
 Very Poor  
***** 
 
82

 
52 | P a g e  
 
Annexure-VI 
 
SUMMARY OF ANALYSIS: INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES IN DISTRICT INSTITUTES OF 
EDUCATION AND TRAINING (DIETs), 2023  
The following is an analysis of the data inferred from the responses collected through 
a Google Questionnaire Survey questionnaire on infrastruct ural facilities in DIETs 
conducted in June 2023. 
 
1) Status of DIETs 
 Graph-1 
 
Overall, a total of 672 DIETs are sanctioned throughout the country (except Chandigarh) in 
35 States and UTs. Out of these, 613 are currently functional, while 59 are yet to be made 
functional. A total of 612 DIETs (99.84% response rate) participated in this Google Survey 
Questionnaire to assess the Infrastructural Facilities in DIETs, across 35 States and UTs. The 
details of DIETs- state and UT-wise that have filled the question naires as of 26 th July, 2023 
are as provided below: 
Sl.No State/UT No. of DIETs 
Functional 
Questionnaire 
filled by DIETs 
% of DIET filled 
Questionnaire 
against the total 
functional DIETs 
1 A&N Islands 1 1 100.00 
2 Andhra Pradesh 13 13 100.00 
3 Arunachal Pradesh  11 11 100.00 
4 Assam 23 23 100.00 
5 Bihar 33 33 100.00 
6 Chandigarh 0 0 0.00 
7 Chhattisgarh 19 19 100.00 
8 Delhi 9 9 100.00 
672
613
59
Sanctioned Functional Non-functional DIETs
DIETs Status
DIETs Status
83

 
53 | P a g e  
 
Sl.No State/UT No. of DIETs 
Functional 
Questionnaire 
filled by DIETs 
% of DIET filled 
Questionnaire 
against the total 
functional DIETs 
9 DnD-DnH 1 1 100.00 
10 Goa 1 1 100.00 
11 Gujarat 30 30 100.00 
12 Haryana 21 21 100.00 
13 Himachal Pradesh 12 12 100.00 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 20 20 100.00 
15 Jharkhand 24 24 100.00 
16 Karnataka 30 30 100.00 
17 Kerala 14 13 92.86 
18 Ladakh 2 2 100.00 
19 Lakshadweep 1 1 100.00 
20 Madhya Pradesh  50 50 100.00 
21 Maharashtra 33 33 100.00 
22 Manipur 9 9 100.00 
23 Meghalaya 7 7 100.00 
24 Mizoram  8 8 100.00 
25 Nagaland 8 8 100.00 
26 Odisha 30 30 100.00 
27 Puducherry 1 1 100.00 
28 Punjab  17 17 100.00 
29 Rajasthan 33 33 100.00 
30 Sikkim  3 3 100.00 
31 Tamil Nadu 32 32 100.00 
32 Telangana 10 10 100.00 
33 Tripura 4 4 100.00 
34 Uttar Pradesh  70 70 100.00 
35 Uttarakhand 13 13 100.00 
36 West Bengal 20 20 100.00 
  Total  613 612 99.84 
 
The table above provides information on the number of functional DIETs across different 
Sates and UTs and the corresponding questionnaire response rates from these DIETs i.e., the 
percentage of DIETs that have filled out the questionnaire survey form against the total 
number of functional DIETs. 
 
Remarkably, there is a 100% response rate from all the functional DI ETs. This indicates the 
high level of engagement and cooperation of the DIETs, reflecting their commitment towards 
this exercise. 
 
Only one state i.e., Kerala, has a response rate of 92.86%, which means that one DIET 
(Alappuzha) in Kerala did not fill out the questionnaire form. Despite this, the overall 
response rate is remarkably high at 99.84%, which demonstrates the effectiveness of the 
84

 
54 | P a g e  
 
survey implementation and the willingness of DIETs to contribute to the evaluation of 
infrastructural facilities.  
2) Status of Type of DIET (Urban/Rural) 
 
Graph: 2 
 
The above-mentioned Graph-2 depicts that a total of 612 functional DIETs have responded 
to the Google survey questionnaire. From the data, it can be inferred that approximately 54% 
of DIETs (333) are established in urban areas, while the remaining 46% (279) are 
established in rural areas 
 
3)  Whether DIET has a Website 
 
Graph: 3 
45.59%
54.41%
Type of DIETs
Rural Urban
65.85%
34.15%
DIET has Website
Yes No
85

 
55 | P a g e  
 
According to the data presented in Graph -3, it can be inferred that approximately 66% of 
DIETs (403) have reported having a functional website, which indicates that a significant 
portion of DIETs has embraced the importance of online presence and communication. On 
the other hand, around 34% of DIETs (209) have reported not having a functional website, 
highlighting the need for improvement in this area. To ensure that all DIETs can leverage the 
benefits of a functional website, efforts should be made to provide technical support, 
resources, and training to those without an online presence. This way, DIETs can enhance 
their outrea ch, collaboration, and overall efficiency in delivering quality education and 
training programs. 
 
This implies that there are still a substantial number of DIETs without a website even though 
financial provision for developing websites in DIETs have been p rovided through annual 
grant under Samagra Shiksha. 
 10 States and UTs has reported that 100% functional DIETs have websites, these are A&N 
Islands, Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Goa, Lakshadweep, Mizoram, Sikkim, Tripura and West Bengal.  
 Whereas as per 25 States and UT some DIETs have no provision for websites. As per the 
given below table.  
Sl.No State/UT 
Questionnaire 
filled by 
DIETs 
As reported number 
of DIETs does not 
have Website  
% of DIETs do not 
have Website in 
State and UT 
1 DnD-DnH 1 1 100.00 
2 Puducherry 1 1 100.00 
3 Arunachal Pradesh  11 10 90.91 
4 Jharkhand 24 20 83.33 
5 Uttar Pradesh  70 45 64.29 
6 Madhya Pradesh  50 32 64.00 
7 Maharashtra 33 21 63.64 
8 Andhra Pradesh 13 8 61.54 
9 Telangana 10 6 60.00 
10 Punjab  17 10 58.82 
11 Chhattisgarh 19 11 57.89 
12 Ladakh 2 1 50.00 
13 Jammu & Kashmir 20 9 45.00 
14 Haryana 21 9 42.86 
15 Nagaland 8 3 37.50 
16 Himachal Pradesh 12 3 25.00 
17 Odisha 30 7 23.33 
18 Kerala 13 2 15.38 
19 Meghalaya 7 1 14.29 
20 Manipur 9 1 11.11 
21 Uttarakhand 13 1 7.69 
22 Gujarat 30 2 6.67 
23 Tamil Nadu 32 2 6.25 
24 Rajasthan 33 2 6.06 
25 Karnataka 30 1 3.33 
86

 
56 | P a g e  
 
 The analysis reveals that some states and UTs have a relatively high percentage of DIETs 
without a website, while others have a lower percentage. The states and UTs with the 
highest percentage of DIETs lacking a website are Daman & Diu, and Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli, along with Puducherry, and Arunachal Pradesh, with 100% of their DIETs not 
having a website. 
 States like Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh also have a significant number of DIETs without 
a website, with 83.33% and 64.29% respectively. This suggests that there is room for 
improvement in these states to enhance digital presence and communication for their 
DIETs. 
 Madhya Pradesh, Maharash tra, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, and Punjab also have a 
considerable percentage of DIETs without a website, ranging from 58.82% to 64.00%. 
 On the other hand, some states and UTs have a relatively low percentage of DIETs without 
a website. These include Karn ataka, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Gujarat, and Uttarakhand, 
with percentages ranging from 3.33% to 6.67%. This indicates that these states have 
been more proactive in ensuring that their DIETs have a web presence. 
 
4) Whether DIET has their own land 
 
Graph: 4 
Graph-4 above depicts the status of DIETs that have their own land. Approximately 96% of 
DIETs (586) have reported that they own their land, while only around 4% of DIETs (26) 
have reported not having their own land.   
 24 States and UTs have reported that all the functional DIETs (100%) in their respective 
regions have their own land. These States and UTs are A&N Islands, Andhra Pradesh, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jharkhand, Kerala, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Megh alaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Puducherry, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttarakhand, and West Bengal. 
95.75%
4.25%
DIET has Own land
Yes No
87

 
57 | P a g e  
 
 However, on the other hand, as per reports from 11 States and UTs, some DIETs do not 
have their own land. Details are given in the table below. 
Sl.No State/UT Questionnaire 
filled by DIETs 
Number of DIETs 
does not have Own 
Land  
% of DIETs do not 
have Own Land in 
State and UT 
1 DnD-DnH 1 1 100.00 
2 Delhi 9 3 33.33 
3 Jammu & Kashmir 20 4 20.00 
4 Karnataka 30 4 13.33 
5 Maharashtra 33 4 12.12 
6 Odisha 30 3 10.00 
7 Haryana 21 2 9.52 
8 Himachal Pradesh 12 1 8.33 
9 Punjab  17 1 5.88 
10 Gujarat 30 1 3.33 
11 Uttar Pradesh  70 2 2.86 
Total 26   
 
5) Status of the DIET building 
 
Graph: 5 
a) DIETs with own building: As can be inferred from the graph-5 above, approximately 
93% of DIETs (572) reportedly have their own building. Furthermore, 24 States and UTs 
have reported that all the DIETs in their respective regions have their own buildings. 
These States and UTs include A&N Islands, Andhra Prade sh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Madhya 
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Odisha, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttarakhand, and West Bengal 
93.46
2.12 3.59 0.82Status of DIETs Building
Own Building
Building under
Construction
DIET running in other
Department building
Rented
88

 
58 | P a g e  
 
b) DIETs running in other Department building:  Around 4% DIETs (22) have reported 
that it is running in other Department building in 7 States and UTs. 
Sl.No State/UT Questionnaire 
filled by DIETs 
Number of DIETs 
running in other 
Department building 
% of DIETs running in 
other Department 
building in State and 
UT 
1 DnD-DnH 1 1 100.00 
2 Delhi 9 3 33.33 
3 Jammu & Kashmir 20 4 20.00 
4 Karnataka 30 5 16.67 
5 Gujarat  30 4 13.33 
6 Maharashtra 33 4 12.12 
7 Punjab  17 1 5.88 
    Total 22   
 Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (DnD -DnH) have only one DIET, and it is 
reported to be running in another department's building, resulting in 100% of DIETs in 
the region facing this situation. 
 In Delhi, out of the nine DIETs, approximately 33.33% (3 out of 9) are  running in other 
department buildings. 
 In Jammu & Kashmir, out of the 20 DIETs, approximately 20% (4 out of 20) are operating 
in buildings belonging to other departments. 
 Similarly, in Karnataka, around 16.67% (5 out of 30) of the DIETs are running in oth er 
department buildings. 
 Gujarat has 30 DIETs, with approximately 13.33% (4 out of 30) operating in buildings 
belonging to other departments. 
 In Maharashtra, out of the 33 DIETs, approximately 12.12% (4 out of 33) are running in 
other department buildings. 
 Punjab reported 17 DIETs, and approximately 5.88% (1 out of 17) of them are operating 
in buildings belonging to other departments. 
In total, there are 22 DIETs across these 7 States and UTs that are running in other 
department buildings. This data highlig hts the need for ensuring dedicated spaces and 
infrastructures for DIETs to function optimally and provide quality teacher training and 
educational services.  
 
c) DIETs running in Rented building:  less than 1% DIETs (5) have reported that it is 
running in a rented building in 3 States and UTs.     
Sl.No State/UT Questionnaire 
filled by DIETs 
Number of DIETs 
running in Rented 
building 
% of DIETs running in 
Rented building in 
State and UT 
1 Jammu & Kashmir 20 1 5.00 
2 Maharashtra 33 3 9.09 
3 Uttar Pradesh  70 1 1.43 
    Total 5   
89

 
59 | P a g e  
 
The data presented above highlights the status of DIETs operating in rented buildings across 
three States and UTs. In Jammu & Kashmir, out of the 20 DIETs that filled the questionnaire, 
5% (1 out of 20) are reported to be functioning in rented spaces. Similarly, in Maharashtra, 
9.09% (3 out of 33) of the DIETs are operating in rented buildings, indicating a higher 
proportion compared to Jammu & Kashmir. Uttar Pradesh, w ith 70 DIETs that participated 
in the survey, reports only 1.43% (1 out of 70) of its DIETs running in rented spaces. 
 
The data reflects that a small percentage of DIETs in these regions are facing the challenge of 
operating in rented premises. Ensuring dedicated and permanent spaces for these 5 DIETs can 
be a crucial step towards enhancing their capacity to deliver high -quality education and 
training to educators, ultimately contributing to the improvement of the overall education 
system in these States an d UTs. It may be essential for State and UT to address this issue and 
allocate appropriate resources to provide suitable infrastructure for DIETs. 
 
d) DIETs with building under construction: Around 2% DIETs (13) have reported that 
the building is under construction.  
Sl.No State/UT Questionnaire 
filled by DIETs 
Number of DIETs 
building under 
construction 
% of DIETs building 
under construction in 
State and UT 
1 Jharkhand 24 3 12.50 
2 Nagaland  8 1 12.50 
3 Maharashtra 33 4 12.12 
4 Jammu & Kashmir 20 2 10.00 
5 Punjab 17 1 5.88 
6 Gujarat 30 1 3.33 
7 Bihar 33 1 3.03 
    Total 13   
The data provided above offers insights into the status of DIET buildings under construction 
in seven States and UTs. In Jharkhand, out of the 24 DIETs that filled the questionnaire, 
approximately 12.50% (3 out of 24) are reported to be under construction. Similarly, 
Nagaland and Maharashtra both exhibit the same percentage of DIETs under construction, 
with 12.50% (1 out of 8) and 12.12% (4 out of 33) respectively. Jammu  & Kashmir follows 
closely, with 10.00% (2 out of 20) of its DIETs in the construction phase. Punjab reports 
approximately 5.88% (1 out of 17) of DIETs under construction, while Gujarat and Bihar 
both have approximately 3.33% (1 out of 30) and 3.03% (1 out  of 33) of DIETs respectively 
being built. 
6) Status of the Regular Maintenance Schedule for the DIET Building  
The Graph -6 below represents the status of regular maintenance schedules for DIET 
buildings.  
 Around 54% DIETs (328) have reported that regular maintenance schedule for the DIET 
building in the State and UT. 
 Around 25% DIETs (150) have reported that very rarely maintenance schedule  for the 
DIET building in the State and UT. 
90

 
60 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 6 
 Around 22% DIETs (134) have reported that no maintenance schedule for the DIET 
building in the State and UT. 
 State/UT 
Questionnaire 
filled by 
DIETs 
No 
maintenance 
schedule for the 
DIET building 
% of DIETs do not have 
maintenance schedule 
for the DIET building in 
State and UT 
1 Meghalaya 7 4 57.14 
2 Jammu & Kashmir  20 11 55.00 
3 Mizoram  8 4 50.00 
4 Arunachal Pradesh  11 5 45.45 
5 Bihar  33 15 45.45 
6 Maharashtra  33 14 42.42 
7 Himachal Pradesh  12 5 41.67 
8 Chhattisgarh 19 6 31.58 
9 Telangana  10 3 30.00 
10 Uttar Pradesh  70 20 28.57 
11 Tripura  4 1 25.00 
12 Haryana 21 5 23.81 
13 Madhya Pradesh  50 10 20.00 
14 Gujarat 30 5 16.67 
15 Karnataka 30 5 16.67 
16 Odisha  30 5 16.67 
17 Andhra Pradesh 13 2 15.38 
18 Jharkhand  24 3 12.50 
19 West Bengal  20 2 10.00 
20 Tamil Nadu  32 3 9.38 
21 Kerala  13 1 7.69 
22 Uttarakhand  13 1 7.69 
23 Rajasthan  33 2 6.06 
Yes
Very Rarely
No
53.59
24.51
21.90
91

 
61 | P a g e  
 
 State/UT 
Questionnaire 
filled by 
DIETs 
No 
maintenance 
schedule for the 
DIET building 
% of DIETs do not have 
maintenance schedule 
for the DIET building in 
State and UT 
24 Punjab  17 1 5.88 
25 Assam  23 1 4.35 
      134   
Overall, there are 134 DIETs across these 25 States and UTs that do not have a maintenance 
schedule for their buildings. The data highlights the need for prioritizing regular 
maintenance practices to ensure the longevity and effectiveness of DIET buildings, creating 
a safe and conducive learning environment for teachers and students. Adequate 
maintenance can prevent costly repairs and potential  hazards, contributing to the overall 
efficiency of DIETs in delivering quality education and training programs 
 
7) Status of Overall condition and cleanliness of the DIET building  
 Graph: 7 
Graph-7 has mentioned the status of overall condition and cleanliness of the DIET building.   
 Around 13% DIETs (79) have given “excellent” rating for well -maintained and clean 
facilities of their DIET. 
 Whereas, 39% DIETs (240) have given “good” rating for generally satisfactory condition 
and cleanliness.   
 Around 40% DIETs (246) have given “Average” rating for some areas needing 
improvement in condition or cleanliness. 
 On the other hand around 8% DIETs (47) have given “Poor” rating for significant issues 
in the condition or cleanliness of the building.   
12.91
39.22 40.20
7.68
Excellent Good Average Poor
92

 
62 | P a g e  
 
 Sl.No State/UT 
Questionnaire 
filled by 
DIETs 
No of DIETs “Poor” 
rating with 
significant issues in 
the condition or 
cleanliness of the 
building 
% of DIETs “Poor” 
rating with significant 
issues in the 
condition or 
cleanliness of the 
building in State and 
UT 
1 Maharashtra  33 11 33.33 
2 Nagaland  8 2 25.00 
3 Tripura  4 1 25.00 
4 Arunachal Pradesh  11 2 18.18 
5 Andhra Pradesh 13 2 15.38 
6 Meghalaya 7 1 14.29 
7 Bihar  33 4 12.12 
8 Gujarat 30 3 10.00 
9 Jammu & Kashmir  20 2 10.00 
10 Telangana  10 1 10.00 
11 West Bengal  20 2 10.00 
12 Haryana 21 2 9.52 
13 Assam  23 2 8.70 
14 Kerala  13 1 7.69 
15 Karnataka 30 2 6.67 
16 Chhattisgarh 19 1 5.26 
17 Uttar Pradesh  70 3 4.29 
18 Jharkhand  24 1 4.17 
19 Odisha  30 1 3.33 
20 Tamil Nadu  32 1 3.13 
21 Rajasthan  33 1 3.03 
22 Madhya Pradesh  50 1 2.00 
     47  
 Maharashtra reports the highest percentage of DIETs with a "Poor" rating, with 33.33% 
(11 out of 33) of DIETs in this category. 
 Nagaland, Tripura, and Arunachal Pradesh share the same percentage, with 25% (2 out 
of 8), 25% (1 out of 4), and 18.18% (2 out of 11) of their DIETs respectively having a 
"Poor" rating. 
 Andhra Pradesh, Meghalaya, Bihar, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Telangana, West Ben gal, 
and Haryana report between 15.38% to 10.00% of their DIETs with a "Poor" rating. 
 Assam, Kerala, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, 
Rajasthan, and Madhya Pradesh also have some of their DIETs with a "Poor" rating, 
ranging from 8.70% to 2.00%. 
 The total number of DIETs with a "Poor" rating across these 22 States and UTs is 47. 
93

 
63 | P a g e  
 
The data reflects the need for attention and action to address significant issues in the 
condition and cleanliness of DIET buildings.  Adequate m easures should be taken to 
addressing these issues is crucial for enhancing the overall effectiveness and efficiency of 
DIETs. 
 
8) Status of Classrooms in the DIET 
 
a) Total no. of Classrooms in the DIET 
 Graph: 8 
 
The graph mentioned above, Graph 8, and presents the status of the total number of 
classrooms available in the DIETs. The data presented above shows the distribution of the 
total number of classrooms in various DIETs along with the corresponding number of DIETs 
and their percentages. The analysis of this data is as follows 
 The most common total number of classrooms in DIETs is 4, with 108 DIETs representing 
17.65% of the total. 
 The second most common total number of classrooms is 2, with 95 DIETs, accounting for 
15.52% of the total. 
 There are 75 DIETs (12.25%) that have 10 or more classrooms. 
 DIETs with 6 classrooms are found in 66 instances, comprising 10.78% of the total. 
 59 DIETs (9.64%) have 5 classrooms. 
 55 DIETs (8.99%) have 8 classrooms. 
 The total number of classrooms in 48 DIETs (7.84%) is 3. 
 42 DIETs (6.86%) have 7 classrooms. 
13
5
95
48
108
59
66
42
55
12
34
75
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 10+
Total no. of Classrooms in the DIET
94

 
64 | P a g e  
 
 34 DIETs (5.56%) have exactly 10 classrooms. 
 There are 13 DIETs (2.12%) that have no classrooms. 
 12 DIETs (1.96%) have 9 classrooms. 
 The least common total number of classrooms in DIETs is 1, with only 5 instances, 
representing 0.82% of the total. 
 
The data illustrates the varying distribution of the total number of classrooms in DIETs across 
different regions. Having this information is valuable for education policymakers and 
authorities to identify areas of improvement and allocate resources effectively to ensure 
adequate classroom facilities for quality teacher training and educational programs. 
 
b) No. of Classrooms used for instructional purposes 
No. of Classrooms used for 
instructional purposes No. of DIETs % of DIETs 
2 202 33.01 
4 149 24.35 
3 63 10.29 
1 43 7.03 
6 43 7.03 
5 36 5.88 
0 33 5.39 
8 17 2.78 
7 14 2.29 
9 4 0.65 
10 4 0.65 
10+ 4 0.65 
 
The data provided above presents the distribution of the number of classrooms used for 
instructional purposes in various DIETs, along with the corresponding number of DIETs and 
their percentages. The analysis of this data is as follows: 
 The most common number of classrooms used for instructional purposes in DIETs is 2, 
with 202 DIETs representing 33.01% of the total. 
 The second most common number of classrooms used for instructional purposes is 4, 
with 149 DIETs, accounting for 24.35% of the total. 
 63 DIETs (10.29%) use 3 classrooms for instructional purposes. 
 43 DIETs (7.03%) have only 1 classroom utilized for instructional purposes. 
 There are 43 DIETs (7.03%) that use 6 classrooms for instructional purposes. 
 36 DIETs (5.88%) use 5 classrooms for instructional purposes. 
 33 DIETs (5.39%) do not use any classrooms for instructional purposes. 
 17 DIETs (2.78%) use 8 classrooms for instructional purposes. 
95

 
65 | P a g e  
 
 14 DIETs (2.29%) use 7 classrooms for instructional purposes. 
 There are 4 DIETs (0.65%) that use 9 classrooms for instructional purposes. 
 There are also 4 DIETs (0.65%) that use exactly 10 classrooms for instructional purposes. 
 Lastly, there are 4 DIETs (0.65%) that use 10 or more classrooms (10+). 
 
The data illustrates the varying distribution of the number of classrooms used for 
instructional purposes in DIETs across different regions. Adequate and well-utilized 
classroom facilities are essential for the effective delivery of quality education and 
professional development for teachers. The data also highlights the importance of 
addressing the issue of DIETs that do not currently use any classrooms fo r instructional 
purposes, as this may indicate the need for better infrastructure and resource allocation to 
support teacher training and educational initiatives effectively. 
 
c) No. of Classrooms used for other purpose 
No. of Classrooms used for 
other purpose No. of DIETs % of DIETs 
0 223 36.44 
1 109 17.81 
2 126 20.59 
3 35 5.72 
4 55 8.99 
5 20 3.27 
6 20 3.27 
7 8 1.31 
8 9 1.47 
9 1 0.16 
10 2 0.33 
10+ 4 0.65 
 At the highest level, the majority of DIETs, accounting for 36.44% of the total, reported 
that they do not use any classrooms for purposes other than instructional. This indicates 
that a significant number of DIETs have dedicated their classrooms exclusively to 
teaching and learning activities, which is a positive sign for effective teacher training and 
educational programs. 
 Among the DIETs that use classrooms for other purposes, the most common scenario is 
having only 1 classroom utilized for such activities, with 17.81% of the DIETs falling into 
this category. This suggests that some DIETs might repurpose a single classroom for non-
instructional activities, while the remaining classrooms are solely dedicated to teaching. 
 Furthermore, 20.59% of DIETs reported using 2 classrooms for purposes other than 
instructional. This indicates that a considerable proportion of DIETs allocate a small 
portion of their classrooms for non -teaching activities, while still primarily focusing on 
instructional needs. 
 It's worth noting that a small percentage of DIETs, ranging from 0.16% to 1.47%, 
reported us ing a higher number of classrooms (from 7 to 9) for non -instructional 
96

 
66 | P a g e  
 
purposes. Additionally, a few DIETs, approximately 0.33% of the total, reported using 10 
or more classrooms for other activities. 
 
d) No. of classrooms in usable condition but not in use 
No. of classrooms in usable 
condition but not in use No. of DIETs % of DIETs 
0 500 81.70 
1 32 5.23 
2 34 5.56 
3 14 2.29 
4 14 2.29 
5 5 0.82 
6 4 0.65 
7 2 0.33 
8 5 0.82 
9 0 0.00 
10 1 0.16 
10+ 1 0.16 
 The majority of DIETs, representing 81.70% of the total, reported having all their 
classrooms in usable condition and in use. This indicates that a significant proportion of 
DIETs effectively maintain their classrooms and utilize them for instructional purposes. 
 Among the DIETs that have classrooms in  usable condition but not in use, the most 
common scenario is having only one classroom falling into this category, accounting for 
5.23% of the DIETs. This suggests that some DIETs might have a single classroom that is 
currently not being utilized, possibly due to specific reasons such as temporary closures 
or renovations. 
 Additionally, 5.56% of DIETs reported having two classrooms in usable condition but not 
in use. This indicates that a small proportion of DIETs have a couple of classrooms that 
are currently not being utilized for instructional activities. 
 Similarly, 2.29% of DIETs reported having either three or four classrooms in usable 
condition but not in use. This shows that a few DIETs might have a small number of 
classrooms that are not currently ut ilized, which could be due to various factors like 
changes in student enrollment or program requirements. 
 A very small percentage of DIETs, ranging from 0.65% to 0.16% of the total, reported 
having five or more classrooms in usable condition but not in use. This indicates that only 
a handful of DIETs have a higher number of classrooms that are not being utilized at the 
moment. 
 Furthermore, there is only one DIET each, representing 0.16% of the total, that reported 
having ten classrooms and 10+ classrooms in usable condition but not in use 
 
Overall the data indicates that most DIETs prioritize the effective maintenance and utilization 
of classrooms for instructional purposes. However, the presence of a small percentage of DIETs 
with classrooms not in use raises the need for further assessment  and planning. Regular 
97

 
67 | P a g e  
 
evaluations and monitoring can help identify the reasons behind underutilized classrooms and 
facilitate appropriate actions to optimize their usage.  
 
e) No. of classrooms in Un-usable condition  
No. of classrooms in Un-usable 
condition  No. of DIETs % of DIETs 
0 508 83.01 
1 32 5.23 
2 36 5.88 
3 14 2.29 
4 11 1.80 
5 2 0.33 
6 2 0.33 
7 2 0.33 
8 2 0.33 
9 1 0.16 
10 2 0.33 
10+ 0 0.00 
 The majority of DIETs, representing 83.01% of the total, reported having no classrooms 
in un-usable condition. This is a positive sign as it indicates that a significant proportion 
of DIETs prioritize the maintenance and upkeep of their classrooms, ensuring they are in 
a usable state for instructional purposes. 
 Among the DIETs that have classrooms in un -usable condition, the most common 
scenario is having only 1 classroom falling into this category, accounting for 5.23% of the 
DIETs. 
 Additionally, 5.88% of DIETs reported having two classrooms in un -usable condition, 
indicating that a small proportion of DIETs might have a couple of classrooms that need 
attention. 
 Similarly, 2.29% of DIETs reported having either three or four classrooms in un -usable 
condition. This shows that a few DIETs might have a small number of classrooms that are 
currently not usable due to various reasons. 
 A very small percentage of DIETs, ranging from 0.33% to 0.16% of the total, reported 
having five or more classrooms in un -usable condition. This indicates that only a few 
DIETs have a higher number of classrooms that require attention or repair. 
 
Overall, the data showcases that the majority of DIETs prioritize maintaining their 
classrooms in a usable condition, however, there are still some DIETs with classrooms in un-
usable condition, highlighting the importance of regular maintenance and timely repairs.  
 
 
 
 
9) When the last time renovation was carried out in Classrooms of the DIET? 
98

 
68 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 9 
 
As per the above graph -9 presented information on the latest renovation of classrooms in 
District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) carried out in different years, along 
with the corresponding percentage of DIETs that have undergone renovation in each 
respective year. 
 The analysis reveals that a significant number of DIETs have not undergone renovation 
recently, with 26.14% (160) of them stating that they have never been renovated. This 
indicates a considerable proportion of DIETs facing the challenge of outdated 
infrastructure 
 Among the DIETs that have reported renovation, the year 2023 stands out with the 
highest percentage, with 16.34% (100) of DIETs undergoing renovation in this year. This 
could indicate a recent focus on infrastructure improvement in some regions. 
 The years 2022, and 2021, also show relatively high percentages of renovation, with 
16.01% (98 DIETs) and 9.80% (60 DIETs) respectively. This suggests that there has been 
an ongoing effort to update classroom facilities in the past few years 
 On the other hand, the years 2020 and 2019 have relatively lower percentages of 
renovation, with 8.01% (49 DIETs) and 3.59%  (22 DIETs) respectively. This could be 
attributed to various factors such as budget constraints, administrative decisions, or 
lower priority given to infrastructure upgrades during those specific years. 
Overall, the data highlights the need for regular an d consistent efforts to renovate and 
upgrade classroom facilities in DIETs. 
10) Classrooms  in the DIET building furnished with desks and chairs for students? 
16.34 16.01
9.80
8.01
3.59
5.07
15.03
26.14
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 Before
2018
Never
99

 
69 | P a g e  
 
 
Graph: 10 
 
The above mentioned graph -10 represents the status of availability of desks and chairs for 
students in the classrooms.  
 Approximately 62.75% of DIETs (384) reported that they have provided all the necessary 
furniture, ensuring that desks and chairs are available for students. 
 Around 29.74% of DIETs (182) reported that they have only partially provided furniture, 
indicating that some classrooms may lack essential furniture or have furniture in poor 
condition. 
 About 7.52% of DIETs (46) reported that their cla ssrooms lack essential furniture, 
meaning that desks and chairs are not adequately provided for students. (Andhra Praesh-
1; Assam -1; Bihar -4; Chhattisgarh -2; Dnd – Dnh-1; Gujarat -3; Haryana -1; Jammu & 
Kashmir-6; Jharkhand -3; Karnataka -6; Ladakh -1; Madhya P radesh-6; Maharashtra -8; 
Punjab-1 and Uttar Pradesh-2). 
 
DIETs need to ensure that all classrooms are well -equipped with desks and chairs to 
facilitate effective teaching and learning experiences for teachers and students alike. 
Additionally, regular maint enance and upgrades of furniture are crucial to ensure a 
comfortable and supportive setting for education and training programs. 
 
62.75
29.74
7.52
Yes, all necessary furniture is provided
Partially, some furniture may be lacking or in
poor condition
No, the classrooms lack essential furniture
%.of DIETs with desks and chairs for students
100

 
70 | P a g e  
 
11) Classroom equipped with interactive whiteboards, multimedia projectors or 
smart boards 
 
Graph: 11 
The above mentioned graph-11 represents the percentage of DIETs classrooms equipped 
with interactive whiteboards, multimedia projectors, or smart boards: 
 Approximately 25.82% of DIETs (158) reported that they have equipped every 
classroom with interactive whiteboards, multime dia projectors, or smart boards. This 
indicates that a quarter of the DIETs have made significant strides in adopting modern 
teaching technology and interactive tools for enhanced learning experiences. 
 Around 49.18% of DIETs (301) reported that they have equipped some classrooms with 
interactive whiteboards, multimedia projectors, or smart boards. This suggests that 
almost half of the DIETs have started integrating technology in certain classrooms, but 
there is still room for expansion to cover all classrooms. 
 About 25.00% of DIETs (153) reported that they do not have these technological 
resources available in any of their classrooms. This highlights the need for further efforts 
and investment in updating the infrastructure to support modern teaching methods and 
technology-driven education. (Andhra Praesh -3; Arunachal Pradesh-2; Assam-7; Bihar-
14; Chhattisgarh-11; Gujarat-7; Himachal Pradesh-1; Jammu & Kashmir-5; Jharkhand-3; 
Karnataka-14; Madhya Pradesh-13; Maharashtra-8; Manipur-2; Meghalya-1; Mizoram-1; 
Nagaland-4; Odisha -8; Punjab -1; Rajasthan -2; Tamil Nadu -5; Telenaga -6, Tripura -3; 
Uttar Pradesh-30 and West Bengal-2). 
The data indicates a positive trend towards incorporating interactive technology in DIET 
classrooms. However, there is still a significant portion of DIETs that need to catch up in 
terms of adopting modern teaching aids. Utilizing interactive whiteboards, multimedia 
projectors, or smart boards can enrich the teaching and learning process, making it more 
engaging and effective for both teacher s and students. Emphasizing technology integration 
26%
49%
25%
%.of DIETs classroom equipped with interactive whiteboards, 
multimedia projectors or smart boards
Yes, in every classroom
In Some classrooms
Not available
101

 
71 | P a g e  
 
in DIETs can help educators deliver better educational experiences and improve the overall 
quality of teacher training and development programs. 
 
12) How would you  rate the overall condition of the Classrooms  in the DIET?  
 
Graph: 12 
 
Graph-12 above reflects the percentage of DIETs rating the overall condition of their 
classrooms: 
 Excellent: Approximately 9.80% of DIETs (60) reported that their classrooms are in 
excellent condition, with well-maintained and comfortable settings. This signifies that a 
small portion of DIETs have prioritized maintaining high -quality classrooms that offer a 
conducive learning environment. 
 Good: Around 43.14% of DIETs (264) rated their classrooms as good, indicating that 
most DIETs have classrooms with generally satisfactory conditions and functionality. 
This suggests that a significant number of DIETs are performing adequately in terms of 
classroom maintenance and management. 
 Average: About 40.20% of DIETs (246) rated their classroo ms as average, 
acknowledging that some areas need improvement in condition or functionality. This 
implies that a considerable portion of DIETs have identified specific areas where 
enhancements can be made to optimize the classroom experience. 
 Poor: Approximately 6.86% of DIETs (42) rated their classrooms as poor, indicating that 
these DIETs are facing significant issues in the condition or functionality of their 
classrooms. This highlights the need for urgent attention and resources to address 
classroom-related challenges in these institutions. 
The data reveals that while a considerable number of DIETs have satisfactory or good 
classroom conditions, there is still a notable percentage that needs improvement. 
9.80
43.14
40.20
6.86
% of DIETs rate the overall condition of the Classrooms
Excellent, with well-maintained
and comfortable classrooms
Good, with generally
satisfactory condition and
functionality
Average, with some areas
needing improvement in
condition or functionality
Poor, with significant issues in
the condition or functionality of
the classrooms
102

 
72 | P a g e  
 
Addressing areas of concern, enhancing classroom f acilities, and ensuring regular 
maintenance are essential steps for all DIETs. Improving classroom conditions can positively 
impact the effectiveness of educational programs and contribute to the overall development 
of teaching practices and educational initiatives within DIETs. 
 
13) Details of Toilets facility 
 
a) For Faculties 
 
Graph: 13-a 
As per Graph13 (a) above, the data provided shows the number of toilet units available and 
functional for both male and female faculties in various categories 
 
a) For DIETs with 1 toilet unit: 
 Approximately 47.39% of DIETs (290) have male toilet units available, with 49.35% 
(302) functional. 
 Around 51.31% of DIETs (314) have female toilet units available, with 53.43% (327) 
functional. 
b) For DIETs with 2 toilet units: 
 About 28.59% o f DIETs (175) have male toilet units available, with 28.43% (174) 
functional. 
 Approximately 25.82% of DIETs (158) have female toilet units available, with 26.31% 
(161) functional. 
c) For DIETs with 3 toilet units: 
47.39
28.59
10.78
6.54
2.12
4.58
49.35
28.43
10.78
5.72
1.96
3.76
51.31
25.82
9.31
6.21
2.12
5.23
53.43
26.31
8.82
5.56
2.12
3.76
1 2 3 4 5 5+
No. of toilet units Available (Male Faculties) No. of toilet units Functional (Male Faculties)
No. of toilet units Available (Female Faculties) No. of toilet units Functional (Female Faculties)
103

 
73 | P a g e  
 
 Roughly 10.78% of DIETs (66) have male toilet  units available, and all of them are 
functional. 
 Around 9.31% of DIETs (57) have female toilet units available, with 8.82% (54) 
functional. 
 
d) For DIETs with 4 toilet units: 
 Approximately 6.54% of DIETs (40) have male toilet units available, with 5.72% (35)  
functional. 
 About 6.21% of DIETs (38) have female toilet units available, with 5.56% (34) functional. 
e) For DIETs with 5 toilet units: 
 Approximately 2.12% of DIETs (13) have male toilet units available, with 1.96% (12) 
functional. 
 All 2.12% of DIETs (13) that have female toilet units also have them functional. 
f) For DIETs with more than 5 toilet units: 
 Around 4.58% of DIETs (28) have male toilet units available, with 3.76% (23) functional. 
 Approximately 5.23% of DIETs (32) have female toilet units available, w ith 3.76% (33) 
functional. 
b) For Students 
 
Graph: 13-b 
34.48
28.10
11.60
9.80
4.25
11.76
38.73
25.00
11.60
9.48
3.59
11.60
32.84
27.94
11.44
10.13
3.10
14.54
36.60
26.14
10.62
9.97
2.94
13.73
1 2 3 4 5 5+
No. of toilet units Available (Male Students) No. of toilet units Functional (Male Students)
No. of toilet units Available (Female Students) No. of toilet units Functional (Female Students)
104

 
74 | P a g e  
 
As per Graph13 (b) above, the data provided shows the number of toilet units available and 
functional for both male and female students in various categories 
 
a) For DIETs with 1 toilet unit: 
 Approximately 34.48% of DIETs (211) have male toilet units available, with 38.73% 
(237) functional. 
 Around 32.84% of DIETs (201) have female toilet units available, with 36.60% (224) 
functional. 
 
b) For DIETs with 2 toilet units: 
 About 28.10% of DIETs (172) have male toil et units available, with 25.00% (153) 
functional. 
 Approximately 27.94% of DIETs (172) have female toilet units available, with 26.14% 
(160) functional. 
 
c) For DIETs with 3 toilet units: 
 Roughly 11.60% of DIETs (71)) have male toilet units available, and all of them are 
functional. 
 Around 11.44% of DIETs (70) have female toilet units available, with 10.62% (65) 
functional. 
 
d) For DIETs with 4 toilet units: 
 Approximately 9.80% of DIETs (60) have male toilet units available, with 9.48% (58) 
functional. 
 About 10.13 % of DIETs (62) have female toilet units available, with 9.97% (61) 
functional. 
 
e) For DIETs with 5 toilet units: 
 Approximately 4.25% of DIETs (26) have male toilet units available, with 3.59% (22) 
functional. 
 All 3.10% of DIETs (19) that have female toilet units also have them functional. 
 
f) For DIETs with more than 5 toilet units: 
 Around 11.76% of DIETs (72) have male toilet units available, with 11.60% (71) 
functional. 
 Approximately 14.54% of DIETs (89) have female toilet units available, with 13.73% (84) 
functional. 
 
The data suggests that the majority of DIETs have at least one functional toilet unit for both 
male and female students. Ensuring that all toilet units are functional and well -maintained 
is essential for providing a hygienic and comfortable envi ronment for faculty, staff and 
students at DIETs. Regular maintenance and necessary repairs can help improve the overall 
condition and functionality of the toilet facilities in these institutions, ensuring that the 
students' needs are met effectively. 
 
105

 
75 | P a g e  
 
14) Accessible toilet facilities for differently abled student/faculty are available? 
 
Graph: 14 
 
The data indicates that 46.57% of DIETs (285) have accessible toilet facilities for differently-
abled students and faculties, while 53.43% of DIETs (327) do not have such facilities. Having 
accessible toilet facilities is crucial for promoting inclusivity and ensuring that differently -
abled individuals can access educational institutions comfortably and without barriers. 
DIETs without these facilities should consider  implementing necessary changes to provide 
equal opportunities and a conducive learning environment for all students and faculty 
members. 
 
15) How would you rate the overall condition of the Toilets in the DIET? 
Graph 15 below presents the rating the overall condition of the Toilets in the DIET  
 Excellent: 7.19% of DIETs (44) rate their toilets' overall condition as excellent, indicating 
that they are well-maintained and clean.  
 Good: Around 43.46% DIETs (266) rate their toilets as good, reflecting generally 
satisfactory condition and cleanliness.  
 Average: Approximately 39.22% of DIETs (240) rate their toilets as average, suggesting 
that some areas need improvement in condition or cleanliness.  
 Poor: Lastly, 10.13% of DIETs (62) rate their toilets' condition as poor, indicating 
significant issues in the condition or cleanliness of the facilities. To maintain a conducive 
and hygienic learning environment, DIETs with lower ratings should  focus on 
implementing necessary improvements and maintenance measures. 
 
46.57
53.43
Accessible toilet facilities for Differently abled student/faculty 
Yes
No
106

 
76 | P a g e  
 
 
Graph: 15 
 
16) Whether Ramp with handrail is available for Differently abled student/faculty to 
access the DIET building 
 
Graph: 16 
 
As per the above mentioned Graph-16 data indicates that 58.01% of DIETs (355) have made 
provisions for ramps with handrail facilities to accommodate differently-abled students and 
faculty members, ensuring better accessibility to the DIET building. However, there are still 
7.19
43.4639.22
10.13
Rate the overall condition of the Toilets in the DIET (%)
 Excellent, with well-
maintained and clean toilets
Good, with generally
satisfactory condition and
cleanliness
Average, with some areas
needing improvement in
condition or cleanliness
Poor, with significant issues
in the condition or
cleanliness of the toilets
58.01
41.99
Availability of Ramp with Handrail facilities 
Yes No
107

 
77 | P a g e  
 
41.99% of DIETs (257) that do not have such facilities in place, potentially hindering the ease 
of access for differently -abled individuals. To promote inclusivity and provide equal 
opportunities for all, DIETs without ramp facilities should consider implementing these 
accessibility features to create a more welcoming and inclusive learning environment. 
 
17) Provision of clean drinking water in the DIETs 
As per Graph -17 below, a significant majority of DIETs 97.39% (596) have provisions for 
clean drinking water, ensuring that students, faculty , and staff have access to safe and 
hygienic drinking water within the institute's premises. This high percentage reflects a 
positive aspect of the DIETs' infrastructure and commitment to maintaining a healthy and 
conducive learning environment. 
 
However, it is also noteworthy that 2.61% of DIETs (16) still do not have adequate provisions 
for clean drinking water. (Andhra Praesh -1; Arunachal Pradesh -1; Assam -2; Gujarat -1; 
Jammu & Kashmir -1; Karnataka -1; Madhya Pradesh -1; Maharashtra -1; Manipur -2; 
Meghalya-2;Nagaland-1; Telenaga-1, and West Bengal-1). 
This indicates a potential area of improvement where these DIETs should focus on ensuring 
the availability of safe and clean drinking water for all individuals on their premises. Access 
to clean water is essenti al for promoting good health, well -being, and overall efficiency in 
educational institutions. Therefore, efforts should be made to rectify this gap and ensure that 
all DIETs provide access to clean drinking water to meet the needs of their students and staff. 
 Graph: 17 
 
 
 
18) Is there a library available at the DIET? 
97.39
2.61
Provision of Clean Drinking Water 
Yes No
108

 
78 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 18 
 
As per Graph-18 above, majority of the DIETs i.e., 95.10% (582) have a library available in 
their premises. This is a positive finding as libraries play a crucial role in providing access to 
a wide range of educational resources, including books, journals, and other learning 
materials. Having a library at the DIETs enhances the learning experience for students, 
teachers, and other stakeholders by providing a conducive environment for  self-study, 
research, and professional development. 
 
However, it is worth noting that 4.90% of DIETs (30) still do not have a library. This suggests 
a potential area of improvement where these DIETs could focus on establishing a library 
facility to further enhance the learning and professional development opportunities for their 
students and faculty. Libraries serve as essential hubs for knowledge acquisition and 
dissemination, and having one at the DIETs is vital to support quality education and 
continuous learning for all. Therefore, efforts should be made to ensure that all DIETs have 
a library to cater to the educational needs of their community effectively.  
State/UT Questionnaire filled 
by DIETs 
No. of DIETs do 
not have Library 
% of DIETs do not 
have Library in State 
and UT 
Arunachal Pradesh 11 2 18.18 
Bihar 33 1 3.03 
Gujarat 30 4 13.33 
Jammu & Kashmir 20 4 20.00 
Jharkhand  24 2 8.33 
Ladakh 2 1 50.00 
Madhya Pradesh 50 4 8.00 
Maharashtra 33 3 9.09 
Nagaland 8 1 12.50 
Odisha 30 1 3.33 
95.10
4.90
Yes
No
Yes
 No
109

 
79 | P a g e  
 
State/UT Questionnaire filled 
by DIETs 
No. of DIETs do 
not have Library 
% of DIETs do not 
have Library in State 
and UT 
Punjab  17 2 11.76 
Uttar Pradesh  70 5 7.14 
 
19) Are the library materials organized and easily accessible to the students and 
faculty? 
In the below mentioned Graph-19 presents the status of organized library facility in DIETs  
 Majority of DIETs - 32.19% (197) have well-organized libraries, with most materials 
easily accessible to users. This is a positive sign as a well -organized library makes it 
convenient for students, teachers, and other stakeholders to locate and access the 
resources they need for their educational and professional development. 
 However, there is still room for improvement, as 47.22% of DIETs (289) reported having 
moderately organized libraries, with occasional difficulties in finding materials. This 
suggests that there may be some scope for enhancing the organization and cataloging of 
library resources to make them more user-friendly and easily accessible. 
 Additionally, a smaller percentage of DIETs 13.89% (85) reported that their libraries are 
somewhat disorganized and require effort to locate materials.  
 A further 6.70% DIETs (41) reported that their libraries are poorly organized, making it 
difficult for users to find the resources they need.  
These findings highlight the importance of implementing better library management 
practices and adopting modern library technologies to improve organization and 
accessibility. 
 
32.19
47.22
13.89
6.70
Well-organized, with
most materials easily
accessible
Moderately organized,
with occasional difficulty
in finding materials
Somewhat disorganized
and requires effort to
locate materials
Poorly organized and
difficult to find materials
Library materials organized and easily accessible 
110

 
80 | P a g e  
 
Graph: 19 
 
20) How would you describe the accessibility of library resources (books, journals, 
databases, etc.) to students and faculty? 
 Graph: 20 
 
Graph-20 above shows the analysis of the accessibility of library resources in DIETs is as 
follows: 
 Very Accessible: Approximately 19.77% of DIETs (121) have been rated as having very 
accessible library resources. These DIETs likely provide a wide range of resources, 
including books, journals, digital materials, and other educational resources, creating an 
enriching environment for students and faculty. 
 Moderately Accessible:  The majority of DIETs, about 52.29% (320), fall into the 
moderately accessible category. These DIETs offer a reasonable variety of resources but 
may have some limitations in terms of resource availability, either due to budget 
constraints or other factors. 
 Somewhat Accessible:  Around 21.24% of DIETs (130) have been rated as having 
somewhat accessible library resources. These DIETs face significant limitations in terms 
of resource availability, which may affect the quality of educational and training 
programs offered. 
 Not Accessible: Small percentages, 6.70%, of DIETs (41) have been rated as not having 
accessible library resources. These DIETs lack the necessary resources for students and 
faculty, which can hinder research, professional development, and overall academic 
excellence. 
 
 
19.77
52.29
21.24
6.70
Rate the accessibility of library resources
Very accessible, with a wide
range of resources available
Moderately accessible, with some
limitations in resource
availability
Somewhat accessible, with
significant limitations in
resource availability
Not accessible, with limited or no
access to necessary resources
111

 
81 | P a g e  
 
21) Are there comfortable seating arrangements and study spaces available in the 
library for students and faculty? 
 Graph: 21 
 
Based on the data presented in Graph-21 above, it can be inferred that around 42.32% of the 
DIETs (259) reported having comfortable seating arrangements and study spaces available 
in their libraries. Additiona lly, approximately 38.89% of DIETs (238) mentioned having 
partial availability of such facilities, while about 18.79% of DIETs (115) reported not having 
comfortable seating arrangements and study spaces in their libraries. 
22) Is there a dedicated librarian available to assist users and manage the library? 
 
 Graph: 22 
42.32
38.89
18.79
Comfortable seating arrangements and study spaces available in 
the library(%)
Yes Partially No
34.31
65.69
Yes
No
Yes
 No
112

 
82 | P a g e  
 
 
From the data presented, it can be inferred that approximately 34.31% of DIETs (210) have 
the availability of a dedicated librarian, while about 65.69% of DIETs (402) do not have a 
dedicated l ibrarian. Having a dedicated librarian is essential to effectively manage and 
organize the library resources, provide guidance to students and faculty, and enhance the 
overall functionality and usefulness of the library. The higher percentage of DIETs without a 
dedicated librarian may indicate a need for strengthening library services and staffing to 
better support the educational needs of the institution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23) When Last time the renovation of the library facilities was carried out 
113

 
83 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 23 
 
Graph-23 above provides the analysis of the latest renovation of the library in DIETs is as 
follows: 
 2023: Approximately 18.31% of DIETs (106) reported that the latest renovation of their 
library was carried out in 2023. This indicates ongoing efforts to improve library facilities 
and resources. 
 2022: About 15.72% of DIETs (91) conducted their latest library renovation in 2022, 
which also shows recent efforts to upgrade library facilities. 
 2021: Around 10.36% of DIETs (60) renovated their libraries in 2021, reflecting 
continued attention to improving library infrastructure. 
 2020: Approximately 7.08% of DIETs (41) reported that their latest library renovation 
was carried out in 2020, indicating recent efforts to upgrade library facilities. 
 2019: About 3.11% of DIETs (18) conducted their latest library renovation in 2019, 
showing some focus on improving library resources in the past couple of years. 
 2018: Approximately 4.15% of DIETs (24) reported t hat their latest library renovation 
was done in 2018, which also represents efforts to enhance library facilities. 
 Before 2018:  Around 15.72% of DIETs (91) had their last library renovation before 
2018, indicating that a significant portion of DIETs might benefit from updating their 
library infrastructure. 
18.31
15.72
10.36
7.08
3.11 4.15
15.72
25.56
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 Before
2018
No
When was the latest renovation of the Library carried out in the DIET
114

 
84 | P a g e  
 
 No Renovation: The data shows that 25.56% of DIETs (148) have not carried out any 
renovation of their library, indicating a potential area for improvement to ensure that 
library facilities meet current educational needs. 
Overall, the analysis suggests that a considerable number of DIETs have renovated their 
libraries in recent years, but there is still room for improvement, especially for those DIETs 
that have not undergone any renovation or have not renovated their libraries in a significant 
period. Regular updates and improvements to library facilities can enhance the overall 
learning environment and support the professional development of teachers and trainees. 
 
24) How would you rate the overall condition of the library facilities in the DIET 
 Graph: 24 
 
Based on the data, it can be inferred that the majority of DIETs approximately 39.87% (244) 
rate the overall condition of their library as "Good," followed by around 43.46% (266) rating 
it as "Average." A smaller percentage of DIETs approximately 11.44% (70) rated the library 
condition as "Poor," while only about 5.23% (32) rated it as "Excellent." These ratings 
suggest that while a significant portion of DIETs consider their library condition to be 
satisfactory (Good and Average), there is still room for improvement in some institutions. 
Enhancing the library facilities, resources, and organization could contribute to better 
educational outcomes and support for students and faculty. 
 
25) Are there computer labs available for students' use? 
Graph-25 below indicates that approximately 75.00% of DIETs (459) have an available 
computer lab, while the remaining 25.00% DIETs (153) do not have one. This suggests that 
a significant majority of DIETs have invested in providing computer facilities, which can play 
a crucial role in enhancing digital literacy, supporting innovative teaching methods, and 
5.23
39.87
43.46
11.44
Rate the Overall condition of the Library facilities in DIETs
Excellent Good
Average Poor
115

 
85 | P a g e  
 
enabling teachers and students to access modern educational resources. However, for the 
25.00% of DIETs without a computer l ab, there is a potential area of improvement to 
consider in order to align with the evolving educational landscape and technological 
advancements. 
 Graph: 25 
 
State/UT Questionnaire filled 
by DIETs 
No. of DIETs do 
not have 
Computer Lab 
for students' use 
% of  DIETs do not have 
Computer Lab for 
students' use 
Meghalaya 7 5 71.43 
Jammu & Kashmir 20 14 70.00 
Uttar Pradesh  70 47 67.14 
Arunachal Pradesh 11 6 54.55 
Maharashtra 33 16 48.48 
Rajasthan  33 13 39.39 
Himachal Pradesh  12 4 33.33 
Sikkim 3 1 33.33 
Assam 23 7 30.43 
Mizoram 8 2 25.00 
Manipur  9 2 22.22 
Jharkhand  24 5 20.83 
Bihar 33 6 18.18 
Madhya Pradesh 50 9 18.00 
Gujarat 30 5 16.67 
Kerala 13 2 15.38 
Karnataka 30 3 10.00 
Telangana 10 1 10.00 
Haryana 21 2 9.52 
75.00
25.00
Computer Labs Available for Students Use
Yes No
116

 
86 | P a g e  
 
State/UT Questionnaire filled 
by DIETs 
No. of DIETs do 
not have 
Computer Lab 
for students' use 
% of  DIETs do not have 
Computer Lab for 
students' use 
Andhra Pradesh  13 1 7.69 
Chhattisgarh 19 1 5.26 
Tamil Nadu 32 1 3.13 
Overall, the analysis highlights the need for improving digital infrastructure in DIETs across 
various states and UTs, especially in regions with higher percentages of DIETs lacking 
computer labs. Ensuring access to computer labs in all DIETs can enhance technology -
enabled learning and capacity building for teachers and students, leading to improved 
educational outcomes 
 
26) Are there an adequate number of computers available for students and faculty? 
 Graph: 26 
 
Graph-26 above shows the availability of computers at the DIETs and their distribution 
across different categories. Here is the analysis: 
 Very Available: 19.44% of the DIETs (119) reported having a high level of computer 
availability. This suggests that a significant proportion of DIETs has well -equipped 
computer labs, providing ample opportunities for students and faculty to use technology 
for teaching, learning, and research. 
 Moderately Available: 36.44% of the DIETs (223) reported having a moderate level of 
computer availability. This means that a considerable number of DIETs have a reasonable 
number of computers accessible to students and faculty, allow ing them to utilize 
technology for various educational purposes. 
16.18
27.94
36.44
19.44
No computer labs
Somewhat available
Moderately available
Very available
Adequte number of Computers available at the DIET
No computer labs Somewhat available Moderately available Very available
117

 
87 | P a g e  
 
 Somewhat Available: 27.94% of the DIETs (171) reported that they have some level of 
computer availability. This category indicates that while some DIETs have access to 
computers, it may not b e sufficient to meet the digital needs of students and faculty 
adequately. 
 No Computer Labs: 16.18% of the DIETs (99) reported not having computer labs. This 
suggests that a significant portion of DIETs lacks access to computer facilities, which can 
impact the integration of technology in teaching and learning processes. 
Overall, the analysis indicates that a considerable number of DIETs have some level of 
computer availability, with a significant portion falling into the "Moderately Available" 
category. However, there is still room for improvement, especially in the "No Computer Labs" 
and "Somewhat Available" categories, where efforts may be needed to enhance access to 
computers and promote the effective integration of technology in the educational process.  
DIETs with "Very Available" computer facilities are better equipped to leverage technology 
and its benefits for fostering modern teaching and learning practices. 
 
27) Are the computers equipped with the necessary software and hardware for 
educational purposes? 
As per Graph-27 below, shows the status of software and hardware facilities in DIETs. Here 
is the analysis: 
 Yes: 32.19% of the DIETs (197) reported having computers equipped with the 
necessary software and hardware. This indicates that around one -third of the DIETs 
have successfully ensured that their computers are adequately equipped with the 
required software and hardware, enabling efficient functioning and utilization. 
 Partially: 42.16% of the DIETs (258) reported that their computers are only partially 
equipped with the necessary software and hardware. This suggests that a significant 
portion of DIETs has made some progress in ensuring proper computer equipment, 
but there might be room for improvement in enhancing the availability and 
functionality of software and hardware. 
 No: 25.65% of the DIETs (157) reported not having computers equipped with the 
necessary software and hardware. This highlights that a considerable number of 
DIETs face challenges in providing their computers with the required software and 
hardware, which can impact their effectiveness in delivering modern educational 
practices. 
 
118

 
88 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 27 
 
Overall, the analysis indicates that while some DIETs have successfully ensured that their 
computers are adequately equipped with software and hardware, a substantial port ion of 
DIETs still needs to make improvements in this area. Having computers with necessary 
software and hardware is essential for leveraging technology effectively in the educational 
process and facilitating modern teaching and learning practices. 
 
28) What is the current status of DIET network connectivity 
 Graph: 28 
In the Graphi -28, the data shows the status of DIET network connectivity. Here is the 
analysis: 
32.19
42.16
25.65
Yes Partially No
Computers Equipped with necessary Software & Hardware
32.19
42.16
25.65
DIET network connectivity
High-speed broadband
internet available in all
classrooms
Limited internet access in
specific areas
No internet connectivity
119

 
89 | P a g e  
 
 High-speed broadband internet available in all classrooms:  According to the data, 
32.19% of the DIETs (222) reported having high -speed broadband internet available in 
all classrooms. This indicates that approximately one -third of the DIETs have made 
significant progress in ensuring reliable and fast internet conn ectivity across all their 
classrooms. 
 Limited internet access in specific areas:  The data shows that 42.16% of the DIETs 
(335) reported having limited internet access in specific areas. This suggests that a 
substantial portion of DIETs has internet connectivity, but it might not be available in all 
classrooms or parts of the campus.  
 No internet connectivity:  According to the data, 25.65% of the DIETs (55) reported 
having no internet connectivity. This is a concerning figure, as it means that a significant 
number of DIETs are currently lacking internet access altogether. The absence of internet 
connectivity can hinder the implementation of modern educational practices that heavily 
rely on online resources, research, and communication tools. 
 
29) When was the Last time the renovation of computer and internet facility was 
carried out in the DIET 
 Graph: 29 
 
Based on the data provided, is an analysis of the latest updation/renovation of the Computer 
& Internet facility in DIETs is as follows: 
 
 2023: Approximately 34.64% of DIETs (212) reported that the latest renovation of their 
Computer & Internet facility was carried out in 2023. This indicates ongoing efforts to 
upgrade computer infrastructure and internet connectivity. 
 2022: About 18.95% of DIETs (116) conduc ted their latest renovation of Computer & 
Internet facility in 2022. 
21.43
14.12
9.80
6.64
3.99 3.82
12.79
27.41
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 Before
2018
No
Latest Overall renovation carried out in the DIET
120

 
90 | P a g e  
 
 2021: Around 8.17% of DIETs (50) renovated their Computer & Internet facility in 2021, 
reflecting continued attention to upgrading technological infrastructure. 
 2020: Approximately 5.07% of DIETs (31) reported that their latest renovation of 
Computer & Internet facility was carried out in 2020. 
 2019: About 2.78% of DIETs (17) conducted their latest renovation of Computer & 
Internet facility in 2019. 
 2018: Approximately 2.45% of DIETs (15) reported that their latest renovation of 
Computer & Internet facility was done in 2018. 
 Before 2018:  Around 6.70% of DIETs (41) had their last renovation of Computer & 
Internet facility before 2018, indicating that some DIETs might nee d to update their 
technological infrastructure. 
 No Renovation: The data shows that 21.24% of DIETs (130) have not carried out any 
renovation of their Computer & Internet facility, indicating a potential area for 
improvement to ensure that technology resources meet current educational needs. 
 
Overall, the analysis suggests that a significant number of DIETs have renovated their 
Computer & Internet facilities in recent years, but there is still room for improvement, 
especially for those DIETs that have not un dergone any renovation or have not renovated 
their technological resources in a significant period. Regular updates and improvements to 
Computer & Internet facilities can enhance the overall technological capabilities of DIETs 
and support effective teaching and learning practices. 
 
30) How would you rate the overall condition of the Computer and Internet facilities 
in the DIET? 
 
Graph: 30 
10.62
33.50
41.67
14.22
Rate the Overall condtion of Computer & Internet
Excellent, with well-maintained
and up-to-date computer and
internet facilities
Good, with generally
satisfactory condition and
functionality
Average, with some areas
needing improvement in
condition or functionality
 Poor, with significant issues in
the condition or functionality of
the computer and internet
facilities
121

 
91 | P a g e  
 
As per Graph-30 above, the data represents the ratings given by DIETs regarding the overall 
condition of their computer and internet facilities. Here is the analysis: 
 Excellent: The data shows that 10.62% of the DIETs (65) rated their computer and 
internet facilities as "Excellent," indicating that these DIETs have well -maintained and 
up-to-date computer systems and internet infrastructure.  
 Good: Approximately 33.50% of the DIETs (205) rated their computer and internet 
facilities as "Good." This suggests that these DIETs have satisfactory computer and 
internet setups with functional equipment and infrastructure. While they might not be at 
the highest level of excellence, they are still in a decent condition and meet the basic 
requirements for conducting educational activities that involve technology integration. 
 Average: The majority of DIETs, around 41.67% DIETs (255) rated th eir computer and 
internet facilities as "Average." This indicates that a considerable number of DIETs have 
areas that need improvement in the condition or functionality of their computer systems 
and internet facilities. It could imply that they are facing challenges in keeping up with 
technological advancements or maintaining their equipment regularly. 
 Poor: According to the data, 14.22% of the DIETs (87) rated their computer and internet 
facilities as "Poor," indicating significant issues in the condition or functionality of these 
resources. This is a concerning figure as it suggests that a notable portion of DIETs is 
facing substantial challenges in providing adequate and reliable computer and internet 
facilities to their staff and students. 
The analysis r eveals a range of ratings given by DIETs for the overall condition of their 
computer and internet facilities. While some DIETs have achieved excellence or satisfactory 
levels, a significant number still needs improvement. It highlights the importance of 
investing in regular maintenance, updating technology, and addressing challenges to ensure 
that all DIETs have well-functioning and up-to-date computer and internet facilities that can 
support modern educational practices and meet the needs of teachers and s tudents 
effectively. 
 
31) Is there a hostel facility available for students or trainees 
Graph-31 below represents the availability of hostel facilities for students or trainees in 
DIETs. Here is the analysis: 
 
Yes: According to the data, approximately 58.82% of DIETs (360) reported having hostel 
facilities for students or trainees. This indicates that a significant proportion of DIETs offer 
accommodation options to students or trainees who may be coming from distant locations to 
pursue their education or training programs. 
 
No: The data shows that around 41.18% of DIETs (252) do not have hostel facilities for 
students or trainees. This implies that a notable portion of DIETs may not be providing on -
campus housing opt ions. Lack of hostel facilities can be a significant challenge, particularly 
for those students or trainees who have to travel long distances to attend DIETs. It may lead 
to difficulties in finding affordable and suitable accommodations nearby, potentially  
impacting the enrollment and participation of certain individuals in DIET programs. 
122

 
92 | P a g e  
 
 
 
Graph: 31 
 
32) Are there separate hostels for male and female students/trainees? 
 Graph: 32 
 
Graph-32 above presents the availability of hostel facilities in DIETs based on gender. Here 
is the analysis 
58.8241.18
Availability of Hostel Facility
Yes No
Male Female
Provision for Seperate Hostel Facility for Male & Female Students
Yes No No Hostel Facility
123

 
93 | P a g e  
 
a) Male: 
 Yes: Approximately 45.92% of DIETs (281) reported having hostel facilities for male 
students or trainees. This indicates that a significant proportion of DIETs provide on -
campus housing options for male participants. 
 No: Around 21.08% of DIETs (129) do not have hostel facilities for male students or 
trainees. 
 No Hostel Facility : Approximately 33.01% of DIETs (202) fall under this category, 
indicating that they do not offer hostel facilities for male students or trainees.  
 
b) Female: 
 Yes: About 41.01% of DIETs (251) reported having hostel facilities for female students 
or trainees. While a significant number of DIETs do provide accommodation options for 
female participants, there is room for improvement to increase this percentage and 
ensure that more female learners have access to on-campus housing. 
 No: Approximately 25.65% of DIETs (157) do not have hostel facilities for female 
students or trainees.  
 No Hostel Facility:  Around 33.33% of DIETs (204) fall under this category, signifying 
that they do not offer hostel facilities for female students or trainees. This underscores 
the need for addressing this gap and providing better residential options for female 
participants. 
Overall, the analysis reveals that while some DIETs have hostel facil ities for both male and 
female participants, a significant number of DIETs lack such provisions. The data highlights 
the importance of enhancing hostel availability in DIETs to create an inclusive and 
supportive learning environment, especially for those w ho have to travel long distances to 
attend educational and training programs. Additionally, it emphasizes the need for gender -
responsive planning to ensure equitable access to housing options for both male and female 
learners in DIETs. 
33) How would you rate the overall condition and cleanliness of the hostel facilities 
The data in Graph-33 below presents the ratings given by DIETs to the overall condition and 
cleanliness of their hostel facilities. Here is the analysis: 
 Excellent: A very small percentage of DIETs approximately 2.45% (15) rated their hostel 
facilities as excellent. This suggests that only a few DIETs have well-maintained and clean 
hostel facilities, indicating a need for improvement in the overall quality and cleanliness 
of on-campus housing options. 
 Good: About 17.97% of DIETs (110) rated their hostel facilities as good, with generally 
satisfactory condition and cleanliness. While this is a higher percentage than the 
"Excellent" category, it still shows that a significant number of DIETs need to  work on 
enhancing the quality and cleanliness of their hostels to achieve higher ratings. 
 Average: Approximately 25.65% of DIETs (157) rated their hostel facilities as average, 
indicating that some areas of improvement are needed. This suggests that a considerable 
124

 
94 | P a g e  
 
proportion of hostel facilities may have minor issues that need attention to improve the 
overall condition and cleanliness. 
 Poor: Around 15.03% of DIETs (92) rated their hostel facilities as poor, with significant 
issues in the condition and cleanliness. This indicates that a noteworthy number of DIETs 
are facing substantial challenges in maintaining their hostels. 
 No Hostel Facilities: A considerable percentage of DIETs approximately 38.89% (238) 
reported not having hostel facilities. This means that a large number of DIETs do not offer 
on-campus housing options for students or trainees, which can be a limiting factor for 
individuals who require accommodation support while attending DIET programs. 
 Graph: 33 
Overall, the analysis reveals that there is room for improvement in the condition and 
cleanliness of hostel facilities in many DIETs. It is crucial for educational institutions to invest 
in maintaining and upgrading hostel infrastructure to create a safe, comfortable, and 
conducive living environment for students and trainees. Additionally, efforts should be made 
to provide on -campus housing options in more DIETs to cater to the needs of those who 
might face challenges in finding off-campus accommodations. 
 
 
 
2.45
17.97
25.65
15.03
38.89
Rate the overall condition and cleanliness of the hostel facilities
 Excellent, with well-maintained and clean hostel facilities
 Good, with generally satisfactory condition and cleanliness
Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or cleanliness
Poor, with significant issues in the condition or cleanliness of the hostel facilities
 No hostel facilities
125

 
95 | P a g e  
 
34) Are there sufficient amenities provided in the hostel, such as study areas, common 
rooms, and recreational facilities 
 Graph: 34 
 
 Yes: Only a quarter of the DIETs 25.00% (153) reported having sufficient amenities in 
their hostels. These amenities include study areas, common rooms, and recreational 
facilities. 
 No: The majority of DIETs approximately 38.89% (238) reported not having suffic ient 
amenities in their hostels. This suggests that a significant number of DIETs lack proper 
study areas, common rooms, and recreational facilities, which could negatively impact 
the overall experience and well-being of students or trainees residing on-campus. 
 No Hostel Facility: Around 36.11% of the DIETs (221) mentioned that they do not have 
any hostel facility at all. Since there are no hostels, the availability of amenities like study 
areas, common rooms, and recreational facilities becomes irrelevant in such cases. 
 
Overall, the analysis indicates that there is a need for improvement in providing sufficient 
amenities in the hostels of DIETs. Properly equipped study areas, common rooms, and 
recreational facilities are essential for students and trainees. Additionally, for DIETs without 
any hostel facilities, there may be opportunities to explore the possibility of establishing 
hostels to support students or trainees who require accommodation assistance during their 
education and training programs. 
 
 
 
35) How would you rate the overall condition of the hostel facilities in the DIET?  (If  
hostel facility available) 
25.00
38.89
36.11
Yes
No
No Hostel Facility
Sufficient amenities provided in the hostel, such as study areas, common 
rooms, and recreational facilities
Yes No No Hostel Facility
126

 
96 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 35 
 
Graph-35 above, provides an overview of how DIETs rate the overall condition of their hostel 
facilities. Here is the analysis: 
 
 Excellent: A very small percentage of DIETs approximately 0.98% (6) rated their hostel 
facilities as excellent. These DIETs reported having well -maintained and modern hostel 
facilities, indicating a commitment to providing high -quality accommodation for 
students or trainees. 
 Good Around 15.36% of DIETs (94) rated their hostel facilities as good. This suggests 
that these DIETs have generally satisfactory hostel conditions and functionality, but there 
might be some room for improvement to further enhance th e quality of the 
accommodation. 
 Average: The majority of DIETs approximately 26.96% (165) rated their hostel facilities 
as average. This indicates that many DIETs have recognized the need for improvements 
in some areas of their hostel facilities to ensure better condition and functionality. 
 Poor: Around 17.81% of DIETs (109) rated their hostel facilities as poor. This suggests 
that these DIETs have significant issues in the condition or functionality of their hostel 
facilities, which could have negative implications for the well -being and experie nce of 
students or trainees residing in the hostels. 
0.98
15.36
26.96
17.81
38.89
Rate the overall condition of the hostel facilities
Excellent, with well-maintained and modern hostel facilities
Good, with generally satisfactory condition and functionality
Average, with some areas needing improvement in condition or functionality
 Poor, with significant issues in the condition or functionality of the hostel facilities
 No hostel
127

 
97 | P a g e  
 
 No Hostel: The highest percentage, approximately 38.89%, of DIETs (238) reported that 
they do not have any hostel facility. This means that a significant number of DIETs do not 
offer hostel accommodation to their students or trainees. 
 
Overall, the analysis highlights the diversity in the quality and availability of hostel facilities 
among DIETs. While some DIETs are providing excellent or good hostel facilities, a 
considerable number of them have recogni zed the need for improvement. Additionally, a 
large portion of DIETs do not have any hostel facilities, which might be a concern for students 
or trainees who require accommodation support. The data emphasizes the importance of 
investing in the improvement and establishment of hostel facilities to enhance the overall 
experience and well-being of students or trainees attending DIETs. 
 
36) Whether Faculty Residence/Quarters (working) provision in the DIET 
 Graph: 36 
 
Graph-36 above provides the provision of faculty residence or quarters in DIETs. Here is the 
analysis: 
Yes: Approximately 33.33% of DIETs (204) reported having faculty residence or quarters 
for their working staff. This suggests that a portion of DIETs provides accommodation 
facilities for their faculty members, which can be beneficial in terms of convenience, 
accessibility, and promoting a sense of community within the institution. 
No: The majority of DIETs around 66.67% (408) do not have faculty residence or quarters 
for their working staff. This means that a significant number of DIETs do not offer dedicated 
accommodation facilities to their faculty members, and staff. 
33.33
66.67
Faculty Residence/Quarters(working) provision in the DIET 
Yes No
128

 
98 | P a g e  
 
Overall, the analysis highlights that a considerable number of DIETs lack faculty residence 
or quarters. This may present challe nges for faculty members, particularly those who are 
relocating from distant locations or areas without adequate housing options. Therefore, 
addressing this aspect could be beneficial for the overall well-being and effectiveness of the 
faculty members and, consequently, the quality of education provided by the DIET. 
 
37) Are there sports facilities available at the DIET? 
 Graph: 37 
 
In Graph-37 above, analysis of the availability of sports facilities in DIETs is represented. 
Here is the analysis: 
 Yes: Approximately 74.35% of DIETs (455) reported having sports facilities on their 
premises. This indicates that the majority of DIETs have dedicated spaces and amenities 
for sports activities, which can contribute to promoting physical fitness, recreational 
opportunities, and a balanced lifestyle for students and staff. 
 No: Around 25.65% of DIETs (157) do not have sports facilities. This means that a 
significant number of DIETs lack infrastructure for sports -related activities, which may 
limit students' access to physical activities and sports-based learning experiences. 
 
Overall, the analysis shows that a substantial proportion of DIETs do provide sports facilities, 
suggesting that they recognize the importance of physical education and sports in the overall 
development of students and teachers. However, there is still a significant number of DIETs 
that do not offer such facilities, potentially missing out on the benefits that sports and 
physical activities can bring to the learning and teaching environment. 
 
 
74.35
25.65
Availability of sports facilities at the DIET 
Yes No
129

 
99 | P a g e  
 
38) Are there outdoor sports facilities such as a playground or sports field available at 
DIET? 
 Graph: 38 
 
Graph-38 above represents the availability of outdoor sports facilities, such as a playground 
or sports field, at DIETs. Here is the analysis: 
 
 Yes: Approximately 68.79% of DIETs (421) reported having outdoor sports facilities, 
which includes playgrounds or sports fields. This indicates that a significant majority of 
DIETs have dedicated spaces for outdoor sports and physical activities. These facilit ies 
can offer ample opportunities for students and staff to engage in various sports, games, 
and physical exercises, promoting physical fitness and overall well-being. 
 
 No: About 31.21% of DIETs (191) do not have outdoor sports facilities. This implies that 
a substantial number of DIETs lack designated spaces for outdoor sports and recreational 
activities. The absence of outdoor sports facilities could limit the scope for students and 
faculty to participate in outdoor games, sports competitions, and other outdoor activities, 
potentially affecting the overall development and health of the DIET community. 
 
Overall, the analysis shows that a significant majority of DIETs do provide outdoor sports 
facilities, which is positive as it enables students and faculty to engage in outdoor physical 
activities and promotes a healthier and more active lifestyle. However, there is still a 
considerable number of DIETs without such facilities, and it may be essential for them to 
consider the benefits of providing outdoor spor ts spaces to enhance the educational 
experience. 
 
68.79
31.21
Availability of outdoor sports facilities such as a playground or sports 
field at DIET
Yes No
130

 
100 | P a g e  
 
39) Are there indoor sports facilities such as a gymnasium or sports hall available at 
DIET? 
 Graph: 39 
 
Graph-39 above indicates the availability of indoor sports facilities, such as a gymnasium or 
sports hall, at DIETs. Here is the analysis: 
 
 Yes: Only approximately 20.10% of DIETs (123) reported having indoor sports facilities, 
which include amenities like a gymnasium or sports hall. This suggests that a relatively 
small proportion of DIETs have dedicated indoor spaces for sports and physical activities. 
Indoor sports facilities can offer a range of opportunities for students and staff to engage 
in various indoor sports, fitness activities, and sports training, especially during adverse 
weather conditions or when outdoor spaces are limited. 
 No: The majority of DIETs approximately 79.90% (489) do not have indoor sports 
facilities. This implies that a significant number of DIETs lack dedicated spaces for indoor 
sports and physical activities. The absence of indoor sports facilities may limit the scope 
for students and faculty to participate in indoor sports, fitness programs, and other 
recreational activities, which could impact their physical well-being and engagement. 
 
Overall, the analysis highlights that most DIETs do not provide indoor sports facilities. This 
indicates a potential area for improvement for DIETs to consider, as having indoor sports 
amenities can significantly enhance the overall experience for students and staff. Indoor 
sports facilities no t only promote physical fitness and well -being but also contribute to a 
balanced and holistic approach to education and personal development. 
 
Having sports facilities at DIETs can enhance students' well-being, teamwork, discipline, and 
leadership skills. It also provides a platform for teachers and students to engage in 
extracurricular activities, promoting a healthier and more vibrant educational community. 
For DIETs without sports facilities, exploring opportunities to introduce sports facilities and 
20.10
79.90
Availability of Indoor sports facilities such as a gymnasium or sports hall 
at DIET 
Yes No
131

 
101 | P a g e  
 
programs could contribute to a more holistic and enriching educational experience for all 
stakeholders involved. 
 
40) Are there provisions for organizing extracurricular activities and events? 
 Graph: 40 
 
The analysis reveals that a significant portion of DIETs 56.86% (348) have provisions for 
organizing extracurricular activities and events on a regular basis. This is an encouraging 
finding, as extracurricular activities play a crucial role in fostering students' all -round 
development, promoting their talents, a nd building essential life skills. However, it is also 
worth noting that a considerable number of DIETs 29.25% (179) organize such activities 
very rarely, indicating room for improvement in this aspect. Regular extracurricular 
activities can enhance students' creativity, teamwork, leadership, and social skills, leading to 
a more enriching learning experience. For the DIETs that do not currently have provisions 
for extracurricular activities 13.89% (85), it may be beneficial to consider incorporating such 
initiatives into their curriculum. By offering a diverse range of extracurricular options, DIETs 
can create a more vibrant and engaging educational environment that nurtures students' 
overall growth and well -being. Moreover, consistent and varied extracurric ular 
opportunities can contribute to a positive and holistic educational journey for both students 
and faculty at DIETs. 
 
41) How would you rate the quality and maintenance of the sports facilities at the 
DIET? 
Graph-41 below gives the analysis of the ratings given by DIETs regarding the quality and 
maintenance of sports facilities presented in a point-wise format 
 
56.86
29.25
13.89
Yes, regular Very rarely No
Provisions for organizing extracurricular activities and events
Provisions for organizing extracurricular activities and events
132

 
102 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 41 
 
 Excellent: Only 2.29% of the DIETs (14) have rated their sports facilities as "Excellent." 
This suggests that only a small percentage of DIETs have well -maintained facilities and 
equipment that meet the highest standards.  
 Good: Approximately 26.96% of the DIETs (165 ) have given a rating of "Good" to their 
sports facilities. This indicates that a significant proportion of DIETs are providing 
generally satisfactory facilities and equipment. While not the highest rating, it showcases 
that these DIETs are meeting acceptable standards for their sports amenities. 
 Average: Around 41.34% of the DIETs (253) have rated their sports facilities as 
"Average." This suggests that there are some areas in these DIETs that require 
improvement in terms of quality or maintenance. While n ot the lowest rating, it 
highlights the need for addressing these shortcomings to enhance the overall quality of 
sports facilities. 
 Poor: Approximately 29.41% of the DIETs (180) have rated the quality and maintenance 
of sports facilities as "Poor." This in dicates that these DIETs are facing significant issues 
and challenges in maintaining satisfactory sports amenities. The high percentage of poor 
ratings suggests that there is a need for urgent attention and improvement in these areas.  
Overall, the data re veals that a considerable number of DIETs have identified areas for 
improvement in their sports facilities, either as "Poor" or "Average." It highlights the need 
for focused efforts and investment in enhancing sports amenities to provide a better 
experience for students and staff. Improving the quality and maintenance of sports facilities 
can positively impact physical fitness, overall well -being, and the overall learning 
environment within the DIETs. 
42) Are the sports facilities accessible to students and fac ulty members on a regular 
basis 
29.41
41.34
26.96
2.29
Poor, with significant issues in the quality or
maintenance of facilities
Average, with some areas needing
improvement in quality or maintenance
 Good, with generally satisfactory facilities and
equipment
Excellent, with well-maintained facilities and
equipment
Rate the quality and maintenance of the sports facilities 
Rate the quality and maintenance of the sports facilities
133

 
103 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 42 
Graph-42 above presents an analysis on the accessibility of sports facilities to students and 
faculty members based on the ratings provided by DIETs is as follows. 
 Yes, they are readily accessible: Approximately 27.45% of the DIETs (168) have rated 
their sports facilities as "Readily Accessible." This suggests that these DIETs have taken 
measures to ensure that sports amenities are easily available and accessible to both 
students and faculty members. It indicates a proactive approach by these DIETs in 
promoting physical activities and encouraging sports participation. 
 Partially, with limited access or specific time restrictions:  Around 46.24% (283) of 
the DIETs have given this rating, indicating that there are some limitations or restrictions 
in accessing sports facilities. These limitations could be related to specific time 
restrictions, limited availability, or other factors th at hinder full access to sports 
amenities. It highlights the need for these DIETs to review their policies and consider 
ways to improve accessibility. 
 No, the sports facilities have restricted or no access for students and faculty:  
Approximately 26.31% of the DIETs (161) have reported that their sports facilities have 
restricted or no access for students and faculty. This is a concerning finding as it indicates 
that a significant number of DIETs are not providing sufficient opportunities for their 
stakeholders to utilize sports amenities. Lack of access to sports facilities can negatively 
impact the physical well -being and overall development of students and faculty 
members. 
 
 
 
43) Status of registration of DIETs under Public Finance Management System (PFMS) 
27.45
46.24
26.31
Sports facilities accessible to students and faculty members 
Yes, they are readily accessible
Partially, with limited access or specific time restrictions
No, the sports facilities have restricted or no access for students and faculty
134

 
104 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 43 
 
Graph-43 above gives an analysis of the status of registration of DIETs under PFMS (Public 
Financial Management System) based on the provided data is as follows: 
 Yes: Approximately 86.93% of the DIETs (532) have reported that they are registered  
under PFMS. This indicates that a significant majority of DIETs have successfully 
completed the registration process and are likely utilizing the PFMS platform for 
managing their financial transactions and funds. 
 No: About 11.76% of the DIETs (72) have stated that they are not registered under PFMS. 
This finding suggests that there is still a portion of DIETs that have not integrated into 
the PFMS system. It may indicate possible challenges or delays in the registration process 
for these DIETs. 
State/UT Questionnaire filled 
by DIETs 
No. of DIETs do 
not registered 
under PFMS 
% DIETs do not 
registered under PFMS 
in State/UT 
Goa 1 1 100.00 
Telangana 10 9 90.00 
West Bengal  20 18 90.00 
Kerala 13 7 53.85 
Rajasthan  33 17 51.52 
Himachal Pradesh  12 4 33.33 
Tamil Nadu 32 8 25.00 
Madhya Pradesh 50 3 6.00 
Chhattisgarh  19 1 5.26 
Assam 23 1 4.35 
Jharkhand  24 1 4.17 
Bihar 33 1 3.03 
86.93
11.76
1.31
Yes No Under Process
Status of registration of DIETs under PFMS
Status of registration of DIETs under PFMS
135

 
105 | P a g e  
 
State/UT Questionnaire filled 
by DIETs 
No. of DIETs do 
not registered 
under PFMS 
% DIETs do not 
registered under PFMS 
in State/UT 
Uttar Pradesh  70 1 1.43 
 Under Process: A small percentage, approximately 1.31% of the DIET (8), have reported 
that they are currently in the process of registering under PFMS. This category includes 
DIETs that have initiated the registration but have not completed it yet. It may imply that 
these DIETs are in the transition phase towards adopting the PFMS platform. 
Overall, the analysis demonstrates that a majority of DIETs have embraced the PFMS system 
for managing their financial operations, which can lead to improved transparency, 
accountability, and efficiency in financial transactions. However, there are still some DIETs 
that have yet to register, and efforts should be made to facilitate their integration into the 
PFMS platform to enhance the overall financial management and governance of th ese 
institutions. 
 
44) Whether regular electricity is available in the DIET 
Graph-44 below presents an analysis of the availability of electricity in DIETs based on the 
provided data  
Graph: 44 
 Yes: Majority of DIETs, approximately 96.57% (591) have reported that they have access 
to electricity. This finding indicates that the majority of DIETs are well -equipped with 
electricity supply, ensuring proper functioning of classrooms, computer labs, librar y 
facilities, and other essential amenities that require electricity. 
 No: Small percentages, approximately 3.43%, of DIETs (21) have reported that they do 
not have access to electricity. This indicates that there are still a few DIETs that face 
96.57
3.43
Availability of electricity in the DIET
Yes No
136

 
106 | P a g e  
 
challenges in electricity availability. The lack of electricity can significantly impact the 
functioning of educational facilities and hinder students' learning experience. 
State/UT Questionnaire filled 
by DIETs 
No. of DIETs do 
not have 
Electricity 
% IETs do not have 
Electricity in the 
State/UT 
Jammu & Kashmir  20 5 25.00 
Arunachal Pradesh  13 3 23.08 
Meghalaya 7 1 14.29 
Nagaland 9 1 11.11 
Telangana 10 1 10.00 
Uttar Pradesh  70 4 5.71 
Haryana 21 1 4.76 
Jharkhand  24 1 4.17 
Gujarat  30 1 3.33 
Tamil Nadu 32 1 3.13 
Maharashtra 33 1 3.03 
Rajasthan  33 1 3.03 
 
Overall, the analysis demonstrates that the majority of DIETs have access to electricity, 
ensuring a conducive learning environment and supporting various facilities and resources. 
However, efforts should be made to address the electricity needs of the remaining DIETs to 
ensure equitable access to quality education and educational infrastructure across all 
institutions. Providing reliable electricity supply to all DIETs will further enhance their 
effectiveness in promoting teacher education and professional development for improved 
educational outcomes. 
 
45) Does the DIET have an auditorium or seminar halls for conducting workshops, 
seminars, and conferences 
 Graph: 45 
76.14
23.86
Availability of Auditorium or Seminar halls 
Yes No
137

 
107 | P a g e  
 
 
Graph-45 above represents an analysis of the availability of auditoriums or seminar halls in 
DIETs based on the provided data is as follows:  
 Yes: Majority of DIETs, approximately 76.14%, (466) have reported that they have access 
to an auditorium or seminar hall. This finding indicates that a si gnificant proportion of 
DIETs are equipped with dedicated spaces for conducting seminars, workshops, 
conferences, and other educational events. Having such facilities can be beneficial for 
organizing large gatherings, academic discussions, and professional  development 
programs, enhancing the overall learning experience for both students and faculty. 
 No: However, around 23.86% of DIETs (146) have reported that they do not have access 
to an auditorium or seminar hall. This indicates that there is a significant portion of DIETs 
lacking dedicated spaces for hosting educational events and large gatherings. The 
absence of such facilities may limit their ability to organize large-scale academic activities 
and professional development opportunities. 
 
Overall, the analysis suggests that while a majority of DIETs have access to auditoriums or 
seminar halls, a considerable number of institutions still lack this essential facility. Providing 
auditoriums or seminar halls to all DIETs could significantly enhance their capa bilities in 
hosting educational events, fostering collaborations, and promoting academic discussions, 
ultimately contributing to the overall improvement of teacher education and training 
programs. Efforts to address this disparity and ensure equitable acce ss to such facilities 
across all DIETs can further enhance the quality and effectiveness of teacher education in the 
respective regions. 
 
46) What is the sitting capacity of the auditorium or seminar halls in DEIT? 
 Graph: 46 
17.81
34.31
13.89
8.66
3.76
21.57
Upto 50
Upto 100
Upto 150
Upto 200
200+
No Seminar/Auditorium
Sitting capacity of the auditorium or seminar halls in DEIT
138

 
108 | P a g e  
 
Graph-46 above shows the sitting capacity of the auditorium or seminar halls in DIETs based 
on the provided data is as follows: 
 Upto 50: Approximately 17.81% of DIETs (109) have auditoriums or seminar halls with 
a sitting capacity of up to 50 individuals.  
 Upto 100: The majority of DIETs,  around 34.31% (210) have auditoriums or seminar 
halls with a sitting capacity of up to 100 individuals.  
 Upto 150: About 13.89% of DIETs (85) have auditoriums or seminar halls with a sitting 
capacity of up to 150 individuals.  
 Upto 200: Smaller percentages, approximately 8.66% of DIETs (53), have auditoriums 
or seminar halls with a sitting capacity of up to 200 individuals.  
 200+: A limited number, 3.76% of DIETs (23), have auditoriums or seminar halls with a 
sitting capacity of more than 200 individuals.  
 No Seminar/Auditorium:  About 21.57% of DIETs (132) reported not having any 
seminar or auditorium facilities. This implies that a notable proportion of DIETs lack 
dedicated spaces for organizing educational events and gatherings, potentially limiting 
their ability to conduct large-scale seminars and conferences. 
Overall, the analysis indicates that there is a varied distribution of auditorium or seminar 
hall capacities in DIETs. While many institutions have adequate space to host various events, 
there is still a substantial porti on that lacks such facilities. Investing in and enhancing the 
capacity of seminar halls or auditoriums in DIETs can significantly contribute to the 
improvement of teacher education and training programs, facilitating academic discussions, 
and fostering pro fessional development opportunities. Ensuring equitable access to these 
facilities across all DIETs can further enhance the overall learning experience and support 
the growth of the teaching community. 
 
47) How would you rate the capacity of the auditorium or seminar halls at the DIET? 
Graph-47 below shows an analysis of the ratings for the capacity of the auditorium or 
seminar halls in DIETs based on the provided data is as follows: 
 Excellent: Approximately 10.67% of DIETs (51) have auditoriums or seminar hall s with 
excellent seating capacity, providing sufficient space to accommodate large gatherings and 
events.. 
 Good: The majority of DIETs, around 51.88% (248), have auditoriums or seminar halls with good 
seating capacity. 
 Average: About 33.26% of DIETs (159) have auditoriums or seminar halls with an average 
seating capacity. 
 Poor: Smaller percentages, approximately 4.18% of DIETs (20), have auditoriums or seminar 
halls with poor seating capacity. 
 
 
139

 
109 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 47 
 
The analysis suggests that the majority of DIETs have auditoriums or seminar halls with 
satisfactory seating capacity, making them suitable for organizing various educational 
events and workshops. However, there are still some institutions with limited seating 
capacity, indicating a need for potential im provements and upgrades in these facilities to 
meet the requirements of larger gatherings and conferences.. 
 
48) Are the auditorium and seminar halls equipped with audio -visual systems and 
other necessary equipment? 
Graph: 48 
10.67
51.88
33.26
4.18
Rate the capacity of the auditorium or seminar 
Excellent, with sufficient seating
capacity for large gatherings
Good, with satisfactory seating
capacity for most events
Average, with limited seating
capacity for smaller events
Poor, with inadequate seating
capacity for most events
52.15
31.33
16.52
Auditorium/Seminar halls fully equipped
Yes, all necessary audio-visual
equipment is available
Partially, some equipment may
be missing or outdated
No, the auditorium or seminar
halls lack essential audio-
visual equipment
140

 
110 | P a g e  
 
Graph-48 above shows an  analysis of the status of auditoriums or seminar halls in DIETs 
regarding their equipment is as follows: 
 Fully Equipped:  Approximately 52.15% of DIETs (243) have auditoriums or seminar 
halls that are fully equipped with all necessary audio-visual equipment. 
 Partially Equipped: About 31.33% of DIETs (146) have auditoriums or seminar halls 
with partial equipment availability. While they may have some audio -visual equipment, 
certain items could be missing or outdated. This may require some improvements or 
upgrades to ensure that these spaces are fully functional for conducting events. 
 Not Equipped: A smaller percentage, approximately 16.52% of DIETs (77), lack essential 
audio-visual equipment in their auditoriums or seminar halls.  
 
The analysis highlights tha t more than half of the DIETs have auditoriums or seminar halls 
that are well-equipped with audio-visual facilities. However, there is a significant portion of 
institutions where improvements or investments may be needed to enhance the 
technological capabi lities of these spaces. Having fully equipped auditoriums or seminar 
halls with modern audio -visual equipment can contribute to more engaging and impactful 
educational events, professional development activities, and overall academic experiences 
for students and faculty members.  
 
49) Whether the DIET has rain water harvesting or any such facility for water 
conservation.  
 Graph: 49 
 
Graph-49 above presents an analysis of the availability of rainwater harvesting systems in 
DIETs is as follows: 
29.90
70.10
Availability  of Rain water harvesting system
Yes
No
141

 
111 | P a g e  
 
 Availability: Only 29.90% of DIETs (183) have implemented rainwater harvesting 
systems. 
 Non-Availability: The majority, approximately 70.10% of DIETs (429), do not have 
rainwater harvesting systems in place. This suggests that a significant number of 
institutions have not yet adopted this eco-friendly and resource-saving technology. 
The analysis underscores the need for more DIETs to adopt rainwater harvesting systems to 
promote water conservation and sustainable practices. Implementing such systems can have 
positive effec ts on water availability, environmental preservation, and overall resource 
management. DIETs without rainwater harvesting should consider the implementation of 
these systems as part of their efforts towards promoting sustainable practices and reducing 
their ecological footprint. 
 
50) Whether the DIET has a solar system facility 
Graph-50 below provides an analysis of the availability of solar systems in DIETs is as 
follows: 
 Availability: Only 20.75% of DIETs (127) have implemented solar systems. These solar 
systems typically include solar panels that harness solar energy to generate electricity or 
heat water.  
 Non-Availability: The majority, approximately 79.25% of DIETs (485), do not have solar 
systems installed. This suggests that a significant number of institutions have not yet 
adopted solar energy solutions to meet their electricity or water heating needs.  
 
Graph: 50 
 
The analysis highlights the potential for DIETs to increase the adoption of solar systems to 
harness renewable energy and reduce their reliance on fossil fuels. Implementing solar 
systems can have multiple benefits, including cost savings on electricity bi lls, reduced 
20.75
79.25
Availability  of Solar System 
Yes
No
142

 
112 | P a g e  
 
greenhouse gas emissions, and greater sustainability. DIETs without solar systems should 
explore the feasibility of incorporating solar energy solutions to align with environmental 
and energy conservation goals. 
 
51) Whether the DIET have boundary wall 
Graph-51 below provides an analysis of the status of boundary wall in DIETs: 
 Pakka (Concrete) Boundary Wall:  Approximately 69.61% of DIETs (426) have a 
concrete boundary wall. A concrete boundary wall provides a sturdy and permanent 
enclosure, enhancing security and privacy for the DIET premises.  
 Barbed Wire Boundary Wall:  About 4.41% of DIETs (27) have a boundary wall made 
of barbed wire. Barbed wire boundary walls are generally less secure and may be used 
in conjunction with other fencing materials. They are cost-effective but may not offer the 
same level of security as concrete walls. 
 Fencing Hedges:  Approximately 3.76% of DIET (23)s have fencing hedges. Fencing 
hedges are living barriers created by planting bushes or shrubs in a line to enclose th e 
area. While they can provide a natural and aesthetically pleasing boundary, they may not 
be as robust or secure as concrete walls or other physical barriers. 
 No Boundary Wall: Around 22.22% of DIETs (136) do not have any boundary wall. The 
absence of a b oundary wall can pose security and safety risks, making it easier for 
unauthorized individuals to access the DIET premises. It may also lead to encroachments 
and misuse of the property. 
 
Graph: 51 
 
Overall, the data suggests that a significant proportion of DIETs have concrete boundary 
walls, which is a positive aspect in terms of security and protection of the institute's 
property. However, there is room for improvement for DIETs without boundary wa lls, as 
69.61
4.41 3.76
22.22
Pakka (Concrete) Barbed Wire Fencing Hedges No boundary wall
DIET have boundary wall
DIET have boundary wall
143

 
113 | P a g e  
 
establishing proper fencing can enhance security and safeguard the institute's assets and 
resources. Additionally, DIETs with barbed wire boundary walls should consider evaluating 
the effectiveness of their current fencing solution and assess wheth er upgrading to a more 
secure boundary wall would be beneficial. 
 
52) Is there a provision for fire safety in the DIET (e.g., fire extinguishers, fire alarms, 
evacuation plans, etc.)? 
Graph- 52 below presents the analysis of the provision for fire safety in DIETs is as follows: 
 Provision for Fire Safety:  Approximately 53.59% of DIETs (328) have provisions for 
fire safety. This indicates that more than half of the DIETs have implemented measures 
to protect against fire incidents. 
 No Provision for Fire Safety: Around 46.41% of DIETs (284) do not have provisions for 
fire safety. This is a concerning finding, as fire incidents can be extremely hazardous and 
detrimental to human life and property. The absence of fire safety measures increases 
the risk of fire acciden ts and makes it challenging to respond effectively in case of an 
emergency. 
 Graph: 52 
 
Overall, the data suggests that while a significant portion of DIETs have implemented fire 
safety measures, there is still room for improvement. DIETs without fire safety provisions 
should prioritize the implementation of appropriate measures to safeguard the well -being 
of their students, staff, and assets. This may involve conducting fire safety audits, installing 
fire safety equipment, and organizing training sessi ons to raise awareness about fire safety 
and emergency response procedures. Ensuring fire safety is a critical aspect of maintaining 
a secure and conducive learning environment within the DIETs. 
 
 
53.59
46.41
Provision for fire safety in the DIET 
Yes
No
144

 
114 | P a g e  
 
53) When the last time Overall renovation was carried out in the DIET 
 Graph: 53 
 
Based on the provided data, an analysis of the latest overall renovation carried out in DIETs 
is as follows: 
 2023: Approximately 21.43% of DIETs (129) reported that the latest overall renovation 
was carried out in 2023. This indicates ongoing efforts to improve the infrastructure and 
facilities of DIETs. 
 2022: About 14.12% of DIETs (85) conducted their latest overall renovation in 2022, 
which also shows recent efforts to upgrade and enhance the infrastructure of DIETs. 
 2021: Around 9.80% of DIETs (59) renovated their facilities in 2021. 
 2020: Approximately 6.64% of DIETs (40) reported that their latest overall renovati on 
was carried out in 2020. 
 2019: About 3.99% of DIETs (24) conducted their latest overall renovation in 2019. 
 2018: Approximately 3.82% of DIETs (23) reported that their latest overall renovation 
was done in 2018. 
 Before 2018:  Around 12.79% of DIETs (77) had their last overall renovation before 
2018, indicating that some DIETs might need to undergo further improvements and 
upgrades. 
 No Renovation: The data shows that 27.41% of DIETs (165) have not carried out any 
overall renovation, indicating a potential area for improvement to ensure that all DIETs 
maintain and enhance their infrastructure and facilities regularly. 
 
34.64
18.95
8.17
5.07
2.78 2.45
6.70
21.24
2023 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 Before
2018
No
When was the latest renovation of the Computer & Internet facility carried out in the
DIET
145

 
115 | P a g e  
 
Overall, the analysis suggests that a significant number of DIETs have conducted renovations 
in recent years, but there is still room for improvement, especially for those DIETs that have 
not undergone any renovation or have not renovated their facilities for an extended period. 
Regular updates and improvements to the overall infrastructure of DIETs are crucial to 
creating a conducive and modern learning environment for students and providing adequate 
resources and facilities to support effective teaching and learning practices. 
 
54) Details of Academic/Para Academic and Non Academic positions in the DIET 
 
i. Academic Posts  
Graph-54-a 
 
The analysis of the sanctioned, filled, and vacant positions for different positions in the 
DIETs is as follows:  
a) Principal: 
 Sanctioned Positions: There are a total of 604 sanctioned principal positions across 
DIETs. 
 Filled Positions: Currently, 327 principal positions are filled with individuals. 
 Vacant Positions: There are 277 (45.86%) vacant principal positions, indicating a 
significant number of DIETs that do not have a principal. 
b) Vice Principals: 
 Sanctioned Positions: There are 281 sanctioned vice principal positions in DIETs. 
 Filled Positions: Currently, 115 vice principal positions are filled with individuals. 
604 281
3005
8029
327 115
1330
4788
277 166
1675
3421
Principal Vice Principals Senior Lecturers Lecturers
Sanctioned Filled Vacant
146

 
116 | P a g e  
 
 Vacant Positions: There are 166 (59.07%) vacant vice principal positions, which is a 
considerable number of unfilled roles. 
c) Senior Lecturers: 
 Sanctioned Positions: There are a total of 3005 sanctioned senior lecturer positions 
in DIETs. 
 Filled Positions: Currently, 1330 senior lecturer positions are filled with individuals. 
 Vacant Positions: There are 1675 (55.74%) vacant senior lecturer positions, 
showing a substantial number of unfilled roles in this category. 
d) Lecturers: 
 Sanctioned Positions: There are 8029 sanctioned lecturer positions in DIETs. 
 Filled Positions: Currently, 4788 lecturer positions are filled with individuals. 
 Vacant Positions: There are 3421 (46.61%) vacant lecturer positions, representing a 
significant number of unfilled roles in this category. 
 The data indicates a significant shortage of staff in DIETs across all categories, especially 
for the positions of vice principals, senior lecturers, and lecturers. The number of vacant 
positions is notably high in these roles, which may affect the smooth functioning of DIETs. 
 The high number of vacant positions could lead to an increased workload on existing staff 
members, potentially affecting the quality of education and training provided at DIETs. 
 The lack of principals and vice principals may impact the overall administration and 
management of DIETs, which can have implications on various aspects, including 
resource management, decision-making, and coordination. 
 Addressing the issue of staff shortages and filling vacant positions should be a priority 
for DIETs to ensure the effective and efficient functioning of these institutions. 
 
ii. Para-Academic Posts  
The analysis of the Para-Academic; sanctioned, filled, and vacant positions for different roles 
in DIETs are as follows: 
a) Work Education Teacher: 
 Sanctioned Positions: There are a total of 407 sanctioned work education teacher 
positions across DIETs. 
 Filled Positions: Currently, 177 work ed ucation teacher positions are filled with 
individuals. 
 Vacant Positions: There are 230 (56.51%) vacant work education teacher positions, 
indicating a significant number of unfilled roles in this category. 
b) Librarian: 
 Sanctioned Positions: There are 502 sanctioned librarian positions in DIETs. 
 Filled Positions: Currently, 204 librarian positions are filled with individuals. 
 Vacant Positions: There are 298 (59.36%) vacant librarian positions, showing a 
considerable number of unfilled roles in this category. 
147

 
117 | P a g e  
 
 Graph-54-b 
c) Laboratory Assistant including ICT Support Staff: 
 Sanctioned Positions: There are a total of 575 sanctioned laboratory assistant 
positions, including ICT support staff, across DIETs. 
 Filled Positions: Currently, 306 laboratory assistant positio ns are filled with 
individuals. 
 Vacant Positions: There are 269 (46.78%) vacant laboratory assistant positions, 
representing a significant number of unfilled roles in this category. 
d) Statistician/Accountant: 
 Sanctioned Positions: There are 823 sanctioned po sitions for statisticians and 
accountants in DIETs. 
 Filled Positions: Currently, 431 positions for statisticians and accountants are filled 
with individuals. 
 Vacant Positions: There are 392 (47.63) vacant positions for statisticians and 
accountants, indicating a considerable number of unfilled roles. 
 The data highlights a consistent pattern of staff shortages in various positions within 
DIETs. Across all roles mentioned, there are notable numbers of vacant positions, which 
may impact the overall functioning and efficiency of these institutions. 
 The shortage of work education teachers may affect the implementation of work 
education programs and initiatives, which are essential for skill development and 
practical learning among students. 
 The absence of librarians can have implications for the management and accessibility of 
library resources, impacting students' access to relevant study materials and academic 
support. 
407
502
575
823
177 204
306
431
230
298 269
392
Work
EducationTeacher
Librarian Laboratory Assistant
including ICT Support
Staff
Statisician/Accountant
Sanctioned Filled Vacant
148

 
118 | P a g e  
 
 The shortage of laboratory assistants, including ICT support staff, may hinder the smooth 
functioning of practical-based learning and technology-related activities in DIETs. 
 Additionally, the lack of statisticians and accountants can affect the proper maintenance 
and management of financial records, data analysis, and budgeting in DIETs. 
 Addressing these staff shortages and filling the vacant positions is crucial to ensure the 
effective functioning and quality of education and training provided by DIETs. 
 
55) Status of In-service & Pre-service training programmes 
 Graph: 55 
 
Based on the provided data, Graph-55 shows the status of in-service and pre-service training 
programs in DIETs is as follows: 
 Pre-service Training Program:  Approximately 7.35% of DIETs (45) offer only pre -
service training programs.  
 In-service Training Program: Around 18.46% of DIETs (113) provide only  in -service 
training programs. 
 Both Pre -service and In -service Training:  A significant majority, approximately 
74.18%, of DIETs (454) offer both pre -service and in -service training programs. This 
indicates that the majority of DIETs re cognize the importance of providing 
comprehensive training to both aspiring and practicing teachers. Offering both types of 
training ensures that teachers receive continuous professional development throughout 
their careers, from the initial stages of their preparation to their tenure in the classroom. 
 
56) Please rate the current overall  infrastructure of the DIET 
7.35
18.46
74.18
Pre-service programme In-service Programme Both
Status of In-service & Pre-service training programmes
Pre-service programme In-service Programme Both
149

 
119 | P a g e  
 
 Graph: 56 
 
Graph-56 above provides an analysis of the current overall infrastructure facilities of DIETs 
is as follows. 
 Excellent: Small percentages, 6.54%, of DIETs (40) have been rated as having an 
excellent infrastructure. These DIETs likely have state -of-the-art facilities, well -
maintained buildings, and all necessary amenities that support effective teaching, 
learning, and professional development activities. 
 Good: About 41.01% of DIETs (251) have been rated as having a good infrastructure. 
These DIETs have a satisfactory level of infrastructure that enables them to function 
efficiently and provide a conducive environment for students and staff. 
 Average: The majority of DIETs, approximately 41.99% (257), fall into the average 
category. This suggests that many DIETs have a moderate level of infrastructure quality. 
While they may have some areas that need improvement, they are gener ally capable of 
delivering their core services adequately. 
 Poor: Around 8.66% of DIETs (53) have been rated as having a poor infrastructure. 
These DIETs may have several areas in their infrastructure that require urgent attention 
and improvement to meet the necessary standards and cater to the needs of students and 
faculty effectively. 
 Very Poor:  Only 1.80% of DIETs (11) have been rated as having a very poor 
infrastructure. This indicates that a very small proportion of DIETs are struggling with 
significant issues in their infrastructure, which may affect their overall functioning and 
the quality of services they provide. 
Overall, the data indicates that a significant number of DIETs have an average to good 
infrastructure, enabling them to deliver their educ ational and training services effectively. 
1.80
8.66
41.99
41.01
6.54
Very poor
Poor
Average
Good
Excellent
Rate the current infrastructure of the DIET
Very poor Poor Average Good Excellent
150

 
120 | P a g e  
 
However, there is still room for improvement, as a noticeable proportion falls under the poor 
or very poor categories. To enhance the quality of education and training provided by DIETs, 
the ones with lower rating s should focus on upgrading their infrastructure and addressing 
any shortcomings to align with the standards expected in the education sector. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
151

 
121 | P a g e  
 
 
152