198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN
THE HUNDRED EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT ON
 MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 17TH AUGUST, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 17TH AUGUST, 2007)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
AUGUST, 2007/SRAVANA, 1929 (SAKA)
 
 
CONTENTS
 
       
1.                    COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.                    PREFACE
3.                    REPORT
PART I              Recommendations/Observations either accepted by the Department or
having been satisfactorily replied to by the Department
PART II                 Recommendations/Observations on which Committee has further
commented upon
 
4.             OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE..
5.             MINUTES
6.             *ANNEXURES
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
*To be appended at printing stage.
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2006-07)
 
1.      Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
MEMBERS
 
2.
      Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.      Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.      Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5.      Shri Laxminarayan Sharma

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
6.      Smt. Brinda Karat
7.      Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
9.      Smt. Supriya Sule
10.  Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran
 
LOK SABHA
 
11.  Shri Ashok Argal
12.  Shri Basudeb Barman
13.  Shri Harishchandra Chavan
14.  Shri Harisinh Chavda
15.  Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
16.  Shri Ramswaroop Koli
17.  Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
18.  Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
19.  Smt. Archana Nayak
20.  Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
21.  Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
22.  Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
23.  Shri Chengara Surendran
24.  Dr. Thokchom Meinya
25.  Shri K. Virupakshappa
26.  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
27.  Shri Francis K. George
28.  Shri Anantkumar Hegde
29.  Shri Rahul Gandhi
30.  Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
31.  Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
 
 
 
(i)
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
          Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
(ii)
PREFACE
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development,
having been authorised by the Committee do hereby present on its behalf, this Hundred Ninety-eighth Report on Action
Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Hundred Eighty-fourth Report on "Major issues
concerning Navodaya Vidyalayas".
 
2.         The Hundred Eighty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30
th November, 2006.
Replies of the Government to the recommendations/observations contained in the Report were considered by the

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
Committee at its meeting held on the 17th July, 2007.
 
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 17th July, 2007.
NEW DELHI;
 July 17, 2007
 Asadha 26, 1929, (Saka)
      JANARDAN DWIVEDI
 Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on
Human Resource Development
                                                                           
(iii)
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
its One Hundred Eighty-fourth report on "Major Issues concerning Navodaya Vidyalayas" of the Department of School
Education & Literacy.  The Committee had presented the Hundred and Fifty-fourth Report, a detailed analysis of various
aspects concerning the functioning of Navodaya Vidyalayas, to Lok Sabha on 2 nd March and Rajya Sabha on 3 rd March,
2005.  While considering the Action Taken Note on the Report received from the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education (now Department of School Education and Literacy) the Committee noticed that further clarifications were
required on a number of important issues.  The Committee accordingly, held another series of extensive deliberations with
all concerned and presented another Report (184
th) on the subject.
2.         While going through the Action Taken Notes received from the Department in respect of the
recommendations contained in the 184 th Report, the Committee observed that while in respect of some aspects, position
had considerably improved, there still remained some problem-areas where the Department was required to be pro-active.
Present Report has been accordingly divided into two parts.  Part-I deals with Recommendations/Observations either
accepted by the Department or having been satisfactorily replied to by the Department. Part-II relates to those
recommendations/observations on which Committee has further commented upon.
(i)         Part-I              Recommendations/Observations either accepted by the Department or having been
satisfactorily replied to by the Department: 1.2, 1.6, 1.7, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10, 1.11, 1.12, 1.13, 1.14, 1.16, 1.17, 2.2, 3.1, 3.3, 4.1,
4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 7.1, 7.2
(Part I) Total – 22
(ii)        Part-II Recommendations/observations on which Committee has further commented upon: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.15,
2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 3.2, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 6, 8
(Part II)  Total – 14
PART - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENTOR HAVING BEEN
SATISFACTORILY REPLIED TO BY THE DEPARTMENT
I.          NORMS FOR OPENING OF NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
Recommendations/Observations
1.2       Committee is concerned about the oft-repeated excuse given by the Department regarding the non-functional JNVs
i.e. non-availability of temporary accommodation that is to be provided by the State Governments.  The Committee is
perturbed over the non-challant attitude of the Government in making the JNVs functional.  The Committee strongly feels
that this being a Central Scheme, the JNV Samiti and the Department of Secondary & Higher must try to see that a
sanctioned JNV becomes functional as soon as possible and it must not be left to the States and wait till they take a
decision.  It is a scheme for the benefit of their students.  States, therefore, must be persuaded/advised and facilitated to
arrange an accommodation.
Action Taken
            The Ministry and NVS are regularly pursuing the matter with the Education Secretaries/Chief Secretaries of the

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
States to make available land and temporary accommodation.
            The temporary accommodation has since been made available since the last meeting for the following JNVs, which
have started functioning: -
1.      Birbhum (West Bengal)
2.      Deogarh (Orissa)
3.      Hamirpur (UP)
4.      Ghaziabad (UP)
5.      Rohtas (Bihar)
6.      Lakhisarai (Bihar)
7.      Burhanpur (MP)
8.      Champhai (Mizoram)
Land has also been transferred in respect of following JNVs and construction of buildings has been sanctioned.
1.      Dangs (Gujarat)
2.      Anand (Gujarat)
3.      Jamtara (Jharkhand)
4.      Aizawal (Mizoram)
5.      Kolasib (Mizoram)
6.      Chimtuipui (Lawngtlai) (Mozoram)
7.      Lunglaei (Mizoram)
8.      Sarawasti (Uttar Pradesh)
9.      Ambedkar Nagar (Uttar Pradesh)
10.  Dehradun (Uttranchal)
Recommendations/Observations
1.6       Another issue connected with the scheme of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya is shifting of the Navodaya Vidyalayas
from temporary sites to permanent accommodations. One of the reasons for the delay is the slow pace of civil
constructions. The Committee found this as an area of great concern. The Committee is at a loss to see that the
construction activities are held up / delayed mainly due to petty administrative and technical reasons. These delays
sometimes run into four to five years resulting in huge time and cost over-run. The Committee hopes that he Department
and the JNV Samiti are alive to this fact. The Committee noted the procedural delay in the communication about
sanctioning of the Vidyalayas is taking in some cases several months. The Committee finds it completely unacceptable. It,
therefore, recommends that henceforth the communication regarding sanctions should be sent to all relevant offices
immediately at various levels, so that the process of preparing plans, drawings, etc. could be commenced instantly.
Action Taken
The delay in shifting of Navodaya Vidyalayas from temporary to permanent accommodation, NVS has initiated
several steps to expedite the completion of Navodaya buildings which are as follows:
-         Allotting construction work to Central / State Government undertaking rather depending upon Government
organization like CPWD / BRTF only.
-         Empanelment of more architects to expedite the process of preparation of plans and drawings.
-         Timely release of funds to Construction Agencies.
-         Regular project review meetings at regional & HQrs level.
            There has been improvement in completion of civil works and shifting of vidyalayas in permanent accommodation
as given below: -
S. No. Year Number of Vidyalayas shifted to permanent building
01. Up to 2001-02 332
02. 2002-03 7
03. 2003-04 13

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
04. 2004-05 18
05. 2005-06 18
06. 2006-07 22 (Expected)
07 2007-08 30 (Expected)
Recommendations/Observations
1.7       The Committee was informed that another reason for delay in completion of works has been lack of proper
coordination between the civil and electrical wings of the CPWD. The Committee had the occasion to interact with the
DG, CPWD who informed that they have now introduced a composite tendering system providing for both civil as well as
electrical works in the same contract, with a view to avoiding these problems. The Committee feels that though the system
of composite tendering system is a welcome development, it would still not rule out completely the possibility of delays
due to other reasons. The Committee feels that in order to see that civil works are not unduly delayed, this activity
including the clearances, etc. from different agencies involved should be completed in a fixed time schedule. The
Committee feels that help of local MP and other representatives of the people can be sought for expediting such clearances
particularly from State Governments and their agencies.
Action Taken
After the assurance given by the DG, CPWD during Parliamentary Committee Meeting, there has been
improvement in this regard. Composite tender for civil as well as electrical works are now being called by CPWD & other
construction agencies.
            Regarding projects delay due to other reasons like land disputes, forest clearance and approach road etc., all
Construction Agencies / Deputy Commissioners of the region have been directed to resolve these issues with the
cooperation of Member of Parliaments and local representatives.
Recommendations/Observations
1.8       The Committee is also of the considered opinion that the tender documents must provide for heavy penalty on the
contractors if they fail to stick to the stipulated time frame fixed for this purpose.
Action Taken
The existing penalty clause has now been modified by the CPWD. As per new clause important milestones for
completion of the projects are to be defined in the tender documents. There is a provision of deduction of 1.5% per month
of delay of tender cost as a penalty in case of non-achievement of each milestone. (Copy enclosed at Annexure-V). The
new clause also provides submission of performance guarantee equivalent to 5% value of the work before signing the
agreement. There is a provision to forfeit the performance guarantee in case of non-performance by the contractor (Copy
enclosed at Annexure-V).
Recommendations/Observations
1.9       The Committee was informed that sometimes the contractors abandon the construction due to unforeseen
developments such as price escalation of iron, cement etc. The Committee is of the view that such cases might be fewer
and far between. The Committee desires that the JNV Samiti and CPWD devise some model and calculate the expected
price rise and time frame to complete the building projects. The construction work should be entrusted to those contractors
who are dependable and have the capability to finish the work.
Action Taken
A price variation clause to compensate abnormal increase / decrease in price of steel / cement has been included in
the tender documents to avoid delay in completion of the projects (Copy enclosed at Annexure-V). All the JNV works are
being executed by Government department / undertakings. These departments have already a system of either registration
or pre-qualification of the contractors so that only financially sound and capable contractors are selected and awarded the
work.
Recommendations/Observations
1.10     The Committee also notes that a lot of time is lost in awarding the works after these are sanctioned. Further, a
change in the plan or site at the last moment also delays the process unduly. The Committee is aware that several

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
formalities are to be completed before completion / finalization of tender and awarding job to contractors is also a long
process. Yet, the Committee is of the view that it is possible to reduce time in all these to a large extent. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommends that the entire process from sanctioning the project and awarding the job to the
construction agencies should be streamlined so as to obviate possibility of any delay. Further, on-line tendering may be
tried to cut the delays drastically. There is also need to bring in transparency in the entire procedure.
Action Taken
NVS has now empanelled more architects to expedite  pre-construction activities like site survey, preparation of
drawings and tender schedule. As a result, time required from start of the projects to award of work has reduced from 11-
12 months to 6-7 months.
            All Construction Agencies have been directed to switch over to online tendering system.
Recommendations/Observations
1.11     The Committee has been informed that the Department of Secondary and Higher Education has a Construction
Coordination Committee under the Chairmanship of the Additional Secretary of the Department.  The Committee includes
the Commissioner, Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, General Manager (Constn.) in NVS and the senior Managers of the
construction companies.  This Committee meets once in six months to monitor construction of phase-A & phase-B works. 
The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Construction Coordination Committee should meet more often, but
not less than once in two months.  This, the Committee feels, would keep the monitoring officials more attentive and alert
because they will have to report every two months about the progress in construction.  Strict view must be taken in the
cases of undue and unreasonable delays.
Action Taken
            Construction works in JNVs are being executed by CPWD and Central/State undertakings.  These departments also
have their own internal projects monitoring system.  Apart from this Samiti has been conducting quarterly and half yearly
projects review meeting at the regional and Hqrs. level to monitor the progress of the projects.  Samiti has also taken
initiative to develop web based online project monitoring system with the help of National Informatics Centre (NIC).  As
such adequate monitoring system is in place, which is being further strengthened by developing web based monitoring
system.
Recommendations/Observations
1.12     The construction delays in Shillong Region was attributed to the unsettled condition in the North-East.  In fact, the
unsettled condition has also been cited as the main reason for pending civil works in other States like J&K, Bihar and
Jharkhand.  There is no denying the fact that law & order problem also sometimes causes delays in such activities in some
areas.  Surprisingly, the Committee finds that there is no obstruction to railways and other construction works being
carried out at the places like Uri in J&K.  The Committee is of the view that such areas need more quick attention in regard
to schools, etc. than rest of the regions of the country and must be ensured that the law and order aspect may not be taken
as an excuse for delays in construction.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should exercise more
caution in choosing the construction agencies for difficult regions.  Engaging local agencies for the construction work may
also be considered.  All out efforts be made with the help of State Governments to ensure that the construction work is
completed well within time.  And if it is unduly delayed, responsibility must be fixed to check any possible carelessness in
this regard.
Action Taken
Samiti has already taken steps to appoint local agencies in North East and Jammu & Kashmir region and other
difficult areas.
All the major works in the J&K region are being executed by JKPCC and JKPWD.  There has been lot of
improvement in completion of the infrastructure in J&K during last two years.  New dormitories, dining hall and
residential quarters have been completed and occupied by the JNV students and staff at Baramulla, Kupwara, Budgam,
Anantnag & Srinagar, etc.  Additional dormitories and residential quarters have also been sanctioned in the J&K region at
various JNVs, which are under full progress.
Similarly, Samiti has allotted works in North East region to local government agencies like Development of
Nagaland Authority (DAN), Meghalaya Government Construction Corporation (MGCC) & Manipur Police Housing 
Corporation (MPHC) & RITES etc. rather depending upon government department like CPWD/BRTF.  As a result during
last two years 12 JNVs have been shifted from temporary site to permanent buildings.  Also additional dormitories and

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
staff quarters have been completed in 10 JNVs.
Recommendations/Observations
1.13     The Committee also notes that the land allotted to JNV in Kargil was partially taken over by Defence and it
appears that the Department did not take up the issue with the Ministry of Defence for a long time.  Now that new site has
been identified, the Department must endeavour to complete the required formalities and consultation with district and
defence authorities as soon as possible so that construction work could begin at early date.
Action Taken
The work at JNV, Kargil has already been allotted to the construction agencies like JKPCC and Jammu & Kashmir
Public Works Department. All the drawings and design have been completed and foundation work of various buildings is
in progress.  Construction agencies have informed that working season in the Kargil is limited due to heavy snow fall
during October-March and assured that all the works shall be completed by December, 2008.  Samiti has been closely
monitoring progress of works of the JNV.
Recommendations/Observations
1.14     The Department while explaining the status of construction activities in J&K and Northeast has merely informed
the Committee that the work was in progress in these regions. The `work in progress’ as such does not give a correct status
of work. The Department must in future give the Committee specific stages of the construction so as to enable it to get a
definite view in the matter.
Action Taken
Details status of construction activities in Jammu & Kashmir and North Eastern Region is placed at Annexure-VI,
VII & VIII respectively.
Recommendations/Observations
1.16     The Committee takes note that 30 acres of land is must for opening a JNV. The Committee finds that such a large
piece of land having necessary infrastructure may not be easily available particularly in urban as well as in hilly areas. As
a result, land of this size is allotted, more often than not, in remote areas, which need further time, and more resources to
develop basic infrastructure like approach road, water, electricity, etc. The Committee was informed that land in remote
areas act as disincentive for the contractors who lose interest in these projects resulting in delay and cost over-run.
Action Taken
The Executive Committee in its meeting held on 10
th November 2006 had directed that efforts should be made to
locate the new JNVs close to District HQrs so that all basic facilities like electricity, water, safety & security, approach
roads, support services are easily available and the students do not feel isolated. Samiti has scaled down the requirement of
the land for opening a JNV from 30 to 10-15 acres in case land is allotted near District Headquarters with proper approach
road, water supply and electrical connection etc. However, Samiti would like to inform that in majority of the cases land is
offered at remote locations without any proper infrastructure like approach road, water supply, low lying area etc. by the
State Governments, which not only causes administrative difficulties in running the school but also results in high
development and construction cost.The State Governments are also persuaded to provide better connectivity and urban
feeder power supply to all Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas.
Recommendations/Observations
1.17     The Committee feels that suitable flexibility needs to be brought in the requirement of land for opening of JNVs in
urban, semi-urban and hilly areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the State and District Administration
should be sensitized for selecting sites that are suitable, easily accessible and free from encumbrances. After all, the
children of that State are going to be the beneficiaries of these Schools. The Committee at the same time also opines that
the reduced land area should not be a constraint for game and sports activities.
Action Taken
The Samiti has already considered the requirement of land for opening of Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas in urban,
semi-urban and hilly areas including that of North Eastern Region and had decided that 30 acres of land will not be
insisted upon in all the cases. However, in relaxation of the requirement of land has been reduced to 15 to 20 acres in hilly
areas as well as North Eastern Region. Samiti has also decided to agree upon the requirement of land up to 10 acres by
constructing the academic block as well as the hostel in a three-story building keeping in a view that children of that

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
district are going to be beneficiaries of these JNVs. However, the reduction of the requirement of land may not be the
constraint for game and sports activities in the Vidyalaya.
II.        INFRASTRUCTURE
Recommendations/Observations
2.2       The Committee was informed that out of total 498 functional / established Navodaya Vidyalayas, 378 are
functioning at permanent sites in permanent buildings while 120 are functioning in temporary site in temporary  
buildings.   To add to the woes, 36 JNVs out of 378 permanent Vidyalayas do not have a playfield. To this 36 JNVs
another 120 temporary JNVs may be added. Thus a total of 156 JNVs are not having playfield out of the total 498
functional / established Vidyalayas. The Committee finds this situation very disturbing. The Committee is of considered
opinion that the sports help in improving physical & psychological strength of the children and further contribute in
development of overall personality of the children. It is a means of recreation as well. Absence of playfields, therefore, put
them at disadvantage in these regards. The Committee strongly emphasizes the need for making playfield mandatory and
where it is not possible due to small area available, alternate arrangements be made with neighbouring bodies, agencies,
clubs, etc. for allowing students to make use of their facilities.
Action Taken
As on date, 539 Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNVs) are functional, out of which, 400 JNVs are functioning at
permanent site. 365 JNVs functioning at permanent site have been provided with proper playfields including 400 meter
track, football / hockey fields, basketball and volleyball courts. Similar playfields are under construction in remaining 35
JNVs functioning at permanent site. Facilities for volleyball, Kho-Kho and Badminton courts etc. are available at 139
JNVs functioning at temporary site also. Construction of Phase-A, which includes construction of playgrounds, for 109
JNVs functioning at temporary sites, is in progress. Efforts are on to provide playgrounds to all schools.
            Games and sports are made compulsory for all students in Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas. Invariably they start
morning with PT & morning physical exercises / yoga and in the evening for about an hour they are taken to games and
sports.
 
III.       FUNDING
Recommendations/Observations
3.1       The Committee notes that a huge amount of fund is being pumped into the implementation of this Scheme. The
Committee was informed that the Samiti while submitting the Tenth Five Year Plan proposal had initially projected the
total requirement of funds to the tune of Rs. 6958.03 crore. However, the Department fixed the Plan outlay to Rs. 2,000
Crores only in addition to the Grants-in-aid of Rs. 1,191.56 crores under Plan and Rs. 383.60 crores under Non-Plan for
the first three years. The Committee feels that though the fund allocation is not up to the expectations of the Samiti, it is
still sufficient enough to allow the NV Samiti to carry out its activities smoothly provided it observes fiscal discipline.
Action Taken
The position of budgetary support (Grant-in-Aid) actually provided to the Samiti and its utilization during the X
Plan period is as under: -
                 
 (Rs. in crores)
Year Grant-in-aid Actual expenditure
 Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan
2002-03 122.60 360.00 121.04 361.33
2003-04 130.00 439.56 130.23 424.44
2004-05 139.66 449.00 145.20 442.02
2005-06 150.85 571.00 157.43 572.77
2006-07 (BE) 155.15 650.00 183.90* 754.06*

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
Total 698.26 2469.56 636.71 2554.62
 
* Anticipated
NOTE: Excess expenditure incurred / anticipated over & above the approved budgetary support (Grant-in-Aid) has been
met with the permitted closing balance of previous year and the internal receipts of the year concerned.
While incurring expenditure, the Samiti has observed the extent rules / norms / instructions of the Government of
India as laid down from time to time. NVS will make all efforts to ensure fiscal discipline.
Recommendations/Observations
3.3       At the same time, the Committee is of the view that the Department may in the meantime take up the matter
strongly with the Planning Commission for enhanced Tenth Plan outlay to complete the requirements of the JNVs.
Action Taken
As regards to the observations of the Committee regarding enhancement of X Plan outlay, the Ministry had
requested for enhanced budgetary provisions at Rs.755.00 crores for the year 2006-07 to enable NVS to meet its
committed expenditure and also to achieve the physical targets fixed for X Plan Period, as against this, an amount of
Rs.653.50 has been allocated.  This has been enhanced to Rs.710.00 crores in 2007-08.
IV.       CRITERIA FOR ADMISSION IN NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
Recommendations/Observations
4.1       The Committee notes that the admission to Navodaya Vidyalayas is done on the basis of a Selection Test for
which, certain eligibility conditions have been laid down. The conditions inter alia provide that a candidate appearing for
the Selection Test must be studying in Class-V in a recognized school in that district where he / she is seeking admission.
Admission in Class-VI is given subject to the condition of passing Class-V before admission and also the candidate must
have studied and passed Class III, IV and V from recognized school / schools in the preceding three continuous academic
sessions for which the Selection Test is conducted, spending one full academic session in each class through the formal
system of education, without any repetition of class, gap and / or break in attendance.
Recommendations/Observations
4.2       The Committee notes that unscrupulous people are taking undue advantage of district criterion laid down in the
guidelines. The Committee finds that children of other districts take admission in absentia in Class V in educationally
backward districts where a JNV is situated while continuing their education in reputed schools in urban or semi-urban
areas. At the time of Selection Test, they compete against students of that district who are comparatively weaker, and thus
they have better chance to get admission meant for the rural students of that district. This peculiar aspect has remained
unnoticed and goes against the very basic idea of providing quality education to the rural students of a particular district.
The Committee is of the considered view that the condition of studying and passing Class-III, IV and V in preceding three
continuous sessions needs to be reviewed. The student aspiring for admission in a particular JNV should be asked to
produce a certificate of domicile of that particular district. This would be the most reasonable way to check the influx of
otherwise ineligible candidates.
Recommendations/Observations
4.3       The Committee wants to draw the attention of the Department towards the fact that a large number of poor farmers
and labourers are sending their children to so called `English schools’ running in their villages which are actually local,
private, small-time, non-recognized schools. Also, a good number of children are availing education in informal centres of
learning like EGS & AIE and others being run by the NGOs and supported by the Government. The Committee is not
aware whether children coming out from these non-recognized / informal centres  are eligible to get admission in their
district’s JNV. The Committee desires the Department to reconsider the concept of formal education and see that its aim to
provide quality education to meritorious poor rural students does not get defeated in the cobweb of guidelines which seems
to be a little  away  from  the  ground  reality prevailing in rural areas. The Committee strongly feels that a candidate
coming out of these informal centres or un-recognized school of the village be allowed to take the selection test once he or
she has passed Class-V.
Recommendations/Observations

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
4.4       The Committee has earlier expressed its reservation in its 154th Report on the functioning of Navodaya Vidyalayas
over the requirement of a rural candidate passing Class-III, IV and V from recognized school / schools, without any
repetition of class, gap or break in attendance. The Committee is of the opinion that such requirement deprives poor and
deserving students from appearing in the Selection Test. To this, the Committee was informed that a group of Officers is
examining this aspect. The Committee would like the Department to take suitable measures to ensure that poor,
meritorious students of rural areas are able to make into the JNVs. The Committee hopes that the Department will suitably
amend the eligibility conditions for Selection Test.
Action Taken
4.1 to 4.4         The condition of studying and passing Class-III, IV and V in preceding three continuous sessions without
any repetition of class, gap or break in attendance has been reconsidered and it had been decided to waive off this
condition from ensuing Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya Selection Test 2007.  Also the candidates passing Class-V from
NIOS & Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (non-formal education) has been allowed for appearing in the JNVST 2007.
            The recommendation to allow the students studying in non-formal system and private primary schools for
admission in JNVs in Class VI is under consideration of NVS and will be placed before the Academic Advisory
Committee and Executive Committee.
Recommendations/Observations
4.5       The Committee also desires that prominent heads of village panchayats and the President of the Zilla Parishad be
included as ex-officio members in the Vidyalaya Management Committees to ensure that interests of the poor local people
of rural areas protected.
Action Taken
In order to have responsive attitude from the parents in the day-to-day management of the Navodaya Vidyalayas,
two representatives from the parents and one member of the public who is to be nominated in consultation with the local
Member of Parliament have been made members of the Vidyalaya Management Committee. Further, Chairman of the Zila
Parishad or his nominee form the Zila Parishad and local Member of Parliament are also a Member of the Vidyalaya
Advisory Committee for every Navodaya Vidyalaya. It is expected that this representation will ensure protecting the
interest of the parents as well as local population.
VII.     PROBLEM OF DROP-OUT
Recommendations/Observations
7.1       The Committee notes that dropout is occurring in different classes of JNVs due to various reasons.  The Committee
finds the vacancies arising due to the drop-out are not being filled up before Class IX   for   the reason that the special
identity of JNVs would not be amenable to newly admitted students as they would not be able to adapt to the new
environment.  The Department has been informed that lateral entry is allowed only in Class IX, which is a stage when the
children are grown up, and special orientation programmes are conducted to bring them at par with regular students.  The
Committee does not agree to this notion of adaptability of students before Class IX.  It feels that the identity of the JNVs
should be made special in the sense that any child who joins the Vidyalaya at any stage must feel at home rather than
experiencing problem of adaptability.  Adaptability for a newcomer is a natural problem.  But the Samiti needs to devise
such teaching methods where the newcomer gets mentally and psychological settled and feels at home at the earliest.
Recommendations/Observations
7.2       Another problem against lateral entry before Class IX as explained by the Department before the Committee was
that holding an entrance test for every class every year is not a viable proposition.  The Committee is of the opinion that
the lateral entry must be allowed to fill up vacancies, if any, in all the classes and not merely in IX and XI classes to ensure
that no seat was allowed to go vacant.  It is a waste of the available resources.  The Committee is not inclined to agree with
the argument of the Department that the number of vacancies being small, it would not be viable to hold an entrance
system for every class every year.  The practice of entrance test is in vogue  in  all  schemes  of  school including private /
public school.  If entrance test could be held every year for VI, IX and XI classes other classes also can be clubbed with
them.  Furthermore, the Committee wishes to reiterate its recommendation about admitting girl students of the area in the
vacant seats.  The Committee desires that no seat be allowed to go vacant when lot of our children remains out of school.
Action Taken
7.1 & 7.2         The recommendations of the Committee have been considered by the Samiti and it has been decided to start

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
lateral entry of students against vacant posts in Class-VII also from the academic session 2007-08 to ensure that the seats
do not remain vacant and available infrastructure is properly utilized.
 
PART- II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH COMMITTEE HAS FURTHER COMMENTED UPON
I.          NORMS FOR OPENING OF NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
Recommendations/Observations
1.1       As per the decision of the government, every district is supposed to have one Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya. All the
States / UTs except, Tamil Nadu, have accepted the Scheme. Out of the remaining 582 districts of the Country, 528 have
one Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya (JNV) each. As per latest information, of the 528 JNVs set up 507 are functional and 21
are non-functional. Remaining 54 districts are yet to have these Vidyalayas.
Action Taken
The status of establishment of JNVs as on 31
st January 2007 is as under: -
i) Total number of districts *584
ii) JNVs sanctioned so far 565
iii) Number of JNVs functional 539
iv) Number of JNVs non-functional **26
v) Un-covered districts 19
* Including newly created districts Mewat (Haryana) and Tarn Taran (Punjab) & excluding 30 districts in Tamil Nadu,
which has not accepted the Scheme.
** Out of 26 non-functional JNVs, 14 JNVs have   been sanctioned during 2006-07 and are likely to become functional in
the next academic year.
The status of JNVs in the country at a glance as on 31st January 2007 is at Annexure-I.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is happy to note some progress in the sanctioning of new JNVs and making them functional during
the last year.  As on 31 st January, 2007, out of 565 JNVs sanctioned, 539 JNVs have been made functional.  Out of 26
non-functional JNVs, 14 JNVs have been sanctioned during 2006-07.  The Committee would, however, like to point out
that out of 21 non-functional JNVs existing at the time of presentation of the 184th Report in November 2006, only 9 JNVs
could be made functional till 31 st January 2007.  The Committee would like to know the reasons for such delay.   It
recommends the Department and the NVS to take urgent measures to make all the JNVs sanctioned before 2006-07,
functional during 2007 itself.  It also desires that 14 JNVs sanctioned during 2006-07 must also be made functional in the
next academic year.
 
Recommendations/Observations
1.3       The Committee is of the opinion that the Department in the first place should explore all possibilities to ensure that
the suitable temporary accommodations are arranged by the State Government well before the JNVs are sanctioned.
Normally, sanctioning of JNVs should be made after a suitable accommodation, temporary or permanent, has been made.
Action Taken
NVS has generally been insisting on temporary accommodation before sanctioning of a school. However, it is the
endeavor of Ministry of Human Resource Development and NVS to have one school in each district of the country.
Comments of the Committee

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
            The Committee would reiterate that the Department while ensuring to establish one school in each district of the
country, must insist on suitable temporary accommodation before sanctioning the schools.  Otherwise, as has been the
experience, the process of making schools functional gets delayed for a long time.
Recommendations/Observations
1.4       The Committee finds that the problem of non-functioning of a JNV is endemic in North East.  Despite best efforts
made by the Department to make them functional, it leaves lot to be desired.  The Committee feels that more sincere and
concerted efforts are needed to make the JNVs functional as soon as possible.  Looking at peculiar topography of this
region, special efforts and norms must also be considered so that the schools start functioning without wasting much time.
Action Taken
Out of 84 Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas sanctioned in the North East Region, 76 JNVs are functional and only 8
JNVs are non-functional.  Concerted efforts are being made to make these JNVs functional.
The present status of these eight non-functional JNVs is as under:-
1. Dhubri Temporary accommodation not made available.
2. Udalguri Temporary accommodation likely to be taken over soon.
3. Kolasib Matter for acquiring the temporary accommodation being taken up with District
Administration.
4. Mamit Temporary accommodation not made available
5. Aizwal The land has been transferred in the name of NVS and the construction works sanctioned. 
The construction activities are going to be started in near future.
6. Chimtuipui (Lawngtlai)
7. Lunglei
8. North Tripura Temporary accommodation not made available.
            With a view to make these Vidyalayas functional at the earliest, construction of permanent building has been
sanctioned wherever permanent site has been made available as indicated above.  The matter regarding transfer of land and
temporary accommodation is being pursued vigorously with the concerned authorities of the State Government.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that out of 84 JNVs sanctioned in the NER, 8 JNVs continue to be non-functional, mainly
due to non-availability of temporary accommodation.  The Committee observes that there is no likelihood of situation
improving in the near future.  The Committee is also not aware about the constraints being faced by the concerned State
Governments in making the required land available.  But the fact remains that there is an urgent and greater need for
setting up JNVs in this remote and backward area of the country.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
Department should pursue this matter with the concerned authorities at the highest level.
            The Committee notes that in respect of JNVs at Aizwal, Chimtuipui (Lawngtlai) and Lunglei, lands have been
transferred and the construction works sanctioned.  Construction activities are going to be started in the near future.  The
Committee feels that only constant monitoring at every level will ensure the completion of the projects at the earliest.  The
Committee would appreciate if the Department takes up this task on priority, and ensures no laxity at any level.
Recommendations/Observations
1.5       The Committee would like the Department to ensure that the districts not covered under the Scheme are covered by
the end of the Tenth Plan. As regards, Tamil Nadu not adopting the Scheme, the Committee would like this mater to be
taken up again with the State Government and place the outcome before the Committee for its information within three
months.
Action Taken
There are 19 uncovered districts (Annexure-IA) as on date out of which in following 06 Districts a JNV can not be
sanctioned due to non-availability of the rural population:

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
1. Hyderabad 2. Central Delhi
3. New Delhi 4. Mumbai
5. Mumbai Suburban 6. Kolkatta
            Efforts are being made to obtain required infrastructure in the remaining 13 uncovered districts so that schools cans
be sanctioned there.
The Samiti has taken up the matter for establishment of JNVs in the State of Tamil Nadu. The Commissioner, NVS
has written a letter to the Secretary (Education), Govt. of Tamil Nadu on 22 nd June 2006. Another D. O. letter was written
to the Chief Minister by Hon’ble HRM on 21 st July 2006 in this regard. Secretary( SE & L) has also written to the Chief
Secretary Government of Tamil Nadu  on 6.12.2006 for accepting the NVS Scheme. (Annex. II to IV).
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that the 19 uncovered districts include 6 districts located in Andhra Pradesh, Delhi,
Maharashtra and West Bengal having no rural population.  JNVs in such districts, therefore, cannot be sanctioned.  The
Committee has been informed that in the remaining 13 districts, the JNVs were not being sanctioned due to lack of
required infrastructure.  The Committee recommends that every conceivable effort needs to be made to arrange for the
required infrastructure in these 13 districts to sanction JNVs and making them fully functional.  This task must be
undertaken on an urgent basis.
Recommendations/Observations
1.15     The Committee finds that the Department is silent about the efforts made by it for taking up the fund requirements
with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendations suggesting the Department
to take up the issue of funds with the Ministry of Finance at the earliest to expedite the construction works. At the same
time, the Committee would expect NV Samiti to bring in such structural and functional changes in it as to impart
efficiency and better work culture.
Action Taken
The budget allocation under Plan during 2006-07 was Rs 653.50 crores against Rs. 571.00 crores for 2005-06. 
There is adequate provision to meet the requirement of construction. Efforts are being made to expedite the construction
work and to make structural and functional changes in order to impart efficiency and better work culture.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee hopes that the NVS must have taken concrete steps to imbue efficiency in its work culture.  The
Committee would like to get a note entailing steps taken to bring structural and functional changes in the working of the
NVS.
II.        INFRASTRUCTURE
Recommendations/Observations
2.3       The Committee notes that the state of infrastructure in Navodaya Vidyalaya leaves lot to be desired. In its visit to
some JNVs, the Committee noticed that many Navodaya buildings were in bad shape with leaking ceilings, damp rooms,
plaster peeling off, unclean water tanks and the likes. The Committee regrets to note poor quality of construction upkeep
and maintenance of Navodaya Vidyalaya buildings, lack of proper cleanliness in toilets, hygiene in kitchen including the
hostels.
Recommendations/Observations
2.4       The Department conceded the poor maintenance of school buildings, despite the fact that certain amount is made
available to the every Vidyalaya for this purpose every year. The Department, however, argued that this amount was not
sufficient particularly in those cases where the requirement was high and in that situation a case is made out for special
maintenance grant, and to the extent possible, it is made available.
Action Taken
2.3 &2.4          CBRI, Roorkee, was appointed as the nodal agency for preparation of building designs and specifications at
the starting of the Navodaya Scheme during 1985. In order to economize the construction cost, double tier system in the

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
dormitories, moderate specifications for toilets, water proofing, electrical works and finishing works were adopted.
Subsequently, in 1995 building specifications were reviewed and upgraded like single tier accommodation in dormitories,
higher toilets and water proofing specifications and permanent finishes on walls etc.
            The JNVs constructed prior 1995 with moderate specifications need special repair and maintenance like
replacement of waterproofing, renovation of toilets and providing permanent finishes on wall etc. The special repair and
maintenance is also needed in some JNVs due to poor quality construction by some agencies. These agencies have already
been debarred by the Samiti for allotting works in future.
            Samiti has taken several steps to improve the conditions of CBRI pattern JNVs in a phased manner.
-           Special repair works like renovation of toilet & replacement of waterproofing etc. taken up in about 54 JNVs
during 2006-07. The details of JNVs are enclosed as per Annexure-IX.
-           Construction of additional dormitories to provide single tier accommodation to senior students i.e. Class-IX to XII
in all CBRI pattern schools.
-           Annual Maintenance budget enhanced from existing 3 to 4.5 lakhs.
-           Principals are encouraged to take up day to day maintenance at the Vidyalaya level by delegating more financial
powers to them rather depending upon Government agencies.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee has been informed that JNVs constructed prior to 1995 with moderate specifications need special
repair and maintenance like replacement of waterproofing, renovation of toilets and providing permanent finishes on walls
etc.  Special repair and maintenance is also needed in some JNVs due to poor quality construction by some agencies.  The
Committee is happy to note that special repair works have been undertaken during 2006-07 for 54 JNVs spread in different
States.  Increase in the annual maintenance budget and delegation of additional financial powers to the Principals are the
steps taken in the right direction, although somewhat delayed.  The Committee would, however, like to impress upon the
Department to closely monitor the repair works of all the JNVs so as to ensure their completion in time bound manner,
preferably before the beginning of the next academic year.                                                                                
Recommendations/Observations
2.5       The Committee is of the view that the need for special maintenance grants arises either because of poor
construction quality or extremely lackadaisical attitude of those looking after the maintenance work. It speaks of near
absence of monitoring mechanism for this purpose in the Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti. The performance of Construction
Wing headed by a General Manager, it appears, was not able to deliver the good. The Committee finds it difficult to
believe that the Executive Engineers at the Regional Offices were regularly inspecting the Navodaya Vidyalayas to see
that the buildings   etc   were properly maintained whereas it was mandatory for them to inspect at least four Navodaya
Vidyalaya buiuldings of the region each month. The Committee deplores that the concerned authorities were not
performing their assigned duty diligently by making regular inspection of these activities in each Vidyalaya that should be
monitored regularly by the NV Samiti every two months
Action Taken
-           Principals  are encouraged to take up day to day maintenance at the Vidyalaya level by delegating more financial
powers to them rather depending upon Government agencies.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee does not dispute the fact that the Principals should be encouraged to take up day-to-day
maintenance at the Vidyalaya level by virtue of being delegated more financial powers.  The Committee would, however,
like to point out that the Department has not responded to its recommendation about the working of the Construction Wing
and its Engineers at the Regional Offices.   They are also expected to carry out their assigned duties earnestly.
III.       FUNDING
Recommendations/Observations
3.2       The Committee is concerned to note that NV Samiti in several cases has failed in completing its targets well within
time due to lack of proper planning and effective monitoring. The time and cost-over-run of projects ultimately increase
the final cost substantially. The Committee while comparing the achievements of Kendriya Vidyalayas and Jawahar
Navodaya Vidyalayas finds that Kendriya Vidyalayas have been more successful in delivering better results with lesser

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
budget. Looked from cost-benefit point, KVs, no doubt, have much more wide coverage with quality education
comparable to many good public schools in the country. The performance, management and amount of funds spent for
JNVs every year, raise a valid question mark about this Scheme. The principle behind it may be noble and highly
desirable, its performance so far, however, has not been what was desired. The Committee would like to have the response
of the Department in this regard.
Action Taken
Navodaya Vidyalayas are fully residential institutions providing free barding and lodging facilities and other
students facilities like textbooks, uniforms etc., to all students. KVS being day schools do not extend such facilities.
Moreover, Navodaya Vidyalaya was set up in 1986 and a number of JNVs are yet under construction. Presently about 45%
of the total plan allocation is spent on construction of JNVs buildings. Therefore, the budget allocation provided to NVS is
more than KVS.
            The performance of NVS during X Plan period may be evaluated on the basis of average pass percentage of NVS
students with that of other school systems of All India Secondary School and Senior Secondary School Examinations as
well as achievements of X Plan physical targets, as per details give below: -
(i) Comparison of pass percentage of NVS and other school students during the first four years of X Plan: -
Year Class-X
 NVS KVS CBSE Independent
2003 88.50 84.64 68.02 83.39
2004 91.43 90.35 72.22 84.83
2005 90.82 89.62 74.60 85.87
2006 91.13 90.63 77.16 85.94
 
Year Class-XII
 NVS KVS CBSE Independent
2003 85.26 88.57 73.59 81.07
2004 87.68 92.62 76.00 80.46
2005 87.08 92.47 77.80 81.28
2006 90.24 92.89 79.55 82.35
 
(ii) Details regarding achievements of physical targets of X Plan are appended at Annexure-X.
            The target & achievements during X Plan regarding sanction and completion of Vidyalayas are given at Annexure-
XI.
            There has been some shortfall in completion of construction targets which is mainly due to delay in transfer of
lands by State Governments, paucity of funds and slow progress in Northeast, Jammu & Kashmir & other regions by
Construction Agencies. The  Samiti has been making all out efforts to cover this shortfall during the ensuing XI Plan. It is
expected that all the JNVs would be shifted to permanent buildings during XI Plan subject to adequate allocation of funds.
            Samiti has initiated several measures to complete the projects without any time and cost over run, such as:
-           Allotment of works to Central / State Government undertakings rather depending upon Government department
only.

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
-           Empanelment of more architects to expedite the process of preparation of plan and drawings.
-           Timely release of funds to Construction Agencies.
-           Regular project review meeting at regional and HQrs. level.
-           Development of web based project-monitoring system with the help of NIC.
-           Follow up with the State Governments for early transfer of lands.
The budget requirement for construction of JNV and KVS can not be compared since Navodaya Vidyalaya being
residential schools provided with additional facilities like hostel, kitchen & dining hall, staff quarters etc., while KVS
being day schools such facilities are not needed.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee appreciates the pass percentage of the JNV students, but it is still of the opinion that the
Department and the Samiti could have been more prudent in achieving the physical targets.  The Committee strongly feels
that the reasons cited for the shortfall in targets are not very sound.  These could have been easily overcome.  In fact, the
recent initiatives, as seen in the ATN, taken by the Department and the Samiti have improved the situation.  It recommends
the Department and the Samiti to be proactive to the emerging situation and ensure that the objectives behind running
JNVs are achieved in letter and spirit.
V.        HOSTEL FACILITY
Recommendations/Observations
5.1       Navodaya Vidyalayas being residential schools need to have proper hostel facilities for their students. 
Committee’s attention has been particularly drawn by acute shortage of required staff for efficient running of Navodaya
Vidyalaya hostels.  Committee had accordingly made detailed observations and recommendations in this regard.  The
Committee is, however, disappointed by the follow-up action indicated by the Department.  One striking feature noticed
by the Committee was the acute shortage of Matrons for the Hostels.  One cannot deny the fact that Navodaya Vidyalayas
whether operating from temporary site or permanent site continue to be residential schools and need to have the required
manpower.  Committee’s pointed observation about there being only 36 posts of Matrons filled up against 339 sanctioned
posts has evoked the response that the directions have been noted for compliance. The Committee fails to understand
whether action if any is contemplated by the NVS / Department.  The Committee would like to reiterate that entrusting the
job of supervision of hostels to teachers can be considered only a stopgap arrangement.  Matrons specifically entrusted
with the supervision of hostel facilities to the enrolled students need to be there.  One must not forget that students enrolled
in Navodaya Vidyalayas include both girls and boys coming from different backgrounds and being in formative year of
their lives need to be handled in a professional and efficient manner, which requires 24 hour supervision.  The Committee
had also drawn the attention of the Department towards big gap between the sanctioned and in position status of other
hostel functionaries like Catering Assistant, cook, and storekeeper.  The Committee has been given to understand that
instructions have been issued to all Regional Offices to fill up vacant posts of non-teaching staff.  The Committee strongly
feels that a review of status of manpower available for the hostels of Navodaya Vidyalayas is required to be made on an
urgent basis and make the hostels functional in the real sense by providing the required staff.
Action Taken
It has been decided to provide one post of Matron for looking after girls students in all those Jawahar Navodaya
Vidyalayas where the strength of the girls students exceeds 100. Procedure for appointment of Matron has been simplified
and henceforth the appointment will be made at the school level. To reduce the delay in selection process, the Principal has
already been authorized to renew the contract of the Matron in case her services and performance are found satisfactory.
As on date, out of 366 sanctioned posts of Matron 208 have been filled. Specific directions have also been issued to all the
Regional Offices and Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas to fill up the vacant posts of non-teaching staff by the end of June
2007.
            The status of manpower available for hostels will be reviewed by NVS.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is happy to note that out of 366 sanctioned posts of Matron, 208 have been filled.  This can be
considered as a good achievement, keeping in view earlier 36 filled up posts of Matron.   The Committee would, however,
like to point out that there still remains a significant gap between the sanctioned (366) and filled up (208) posts of Matron. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all out efforts should be made to get all the sanctioned posts filled up

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
in a time bound manner.  The Committee is not aware about the outcome of the directions issued to all the Regional
Offices and JNVs for filling up the vacant posts of non-teaching staff by the end of June, 2007.   The Committee would
appreciate if a status note in this regard is submitted to it at the earliest.
Recommendations/Observations
5.2       The Committee had also emphasized the need for ensuring safety and security of students of Navodaya Vidyalayas.
However, the feedback received from the Ministry clearly indicates that all the Navodaya Vidyalayas cannot be considered
secure.  Navodaya Vidyalayas not having compound walls are yet to be identified.  Same is the position with regard to
light arrangements. The Committee takes a serious view of lack of security for the Vidyalayas.  Committee is of the firm
view that security aspect needs to be given priority especially in view of location of Navodaya Vidyalayas.  Boundary
walls and lighting arrangements being the minimum requirements needs to be provided to each and every Navodaya
Vidyalayas.  It would be appropriate if initiative is taken by the NVS for strengthening the same.  The Committee would
like to have a status note in this regard.
Action Taken
Compound wall / fencing have been provided in all JNVs except three JNVs at Surat, Chandrapur and Garhchiroli.
In these three JNVs compound wall could not be constructed due to land dispute (Annexure-XII & XIII).
            As per present policy for safety and security of students, compound wall of 2 mtr height (1.2 mtr masonry wall and
0.8 mtr barbed wire fencing) is being provided in all JNVs. However, in past i.e. till 1999 due to paucity of the funds, half
of the campus was provided with brick wall and remaining half with barbed wire fencing. The barbed wire fencing now is
in worn-out conditions at various locations. Samiti has taken steps to replace worn out barbed wire fencing with masonry
walls in a phased manner. Details status of boundary walls is placed at Annexure-XIV. On an average two security staff is
also posted in each vidyalaya.
            In all JNVs functioning at permanent site, electrical connections from the nearby rural / urban feeder have been
provided. However, majority of JNVs are connected with rural feeder wherever 10 to 12 hours load shedding is very
common. Samiti has been making efforts to connect all the Vidyalayas from the urban feeder to improve the lighting
arrangements in the JNVs.
            In all JNVs, 15 to 25 KVA DG Sets have been provided to supply electricity in case of load shedding.
            Samiti has been providing 40 to 50 streetlights in JNV complexes. All the JNVs, except 10, shifted in permanent
buildings have been provided with the streetlights. The streetlight works in remaining 10 JNVs is under progress. Detailed
status is placed at Annexure-XV.
            With a view to ensure safety and security of students, the Samiti has also issued detailed instructions and
guidelines, which have been widely circulated. In addition, the Samiti has prepared the following action plan to sensitize
the students and the staff with regard to safety and security aspects in the Vidyalaya.
i)
        All ROs will prepare detailed case studies of all death cases that have taken place in the region during last three years
giving detailed facts, factors responsible for such incident, negligence, if any on the part of administration,
contributory negligence on the part of student / parents and other relevant factors. These cases studies will be
compiled and circulated to all Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas and NLIs for further discussions and creating awareness
at all levels.
ii)
       Each RO will prepare a short video film highlighting the school specific safety hazards and potential threats to safety
of the children and the steps that may be taken to prevent accidents.
iii)     Entire staff including non-teaching staff should be taken into confidence with regard to school specific safety issues
through staff meetings, regular interactions and informal gathering of information.
iv)     House system should be strengthened to use it for understanding and significant behaviour changes or deviations,
conduct, health and adolescent related problems of the students. The Principals should regularly interact with
housemasters and house captains in this regard.
v)      Value education in Navodaya Vidyalayas should be institutionalized.
All existing instructions with regard to safety and security of students issued by the Samiti should be consolidated.
These should also be reviewed to identify the areas, which require maximum monitoring for safety and security of
children, and should be reiterated.
Comments of the Committee

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
            The Committee appreciates the various initiatives taken by the NVS for strengthening the security of all the JNVs
covering every conceivable aspect.  The Committee hopes that efforts being made by the Samiti for connecting all the
JNVs with urban feeders so as to ensure undisturbed supply of electricity would also prove to be successful.  The
Committee also takes note of detailed instructions/guidelines issued by the Samiti for sensitizing staff and students with
regard to safety and security of JNVs.  The Committee hopes that an effective monitoring mechanism will do the needful.
Recommendations/Observations
5.3       The Committee would also like to point out that the existing medical facilities, i.e. services of a staff nurse and a
part-time doctor in each Vidyalaya cannot be considered adequate for a residential school having an average strength of
550-600 students.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that an assessment of existing health facilities for Navodaya
Vidyalayas may be made and action for strengthening the same may be taken.
Action Taken
At present one female Staff Nurse is provided in all Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas. In those JNVs where male
Staff Nurse has already been appointed, an additional post of female Staff Nurse is being provided. In addition, one Doctor
from nearby PHC / Government Hospital visits the Vidyalaya regularly to attend to the medical problems of the students.
Samiti is providing adequate financial assistance for medical facilities to the students. The present arrangements are
considered adequate.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is not inclined to consider the existing medical facilities at JNVs as adequate.  The Committee
finds the provision of only one female staff nurse for every Vidyalaya inadequate.  It feels that atleast two staff nurse, one
male and another female, be provided in every Vidyalaya.  The Committee has been given to understand that one Doctor
from the nearby PHC/Government Hospital visits the Vidyalaya regularly to attend to the medical problems of students. 
The Committee is not aware whether any health records are being maintained for individual students.  If not, the
Committee recommends that such records be properly maintained. 
VI.       PENSIONARY BENEFITS TO NVS EMPLOYEES
Recommendations/Observations
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 154
th Report for provision of pensionary benefits to the
NVS employees on the same level as being given to the KVS employees.  The Committee strongly feels that NVS
employees need to be governed by similar service conditions including pensionary benefits as applicable to KVS
employees.  The Committee fails to understand the rationale for adoption of a discriminatory approach by the Government
towards an autonomous body having, broadly speaking, the same mandate as the other.  The Committee is not convinced
by the contention of the Department that an organization having Contributory Provident Fund Scheme should continue to
be governed by that scheme as the new Pension Scheme was only applicable to the organizations which earlier had GPF-
cum-Pension Scheme prior to 1-1-02.  The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department towards similar
recommendation made by the Expert Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Y.N. Chaturvedi in June 2001
to review the Management structure and operating mechanism of NVS.  The Committee would like to emphasize that the
Department should approach the Ministry of Finance once again in this regard.
Action Taken
The introduction of pension scheme was earlier taken up in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, but could not
be agreed to due to resource crunch and the efforts of the Government to maintain the budgetary deficit within the desired
limit.  The matter is again under consideration of this Ministry.
Comments of the Committee
            Committee has been informed that the matter of provision of pensionary benefits to NVS employees is again under
the consideration of the Ministry.  The Committee would like the Department to expedite and positively introduce the
pensionary benefits for the NVS employees.
VIII.    SURVEY OF JNVs
Recommendations/Observations
The Committee in its 154
th Report had emphasized the need for conducting a survey of all the JNVs in the country
in order to make an overall assessment about their functioning so as to take corrective action for removal of existing

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
shortcomings.  The Committee would like to point out that constant monitoring and spot inspection being done by the
Samiti has not proved to be very effective.  Problem areas in all the aspects of running of Navodaya Vidyalayas, be its
infrastructure, staff strength, their service conditions, hostel facilities, liasioning with the State authorities, funding etc.
have been noticed by the Committee.  The Committee is of the firm view that a one-time exercise of assessment of an
education system functioning for more than two decades is bound to identity specific problem areas on an All India basis
for which remedial measures can be easily initiated.
Action Taken
A Committee under Shri Y. N. Chaturvedi, former Secretary to Government of India had evaluated the NVS
Scheme in the years 2001-2002. The suggestion for a survey will be considered.
 Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is not aware about the mandate and area of work assigned to the Chaturvedi Committee.  It is also
not known as to what follow-up action was initiated on the report given by the Chaturvedi Committee.  The Committee
would also like to point out that evaluation and survey cannot be equated.  The Committee would reiterate that a detailed
survey of all the JNVs will bring out the problem areas requiring immediate attention.
 
*****
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION AT A GLANCE
 
I.
                   NORMS FOR OPENING OF NAVODAYA VIDYALAYAS
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is happy to note some progress in the sanctioning of new JNVs and making them functional
during the last year.  As on 31
st January, 2007, out of 565 JNVs sanctioned, 539 JNVs have been made functional.  Out of
26 non-functional JNVs, 14 JNVs have been sanctioned during 2006-07.  The Committee would, however, like to point
out that out of 21 non-functional JNVs  existing at the time of presentation of the 184 th Report in November 2006, only 9
JNVs could be made functional till 31st January 2007.  The Committee would like to know the reasons for such delay.   It
recommends the Department and the NVS to take urgent measures to make all the JNVs sanctioned before 2006-07,
functional during 2007 itself.  It also desires that 14 JNVs sanctioned during 2006-07 must also be made functional in the
next academic year.                                                      (Para 1.1)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee would reiterate that the Department while ensuring to establish one school in each district of the
country, must insist on suitable temporary accommodation before sanctioning the schools.  Otherwise, as has been the
experience, the process of making schools functional gets delayed for a long time.
   (Para 1.3)
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee notes that out of 84 JNVs sanctioned in the NER, 8 JNVs continue to be non-functional, mainly
due to non-availability of temporary accommodation.  The Committee observes that there is no likelihood of situation
improving in the near future.  The Committee is also not aware about the constraints being faced by the concerned State
Governments in making the required land available.  But the fact remains that there is an urgent and greater need for
setting up JNVs in this remote and backward area of the country.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
Department should pursue this matter with the concerned authorities at the highest level.
            The Committee notes that in respect of JNVs at Aizwal, Chimtuipui (Lawngtlai) and Lunglei, lands have been
transferred and the construction works sanctioned.  Construction activities are going to be started in the near future.  The
Committee feels that only constant monitoring at every level will ensure the completion of the projects at the earliest.  The
Committee would appreciate if the Department takes up this task on priority, and ensures no laxity at any level.
                                                                                                            (Para 1.4)
 
 

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee notes that the 19 uncovered districts include 6 districts located in Andhra Pradesh, Delhi,
Maharashtra and West Bengal having no rural population.  JNVs in such districts, therefore, cannot be sanctioned.  The
Committee has been informed that in the remaining 13 districts, the JNVs were not being sanctioned due to lack of
required infrastructure.  The Committee recommends that every conceivable effort needs to be made to arrange for the
required infrastructure in these 13 districts to sanction JNVs and making them fully functional.  This task must be
undertaken on an urgent basis.                                                          (Para 1.5)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee hopes that the NVS must have taken concrete steps to imbue efficiency in its work culture.  The
Committee would like to get a note entailing steps taken to bring structural and functional changes in the working of the
NVS.                                                                                                                                       (Para 1.15)
II.
                 INFRASTRUCTURE
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee has been informed that JNVs constructed prior to 1995 with moderate specifications need special
repair and maintenance like replacement of waterproofing, renovation of toilets and providing permanent finishes on walls
etc.  Special repair and maintenance is also needed in some JNVs due to poor quality construction by some agencies.  The
Committee is happy to note that special repair works have been undertaken during 2006-07 for 54 JNVs spread in different
States.  Increase in the annual maintenance budget and delegation of additional financial powers to the Principals are the
steps taken in the right direction, although somewhat delayed.  The Committee would, however, like to impress upon the
Department to closely monitor the repair works of all the JNVs so as to ensure their completion in time bound manner,
preferably before the beginning of the next academic year.                                                                                         (Paras
2.3 &2.4)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee does not dispute the fact that the Principals should be encouraged to take up day-to-day
maintenance at the Vidyalaya level by virtue of being delegated more financial powers.  The Committee would, however,
like to point out that the Department has not responded to its recommendation about the working of the Construction Wing
and its Engineers at the Regional Offices.   They are also expected to carry out their assigned duties earnestly.          
                   (Para 2.5)
 
 
 
 
III.       FUNDING
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the pass percentage of the JNV students, but it is still of the opinion that the Department and
the Samiti could have been more prudent in achieving the physical targets.  The Committee strongly feels that the reasons
cited for the shortfall in targets are not very sound.  These could have been easily overcome.  In fact, the recent initiatives,
as seen in the ATN, taken by the Department and the Samiti have improved the situation.  It recommends the Department
and the Samiti to be proactive to the emerging situation and ensure that the objectives behind running JNVs are achieved
in letter and spirit. 
    (Para 3.2)
 
V.
                 HOSTEL FACILITY
 
Comments of the Committee
 

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
The Committee is happy to note that out of 366 sanctioned posts of Matron, 208 have been filled.  This can be
considered as a good achievement, keeping in view earlier 36 filled up posts of Matron.   The Committee would, however,
like to point out that there still remains a significant gap between the sanctioned (366) and filled up (208) posts of Matron. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that all out efforts should be made to get all the sanctioned posts filled up
in a time bound manner.  The Committee is not aware about the outcome of the directions issued to all the Regional
Offices and JNVs for filling up the vacant posts of non-teaching staff by the end of June, 2007.   The Committee would
appreciate if a status note in this regard is submitted to it at the earliest.                                                     (Para 5.1)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee appreciates the various initiatives taken by the NVS for strengthening the security of all the JNVs
covering every conceivable aspect.  The Committee hopes that efforts being made by the Samiti for connecting all the
JNVs with urban feeders so as to ensure undisturbed supply of electricity would also prove to be successful.  The
Committee also takes note of detailed instructions/guidelines issued by the Samiti for sensitizing staff and students with
regard to safety and security of JNVs.  The Committee hopes that an effective monitoring mechanism will do the
needful.                                                  (Para 5.2)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee is not inclined to consider the existing medical facilities at JNVs as adequate.  The Committee
finds the provision of only one female staff nurse for every Vidyalaya inadequate.  It feels that atleast two staff nurse, one
male and another female, be provided in every Vidyalaya.  The Committee has been given to understand that one Doctor
from the nearby PHC/Government Hospital visits the Vidyalaya regularly to attend to the medical problems of students. 
The Committee is not aware whether any health records are being maintained for individual students.  If not, the
Committee recommends that such records be properly
maintained.                                                                                                      (Para 5.3)
 
VI.       PENSIONARY BENEFITS TO NVS EMPLOYEES
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            Committee has been informed that the matter of provision of pensionary benefits to NVS employees is again under
the consideration of the Ministry.  The Committee would like the Department to expedite and positively introduce the
pensionary benefits for the NVS employees.                                               (Para 6.1 )
 
VIII.     SURVEY OF JNVs
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is not aware about the mandate and area of work assigned to the Chaturvedi Committee.  It is also
not known as to what follow-up action was initiated on the report given by the Chaturvedi Committee.  The Committee
would also like to point out that evaluation and survey cannot be equated.  The Committee would reiterate that a detailed
survey of all the JNVs will bring out the problem areas requiring immediate attention.                                                          
(Para 8.1 )
 
 
*****
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
XIX
NINETEETH MEETING
               

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 17 th July, 2007 in Committee
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Janardan Dwivedi              ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5. Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6. Smt. Brinda Karat
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
8. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
9. Smt. Supriya Sule
 
LOK SABHA
 
10. Shri Ashok Argal
11. Shri Basudeb Barman
12. Shri Harishchandra Chavan
13. Shri Harisinh Chavda
14. Shri Ramswaroop Koli
15. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
16. Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
17. Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
18. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
19. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
20. Shri K. Virupakshappa
21. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
22. Shri Francis K. George
23. Shri Anantkumar Hegde
24. Shri Rahul Gandhi
25. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
26. Shri Abu Hasem Khan Chowdhury
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Deputy Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Smt. Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
 
2.
                  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. He informed the Members that the one
year term of the Committee is coming to an end on the 4 th August 2007.  He thanked the Members for their contribution
and cooperation for the successful functioning of the Committee.   The Members also thanked the Chairman of this
Committee for conducting the proceedings of the Committee effectively and smoothly.   The Committee also thanked the
officials of the Secretariat for assisting the Committee aptly and promptly and also for their efforts in preparing
comprehensive/detailed draft Reports.

198 th Report on Committe of HRD
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/198threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:42:42]
 
3.                  The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following draft reports: (i) *** (ii) Action Taken Report
on the 184 th Report of the Committee on Major Issues concerning Navodaya Vidyalayas; and (iii) *** The Committee
discussed and adopted the reports one-by–one with certain modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to
fix a suitable date to present/lay the Reports and also nominate members from both the Houses to present/lay the reports.
 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m.
NEW DELHI
          17th July, 2007      
               VIMAL KUMAR
                        DEPUTY DIRECTOR
 
_______________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter