    
 
1 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021 /Sravana, 1943, (Saka)  
Report No 
330 
THREE HUNDRED AND         REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken Note on 311th Report of the Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on HRD on the Subject Khelo India Scheme 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on……......., 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on …......., 2020) 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH   REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred and 
Twenty Third Report on Demands for Grants 2021-22 of the Department 
of School Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 6th August 2021) 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH  REPORT 
ON 
 
Action Taken  by the  Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred and Twenty Third 
Report on Demands for Grants 2021-22 of the Department of School 
Education and Literacy, Ministry of Education 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th August, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on 6th August 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2021 /Sravana, 1943, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 CONTENTS  
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (iii) 
3. ABBREVIATIONS  
4. REPORT -1 
 CHAPTER-I OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
2-14 
 CHAPTER-II OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
15-18 
 CHAPTER-III OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
19-25 
 CHAPTER-IV OBSERVATION/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
26-33 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS- AT A GLANCE 34-38 
6. MINUTES 
 
39-41 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH & SPORTS 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th   September, 2020) 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6. ** Vacant 
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
10. Shri G.K. Vasan 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. * Shri Rajveer Singh (Raju Bhaiya) 
17. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21 Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30. Shri S. Venkatesan 
31. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
____________________________ 
* Nominated  w.e.f.  30.12.2020. 
** Vacant  w.e.f. 7.7.2021 
(i) 
SECRETARIAT 

 Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri K. Sudhakaran, Director 
Ms. Chitra G., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Sh. K. Sudhir Kumar (Deputy Director) 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer (in-situ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)  

 
Introduction 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-Related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee o n 
Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports, having been authorised by the Committee 
to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred and  Thirtieth 
Eighth Report of the Committee on the Action Taken b y the Government on t he 
Observations/Recommendations contained in t he Three Hundred and Twenty Third Report 
on Demands for Grants 2021 -22 of the Department of School Education and Literacy, 
Ministry of Education .  The Action Taken Notes were  received from the Department of 
School Education and Literacy on 7th  July, 2021. 
2. Three Hundred and Twenty Third  Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee o n Education, Women, Children, Youth a nd Sports  was presented to 
Rajya Sabha on  9th March, 2021  and Replies of the Government to the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report were considered by the Committee 
at its meeting held on the  5th August, 2021. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting 
held on 5.8.2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
NEW DELHI                                                                                    
5th August, 2021 
Saravana/ 1943 (Saka)                                                               
 
Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary 
              Standing Committee on   Education, Women, 
Children, Youth and Sports 

    
 
1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports deals with the Action Taken by the 
Department of School Education and Literacy on the Recommendations contained in its 
323rd  Report on Demands For Grants 2021-22 of the Department of School Education and 
Literacy, Ministry of Education  which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th March, 
2021 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th March, 2021. 
2. The Action Taken Replies in respect of Recommendations contained in the 323rd   
Report were received from the Department of Scholl Education and Literacy on  2nd July, 
2021. These have been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I :  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
  Paras -2.10, 2.11, 3.3, 3.22, 3.28, 3.34, 3.38, 3.46, 3.54, 3.61 
  TOTAL- 10 
Chapter II : Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's replies: 
 
  Paras – 2.16, 3.27, 3.47, 3.56 
  TOTAL- 4 
Chapter III : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
 
  Paras- 1.3, 2.5 & 2.6, 3.2, 4.2, 5.4 
  TOTAL- 5 
Chapter IV : Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
 
  Paras- 1.7, 2.4, 3.3, 4.3 
  TOTAL- 4 
3.  The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those 
Observations/Recommendations which has been categorised as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished at the earliest 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER I 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Overall Assessment of the Demands For Grants of the Department 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee appreciates the increased Budgetary Allocation to Padhna Likhna 
Abhiyan Scheme for the FY 2021-22 and recommends that the Department devise a definite 
implementation plan to cover 1crore non literates under the Foundational Literacy and 
Numeracy component in both offline and online mode by the end of the Financial Year 
[Para 2.10] 
Action Taken 
1.1 Padhna Likhna Abhiyan (PLA) scheme was approved for implementation during FY 
2020-21 with a financial outlay of ₹.142.61 crore including Central share of ₹.95.25 crore 
and State share of Rs. 47.36 crore. The main objective of PLA scheme is to impart 
Functional Literacy and Numeracy to ₹ 57 lakhs adult illiterates in the country in the age 
group of 15 years and above. The ongoing PLA scheme of Adult Education is not aligned 
with the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020. Therefore, a new scheme of Adult 
Education has been designed and developed with the nomenclature “New India Literacy 
Programme” (NILP) for the next five years i.e. FYs 2021-2026 by aligning with the 
recommendations of NEP 2020 and also in consonance with the Budget Speech 2021-22 
which states “to enable increased access of resources, online modules covering the entire 
gamut of adult education will be introduced.” 
 
1.2 An EFC note on new scheme of Adult Education “New India Literacy Programme” 
was submitted to Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance to consider the scheme for the financial years 2021-22 to 2025-26 with 
a financial outlay of ₹.3141.03 crore which includes Central share of ₹.2084.72 crore and 
State share of ₹.1056.31 crore respectively with physical target of ₹ 13 crore non-literates 
under Foundational Literacy and Numeracy through online and offline mode. 
 

3 
 
1.3 The EFC recommended NILP for FYs 2021-22 to 2025-26 in its meeting held on 
25.3.2021 with an amount of Central share of Rs.700 crore and State share of ₹.337.90 crore 
for 5 years. Hence, the per year distribution on allocation of NILP with regard to the Central 
share is quite less as compared to the BE 2021-22 of Rs.250 crore allocated  to PLA for one 
year only, i.e. FY 2021-22. 
 
 
1.4 As per recommendations of EFC and approved budget of the scheme Adult 
Education Bureau, Department of School Education and Literacy may cover 1.00 crore non 
literates under the Foundational Literacy and Numeracy component in both offline and 
online mode by the end of the financial year @ ₹ 50 lakh through offline and @ ₹ 50 lakh 
through online mode by Online Teaching, Learning and Assessment System (OTLAS) 
which will be developed in collaboration with NIC, NIOS and NCERT. For this activity, a 
budget of ₹. 165.00 crore (Central share ₹107.25 and State share ₹ 57.75 respectively) has 
been recommended by EFC for FY 2021-22. 
 
 
1.5 NCERT has developed primers and learning outcomes for adult education. These 
documents integrate the perspectives of the NEP, 2020. These have been shared with the 
states/UTs. NCERT has also set up an Adult Education Cell, which will look after the 
preparation of National Curriculum Framework for Adult Education and also development 
of resource material (offline and online)in this regard with the capacity building of 
concerned stakeholders for education of non-literate adults.  
 
Recommendation 
2. The funds for the Operation Digital Blackboard has been reduced from ₹ 25.00 
Crore in BE 2020-21 to ₹ 1.00 Crore in RE 2020-21 and no allocations have been made for 
it in BE 2021-22. The Committee notes that in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic there is 
an increased requirement of children through digital mode so that in the long run digital 
online education becomes an alternative way of learning. Accordingly, the Committee  
recommends that the Department should explore the possibility of allocating more funds for 
digital initiatives for addressing the requirements of e-learning. 
[Para 2.11] 
Action Taken 

4 
 
2.1 The digital education proposals of States and UTs are covered under the ICT and 
Innovation components of Samagra Shiksha. The proposals for digital education from 
States/UTs are being considered and approved by Project Approval Boards.  For the year 
2021-22 the PAB meetings are currently ongoing. 
2.2 The Ministry released ₹ 5,228 crore in ad-hoc grants to the states under Samagra 
Shiksha programme and an additional ₹ 2,500 crore will soon be released to ensure 
continuity of various educational initiatives by the states and UTs during the pandemic and 
for the major identified includes Identifying and mainstreaming of Out of School Children 
and ensuring sustained Enrolment, Retention and Transition; Academic learning & cognitive 
development of students; Capacity building- with specific focus on blended and home-based 
learning including student assessments and data use; Nutritional, socio-emotional support; 
Digital education and monitoring, tracking and remediation. An amount of ₹ 224.49 Crore 
has been approved for smart classrooms in 12026 Schools under project innovation. And an 
amount of ₹ 763.04 Crore has been approved for 4049 schools under ICT and Digital 
Initiatives. 
 
2.3 Further following action has been taken by ABs under this Department  
NVS: 
825 Smart classrooms are established under CSR in 618 Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas with 
fully integrated 1:1 learning platform including Laptops /Tablet, Interactive board displays 
etc. for digital learning. 
 1173 classrooms in 99 JNVs are converted to Smart class under the project of 
Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
 Government Portal and other freely available open source apps / platforms are being 
used by students and teachers for ICT Integrated education. 
 
KVS:  Following computer Infrastructure is available in Kendriya Vidyalayas to address the 
requirement of e-learning. 
 12395 e-classrooms have been established. 
 1225 Kendriya Vidyalayas are equipped with 88363 computers with student 
computer ration 16:1. 
 As on date 1226 Kendriya Vidyalayas are having Internet connectivity. 

5 
 
 All 1245 Kendriya Vidyalayas have their own website. 
 
NCERT: For strengthening CIET in NCERT and delivery of e-books and e-contents a sum 
of ₹.589 crores has been proposed from funds to be allocated from Government 
 
GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee however expresses its concern over the sharp decline in Gross 
Enrolment Ratio (GER) at Senior Secondary level to 50.14%. In this Context, the Committee 
also takes note of the observation made by the NEP, 2020 that three crore children who are 
out of the school in the country need to be enrolled in the school to achieve 100% GER in 
school education by the year, 2030. While endorsing the target set under NEP, 2020 the 
Committee recommends that definite time-schedules with specific dates be framed for 
achievement of different task and goals as provided in NEP, 2020 to provide a clear 
roadmap of the implementation schedule of provisions related to School Education in the 
NEP, 2020. The same should be informed to the Committee by 30th June, 2021 and 
uploaded on the website of the Ministry. 
[Para 3.3] 
Action Taken 
3.1 In pursuance of the goals and objectives of the National Education Policy (NEP) 
2020 issued on 29th July, 2020 and to assist States and UTs in this task, the Department of 
School Education and Literacy has developed an indicative and suggestive   Implementation 
Plan for School Education, called ‘Students’ and Teachers’ Holistic Advancement through 
Quality Education (SARTHAQ)’, which has been released on 8th April, 2021. This 
implementation plan keeps in mind the concurrent nature of education and adheres to the 
spirit of federalism. States and UTs are given the flexibility to adapt this plan with local 
contextualization and also modify as per their needs and requirements. This implementation 
plan delineates the roadmap and way forward for implementation of NEP, 2020 for the next 
10 years, which is very important for its smooth and effective implementation. 
 

6 
 
3.2 SARTHAQ has been developed through wide and intensive consultative process 
with States and UTs, Autonomous bodies and suggestions received from all stakeholders, 
and around 7177 suggestions/inputs were received from them. A teacher’s fest, ‘Shikshak 
Parv’ was especially organized from 8th to 25th September 2020 for discussing various 
recommendations of NEP 2020 and its implementation strategies, which attracted around ₹ 
15 lakh suggestions.   
 
3.3 The major focus of SARTHAQ is to define activities in such a manner which 
clearly delineate goals, outcomes and timeframe i.e., it links recommendations of NEP with 
297 Tasks along with responsible agencies, timelines and 304 outputs of these Tasks. 
Attempt has also been made to propose activities in a manner, such that it will be built upon 
the existing structure rather than creating new structures. Thus, SARTHAQ takes care of 
the spirit and intent of the Policy and is planned to be implemented in a phased manner. 
SARTHAQ can be accessed at the website of the Ministry at the following link:    
 
Sl. No.   Link 
1. Part-I https://dsel.education.gov.in/sites/default/files/SARTHAQ_Part-
1_updated.pdf 
2. Part-II https://dsel.education.gov.in/sites/default/files/SARTHAQ_Part-
2_updated.pdf 
 
3.4 The status regarding achievement of different task and goals as provided in NEP, 
2020 by ABs under the Department are as under 
 
KVS: 
 Concept wise modules on Foundational Literacy and Numeracy (FLN) are being 
prepared to further sensitize the Primary teachers and HMs in addition to the 
sensitization of all PRTs/HMs on FLN. Draft modules prepared so far on FLN are in 
the final stage of vetting. 206 PRTs/HMs Master Trainers are training PRTs/HMs of 
all KVs on phonics and going to be completed by April, 2021 (Task No. 32 NEP 
para 2.2). 

7 
 
 Vetting of modules on “Conducive Environment for Learners and Learning” has 
been completed in respect of teachers and in respect of Principals/ VPs/HMs is going 
to be completed very shortly (Task No. 149 NEP Para 5.8 -5.14). 
 A Committee including member from CBSE is constituted for preparing training 
module to train Paper Setters, evaluators and moderators for internal assessments. 
The draft modules have been prepared and are being vetted by the experts from 
CBSE and KVS (Task No. 103 NEP Para 4.34 – 4.35). 
 Artificial Intelligence is introduced as a vocational subject in all 1205 KVs in Class 
– VIII. Identified 25 KVs from all 25 Regions for conducting pilot of the Skill Based 
Aptitude Tests by NCERT. Further KVS has also identified 200 KVs across the 
country for developing Vocational Skill laboratories (Task No. 231 NEP para 16.1 – 
16.8) 
 
NIOS: NIOS has constituted a Core Committee to monitor the smooth execution of the 
tasks of NEP as assigned to NIOS.  The committee is in the process of working out a 
detailed plan out for achievement of different tasks and goals as provided in NEP, 2020.  
Once finalised, the same will be shared. 
 
NCERT: NCERT has already been working on various tasks assigned to it as stated in the 
SARTHAQ document. The major tasks assigned to NCERT are related to NCFs, ECCE, 
Foundational Literacy and Numeracy, Adult Education, Holistic Progress Card, vocational 
education, etc., 
CBSE: Definite time schedules and specific dates have been framed for the tasks allotted to 
CBSE and regularly updated on the trackers maintained by MoE. 
 
NO DETENTION POLICY AND NATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT SURVEY 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee notes that NAS/SAS confined to Government and Government aided 
schools and in certain subjects. The Committee recommends that in addition to Government 
and Government aided school, Private schools and unregistered schools may be covered 
under National Achievement Survey (NAS) in order to have a holistic view of learning 
outcome of school children and develop uniform national standards. 

8 
 
[Para 3.22] 
Action Taken 
4.1 Steering Committee of NAS established by the Government of India, has decided to 
include private schools in the conduct of National Achievement Survey 2021 for classes 3, 
5, 8 and 10.NAS 2021 will be held on 12.11.2021.  The following types of schools will be 
covered in NAS 2021: 
i) Government Schools 
(a) Central Government and  
(b) State Government 
ii) Government Aided Schools 
iii) Private Unaided Schools.  
NUTRITION/KITCHEN GARDEN IN SCHOOLS 
Recommendation 
 
5. The Committee noted that only three lakh schools have kitchen/nutrition garden 
which are a source of fresh vegetables to the students. The Committee further noted that 
around seven lakh schools are yet to develop Kitchen Garden in the school premises. The 
Committee accordingly, recommends that these schools may be persuaded to setup 
kitchen/nutrition garden at the earliest to provide wholesome food to the students 
[Para 3.28] 
Action Taken 
 
5.1 All States/UTs have been advised to ensure development and maintenance of School 
Nutrition Garden in all schools on various for alike, Meetings of Programme Approval 
Board - Mid Day Meal Scheme etc. 
 
5.2 Every JNV develops and maintains a Kitchen garden in the campus. This garden is 
maintained by the active involvement of the students. Plants   of seasonal vegetables, 
tomatoes, green chillis, lemon, etc are grown. 
 

9 
 
VACANCIES ACROSS ORGANIZATIONS UNDER THE DEPARTMENT 
Recommendation 
 
6. The Committee expresses its concern over the status of vacancies and recommends 
that a special time bound recruitment drive should be conducted to fill all the existing 
vacancies, as contractual teachers/staff are always likely to have a sense of insecurity due to 
temporary nature of job besides giving a wrong impression about the Government’s 
commitment for social Justice. 
[Para 3.34] 
 
Action Taken 
 
6.1 Status in this regard for ABs under this Department are :- 
 
NVS: Recruitment is a continuous process and vacancies keeps on arising due to 
resignation, retirement, death, opening of new JNVs, upgradation of existing JNVs to higher 
classes and sanction of new streams etc. Consistent efforts are undertaken to fill up the 
vacant posts on priority, recently under Direct Recruitments offers of appointment to the 
post of PGTs was issued to 470 candidates. Interviews to fill up 1295 posts of TGTs have 
been completed in January, 2021 and its final result is awaited, and to fill up 644 posts of 
Miscellaneous category of teachers interviews are being conducted in March, 2021. To fill 
up posts of Non-teaching cadre process of recruitment for the 63 posts of Female Staff 
Nurse, 31 posts of Catering Assistant and 152 posts of LDCs is half-past stage and expected 
to be completed soon. Apart from this NVS plans to hold DPCs / Limited Departmental 
Exams to fill up vacant posts of Teaching / Non-teaching cadre. 
 
To immediately fill up the vacant posts of teaching and non-teaching posts, teachers are 
engaged on short-term contract basis and persons are engaged on outsource basis against 
non-teaching posts. 
 
NIOS: Though NIOS had started recruitment process, it was slowed down after the Covid-
19 pandemic hit the Nation.  NIOS filled some of the position before the current lockdown.  
The Recruitment Process will be started once the situation improves. 

10 
 
 
NCERT: NCERT has started recruitment process vide Advt. No.166 for filling up various 
teaching  positions (Assistant Headmaster/ Post Graduate Teacher/ Trained Graduate 
Teacher/Work Experience Teacher/Primary Teacher. Selection process  against all the 
aforesaid posts has been completed except the Work Experience  Teacher posts (WET), 
for which work is in progress. 
 
CIET has advertised 20 vacancies of technical cadre in employment news. Out of this 20 
vacancies, process of 14 vacancies have been completed and file is submitted to competent 
authority for taking final decision in this issue. With regard to remaining 6 posts Screening 
have been completed and all the documents related to these posts have been transferred to 
concern Establishment section for taking further action on it.  
CTSA:  As per cabinet decision, CTSA schools are to be transferred to STSS, DOE 
Dharamsala in phased manner. 55 CTSA schools have already been transferred to STSS 
Dharamsala. Transfer of remaining schools is under process. Hence, no fresh recruitment is 
being done in CTSA. 
 
CBSE will fill up nearly 350 vacant posts at various levels within the current year. 
 
Infrastructure Development in KVS 
 
6.2 The Department in its written submissions informed the Committee about the 
number of KVs constructed and the number of new KVs opened in the last five years, as 
follows: 
 
TABLE -8 
Year of  
Opening 
No. of new
 KVs opened 
No. of school building 
constructed 
2015-16 25 15 
2016-17 14 20 
2017-18 43 20 
2018-19 16 33 
2019-20 36 07 

11 
 
2020-21 10 04 
Total 144 99 
 
6.3 It was further informed that 291 KVs are functioning in temporary accommodations 
provided by sponsoring authorities. The Committee noted that the number of new KVs 
opened in the last five years did not match with the number of number of new KVs 
constructed in the same phase. The Committee also raised the issue of upkeep and 
maintenance of old structures under the KVS management. 
 
6.4 The Department informed the Committee that from the FY 2017-18 onwards, it was 
decided that funding for infrastructure would be through the HEFA loans. Accordingly, the 
budgetary support amount for capital was decreased from FY 2017-18 onwards. It was 
decided by the Ministry of Finance that KV, being a completely Government funded 
scheme, it should not be coming under the HEFA loan and funds will be given under 
budgetary support. Fund constraints is the major reason for low completion rate. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT IN KVS 
Recommendation 
 
7. The Committee recommends that KVS should take a comprehensive evaluation of the 
infrastructure requirements of its buildings and assess the requirement for construction of 
new buildings and the need for strengthening of old structures so as to ensure that they are 
fit for running classes. 
[Parta 3.38] 
Action Taken 
7.1 KVS is constructing new buildings with due assessment of space requirements for 
effective teaching learning process.  Action is being taken by KVS for strengthening of old 
structure/ replacement of building (part/full) as per need. 
 
EDUCATIONAL EXCELLENCE IN NVS 
Recommendation 

12 
 
8. The Committee appreciated the efforts made by JNV to nurture rural talent from 
weaker sections and providing excellent results and recommends that that the Ministry 
should explore the possibility of opening more number of JNVs to ensure their presence in 
all districts of the country. 
[Para 3.46] 
Action Taken 
8.1 Navodaya Vidyalaya Scheme envisages for opening a Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya 
in each district of the country. Navodaya Vidyalayas have been set up in all the 638 districts 
of the country, carved out as on 31.05.2014, except Tamil Nadu state, which has not yet 
accepted the scheme.  
 
8.2 At present, 661 JNVs have been sanctioned, which includes 10 additional second 
JNVs for Scheduled Castes concentrated districts and 10 additional second JNVs for 
Scheduled Tribes Concentrated districts and 03 as a special case. 
 
8.3 Opening of JNV is a continuous process. Further, a proposal for opening of JNVs in 
45 uncovered newly carved out districts as on 31.03.2018 is under consideration of the 
Ministry. Districts carved out after 31.03.2018 will be taken up in the next phase. 
 
EXEMPLAR SCHOOLS 
Recommendation 
 
9. The Committee took note of the explanations provided by the Department and 
recommended that the Department should develop a time-line to achieve the goal of 
strengthening the schools to the level of exemplar schools. 
[Para 3.54] 
Action Taken 
9.1 The duration of scheme for achieving the goal of strengthening of selected schools to 
the level of Exemplar schools is proposed to be 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
 
NCERT will aim to 

13 
 
i) reformulate school education system in order to introduce 5+3+3+4 system in a 
time-frame of 2 years i.e. 2021-23 
 
ii)  Develop, disseminate and ensure learning outcomes and competency based 
teaching learning by the end of academic session 2023. 
 
iii)  In addition to ensuring equitable learning outcomes in an inclusive environment for 
all children, make attempts to attain global competencies through high level performance in 
international tests such as Programme for International Students’ Assessment (PISA) by the 
year 2025.   
 
PRE-SCHOOLING 
Recommendation 
10. The Committee is happy to note that Early Childhood Care and Education (ECCE) 
has been proposed to be introduced in public schools which has been followed by some of 
the private schools in the form of play school and nursery. It is widely accepted that during 
this age, 85% of cumulative development of brain takes place, which has definitive bearing 
on acquisition of knowledge and skills in later life. The Committee recommends that as 
envisaged in NEP, 2020 the preparation of National Curricula and Pedagogical Framework 
for Early Childhood Care and Education (NCPFECCE) for children upto 8 years of age 
should be done on priority basis with due seriousness so as to ensure it’s early and effective 
implementation. 
[Para 3.61] 
Action Taken 
10.1 Para 1.3 of NEP, 2020 states that a National Curricular and Pedagogical Framework 
for Early Childhood Care and Education (NCPFECCE) for children up to the age of 8 years 
will be developed by NCERT in two parts, namely, a sub-framework for 0-3 years old, and a 
sub-framework for 3-8 years old. The framework will serve as a guide both for parents and 
for ECCE institutions. 
10.2 As per the NEP 2020 recommendations, NCERT is in the process of developing an 
activity based multifaceted NCPFECCE that includes indigenous games, puppetry, art, 
stories and indigenous poetry/songs. This is to attain optimal outcomes in the domain of 

14 
 
physical and motor development, cognitive development, socio-emotional-ethical 
development and cultural-artistic development. NCPFECCE comprises: 
I. Sub-framework-1/guidelines for 0-3-years: in consultation with the Ministry 
of Women & Child Development 
II. Sub-framework-2 for 3-8 years (Foundational Stage): based on latest 
research, International/National best practices. Sub-framework-2 will also 
consist of a framework for the one-year preparatory class for 5-6 years old. 
III. Sub-framework-2 will also become the basis for implementation of the 
National Mission for Foundational Literacy and Numeracy. 
IV. These two sub-frameworks also come out with a detailed mapping of 
indigenous toys that can be used at every stage of growth for developing 
cognitive and psychomotor skills, learning skills (such as critical thinking, 
creativity, problem-solving, etc.) ethics and values, life skills etc. 
The NCPFECCE will also bring clarity on bridging the gap between the language 
spoken by the child and the medium of teaching. 
 
10.3 The work of preparation of State and national Curriculum Framework for ECCE 
and School Education has been initiated.   
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants of the Department 
Recommendation 
1. The Committee notes that there has been a reduction of ₹ 849.32 Crore in allocation 
to SCSP in BE 2021-22 as compared to BE 2020-21. The Committee recommends that the 
Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance to allocate more funds for the 
Scheduled Caste Sub Plan to ensure that the schemes being operated for their upliftment 
and welfare do not have to face resource crunch. 
[Para 2.16] 
 
 
Action Taken 
1.1 DoSEL is implementing various schemes under which there are initiatives for the 
welfare for SCs, STs and other disadvantaged groups, but funds for the same are released 
proportionately from General, SC and ST components as a part of the Scheme. KVS has 
expressed no resource crunch for the Scheduled Caste sub Plan which is allocated under 
Salary, General and Capital Head. 
 
1.2 NCERT utilizes approximately 9%, and 19% of total expenditure on ST and SC 
groups respectively for various programmes undertaken with the approval of the Programme 
Advisory Committee (PAC). Apart from this, ₹.150 crore is exclusively granted by the 
Ministry of Education for the quality improvement in school and teacher education in the 
tribal areas of North-East Region. The Council do not face financial crunch in undertaking 
the projects and ensures that the funds are utilized for the up-liftment and welfare of the ST 
and SC groups. 
 
 
 

16 
 
 
ENGAGEMENT OF  COOK-CUM-HELPER AND HONORARIUM TO THEM 
Recommendation 
2. The Department in their written submission has stated that the honorarium varies 
from 19,000 as provided by the UT of Puducherry to the major amount of 1000 rupees by 14 
States including Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa and Gujarat etc (State/UT wise list of 
honorarium paid is at Annexure IV). The Committee noted the disparity in the honorarium 
paid to the cook-cum-helper by different States and recommends that the Department should 
develop a uniform system for deciding the honorarium to be paid to the cooks and parity 
should be maintained between different States. 
[Para 3.27] 
Action Taken 
2.1 MDM guidelines envisage honorarium of ₹.1000 per month per CCH for10 months 
in a year. This is shared between Centre and States / UTs as per existing sharing pattern. 
However, States and UTs are free to add on to their minimum mandatory share. 
 
EDUCATIONAL EXCELLENCE IN NVS 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee took note of the social security measures provided to the teachers of 
JNVs recommends that an alternative scheme to pension or similar benefits may be 
considered to provide JNV teachers a sense of greater financial/social security. 
[Para 3.47] 
 
Action Taken 
3.1 The employees of Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti who joined before 01.01.2004 are 
demanding pension under CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 since the organization came into 
existence immediately after the approval of the Cabinet Committee in its meeting on 
05.08.1985. 02 Schools, 01 in Amrawati (Maharashtra) and 01 in Jhajjar (Haryana) were 
made functional in 1985.  
 
3.2 Two Parliamentary Standing Committees in their Report No. 154th and 184th have 
recommended for extension CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 for the employees of NVS. 
However, the Government did not accede to the proposal. 

17 
 
 
3.3 Providing of alternative scheme for pension i.e. Annuity Based Pension scheme 
through LIC has been explored but is yet to be approved. Further, in 40th meeting of 
Executive Committee of NVS held on 25.02.2021, it has been decided to take up the matter 
afresh with the Govt. for extending CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 for the employees of NVS. 
Accordingly, necessary actions are being initiated. 
 
CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL NEEDS 
Recommendation 
 
4. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department and recommends 
that a plan for structured and time bound efforts be devised to provide the best possible care 
and quality education to all children with every category of special needs to help them 
become a part of the main stream. 
[Para 3.56] 
 
Action Taken 
Important points undertaken for Inclusive Education: 
  
4.1 A comprehensive initiative, PM e-Vidya, was launched with an aim to unify all 
efforts related to digital/online education. The programme inter-alia envisages the 
development of special e content for the Divyangjan. In pursuance of this vision, the D/o 
SE&L, MoE constituted a committee of experts for recommending the guidelines for 
development of e content for CwD(Children with Disabilities-CwDs).  
 
4.2 The Committee submitted a report titled “Guidelines for the Development of e-
Content for Children with Disabilities” comprising of eleven Sections and two 
Appendices. This report was shared, presented, discussed and accepted by the MoE. 
4.3 The salient highlights of the e- content guidelines in the report are:  
 e-Content for CwDs should be developed based on the four principles namely: perceivable, 
operable, understandable and robust. 

18 
 
 e-Content including text, tables, diagrams, visuals, audios, videos etc. should comply with 
accessibility standards: national standards (GIGW 2.0) and international standards (WCAG 
2.1, E-Pub, DAISY  etc). 
 Distribution platforms on which content is uploaded (e.g. DIKSHA) and Reading 
platforms/devices on which content is accessed and interacted (e.g. e-pathshala) must 
comply with technical standards 
 Reasonable pedagogical accommodations have been recommended to meet specific needs of 
CwDs 
 The technical standards and guidelines have been detailed out in Section 4 of the report. 
 The Committee has also recommended that in a phased manner textbooks may be adapted 
into Accessible Digital Textbooks (ADTs). The content of ADTs should be provided in 
multiple formats (text, audio, video, sign language etc) with turn-on and turn-off features. 
Further ADTs should provide flexibility to CwDs to respond to its content/exercises in 
multiple ways. The detailed guidelines for developing ADTs along with existing 
international and national experience, in the development of prototypes including the recent 
NCERT’s experience:  Barkha: A Reading Series for All (in print and digital 
forms), Accessible Textbooks for All and UNICEF’s “Accessible Digital Textbooks using 
Universal Design for Learning ( for Learners with and without  Disabilities ) have been 
presented in Section 5 of the report. 
 In addition to ADTs, in Sections 6 to 9 the Committee has recommended specific guidelines 
for development of supplementary e-Content as per 21 disabilities specified in the RPWD 
Act 2016 for students having Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, Multiple 
Disabilities, Autism Spectrum Disorders, Specific Learning Disabilities, Blindness, low 
vision, Deafness and Hard of Hearing and others. 
 A summary of the recommendations has been presented in Section 10 of the report for 
sharing widely with content creators, content designers, developers, publishers. 
 The implementation roadmap along with the suggestions to strengthen compliance to the 
accessibility guidelines have been presented in Section 11 of the report. 
 Comprehensive guidelines and technical standards for the production of Sign Language 
videos have been provided at Appendix-1 of the Report. 
 Universal Design for Learning (UDL) guidelines for content development and pedagogical 
accommodations are given in Appendix 2 of the report.  

19 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Overall Assessment of the Demands For Grants of the Department 
 
Recommendation 
 
1. The Committee recommends that the Department should undertake a scientifically 
conducted comprehensive socio-economic-educational survey of the North Eastern Region 
to develop a roadmap with more focused and result-oriented strategies for enhancing the 
educational status of tribal students. 
[Para 2.15] 
Action Taken 
1.1 It has been decided that the proposed Socio-economic education study in North 
Eastern State may be conducted by NCERT in collaboration with NSSO. It may also include 
analysis of National Achievement Survey (NAS) and other secondary data and some field 
studies wherever feasible. It would help develop State specific roadmap for enhancing the 
educational status of Tribal students in North Eastern States and strategies for interventions 
for improving Learning Outcomes, Access Outcomes, Infrastructure & Facilities, Equity 
Outcomes and Governance Processes. An outlay of ₹.100 lakh has been approved for survey 
related activities.  
 
1.2 NCERT and CBSE are conducting the national Achievement Survey NAS-2021 
under the aegis of the Ministry of Education. All districts of the North Eastern Region 
would be covered to assess the level at Grade III, V, VIII & X as per LO based framework 
developed by NCERT 
 
 
Further Observation(s)/Recommendation(s) 
1.3 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department. However, the 
Committee further recommends that a clear-cut road map alongwith well defined time 

20 
 
line may be prepared so as to complete the entire process of survey in a time bound 
manner. The Department may apprise the Committee of the strategies evolved based 
on the survey for enhancing the educational status of tribal students from the North-
Eastern region of the country. 
 
HIGH DROP OUT RATES AMONGST THE STUDENTS FROM SCHEDULED 
CASTE/SCHEDULED TRINBE/GIRL CHILD 
Recommendation 
 
2. The Committee recommends that the Department should conduct a survey to identify 
the districts where the dropout rates of SC, ST and Girls are higher than the national 
average. Based upon the findings an intervention plan should be chalked out to not only 
bring back these dropout children to school but also to provide them vocational education 
to ensure enhancing their livelihood abilities their greater employability and financial 
independence as well as stability. 
[Para 3.6] 
Action Taken 
2.1 Under Samagra Shiksha, there is a provision of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas 
(KGBVs). KGBVs are residential schools from class VI to XII for girls belonging to 
disadvantaged groups such as SC, ST, OBC, Minority and Below Poverty Line (BPL).The 
KGBVs are set up in Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs) of a State/UT where the 
female rural literacy rate is below the national average. The objective behind establishing 
KGBVs is to ensure access and quality education to girls from disadvantaged groups by 
setting up residential schools and to reduce gender gaps at all levels of school education. 
This provides the facility to have at-least one residential school for girls from Classes VI-
XII in every educationally backward block which do not have residential schools under any 
other scheme of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
or the State Government. 
 Target Group for KGBVs are as under:  
22,2 Girls in the age group of 10-18 years aspiring to study in classes VI to XII; 
belonging to SC, ST, OBC, Minority communities and BPL families. 

21 
 
i) At the primary level, the emphasis is on the slightly older girls who are out of 
school and were unable to complete primary schools (10+). However, in difficult 
areas (migratory populations, scattered habitations that do not qualify for primary/ 
upper primary schools) younger girls can also be targeted;  
ii) At the upper primary level, emphasis is on girls, especially, adolescent girls who 
are unable to go to regular schools’  
iii) In view of the targeted nature of the scheme, 75% girls from SC, ST, OBC or 
minority communities would be accorded priority for enrolment in such residential 
schools and thereafter upto 25% girls from BPL families. 
2.3. In KGBVs, specific skill training is also being provided to girls, for which States 
appoint Vocational instructors in KGBVs to provide need based vocational education to 
girls. The States generally pick up courses based on the choice and need of the students in 
the KGBVs. Fund for this purpose is being provided by the Ministry of Education. 
2.4. Under Samagra Shiksha, total 5726 KGBVs have been sanctioned in the country out 
of which 4887 KGBVs are operational with the enrolment of ₹. 6.30 lakh girls as on 
05.04.2021. 
 
Further Observation(s)/Recommendation(s) 
 
2.5 The Committee while noting the reply of the Department observes that the 
recommendations of the Committee to conduct a survey to identify districts where 
drop out rates of SC, ST and Girls are higher than the national average has not been 
acted upon. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the survey may be conducted 
expeditiously and detailed information along with intervention plans based thereon 
may be furnished. The Committee also recommends that the impact of the Covid-19 
pandemic on the drop out rates, particularly amongst SCs, STs and Girls may be 
specifically analysed and all efforts may be made to bring back such children to the 
mainfold of the education and the Committee may be apprised of the same. 
 
2.6 The Committee also noted that out of the 5726 KGVBs sanctioned, 849 are yet 
to be made operational. The Committee observes that ensuring quality education to 

22 
 
girls, particularly those belonging to Scheduled Castes and Tribes is imperative to 
reduce gender disparity and usher in an equitable society. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that immediate steps should be taken to get the 849 KGVBs operational 
as soon as possible. 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF KITCHEN-CUM-STORE 
Recommendation 
3. The Committee noted with concern that construction of 113693 Kitchen- cum-store, 
i.e., 11% of the total of Kitchen-cum-store sanctioned has not even been started. The 
Committee accordingly recommends that the feasibility of public-private partnership in the 
process of construction of Kitchen-cum- store should also be explored for expediting their 
construction. 
[Para 3.31] 
Action Taken 
3.1 The suggestion is noted. 
 
Further Observation(s)/Recommendation(s) 
 
3.2 The Committee observes that the recommendation of the Committee has only 
been noted and it seems that no concrete action has been taken with regard to 
exploring the feasibility of public-private partnership in the process of construction of 
Kitchen-cum-Stores. The updated status of the physical progress on construction of 
Kitchen-cum-Stores has also not been furnished. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that the feasibility of public-private partnership in the construction 
process of Kitchen-cum-Stores may expeditiously be explored and Committee apprised 
of the action taken. The latest updated status on the construction may also be 
provided. 
 
STARS AND ASIAN DEVELOOPMENT BANK PROJECT 
Recommendation 
4. The Committee took note of the criteria on the basis of which the States were 
selected for the STARS project and recommends that the Department should include more 

23 
 
States under the project by suitably modifying the criteria so that other States can also 
benefit from the project. 
[Para 3.51] 
Action Taken 
 
4.1 The STARS project is implemented in six participating States namely Himachal 
Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Rajasthan and Cabinet approval 
has been received for the same on 14th October, 2020. A similar project of ADB named 
ASPIR Ecovering five States of Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Assam, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand is 
in consideration of the Department. The learnings of participating states will also be shared 
with other states through workshop to ensure knowledge transfer and sharing of best 
practices. 
 
Further Observation(s)/Recommendation(s) 
 
4.2 The Committee observes that the Department has mentioned about the projects 
undertaken or proposed to be undertaken. However, the recommendation of the 
Committee to suitably amend the criteria for selecting more States for STARS project 
has not found any mention. The Committee further recommends that amending the 
criteria for selecting more States for STARS project may be explored expeditiously, 
and Committee informed about the same. 
 
NATIONAL EDUCATION POLICY, 2020 
 
Recommendation 
 
5. The Committee recommends that the Department should take more proactive 
measures to bring the States and UTs in alignment with the schemes and programmes of the 
Government of India so that the total expenditure on Education as a whole can be projected 
accurately 
[Para 3.59] 
 
 
 

24 
 
Action Taken 
 
5.1 STATS.: Analysis of Budgeted Expenditure of Education is available up to the year 
2017-18. As per this publication, the expenditure as a percentage of GDP incurred by the 
Central Government  alone on elementary and secondary education for the years 2015-16, 
2016-17 and 2017-18 are as under: 
  
Year GDP (Rs. Crore) 
(Provisional) 
Expenditure 
(Rs. Crore) 
As % of GDP 
    Elementary  Secondary Elementary Secondary 
2015-16 (actual) 13771874 60103.77  18560.07 0.44 0.13 
2016-17(RE) 15362386 57865.94  18695.44 0.38 0.12 
2017-18(BE) 17095005 63266.88  21920.04 0.37 0.13 
     Source: Analysis of Budgeted Expenditure on Education 2015-16 to 2017-18 
  
5.2 As per this publication, the expenditure as a percentage of GDP incurred by the 
States/UTs on elementary and secondary education for the years 2015-16, 2016-17 and  
2017-18 are as under: 
 
Year GDP (Rs. Crore) 
(Provisional) 
Expenditure 
(Rs. Crore) 
As % of GDP 
    Elementary  Secondary Elementary Secondary 
2015-16 (actual) 13771874 204244.77 124080.05 1.48 0.90 
2016-17(RE) 15362386 227730.46    145716.
25 
1.48 0.95 
2017-18(BE) 17095005 260960.71 162644.24 1.53 0.95 
     Source: Analysis of Budgeted Expenditure on Education 2015-16 to 2017-18 
 
5.3 NCERT formulates academic programmes reflecting educational needs of the States 
identified through the State Coordination Committees (SCC), for the implementation of the 
National Education Policies and as per the suggestions provided by the Ministry of 
Education, Government of India from time to time. Majority of the programmes are national 
level programmes and it ensures participation and cooperation of all the States/UTs. Under 

25 
 
the Samagra Shiksha Scheme, the Council undertakes many programmes for the quality 
improvement in school education covering all States/UTs. 
 
Further Observation(s)/ Recommendation(s) 
5.4 The Committee noted that the Department has given only AN analysis of 
Budgeted Expenditure of Centre and States/UTs from 2015-16 to 2017-18 and not the 
latest figures for 2018-19 and 2019-20. The proactive measures being taken to align the 
States/UTs with the Central Schemes and programmes have not been specifically 
indicated as recommended by the Committee. The Committee reiterates that emphasis 
on quality education accessible to all is a must for building a strong nation with well 
informed, educated and skilled citizens to contribute to its progress. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the Department should focus on slowly enhancing the 
expenditure on education by formulating and implementing policies and schemes in 
such a way as to achieve the target of 6% of GDP, as envisaged in previous education 
policies and reaffirmed in NEP, 2020.  
  

26 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED. 
Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants of the Department  
Recommendations 
1. The Committee understands that the National Education Policy, 2020 has envisaged 
Gender Inclusion Fund (GIA) for education of girl child and transgender and if the 
Department intends to align allocations under such fund for the purpose of girl child 
education, the detailed roadmap should have been prepared and shared with the Committee 
for its consideration. The Committee recommends that a roadmap to ensure that all girls as 
well as kids belonging to transgender communities are covered in school education and to 
that end a plan for time bound implementation be prepared on priority basis and be shared 
with the Committee latest by 30th June, 2021. 
[Para 2.9] 
Action Taken 
1.1. The NEP 2020 lays focus on curtailing dropouts and ensuring better retention for out 
of school girls-particularly from marginalized communities; CWSN; never enrolled; and 
drop outs; by   bringing them back into the system through careful tracking of students and 
their learning levels.  
1.2 As mentioned during the discussions, this Department has also prepared a Roadmap 
for Implementation of NEP in consultation with states/UTs and evolved specific tasks and 
timelines for completion of each tasks of NEP 2020. 
1.3 As a follow-up, letter No. 10-1/2021-IS-11 dated 31.05.2021 has been issued to the 
Addl. Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary/Secretary of all States and UTs with a request to 
issue necessary directions to the concerned authorities to proactively track girls as well as 
kids belonging to transgender communities who are not enrolled in schools or have dropped-
out of school without completing their School Education and get them admitted in age-
appropriate classes in schools in a mission mode.  

27 
 
 
1.4 Several components related to the girl child have been included in the Samagra 
Shiksha scheme, which are as follows: 
 Opening of schools in the neighbourhood as defined by the State,  
 Provision of free text-books to girls up to Class VIII, 
 Uniforms to all girls, SC,  ST  children  and Below  Poverty  Line  (BPL)  children 
up to class VIII,  
 Provision of gender segregated toilets in all schools,  
 Teachers’ sensitization programmes to promote girls’ participation,   
 Provision for Self-Defence training for the girls from classes VI to XII,  
 Stipend to CWSN girls from class I to Class XII,  
 Construction  of  residential  quarters  for  teachers  in  remote/hilly  areas/in areas 
with difficult terrain.   
 
 In addition, to reduce gender gaps at all levels of school education and for providing 
quality education to girls from disadvantaged groups, Kasturba Gandhi Balika 
Vidyalayas (KGBVs) have been sanctioned in Educationally Backward Blocks 
(EBBs), where the female rural literacy rate is below the national average, under 
Samagra Shiksha. KGBVs are residential schools from class VI to XII for girls 
belonging to disadvantaged groups such as SC, ST, OBC, Minority and Below 
Poverty Line (BPL). The objective behind establishing KGBVs is to ensure access 
and quality education to girls from disadvantaged groups by setting up residential 
schools and to reduce gender gaps at all levels of school education. Under Samagra 
Shiksha, total 5726 KGBVs have been sanctioned in the country out of which 4887 
KGBVs are operational with the enrolment of 6.30 lakh girls as on 05.04.2021. 
 Moreover, Special  state  specific  projects for varied interventions  under  equity are 
emphasized for enhancing  access,  retention  and  quality to girls  by  promoting  
enrolment  drives,  retention and motivation camps, gender sensitization modules 
etc. Financial Support is also being provided under  State  Specific  projects  as  per  
the  allocation of  flexi  fund  under  quality  to  the  state subject to viable proposal 
received from the respective State and UTs. Such projects include Life Skills, 
Awareness programmes, Incinerators, Sanitary Pad Vending Machines etc.  

28 
 
 Vocationalisation of Secondary Education: Under Samagra Shiksha, there is a 
provision for Vocationalisation of Secondary Education under which vocational 
Education is provided in such a manner that gender stereotyping is avoided. The 
Principal of the school is expected to take necessary steps to remove gender bias, if 
any, in the minds of employers/ financiers against giving employment or loans to 
girls. Specific Skill Training is also imparted to girls studying in KGBVs.  
 
1.5 The PRABANDH portal of the Department has been expanded to register the details 
of the Out of School children identified by the states/UTs. By 10.06.2021, approx. ₹. 2.89 
lakh number of Out of School Children have been reported by States/UTs (₹. 1.68 lakh boys 
and ₹. 1.20 lakh girls and 23 transgender). 
 
1.6 Autonomous Bodies under this Department have also taken following action in this 
regard: - 
 
KVS: 
In order to provide equitable and inclusive education to all, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan 
has undertaken following measures: 
 Equal opportunity in admission to all children- boys/girls/transgender as per norms. 
 Special provision of admission for single girl child over and above class strength in 
Class-I and Class 6th onwards. 
 Free education to Single Girl Child from Class 6th onwards. 
 Exemption from paying tuition fee for all girl students from Class -I to XII 
 
CBSE: CBSE has already recognized transgender community by creating a special category 
for them in all its examinations forms and they are allowed to appear in all examinations 
conducted by CBSE. Past experience has shown that a number of students belonging to 
transgender community have appeared in exams conducted by CBSE. The percentage of girl 
students is also progressively increasing over the years. 
 
 

29 
 
Further Observation(s)/Recommendation(s) 
1.7 The Committee noted the reply of the Department and recommends that 
further follow up and final action in this regard may be informed. The Committee also 
recommends that a comparative analysis of drop out rates during the pre and post 
COVID-19 pandemic periods may be undertaken to see whether there has been any 
increase in the rates and a clear road map including remedial measures taken to 
redress this issue may be furnished to the Committee. The Committee further 
recommends that more proactive measures to assimilate transgenders (at age 
appropriate levels) into the mainfold of education may also be taken and detailed 
information may be provided. 
DRINKING WATER AND TOILETS IN SCHOOLS 
Recommendation 
 
2. The Committee notes that 8 States have ensured drinking water facility to all schools 
in their territory. However, States like Meghalaya, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh are 
lagging far behind; accordingly the Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
coordinate with the Ministry of Rural Development and Jal Shakti to ensure supply of safe 
and contamination-free piped potable water through Nal Se Jal Mission to every 
educational institution by the end of 2021-22. 
[Para 3.11] 
Action Taken 
 
2.1 The Department  of  Drinking  Water &Sanitation, Ministry of Jal Shakti, vide their communication dated 14thOctober, 2020, had written to this Department regarding nation-wide '100 days campaign' launched on 2ndOctober, 2020 to make provision of 'safe piped water supply' in every anganwadi centre, school, ashramshala and other public institutions in villages under the National  JalJeevan  Mission (NJJM).  
  
2.2 This Department has taken up the matter with States/UTs as per details given below: 
 

30 
 
i. D.O. Letter to Secretary(Education) of all States/UTs dated 23rd October. 2020. 
ii. letter to  Secretary(Education)  of all  States/UTs  dated 12th November, 2020 requesting them to take necessary action for mapping of each school in their State/UT to ensure availability of piped/tap water supply in girls, boys and CWSN toilets; hand wash area  and drinking water facility. 
iii. Reminder letter to Secretary (Education) of all States/UTs dated13thJanuary, 2021. 
 
2.3.  Hon'ble Minister of Jal Shakti. had also written to this Department regarding "Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) –Har Ghar Jal — 100 Days  campaign  to  provide  assured  potable  piped water  supply  in  schools, ashramshalas and anganwadi centres. A reply from Hon'ble Shiksha Mantri to Hon'ble Minister of Jal Shakti has also been sent on 8thJanuary, 2021.  Further Observation(s)/Recommendation(s) 2.4 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department towards achieving the set objective. However, the final outcome of the efforts taken has not been furnished. The Committee recommends that the Department should apprise it of the outcomes of the action taken as well as the concrete timeline by which the target of ensuring supply of safe and contamination free piped potable water in every educational institution in the country will be met.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the specific measures taken in this respect for North Eastern States, which were found to be lagging behind in this venture.  BREAKFAST UNDER MID DAY MEAL   Recommendation 
3. The Department in its submissions to the Committee in the meeting held on 5th 
March, 2021 informed that as envisaged in National Education Policy, 2020 they have 

31 
 
proposed to include 2 new components i) extension of MDM to pre-primary and ii) 
provision of breakfast, under Mid-Day Meal Scheme during 2021-22. The Department in its 
written submission also informed that a number of States have started providing breakfast to 
the students in the Mid-day Meal Scheme. The Committee recommends that under the 
schemes all schools should start providing breakfast from the students in the next academic 
session as envisaged in NEP, 2020 
[Para 3.29] 
Action Taken 
 
3.1 The NEP, 2020 envisages provision of simple and nutritious breakfast to children in 
addition to Mid Day Meal.  
 
3.2 Proposals in this regard were taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the EFC 
Stage.  For extension of MDM Scheme to Pre-primary Class (Bal Vatika) MoF has agreed 
subject to non overlapping of activities which are currently being undertaken by MoWCD.  
However, for inclusion of the component ‘provision of breakfast to pre-primary and 
elementary classes and provision for utensils (eating plate, spoon and tumbler)’,MoF has not 
agreed to the proposal.  The matter will now be submitted to Cabinet for continuation of 
MDM scheme upto 2025-26 accordingly. 
   Further Observation(s)/Recommendation(s) 3.3 The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry and observes that the latest developments in this regard may be furnished. The Committee drew the attention of the Department to its recommendation in the 326th Report of the  Committee on Demands for Grants(2021-22) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development to take up Poshan Abhiyan on a war footing with active involvement and convergent action by the Ministries concerned to ensure concrete action on the ground and observed that ensuring proper nutrition to growing children is a pre-requisite in moulding a strong and healthy nation. The Committee accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should renew its efforts for implementation of the scheme and also ensure that targeted home 

32 
 
delivery of rations under Mid-Day-Meal Scheme to the beneficiaries during the Covid-19 pandemic is continued.   EDUCATION OF GIRL CHILD AND KASTURBA GANDHI BALIKA VIDAYALAYAS  Recommendation 
4. The Committee appreciates the efforts/initiatives taken for the girl child education 
and recommends that the Department should take up the construction of the KGBVs and 
make them operational on a mission mode alongwith integrated skill development training 
to these girls to achieve the objectives of the flagship programme of Beti Padhao, Beti 
Bachao scheme of the government. The Department should give special focus on the 
aspirational districts as only 1016 KGBVs are operational in these districts as against 1339 
sanctioned. 
[Para 3.44] 
Action Taken 
4.1 The matter of non-opertaionalization of KGBVs is taken up with respective 
States/UTs from time to time.  In this regard, this Department has requested the States/UTs 
to operationalize all KGBVs including KGBVs in aspirational districts vide Letter No. 13-
28/2019-IS-l1 dated 12.09.2019 and Letter No. 2-2/2019-lS-l1 dated 07.11.2019 & 
02.11.2020. Recently, in the ongoing Project Approval Board’s meeting, States and UTs are 
directed to operationalise all the KGBVs at the earliest. 
 
4.2 Department of School Education and  Literacy, Ministry of Education is providing 
funds for specific skill training in  Kasturba  Gandhi  Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs). Under 
Specific  Skill  Training,  States  appoint  Vocational  instructors  in  KGBVs  to  provide  
need  based  vocational  education  to  girls.  The States generally pick up courses based on 
the choice and need of the students in the KGBVs. It is generally the state's prerogative to 
choose the course and mode of skill training in KGBV as per the local need and 
requirement. NCERT regularly conducts various research studies on implementation of 
KGBV scheme in various parts of the country. 
 
 

33 
 
 
Further Observation(s)/Recommendation(s) 
4.3 The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the Department noted 
that 323 KGVBs out of 1016 KGVBs sanctioned in Aspirational Districts are yet to be 
operationalized and that the latest status in this regard has not been furnished. The 
Committee recommends that the latest status in this regard may be furnished. The 
Committee also recommends that skill development courses may be designed for or 
imparted in KGVBs in consultation with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship under the Skill India Programme to enhance the employability 
prospects and sustainable livelihood skills of the students. The Committee further 
recommends that the Department should take proactive measures to ensure concrete 
action in this direction instead of leaving it solely to the prerogative of the States.  
 
 
  

34 
 
RECOMMENDATION(S)/OBSERVATION(S)-AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants of the Department 
 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department. However, the 
Committee further recommends that a clear-cut road map alongwith well defined time 
line may be prepared so as to complete the entire process of survey in a time bound 
manner. The Department may apprise the Committee of the strategies evolved based 
on the survey for enhancing the educational status of tribal students from the North-
East region of the country. 
[Para 2.15] 
  
HIGH DROP OUT RATES AMONGST THE STUDENTS FROM SCHEDULED 
CASTE/SCHEDULED TRIBE/GIRL CHILD 
 
The Committee while noting the reply of the Department observes that the 
recommendations of the Committee to conduct a survey to identify districts where 
drop out rates of SC, ST and Girls are higher than the national average has not been 
acted upon. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the survey may be conducted 
expeditiously and detailed information along with intervention plans based thereon 
may be furnished. The Committee also recommends that the impact of the Covid-19 
pandemic on the drop out rates, particularly amongst SCs, STs and Girls may be 
specifically analysed and all efforts may be made to bring back such children to the 
manifold of the education and the Committee may be apprised of the same. 
  
The Committee also noted that out of the 5726 KGVBs sanctioned, 849 are yet 
to be made operational. The Committee observes that ensuring quality education to 
girls, particularly those belonging to Scheduled Castes and Tribes is imperative to 
reduce gender disparity and usher in an equitable society. The Committee, therefore, 

35 
 
recommends that immediate steps should be taken to get the 849 KGVBs operational 
as soon as possible. 
[Paras  2.5 & 2.6] 
  
CONSTRUCTION OF  KITCHEN-CUM-STORE 
 
The Committee observes that the recommendation of the Committee has only 
been noted and it seems that no concrete action has been taken with regard to 
exploring the feasibility of public-private partnership in the process of construction of 
Kitchen-cum-Store. The updated status of the physical progress on construction of 
Kitchen-cum-Stores has also not been furnished. The Committee, accordingly further 
recommends that the feasibility of public-private partnership in the construction 
process of Kitchen-cum-Stores may expeditiously be explored and Committee apprised 
of the action taken. The latest updated status on the construction may also be 
provided. 
[Para 3.2] 
 
STARS AND ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK PROJECT 
 
The Committee observes that the Department has mentioned about the projects 
undertaken or proposed to be undertaken. However, the recommendation of the 
Committee to suitably amend the criteria for selecting more States for STARS project 
has not found any mention. The Committee further recommends that amending the 
criteria for selecting more States for STARS project may be explored expeditiously, 
and Committee informed about the same. 
[Para 4.2] 
NATIONAL EDUCATION POLICY, 2020 
The Committee noted that the Department has given only the analysis of Budgeted 
Expenditure of Centre and States/UTs from 2015-16 to 2017-18 and not the latest 
figures for 2018-19 and 2019-20. The proactive measures being taken to align the 
States/UTs with the Central Schemes and programmes have not been specifically 
indicated as recommended by the Committee. The Committee therefore recommends 
that the Department should focus on slowly enhancing the expenditure on education by 

36 
 
formulating and implementing policies and schemes in such a way as to achieve the 
target of 6% of GDP, as envisaged in previous education policies and reaffirmed in 
NEP, 2020. The Committee reiterates that emphasis on quality education accessible to 
all is a must for building a strong nation with well informed, educated and skilled 
citizens to contribute to its progress. 
[Para 5.4] 
 
  
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
Overall Assessment of the Demands for Grants of the Department 
 
The Committee noted the reply of the Department and recommends that 
further follow up and final action in this regard may be informed. The Committee also 
recommends that a comparative analysis of drop out rates during the pre and post 
pandemic periods may be undertaken to see whether there has been any increase in the 
rates and a clear road map including remedial measures taken to redress this issue 
may be furnished to the Committee. The Committee further recommends that more 
proactive measures to assimilate transgenders (at age appropriate levels) into the 
manifold of education may also be taken and detailed information may be provided. 
[Para 1.7] 
  DRINKING WATER AND TOILETS IN SCHOOLS The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department towards achieving the set objective. However, the final outcome of the efforts taken has not been furnished. The Committee recommends that the Department should apprise it of the outcomes of the action taken as well as the concrete timeline by which the target of ensuring supply of safe and contamination free piped potable water in every educational institution in the 

37 
 
country will be met.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the specific measures taken in this respect for North Eastern States, which were lagging behind in this venture. [Para 2.4]         BREAKFAST UNDER MID DAY MEAL   The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry and observes that the latest developments in this regard may be furnished. The Committee drew the attention of the Department to its recommendation in the 326th Report on DFG(2021-22) of the Ministry of Women and Child Development to take up Poshan Abhiyan on a war footing with active involvement and convergent action by the Ministries concerned to ensure concrete action on the ground and observed that ensuring proper nutrition to growing children is a pre-requisite in moulding a strong and healthy nation. The Committee accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should renew its efforts for implementation of the scheme and also ensure that targeted home delivery of rations under Mid-Day-Meal Scheme to the beneficiaries during the Covid-19 pandemic is continued.  [Para 3.3] 
  
EDUCATION OF GIRL CHILD AND KASTURBA GANDHI BALIKA 
VIDAYALAYAS 
The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the Department noted 
that 323 KGVBs out of 1016 KGVBs sanctioned in Aspirational Districts are yet to be 
operationalized and that the latest status in this regard has not been furnished. The 

38 
 
Committee recommends that the latest status in this regard may be furnished. The 
Committee also recommends that skill development courses may be designed for or 
imparted in KGVBs in consultation with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship under the Skill India Programme to enhance the employability 
prospects and sustainable livelihood skills of the students. The Committee further 
recommends that the Department should take proactive measures to ensure concrete 
action in this direction instead of leaving it solely to the prerogative of the States.  
[Para 4.3] 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND 
SPORTS 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
      The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 
10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 5th August, 2021 in Committee Room No. '63', First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Ms. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
 LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7. Shri Dhal Singh Bisen 
8. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
9. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
10. Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
11. Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
12. Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
13. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
14. Shri Balak Nath 
15. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 

40 
 
16. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
17. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
18. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
19. Shri Dharambir Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr.   Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor  
Shri   K. Sudhakaran, Director 
Smt. Oindrila Roy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Arun Bakshi, Under Secretary 
Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer (in-situ) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
apprised them of the agenda of the day, i.e, consideration and adoption of the 
following Reports:-  
(i) * * * 
(ii) * * * 
(iii) * * * 
(iv) 330th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred and Twenty Third Report on the Demands for Grants, 
2021-22 of the Department of School Education and Literacy, 
Ministry of Education. 
3. The Chairman informed the Members that in regard to Action Taken 
Reports, the Secretary of concerned Ministries were impressed upon the need to 
give due consideration to all recommendations and to indicate concrete steps being 
taken for implementation of the same in the Action Taken Report instead of stating  
 
 * Pertains to other matter 

41 
 
that the matter is under consideration or being looked into etc. Members, 
appreciating the Action Taken Reports, also emphasized the need for analyzing all 
Action Taken Reports and comparing the funds/Budget allocated previously to 
each item and in the new Budget. 
4. The Chairman thereafter gave a detailed observation on the Report on 
Learning Loss. Members also observed that most rural and remote areas of the 
country lack digital facilities that have led to huge digital divide. Digital emphasis 
should be given to primary schools. 
5. * * * 
6. The Committee thereafter considered all the Draft Reports and adopted them 
with some minor modifications. 
7. The Committee further decided to present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 6th August, 2021. It authorized the Chairman and in his absence, 
Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri 
Anubhav Mohanty and in his absence, Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen to lay the Reports on 
the Table of the  Lok Sabha.  
8. * * * 
9. The meeting adjourned at 10.45 A.M.   
 
NEW DELHI                                                                           K. SUDHAKARAN 
5th August, 2021.                                                                              DIRECTOR  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  * Pertains to other matter 