169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
 
HUNDRED SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS,
2005-2006, (DEMAND NO. 105) OF MINISTRY OF YOUTH AFFAIRS AND SPORTS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  13TH  DECEMBER,  2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON  13TH  DECEMBER,  2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER,  2005/AGRAHAYANA,1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         Composition Of The Committee                                                           
2.         Preface                                                                                                
3.                  Report                                                                                                             
           CHAPTER  I    Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s reply
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted         
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are still awaited
4.         Observations and Recommendations                                                                
5.                  Minutes                                                                                               
6.                  Annexure                                                                                                        
              COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2005-06)
 
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
      MEMBERS
      RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. *Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad
5. **Shrimati Chandra Kala Pandey
6. ^ Shrimati Brinda Karat
7.      Shri S. Anbalagan
8. Shri Uday Pratap Singh
9. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
10. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 
11. Shri Anil Dhirubhai Ambani
 
            LOK SABHA
 
12. Shri Basudeb Barman
13. Shri Hari Sinh Chavda
14. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
15. Shri R. L. Jalappa
16. Shri Ramswarup Koli
17. Shri Manjunath Kunnur
18. Shri Y.G. Mahajan
19. Shri Manoj Kumar
20. Shri Babu Lal Marandi
21. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
22.  Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
23. Mohd. Mukim
24. Shri Tukaram Ganpatrao Rengepatil
25. Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
26. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
27. Shri Tufani Saroj
28. Smt. P. Satheedevi
29. Shri A.R. Shaheen
30. Smt. Jyotirmoyee Sikdar
31. Shri K. Virupaxappa
32. Shri Devendra Singh Yadav
 
*nominated w.e.f .23.8.2005
** Ceased to be a member of the Committee on expiry of her term in Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 18th August,  , 2005
^nominated w.e.f. 25.9.2005
 
            SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer
Smt. Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
PREFACE
 
          I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred-Sixty Ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its Hundred
Sixty Third Report onDemands for Grants (Demand No.105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for the year
2005-2006.
2.         The Hundred Sixty Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human
Resource Development was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6
th May, 2005. 
Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report received from the Ministry of Youth
Affairs and Sports were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 8th December, 2005. 
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on  8th December, 2005.
 
NEW DELHI;
December 8, 2005
Agrahayana 17 , 1927 , (Saka)
VAYALAR RAVI
Chairman,
Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development
 
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its One Hundred-Sixty thirdReport onDemands for Grants (Demand No.105) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports for the year 2005-2006.
2.         Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in
the Report.  They have been categorized as follows:-
 
(i)
                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
            2.1,3.1, 4.1,5.10,8.4,9.5,11.3,12.3,17.4,17.5,25.1,     (Chapter I) Total-11
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies:   
4.2,4.4,4.5,4.6,4.7,5.2,5.5,5.7,6.3,6.5,6.7,6.8,6.9,6.10,6.12,6.13,12.4,13.2,13.3,14.1,
15.1,15.2,16.5,17.6,17.9,18.4,19.2,23.4.                                                  
             (Chapter II)  Total- 28
(iii)
               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee:
2.2,4.3,5.3,5.4,5.9,5.11,6.4,6.11,7.4,9.3,9.4,10.5,16.3,16.6,17.3,17.7,17.8,18.3,18.6, 19.4,19.7,20.2,21.3,23.5.
(Chapter-III)  Total- 24
(iv)
              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited– 
16.4 (Chapter – IV) Total- 1
The final  replies in respect of  the recommendations/observations made in Chapter IV of the Report are still
awaited from the Department.  The Committee may be apprised of the fact as and when action is taken.
 CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH  HAVE  BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
II.        NATIONAL YOUTH POLICY, 2003
 
Para 2.1          In order to fulfil the legitimate aspirations and to empower the youth in the age group of 13-35 years to
successfully accomplish the challenging tasks of national reconstruction and social change that lie ahead, the National
Youth Policy has been launched which envisages that all Ministries/Departments of the Central and State Governments
particularly, in the social sectors will strive to make identifiable allocations in their budget for youth development
programmes.  The Committee welcomes the idea of making identifiable allocation for youth programmes by not only
the Central Ministries/Departments but by States also.  This would provide a clear picture about the efforts and
resources devoted for this purpose.  Such youth specific allocations be shown by all the Ministries/Departments from
the year 2006-07 itself.
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
ACTION TAKEN
The provision made in the “Implementation Mechanism” of the National Youth Policy, 2003 that “all
Ministries/Departments of the Union Government and the State Governments, particularly in the social sector will strive
to make identifiable allocation in their budget for youth Development Programmes” has already been brought to their
notice.  However, concerned Union Ministries/Departments are being asked separately to make youth specific
allocations in their budget commencing from the financial year 2006-07.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
III.       NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR YOUTH
 
Para 3.1          The National Commission for Youth (NCY), which was set up in March, 2002 adopted its report in its
meeting held on 5
th July, 2004 and submitted the same to the Ministry on 17 th July, 2004.  The report of the
Commission was laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament on 23 rd December, 2004.  A number of
recommendations have been made by the Commission out of which 14 recommendations have been accepted in
principle by the Ministry.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the recommendations of the Commission that
have been accepted for implementation.  The Committee hopes that youth – the future leaders of the country could be
made instrumental towards achieving socio-economic changes and technological excellence and thus contribute towards
national development.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
The status of the implementation of the recommendations of the National Commission for Youth has been
indicated in Annexure-I.
 
IV.       BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 4.1          Total outlay, both Plan and Non-Plan taken together provided to the Ministry for the year 2004-05, was
Rs. 466.00 crores.  It was decreased to Rs. 441.00 crores in RE 2004-05.  The budget allocation for 2005-06 is Rs.
506.99 crores (Plan Rs. 438.99 crores and Non Plan Rs. 68.00 crores) against a projected demand of Rs. 691.00 crores
(Rs. 610.27 crores under Plan and Rs. 80.81 crores under Non-Plan).  The Plan projections, the Committee was
informed, were made in view of the requirements of the Commonwealth Games, 2010 and proposal for extending the
National Service Scheme to all schools in the country in accordance with the commitment made in the Common
Minimum Programmes of the Government.  The Committee feels that the Ministry’s projection for the annual plan,
2005-06 was quite justified because it constituted only 10% increase over the previous year’s allocations and also
because the Ministry has to fulfil its obligation for the preparations of the Commonwealth Games, 2010 and expansion
of NSS up to the school level.  There appears to be no justification in applying cut to its allocations, particularly when
the Ministry was able to spend more than 66.72% of its allocation up to December, 2004, as per the existing norms in
this regard.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
The Ministry is grateful to the Hon’ble Committee for its support.
 
V.        NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 5.10         The Committee also suggests that Department should make every possible efforts to clear the
confusion/uncertainties in respect of recruitment test that was held for selecting Youth Coordinators.
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
ACTION TAKEN
 
The matter is sub-judice.
 
VIII.    RASHTRIYA SADBHAWANA YOJNA
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 8.4           The Committee notes that this scheme has taken the place of erstwhile National Reconstruction Corps
Scheme, which continued upto March, 2003.  It has taken two years in formulation of the revised scheme.  The
Committee hopes that this scheme would not suffer from the shortcomings experienced in the implementation of the
earlier scheme.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Since the scheme has been implemented w.e.f. 01.04.2005, a review of the scheme will be made after it
completes one year.  The observations of the Committee have been communicated to the Nehru Yuva Kendra
Sangathan, which is the implementing agency for Rashtriya Sadbhavana Yojana. As regards efficacy of 10-20 Sathees
in a district as well as  honorarium of Rs. 1000/-, the matter will be taken up during Mid Term review of the scheme
before 11
th Five Year Plan.
            While formulating the scheme, the shortcomings experienced in the implementation of the old scheme has been
taken in view.  Since volunteers are selected by the Clubs from amongst its own members, there would be transparency
in the selection process. 
 
IX.       SCHEME OF PROMOTION OF NATIONAL INTEGRATION
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 9.5          The Committee notes that the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai was being asked to conduct an
assessment about the impact of the work done by various voluntary agencies under the Scheme of Promotion of
National Integration.  The Madras School of Social Work, Chennai also is being asked to undertake the study on Inter-
State Youth Exchange Programme.  The Committee recommends that the institutions assigned the job of the assessment
should be asked to adhere to a time frame in submitting their reports.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of
the outcome of the assessment along-with the action taken by the Ministry thereon.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
Recommendations of the Committee are noted for future guidance.       
 
XI.       FINACIAL ASSISTANCE TO RURAL YOUTH CLUBS/SPORTS CLUBS
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 11.3        An allocation of Rs. 6.75 crores under the Scheme has been provided in BE 2005-06 against an
allocation of Rs. 3.15 crores BE and RE Rs. 5.35 crores in the year 2004-05.  The Committee is not sure whether last
year’s budget could be fully utilized under the scheme.  It was Rs. 2.83 crores upto 28
th February, 2005.  The enhanced
allocation would include additional grants to Youth Clubs, YDCs, as it is the thrust area identified by Cabinet
Secretariat.  500 RITYDCs and 500 YDCs are proposed to be set up during the current plan period.  The Committee
notes that allocation for this scheme has been nearly doubled in 2005-06 and hopes that entire amount would be utilized
for achieving targets of setting up 500 each YDCs and RITYDCs.  The Committee recommends that the proposed
RITYDCs and YDCs should be proportionately distributed so as to cover all the regions of the country.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
Recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance.                 
 
XII.     PROMOTION OF YOUTH ACTIVITIES AND TRAINING
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 12.3         The Committee notes that vocational training is one of the components of the scheme.  In view of the
number of youth being unemployed due to diminishing job opportunities, it is advisable that more and more vocational
training programmes aimed towards gainful employment be designed.  These training programmes would go a long way
in channelising the hidden potential and energies of the youth towards constructivework.  And at the same time, itwould
also prevent migration of rural youth to cities where they are forced to live a sub-human life apart from falling victims
of anti-social elements.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
Noted for future compliance.                
 
XVII.   SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 17.4        The Committee notes that the BE allocation of Rs. 123.83 crores was reduced at RE to 117.75 crores in
2004-05.  The actual expenditure reported upto 28.3.2005 was Rs. 85.61 crores only.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
The revised Budget Estimate of Rs.117.75 crores, allocated for the year 2004-05 was utilized by 31.3.2005.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
17.5     The Committee would like to remind the Ministry about its last years observations on the issue of under
utilization of funds.  The Ministry in its action taken note has informed that SAI has been instructed to ensure the
optimum utilization of funds under its various Plan Schemes.  Unfortunately the status of utilization does not show any
improvement in 2004-05 either.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation and would like the
Ministry to adopt stringent fiscal measures and guidelines for streamlining its funding pattern.  SAI should be asked by
the Ministry to strictly adhere to those guidelines in utilizing allocations appropriately.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The utilization of the revised budgetary allocation (reduction due to cut of Rs. 25.00 crore by Finance) of Rs.
117.75 crore has been fully utilized by SAI.
ALL INDIA COUNCIL OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 25.1        The decision to set-up an All India Council for Physical Education was taken in May, 1994 in a meeting
of major Physical Education Associations of the country, held under the Chairmanship of the then Minister of Youth
Affairs & Sports. The Committee observed that the decision remained unimplemented for almost ten years. The
Committee finds that during the Ninth Plan, a token provision of Rs.4.00 lakh was kept for this Council. This token
provision has been enhanced to Rs. 93.00 lakhs in the Tenth Plan period. However, the position remains unchanged with
a token amount being provided every year without a single rupee being spent. In   March, 2004 it was decided after
going through the comments/observations of various concerned Ministries/Department/Organizations not to set up such
a Council. Reason given for it was that another statutory body i.e. National Council of Teacher Education has already
laid down regulations on Physical Education. The Committee is surprised to note that a final decision is yet to be taken
as the matter still remains under consideration in consultation with the Ministry of HRD. The Committee fails to

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
understand the constraints in taking a decision on this issue of setting or not setting up of the All India Council of
Physical Education.  The Committee strongly feels that this issue must be settled at the earliest.
 
ACTION TAKEN
It has been decided to drop the proposal for setting up the All India Council of Physical Education (AICPE) in
view of the fact that a Statutory Body already exists to regulate this aspect of the Education.
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH  THE COMMITEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS REPLY
 
IV.
              BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 4.2          The Committee was informed that allocation made to the Ministry in 2005-06, constituted just 0.98 per
cent of the entire Budget of the Government of India.  The Committee considers it disappointingly low in view of the
mandate of the Ministry being to develop the personality of our youth as also involving them in nation-building
activities.  This group, which constitutes nearly 40 per cent of total population of India, is the most vibrant and potent
segment of our society.  Allocation below one percent to youth development and sports reflects a low preference.  The
Committee is of the considered opinion that there is a strong case of adequate allocation for the Ministry in the coming
years.  Department’s demand for a share in the funds collected through education cess must be considered favourably,
particularly for expansion of NSS up to 9
th class and also in all the remaining schools.
 
ACTION TAKEN
            The matter has been being taken up with Planning Commission for the Ministry’s share in the funds collected
through education cess.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 4.4          Even during the Ninth Plan, funds remained underutilized in different categories.  For example, of the
total Ninth Plan outlay of Rs. 352.24 crores for Youth Welfare, only Rs. 336.94 crores could be spent.  The schemes
suffering most were: National Reconstruction Corps, Youth Hostels and Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth
Development.  Similarly, spending Rs. 558.50 crores in Ninth Plan period against an outlay of Rs. 472.61 under Sports
and Physical Education also indicates towards fiscal (mal) practices such as unspent balances or re-appropriation etc. 
The Committee is of the view that these situations- under-utilization as well as unspent balances – indicate that both our
delivery mechanism as well as system of flow of funds are not foolproof and need to be streamlined further.  It reflects a
poor physical performance because it is directly related to the financial performance.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Effective steps for systematic flow of expenditure (quarter-wise) have been taken in recent past.  The position
regarding specific schemes mentioned above is as follows:
 
NRC Scheme has been revamped w.e.f. 31.3.2003 and new scheme under the name of Rashtriya Sadbhavana
Yojana has since been launched this year.  The competition among Youth Clubs has been completed and the selection of
volunteers by the best youth clubs has been finalized.  The enrolled volunteers are being given training to act as
facilitators for the youth clubs in their respective areas.
 
The main reason for non-utilisation of budgeted outlay was non-receipt of utilization certificates of grants
already released and further progress reports from the concerned State Governments.  The matter for expediting the
construction of hostels was taken up by Secretary, YAS with Chief Secretaries of all the concerned States on 17.2.05. 
This has resulted in completion of 4 youth hostel projects and receipt of progress reports of 10 more hostels being
constructed at various places. A total of Rs. 198.13 lakh has been released during the period March, 2005 to July, 2005
as per Annexure - II.  We have committed liability of Rs.14.09 crores, as on 17.8.05, for the 22 on-going youth hostels

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
under construction and as all the projects are being monitored regularly, it is felt that not only the allocated budget for
the scheme will be fully utilized, we will require additional funds at RE Stage also for release to the concerned State
Governments.
 
As far as RGNIYD is concerned, till 2004-05 only two faculty posts had been sanctioned and the infrastructure
had remained incomplete.  During 2004-05, a number of initiatives have been taken to strengthen and streamline the
working of the institute.  These include creation of five Academic Divisions; networking with Universities through IT;
construction projects in the campus have been completed and construction work of the Auditorium has commenced.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 4.5          While appreciating the formulation of quarterly Action Plans during Tenth Plan by the Ministry, the
Committee feels that it has not been able to achieve the desired results.  The Committee would like to emphasize the
need for the judicious and optimum utilization of funds by the Ministry allocated for various schemes.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Noted for guidance.  During 2004-05, the Ministry took number of steps to ensure the physical performance
under various schemes with a view to achieve the desired results.  The physical targets achieved during 2004-05 under
various Schemes is indicated at Annexure- III.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 4.6          The Committee is of the view that a detailed review of the schemes showing poor performance should be
undertaken so as to identify the shortcomings and initiate remedial measures.  The Ministry should involve the Planning
Commission, the State Governments and other implementing agencies in this exercise.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The following initiatives have been undertaken in this regard:
            On Youth side, the Scheme of NRC which was implemented on a pilot basis has been reviewed and a new
scheme, i.e. Rashtriya Sadbhavana Yojana, has been launched from 01.04.2005.
            The financial norms of the various schemes being implemented by Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan have been
revised with effect from 01.04.2005.  A number of initiatives, including new MIS System, have been introduced to
strengthen and streamline the implementation of these schemes.
 
            In National Service Scheme, a review of the Scheme has been undertaken during 2004-05 and proposal for its
deepening and expanding the scheme has been forwarded to the Planning Commission for its in-principle approval.
 
            On Sports side, the review has been undertaken.  A fresh Scheme “Sports for Disabled” is being formulated. 
The Schemes of State Sports Academy and Assistance to National Sports Federations have been identified for revision. 
Wide ranging discussion has been held.  Planning Commission, State Governments, Corporate Sector and eminent
sportspersons have been consulted.  The revised Scheme has been formulated and is being processed for Expenditure
Finance Committee’s approval.  A new initiative i.e. Champion Promotion has been launched to facilitate National
Champions for achieving excellence in Sports.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
                       
Para 4.7          The Committee is aware of the structural problems inherent in our system from Union level down to the
Panchayats in implementing the central sector as well as centrally-sponsored schemes.  Ours being basically a
cooperative federation, States have got to play a more pro-active and coordinated role in this exercise for obtaining the
desired impact of the schemes at the ground level.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The Ministry held a meeting of Sports and Youth Affairs Ministers to highlight the need of proactive role of
States.  The State Governments and District Administrations are being involved in monitoring of various youth sector

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
Schemes, like NSS, youth hostels, funding to NGOs as well as schemes being implemented by Nehru Yuva Kendra
Sangathan.  Volunteers of youth clubs are being encouraged to actively participate in the Gram Sabha meetings.  The
assisted youth clubs having been recognized as NGOs are taking up, projects for the Community development in their
respective areas.  On sports side, the states are actively involved in Schemes of Talent Search, State Training Centres
and Special Area Games and State Coaching Centres as well as Scholarship to Sportspersons.  The State Sports
Academy can also be implemented through the State Governments.
 
V.        NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 5.2          A new initiative entitled Gandhi Gramodaya Sankalp Abhiyan – Model Village Project was launched in
2004 under which NY Kendra will adopt one village with a view to develop it as a model self-reliant village.  497 NYK
Districts have been identified for developing self-reliant villages on the principles of Gram Swaraj as propagated by
Mahatma Gandhi.  A new scheme entitled Rashtriya Sadbhavana Yojna has been approved for empowering rural youth
clubs and promoting leadership among them.  The Committee feels that adequate publicity should be given to all youth
programmes, particularly this new scheme, through print and electronic media.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The Schemes of MYAS are being given due publicity by NYKS during all its youth clubs meetings, training
programmes.  Since 2004-05, a newsletter is being regularly published by NYKS. The schemes are also publicized
through the official web site of MYAS.  As far as Rashtriya Sadhbhavana Yojana is concerned, the process for the
selection of Nehru Yuva Sathees under the scheme has been completed.  The training of volunteers is under way. The
selection process itself has given lot of publicity to the scheme.  Since, NYKS is implementing a large number of
schemes of this and other Ministries, this process also enables it to provide publicity to its schemes
.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 5.5          The Committee is of the view that in order to fulfil its social responsibility, the Youth Clubs and Mahila
Mandals should be encouraged to work as watchdog agencies against drug and human trafficking, HIV/AIDs etc.  They
need to be encouraged to actively participate in awareness generation and promoting activities relating to national
integration.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan is one of the agencies actively engaged in programmes working for the
prevention of HIV-AIDS, Drug Abuse and Human trafficking. Nehru Yuva Kendras’ affiliated Youth Clubs regularly
organize various programmes in connection with these issues.  International Day of Drug Abuse and Human
Trafficking, World AIDS Day etc. are observed by NYK regularly.  NYKS had earlier implementing schemes like
Villagers Talk AIDS programmes with the cooperation of National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO).  Now NYKS
has undertaken implementation of Red Ribbon Express project in collaboration with NACO and Rajiv Gandhi
Foundation (RGF). The participants as well as beneficiaries of the project include all Youth Club and Mahila Mandal
members.  Recently, all the senior level officers of NYKS have been trained in Drug Abuse Prevention activities with
the help of National Institute of Social Defence under Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
 
The Youth Clubs and Mahila Mandals affiliated to NYKS are working for the promotion of National Integration
and Communal Harmony. Youth Club members are also participants of the National Integration Camps organized by
NYKS and the Ministry.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 5.7          While appreciating the idea of utilizing the services of the NYKS by other Ministries/Departments for
improving the outreach of their programmes, the Committee has a word of caution in this regard.  The basic mandate of
the NY Kendras should not get diluted/ignored, the possibility of which cannot be ruled out in this situation.  The
Committee feels that a well-coordinated monitoring mechanism would be required, if NY Kendras were to participate in

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
schemes run by eight to nine Ministries/agencies.
 
In view of the 97 vacant posts of District Youth Coordinators, the Committee expresses its reservations about an
effective implementation of such programmes in addition to the programmes being run by NYKS at present.  Moreover,
nearly 100 districts are yet to have NY Kendras in the country.  The Committee recommends that all the existing
District Kendras should be equipped with requisite infrastructure and manpower for handling such a large number of
programmes.  Committee would like to be apprised of details of various State level programmes being undertaken by
NYKS.  The Committee has been given to understand that state govts. have been asked to converge their programmes
with NYKS.  The Committee feels that this is the right initiative taken by the Ministry.  The Committee is of theview
that a study can be initiated by the Ministry whereunder State and Centre-run programmes could be analysed and
element of overlapping if any, in schemes may be eliminated.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The Committee’s observation on the mandate of NYKS is noted.
 
A list of the State level programmes being undertaken by NYKS is at Annexure- V.  The Committee’s
suggestion about a study to be initiated by the Ministry would be taken up.
 
VI.       NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.3          The Committee is happy to note that the physical and financial performance of the NSS during 2002-03,
2003-04 and 2004-05 have been satisfactory.  It, however, needs to be still improved, specially, the trend of utilization
in 2004-05.  Although BE allocation of Rs. 28.00 crore was enhanced to Rs. 33.50 crore, actual expenditure figures upto
28.2.05 is only Rs. 23.25 crores, which was even less than the BE provision.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
It is submitted that the total expenditure finally for the year 2004-05 was 100% i.e Rs.33.04 crore.  The
expenditure figures of Rs. 23.25 crores till end of February, 2005 were due to the fact that the approval for an amount of
Rs. 9.79 crore sought as re-appropriation was received from the Ministry of Finance only in March, 2005.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.5          The Committee notes that there is a large gap between the existing universities, colleges, etc.  and those
in which NSS units have been provided.  For example, 79 universities, 9683 colleges, 33210 schools and 2031 technical
institutions are yet to be provided with NSS units.  In States like Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand, scheme seems
to have been implemented half-heartedly.  The Committee further notes that States like Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura
were also not performing well, whereas other States like Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Kerala are doing exceedingly
well.  The Committee would like to describe the implementation of this scheme as lop-sided.  In such a scenario, the
Committee feels that it would be difficult to achieve the goal of providing NSS to all the universities, colleges and other
educational institutions in the country, let alone expanding it to all the secondary schools as well.
 
ACTION TAKEN
From the humble beginning of 40,000 student volunteers in 37 universities in 1969, the spread of the scheme
reached 192 universities and 39  +2 councils now. There is a proposal to introduce NSS in all the Secondary Schools
also for which ‘in-principle’ approval of the Planning Commission has been sought.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.7          The Committee would also like the Ministry to review system of release of funds for implementing the
NSS scheme.  It would be appropriate if the institutions get the1
st instalment of the amount by the month of May for the

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
implementation of the scheme without delay.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Every year, Ist instalment of NSS grants for the following year are released in the month of January so that it
could be utilized in the month of May and June which happen to be summer vacation months in most of the States of the
country.  An amount of Rs. 7,04,37,843/- for Regular Activities and Rs. 4,11,75,660/- for Special Camping Programme
was released on   23.12.2004, as 1st instalment for 2005-06 to different States/UTs of the country.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.8          In view of the significance and popularity of the NSS, which is basically meant for preparing our
students for self-development as well as community development, the Committee strongly recommends to provide
adequate funds at appropriate stage for expanding/strengthening this scheme so that it covers the remaining educational
institutions as well as expanding it up to 9
th class.
 
ACTION TAKEN
A proposal to introduce NSS in all the Secondary Schools and expand it to uncovered institution in a phased
manner is pending for ‘in-principle’ approval of the Planning Commission.  The matter is being pursued.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.9           The Committee believes that a large number of students at senior secondary level do not join NSS in
view of the huge curricular load including that of competitive exams that they are forced to take up at 10+2 stage.  This
trend is increasing day-by-day, as a result, a large number of such students are not able to join NSS.  The Committee,
therefore, feels that Ministry, CBSE, NCERT and the Department of Secondary and Higher Education should put their
head together for finding out ways to enable such students for participating in NSS activities.
 
 
ACTION TAKEN
The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) requesting them for
taking appropriate action in the matter. Copy of the D.O. letter dated 10th May, 2005 is attached herewith as Annexure-
VI.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.10 The Committee also feels that regular monitoring mechanism for NSS activities at different levels is not
there.  The Ministry depends on reports and review from the Regional Directors of NSS who get reports from State
Liaison Officers – employees of the States.  Such a channel, the Committee feels, may not be free from biases etc. in
reporting the feedback about impact and outreach of the Programme.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that
amore independent/dependable mechanism should be provided for this purpose.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
The tasks of monitoring is being undertaken at the following three levels:
 
(i)         At Ministry level:
Every year NSS grants are released to various  States/UTs. The State Govt. is required to furnish the Statement of
Accounts to the Ministry, annually, showing details of NSS grants (Central + State share) released to various
Universities/Colleges falling under the jurisdiction of respective State/UT. Ministry is entrusted with the examination of
the statement of accounts furnished by each State/UT and only after having satisfied itself with the performance of each
State/UT, further grants are released.
 
(ii)        At the level of Programme Adviser’s Cell:
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 The Programme Adviser’s Cell is entrusted with the monitoring and implementation of NSS programme in various
States/UTs by examining the periodical (quarterly/half-yearly/annual) reports received from the State level NSS Cell of
various States/UTs.
 
(iii)       At Regional Centre’s level:
 
There are 15 NSS Regional Centres covering the entire country, which are entrusted with liaison between the Centre and
the State. These Regional Centres are also monitoring the release of NSS grants to various Universties/Colleges/+2
schools by respective States/UTs.
Apart from this, officers of the NSS Regional Centres, State Liaison Cells, NSS Programme Co-coordinators visit NSS
Programmes/Camps falling under their jurisdiction and send feed-back to NSS Programme Adviser’s Cell/Ministry on a
regular basis. The monitoring mechanism has been further strengthened with new MIS system with effect from
01.04.2005.  It may be mentioned that State Liaison Cell is manned by Officers of the State Government, which are
funded under the scheme.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.12         Evaluation of this scheme was got done by the Ministry with the help of the IIPA.  The Committee would
like to know the steps proposed to be initiated in the light of the findings of the IIPA report.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Report of evaluation submitted by IIPA has been examined.  While formulating new proposals for deepening
and strengthening the NSS, the recommendations have been taken note of.  The manual is being revised and updated.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.13        To a query about the major constraints faced while implementing the NSS scheme, the Committee was
informed that (i) some States/UTs delay the settlement of account resulting in holding of further release of grants and
(ii) State Liaison Cells which are fully funded by the Ministry are not functioning in some of the State/UTs.  The
Committee is, no doubt, aware of this perennial problem of undue delay in settlement of accounts by the States in
implementing Central sector schemes.  It is the main bottleneck in implementing them.  It further feels that this problem
is projected more often than not as insurmountable.  Similarly, the problem of State Liaison Cell not functioning in
some States and UTs also falls in the same category.  The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry should take up
these two problems with the concerned  States at the highest level with a view to sort out the same and report the action
taken in this regard to the Committee.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Usually, a two years’ moratorium is given to the States for settlement of accounts. Grants were released only to
those States/UTs in the last financial year whose accounts we re settled upto 2001-02. Through the dedicated and
sincere efforts made by the Ministry, the number of defaulting States /UTs has come down to 4 in 2004-05 as compared
to 23 at the beginning of 2000-01. Efforts are also being made to have atleast one SLO Cell for each State/UT, in
consultation with the concerned State Government/UT Administration. The observations of the Committee have been
noted for compliance.
 
XII.     PROMOTION OF YOUTH ACTIVITIES & TRAINING
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 12.4        The Committee observes that against an allocation of Rs. 17.84 crores under the Scheme during the
Ninth Plan, utilization figures amounted to Rs. 21.68 crores.  During the first three years of Tenth Plan also, there has
been optimum utilization of allocated funds, which has already reached the utilization level of Ninth Plan.  The
Committee also notes that against targeted 80,975 youths, 1,26,019 youth were covered under this scheme during the
Ninth Plan.  Position must be similar during the Tenth Plan period also.  The Committee, however, is surprised to note
that main implementing agencies of this scheme seem to be NGOs as indicated in the details of financial releases made

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
thereunder.  The Committee fails to understand the reluctance on the part of the other proposed implementing agencies. 
The Committee strongly feels that an assessment about this aspect along-with the impact of this scheme on the targeted
beneficiaries and also effectiveness of monitoring mechanism need to be taken up by the Department at the earliest.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Though the NGOs are main implementing agencies of this Scheme, this Ministry is also encouraging the other
implementing agencies i.e. NYKs, State Government etc. to implement this scheme.  During the last financial year
(2004-2005), this Ministry had sanctioned funds to about 300 NYKs for conducting vocational training programmes for
28,860 youth all over India.  Proposals from the State Governments of Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh
were also received and the Ministry sanctioned Entrepreneurship Development Programmes for 4000 youth to the
Government of Andhra Pradesh.
 
          For assessing impact of this Scheme, National Productivity Council, New Delhi has already undertaken
evaluation study   and is expected to submit their final report shortly.  The Ministry, however, ensures that the
sanctioned programme are inspected by the recommending authorities as well as NYKs, NSS, State Governments and
the 2
nd/balance grant of approved assistance is released only after the receipt of satisfactory inspection report.  The
antecedents of the applicant NGOs are being verified through the District Collectors. All these measures are expected to
help in effective implementation of the scheme.
 
XIII.    NEW INITIATIVES FOR ADOLESCENT YOUTH
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 13.2        The Committee appreciates the move of the Ministry for setting up a Special Cell for Adolescent Youth
and the project titled support to Adolescent Health and Development (2004-07) as part of UNFPA’s Sixth Country
Programme.  The Committee notes that 82 District Counseling and career guidance centres have been sanctioned under
the scheme, which is targeted towards adolescents.  A number of projects amounting to Rs. 7.00 crores have been
sanctioned during the year 2004-05.  The list provided by the Ministry indicates that all the States are not covered under
the scheme and the distribution is also not even region-wise.  The Committee understands that the responsibility for
monitoring has to be shouldered again by District Collectors.  The Committee opines that the DC would not be able to
spare much time to oversee the working of the agencies as he is already overburdened with tremendous responsibilities. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that some other officer like District Education Officer or District Youth Officer
may monitor this scheme so that it can be implemented effectively and benefits reach to the targetted group.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The observations of the Committee have been noted and necessary action is being taken to involve Chief
Executive Officer of Zila Parishad apart from District Collector/Deputy Commissioner for effective implementation of
the scheme of adolescents.  They are expected to involve District Officers like District Education Youth Officers.  The
spread of the scheme is dependent on the requests of the NGOs.  Through all State Secretaries as well as District
Magistrates all over the Country have been advised to recommend cases for sanction for projects under this scheme.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 13.3        Committee also notes that scheme for Development and Empowerment of Adolescents is a new scheme
launched in the Tenth Plan.  However, the budget provisions for the Scheme in the first two years of Tenth Plan i.e.
2002-03 and 2003-04 could not be utilized due to non-finalisation of the Scheme. Allocation of Rs. 6.30 crore in 2004-
05 was reduced to Rs. 4.30 crore at the RE stage and expenditure incurred upto 28.02.2005 is only Rs. 2.45 crores.  As
per the latest information furnished by the Department, 313-project for Rs. 7.00 crores has been sanctioned.  Maximum
number of projects, i.e. 87 have been sanctioned in UP, followed by 34 in Karnataka.  Funds for all these projects were
released in the second half of 2004-05 and Rs. 4.50 crore were released only in the month of March.  The Committee is
apprehensive whether all precautions had been taken while sanctioning a large number of projects in such a short
period.  The poor utilization of funds in previous years reflects the lack of priority for this scheme.
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
ACTION TAKEN
The grants-in-aid to the eligible organizations were sanctioned on the recommendations of State Govt./DC/CEO
concerned, who were supposed to take into account the viability of organization before making their recommendations.
      The scheme which was finalized in the mid of the year 2004-05 with a provision of Rs.7.00 crores which has been
fully utilized.
 
XIV.    ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL AND STATE YOUTH CENTRES
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 14.1        This is another new scheme launched during the Tenth Plan, which is meant for providing a platform to
youth for organizing various activities like Youth Parliament, National Youth Festival etc.  Rs. 26.00 crore have been
earmarked for this Scheme during the Tenth Plan.  The Committee finds that although funds are being duly allocated
every year, they have remained unutilized.  The scheme continues to be under formulation although Tenth Plan has
crossed its mid-term.  The Committee observes that during 2005-06, which is the fourth year of the Tenth Plan, a token
provision of Rs. 1.00 lakh has been made.  This clearly indicates that this scheme will continue to be in the formulation
stage by the end of Tenth Plan Period.  The Committee reiterates that prior to launching of any new scheme, all
procedural formalities should be completed.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The scheme is awaiting the in-principle approval of Planning Commission.  However, land for the National
Youth Centre has already been allotted to the Ministry.
 
XV.      OVERLAPPING OF SCHEMES
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 15.1        The Committee observes that the Scheme of Financial Assistance for Promotion of Youth Activities and
Training has three components – Vocational Training, Entrepreneurship Development and Exhibition.  Under the
Vocational Training component, vocational training is provided to rural youth to prevent their migration to cities.  The
Committee finds that one of the regular programmes run by NYKS is also Vocational Training.  Rs. 30,000/- per
Kendra isearmarked every year for this activity.  Similarly, under the scheme of Financial Assistance to Rural Youth
Clubs/Sports Clubs, financial assistance is provided to Youth Clubs @ Rs. 10,000/- per Youth Club for normal areas
and Rs. 15,000/- per Youth Club for tribal areas.  NYKS also provides assistance of Rs. 7810/- per Youth Club
Development Programme.
 
            Scheme of Establishment of National/State Youth Centres provides a platform to the youth for organizing
activities like Youth Parliament, National/State Youth Festivals etc.  NYKS also run some special programmes like
National Youth Parliament of HIV/AIDS.
 
Para 15.2        The Committee observes that there is a need for review of components of all the Youth related schemes
to ensure that element of overlapping between two schemes is eliminated.  A composite scheme administered by
designated authorities will lead to better results.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may
initiate this exercise at the earliest.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The scheme for Vocational Training and Entrepreneurship Development under the Ministry provides grants to
NGOs/NSS/NYKS/State Governments.  The NYKS component of Vocational Training is relatively small and is meant
to provide training for small trades to Youth Clubs members only.   There is no overlapping in other schemes.
     
            The scheme of National/State Youth Centers has not yet been approved, but these Centres would be the hub of
Youth activities as facilities of auditorium, sports, multi media would be provided to Youth.  The NYKS, on the other
hand has participated and volunteered for the National Youth Forum on HIV/AIDS, events organized by the
Parliamentary forum. 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 
XVI.    NON-GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS (NGO’s)
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 16.5        The procedure of applying to get grants by the NGOs appears to be quite complicated.  As a result, lot of
persons work as facilitators who do all the procedure for some money.  In the process some of the NGOs coming from
rural and remote areas get fleeced by middlemen.  This problem, the Committee feels, may be overcome by making the
entire procedure more simple and transparent.  Lack of awareness about different schemes to be done by the NGOs also
creates problem for them as many a times, they have to run from pillar to post to find out about such schemes.  The
Ministry must ensure that wide publicity is given to such scheme at the district level through various channels.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Procedure has been simplified during 2005-2006.  The NGO can get recommendation by the District Collector
and submit the application.  Wide publicity is given to our schemes through our field offices and Website.
 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 17.6        The Committee appreciates the constraints of SAI in getting its construction projects implemented by
other agencies both in Delhi and in the States.  SAI would do better to ensure that all the construction works are
completed in a stipulated time frame.  Some methodology needs to be evolved to overcome this recurring phenomena of
underutilization offunds primarily due to delay in the construction works being executed by the agencies like CPWD,
NDMC and DDA.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  A meeting has been taken by the Secretary (YAS) with
CPWD officers and DG, SAI and the system has been streamlined and is expected to expedite construction work.
 
            A Committee under the DG, SAI is monitoring very closely the construction projects undertaken by various
agencies under SAI.  A periodical review is being done to ensure the completion of work under the stipulated time
frame.  Regular coordination meetings are being held with CPWD, NDMC and other agencies to ensure better quality of
work time.  Efforts are being enhanced to focus on infrastructure upgradation in regional centres and STCs keeping in
view the requirements of National teams for the Commonwealth, Asian Games and the Olympics Games.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 17.9        The Committee notes that 25 Navodaya Vidyalayas have been identified to be supported by the Ministry
under NSTC scheme.  The Committee desires to express its reservation about selecting Navodaya Vidyalayas for this
scheme under which lot of support is provided for creating infrastructure for training etc. of the budding sportspersons. 
Because the students coming to Navodya Vidyalayas are selected through open competition who are committed mainly
to the regular studies; sports may not be priority for them.  Secondly, these schools being purely residential, students
from other neighbouring schools may not be able to use the facilities provided there.  The Committee feels, emphasis of
the Ministry while opening the NST Centres, should be to the normal schools particularly in the rural areas where the
infrastructure could be used in a better way.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Keeping in view the need to promote sports in remote and rural areas and to provide an opportunity to the village
children to undergo sports training, the Governing Body in its 27
th Meeting held on July, 9, 2001 approved the proposal
for extension of NSTC Scheme to Navodaya Vidyalaya having requisite sports infrastructure during the 10 th Plan
period. During 2002-03, 24 Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas were adopted and during 10 th Plan it is proposed to adopt
100 JNVs. Selection of the trainees for one adopted Navodaya Vidyalaya is being conducted covering the jurisdiction of

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
4 Navodaya Vidyalayas. As the JNVs are in remote, rural areas, by the end of 10 th Plan Period all the districts of the
country will be covered with this.
 
            For adoption of Navodaya Vidyalayas, the Navodaya Vidyalaya Sangathan recommends the list of schools
having necessary sports infrastructure.  The concerned SAI Regional Directors are requested to depute a team of officers
to inspect the recommended schools and submit the
feasibility reports specially keeping in view the requirement of sports infrastructure. Therefore, based on the feasibility
report the proposals are placed before the Finance Committee of SAI for approval.
 
The basic idea to extend NSTC Scheme to Navodaya Vidyalayas was to promote sports in remote areas to
provide greater balance for Village children and for that Navodaya Vidyalayas are the appropriate institution where
children hailing from the rural and remote places are admitted for regular education.  Since the sports training can best
be imparted under controlled conditions, the children in the Navodaya Vidyalayas reside in the school itself and
therefore, have better opportunities to exploit their skills/potential to excel at National and International level
Competitions.
During 2002-03 Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya was adopted.  In the second leg, 25 more Novodaya Vidyalayas
have been approved for adoption raising the total to 49 schools.  By the end of 10
th Plan period the scheme will be
covering 100 Navodaya Vidyalayas spread through the country, covering all the districts of the country.
 
The views of the Hon’ble Committee shall be placed before the Governing Body.
 
XVIII.COMMONWEALTH GAMES, 2010
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 18.4        The Committee feels that hosting 2010 Commonwealth Games is a privilege accompanied with a lot of
responsibility.  It is understood that more than 600 crores of rupees would be required to set up Commonwealth Games
Village.  Funding would, therefore, be totally based on a well-planned need based approach.  An amount as big as Rs.
600 crores of rupees approximately can leave huge deficit after the Games are over.  The Committee feels that the
Government should have a way out for utilizing the facilities and infrastructure after the games are over, so that the
project would not block government money from other pressing matters.  We have, therefore, to remain highly alert in
the use of infrastructure after the games.  The Committee hopes that the planners would seriously study the funding
pattern in the light of the experiences gained from other countries who have hosted such games in the past.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Insofar as the Games Village is concerned, Delhi Development Authority has submitted a concept note
indicating two options. DDA has indicated that these options have been formulated on the public-private partnership
model.
 
Regarding stadia proposed to be renovated and constructed, efforts are being made to ensure that these are
utilized optimally after the Games are over.
 
XIX.    INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS ACTIVITIES
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 19.2        The Committee observes that during the Ninth Plan these five schemes were operating independently. 
During the first two years of Tenth Plan also these schemes continued their independent status.  Performance of two
schemes, Sports Scholarship Scheme and Pension to Meritorious Sportspersons seemed to be satisfactory as there was
optimum utilization of funds allocated therefor.  However, position was different in respect of the other three schemes,
namely Rural Sports Programme, National Sports Development Fund and Promotion of Sports and Games in Schools. 
Funds provided for these Schemes remained unutilized/under-utilized.  The Committee is constrained to note that
convergence of these five Schemes into one umbrella scheme in 2004-05 failed to improve their performance level.

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 
ACTION TAKEN
On the recommendation of the Planning Commission in the context of Zero Based Budgeting exercise, the
Ministry has amalgamated the five schemes, naming the amalgamated scheme as “Incentives for Promotion of Sports
Activities.”
 
While clubbing the schemes, the schemes were reviewed and revised during the year 2003-04. Being first year of
implementation after revision, the schemes could not be implemented in full swing during the year 2004-05. Therefore,
it was decided to reduce the allocated BE at RE stage in view of Rs. 25.00 crores cut in the overall budget of the
Ministry. Few proposals for financial assistance were received from State/UT Governments under the Scheme of 
“Promotion of Sports and Games in Schools.”  Under the Scheme of “Rural Sports Programme”, grants could not be
released to many States/UTs due to non-receipt of Utilization Certificates of previous grants released.
 
The Scheme of Rural Sports Programme,  one of the sub-components of the Scheme of Incentives for
Promotion Sports Activities has been reviewed and revised during the year 2003-2004, simplifying its various
provisions as well as enhancing the pattern of financial assistance making the scheme more attractive. Provision for
extending financial assistance to Non-Governmental Organizations and Nehru Yuva Kendras for holding district level
sports competitions has been incorporated. The involvement of the functionaries of NYKS and their youth/sports clubs
in the conduct of the tournaments at various levels has been stressed to provide a fillip to theses tournaments.  Special
financial assistance for holding District and State level competitions to North Eastern States will be given henceforth.
For the first time, NYKS was involved in Rural Sports Programme of 54 districts of North-East.
 
Similarly, the scheme relating to Promotion of Sports and Games in Schools has been revised during 2003-04,
simplifying the procedure for implementation of the scheme through the Sports Authority of India. The scale of
assistance has also been revised. The rate of grants-in-aid has been enhanced from Rs.50,000/- to Rs.75,000/- per
district and  from Rs.2,00,000/- to Rs. 3,00,000/- per state for organizing inter-school sports tournament.
 
A precise action-plan for 2005-06 has been drawn through SAI to make these programmes a success.
 
XXIII.GRANTS TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 23.4        The Committee was informed that many NSFs were not submitting their accounts regularly and were
also not regular in holding championships at different levels, which they are supposed to do. It is said that the working
of NSFs needs to be further streamlined.  The Committee, while respecting their autonomy, feels that the NSFs
shouldthemselves evolvesome norms/guidelines for imposing self-discipline amongst them with a view to bringing
more transparency and accountability in their working. If it is done, the erring NSFs would thus be identified and
isolated, who bring all the NSFs in bad repute.
ACTION TAKEN
The Ministry ensures in all cases that the UC and audited account pertaining to an event are submitted by the
concerned NSF before the assistance for the next similar event is sanctioned and released.
 
In recent past, while conveying the approval to release the grants to Federations for holding National
Tournament, it has been made compulsory holding of state level tournaments in all states for both men and women as
well as compulsory holding of district level tournaments in at least 50% districts for men and women before the
federation becomes eligible for release of remaining grants and fresh assistance.
 
With a view to focus on performance, a system of dynamic categorization of National Sports Federations has
been introduced which would automatically decategorised all Federations at the end of Olympic, Asian and
Commonwealth Games etc. and fresh categorization would be based on standards of performance fixed under each
category.
CHAPTER-III

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE   GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
II.        NATIONAL YOUTH POLICY, 2003
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 2.2          An Inter-sectoral Committee (ISC) has been set up under the chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of
Youth Affairs & Sports to prepare a draft National Plan of Action under the National Youth Policy.  The ISC was
constituted on the 13
th December, 2004.  The ISC has representatives from concerned Ministries/Departments, NGOs as
well as experts as members.  Its 1st meeting was held on the 17th March, 2005.  The Committee notes that no time frame
has been fixed for this Inter-Sectoral Committee to complete its mandate.  Committee’s experience has not been very
good in this regard as it causes undue delays.  The Committee, therefore, underlines the need for having time-frame to
prepare the POA by the ISC.  It is necessary that all the stake-holders are taken into confidence by the ISC in this
exercise.  It must evolve strategies to empower youth by way of ensuring their active participation in the decision
making process at all levels.  They should be treated as valuable partners in the process of national planning and
development.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Time frame had been fixed for the Committee on the Action Plan of the National Youth Policy (mentioned in the
para Inter-Sectoral Committee) under the Chairpersonship of the Secretary (YA&S).  The term of the Committee was
fixed for a period of six months from 13
th December, 2004.  The term of the Committee has been extended for another
period of six months to prepare the Plan of Action (POA) for National Youth Policy, 2003.  The representations of
related Ministries dealing with Social Sector as well as experts and NGOs are members of the Committee.  The reports
from the Chairpersons of the eight Sub groups have already been received.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
            The Committee opines that Action Plan on the National Youth Policy 2003 is long overdue. It is surprising that
the Action Plan is being chalked out two years after the announcement of the policy. The Action Plan should always
follow immediately after the policy is announced. The Committee feels that with the reports from the Chairpersons of
the eight sub-groups in hand, the Committee on Action Plan should be in a position to discuss these at the earliest so as
to enable the Inter Sectoral Committee to expedite the Plan of Action within the extended period of time without fail.
 
IV.       BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 4.3          The Committee is concerned over the following pattern of plan allocations as also utilization thereof in
respect of components, ‘youth’ as well as ‘sports’ during the first three years of the Tenth Plan.
                                                                                                                  (Rs. in crores)
2002-2003 BE RE Actual
Youth 106.98 106.98 98.70
Sports 177.67 177.67 177.66
2003-2004  
Youth 121.98 82.20 79.39
Sports 262.67 227.12 222.75
2004-2005 (up to 28.02.2005)  
Youth 120.00 109.37 84.03
Sports 279.50 265.13 185.57
 
The Committee observes that during the first three years of Tenth Plan, performance of schemes for Youth
Welfare like Youth Hostels, National Reconstruction Corps and Incentives for Promotion of Sports Activities, Grants

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
for creation of Sports Infrastructure and Rural School Programme under Sports Sector has not been very satisfactory as
funds allocated for them remained under-utilized.  Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the disturbing trend of
under-utilization of funds meant for NE States both under the Youth and Sports Programmes during the Tenth Plan
period so far.  The Committee is also disturbed by the status of scheme of ‘Promotion of Sports Among Disabled’.  Not
even single rupee could be spent under this scheme against the Ninth Plan allocation of Rs. 15.00 lakhs.  Position
remains unchanged during the Tenth Plan also so far.  This Scheme has been continuing on paper only.  Performance
Budget of the Department for 2005-06 indicates that the Scheme is now being merged with the Scheme relating to
Events.  The Committee does not appreciate the way scheme ‘Promotion of Sports among Disabled’, which is meant to
serve the under-privileged class of society, is being handled.  It needs to be strengthened.
 
ACTION TAKEN
In respect of Youth Welfare Schemes, the under utilization of funds on Youth Hostel scheme is due to lack of
receipt of proposals from State Governments or the State Governments are not providing suitable piece of land with
requisite facilities like approach road, boundary wall, water/electricity connections etc.  So far as scheme of NRC is
concerned, the scheme has been revamped w.e.f. 31.3.2003 and a new scheme known as Rashtriya Sadbhavana Yojna
(RSY) has now been launched. 
            On Sports side, the expenditure in respect of three schemes (viz. Incentives for Promotion of Sports Activities,
Grants for Creation of Sports Infrastructure and Rural Sports Programme) is again on account of limited response or
non-receipt of applications or Utilisation Certificates from the State Government.  The matter has been taken up with
concerned State Governments.
            The utilization of the Plan-funds earmarked for North-Eastern States for the year 2004-2005 is 99.52%.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is surprised to see that the Department has chosen not to respond to its observations about the
strengthening of promotion of sports among disabled. The Committee reiterates its concern about lack of seriousness in
implementing this scheme for the underprivileged class of the society. It appears to the Committee that the scheme is
existing on papers only.
 
As regards poor performance of Youth and Sports Schemes mentioned in its recommendations, the Committee
finds the same old problems like non-receipt of proposals/suitable proposals, delay in submitting UCs etc. extended
again for slow implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The Committee would request the Ministry to supply a
note on these issues hampering the progress of the schemes separately for its consideration.
 
NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS
)
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 5.3          An allocation of Rs. 34.00 crores has been made for NYKS under plan in BE 2005-06 against a provision
of Rs. 28.97 crores in BE 2004-05.  The Committee, however, notes that BE allocation for 2004-05 was reduced at RE
due to plan cut of the Ministry.  The allocation has been increased in the year 2005-06 mainly on account of enhanced
norms for regular/special programmes conducted by NYKS in each district both in normal as well as difficult areas. 
The Committee was assured that the Ministry would be able to fully utilize that fund.  TheCommittee, however, notes
from the table below that the physical performance of the NYKS has been quite dismal.
Year 2004-2005
Title Target Fixed Target achieved Beneficiaries
Male Female Total
Youth Club Development
Programme
1500 417 9223 3710 12933
Awareness Generation 1500 1095 126975 56250 183225
Sports Promotion 1500 336 79474 10208 89682
Seminars & Workshops   500 125 11576 7979 19555
Cultural Programmes 1500 301 77556 49277 126833
Work Camps 1500 365 13711 4321 18032
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
What is more surprising is that position is entirely different if achievement level of financial targets is looked at. 
There was full utilization of non-plan funds amounting to Rs. 15.54 crore during 2004-05.  Against a plan allocation of
Rs. 28.97 crores, funds utilized were Rs. 26.01 crores.  The Committee fails to understand in what manner allocated
funds were utilized with shortfall reported in a number of physical targets.  Either the targets were set without any
proper groundwork or utilization was not judicious.  Both the situations need to be clarified.  The Committee strongly
feels that with significant increase in norms for regular and special programmes conducted by NY Kendras, there is
need for monitoring of these Kendras at district, State and Central level.  Another disturbing trend noticed by the
Committee is that the level of female beneficiaries as compared to males is not of the desirable level.  The Committee is
of the view that an assessment needs to be made in this regard and remedial steps taken. 
 
ACTION TAKEN
Physical achievements mentioned in the report were upto the month of November 2004.  However, all the
Physical targets were achieved between 91% to 137% upto 31.03.2005, as may be seen in the table below:-
Sl.No. Name of the programme Annual
Target
Achievement upto
31.3.2005
% of achievement
1. Youth Club Development Programme 1500 1412 94.31
2 Awareness Generation 1500 1365 91.00
3. Sports Promotion 1500 1558 103.87
4. Seminars & Workshops 500 687 137.40
5. Cultural programmes 1500 1512 100.80
6. Work Camps 8000 7938 99.22
 
The concern over participation level of female beneficiaries has been noted for further guidance. Gender budgeting
targets have been communicated to NYKS for FY 2005-06.  However, it may be mentioned that during 2004-2005 the
coverage of female beneficiaries under NYKS Programme was 35%.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
Committee’s attention had been drawn by the low achievement level of physical targets under various
programmes conducted by Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan during the year 2004-05. The Committee has now been given
to understand that physical targets indicated the achievement made upto November, 2004. However, as on 31 st March
2005, achievement figures touched 91% to 137%. The Committee would like to point out that as per the Performance
Budget (2005-06) of the Ministry, achievement figures for various programmes of NYKS covered the period upto 31 st
December, 2004. Committee observes that as compared to the first three quarters, last quarter of the year 2004-05 must
have been very hectic and eventful. All the activities, be it Awareness Generation Camps or Sports Promotion
Programme or Seminars/Workshops or Work Camps, seems to have been held in the last quarter only. The Committee
would like to emphasize that all programmes should be evenly spread round the year. Only then it could be said that
programmes are being implemented as per the prescribed norms. Committee would appreciate if the Ministry takes
remedial steps in this regard. The Committee is disappointed to note the very low level of female participation under
this scheme. It, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation of raising the number of female beneficiaries upto the
desired level by fixing the targets.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 5.4           The Committee notes that out of 600 districts in the country, NYKs are there only in 500 districts, out of
which, 103 are in difficult areas and 397 are in normal areas.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the states,
which have districts yet to be covered by NYKs.  The Committee emphasizes the need for opening NYKs in remaining
districts also.  Its total outreach in terms of beneficiaries is also very low which need to be expanded in a phased
manner.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
A list of 105 districts yet to be covered by NYKS is at Annexure-IV. No regular programmes of NYKS are

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
organized in these districts; hence, the outreach is low in these areas.  As regard opening of NYKS in these districts, a
proposal for creation of posts for universalization of NYKS is under consideration for approval of Ministry of Finance.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 5.9           The Committee finds this situation quite amazing where NYKS are expected to provide additional
services to different Ministries at the national plane and yet there is an attempt to reduce their number, leave aside
expanding them in remaining Districts of the country.  Even filling up of 97 vacancies is not being allowed.  The
Committee is of the view that in the context of number of schemes relating to education, health, rural development,
women and child development, HIV/AIDS, etc. being supported by the Union Government, the role of NY Kendras
assumes special significance.  The NYKS network can be used for monitoring, getting feedback, awareness generation
etc.  NYKS network extended up to village levels, in fact, has proved to be quite useful.  In view of this, the Committee
feels that while allocating funds for this scheme, only money aspect was kept in mind, and not the utility of it.  The
Committee, therefore, calls upon the Ministry of Finance to clear the proposal of the Ministry for not only filling up the
97 vacancies of Youth Coordinators but also for opening Kendras in remaining districts in the country and allocate
adequate funds at appropriate stage.  This scheme needs to be strengthened as an instrument for channelising the youth
power to constructive activities.
 
ACTION TAKEN
 
The above recommendation has been brought to the notice of Ministry of Finance.  The case was re-referred to
them.  The matter has been reopened and Ministry of Finance has suggested that the case should be placed before the
Committee of Secretaries.  The matter is being processed accordingly.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
5.4 & 5.9         The Committee is happy to learn that after its recommendation, the Ministry’s proposal for filling up of
existing vacancies as well as its demand for additional posts in NYKS has been reopened by the Ministry of Finance.
The Committee feels that if the goal of universalisation of NYKS is to be achieved in real sense, the process of filling
up/ creation of additional vacancies and also opening new Kendras cannot be postponed any further. The Committee
appreciates the limitations of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in getting these proposals accepted. The Committee
would like the Ministry to urgently place their proposal before the Committee of Secretaries as suggested by Ministry of
Finance. There should not be any excuse for delay in that regard.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 5.11        During the meeting, some members of the Committee, narrated their personal experiences that elected
representatives like MPs and MLAs were not being involved, formally or informally, in the activities of the NY
Kendras.  The names recommended by them for constituting District Advisory Committees are also not being honoured
by the concerned District Collectors.  The Committee was also informed by them that meetings are not taking place at
the district level for years mainly because District Collector who has to chair those meetings does not have time for this
purpose.  As a result, monitoring of the implementation of the scheme is not being done in a regular and effective
manner.  In view of this, the Committee emphasizes the need for involving people’s representatives of the area in an
effective and formal manner.  Members of Parliament may also be suitably associated with a view to imparting
regularity in holding meetings etc. to review the activities of the NY Kendras and receiving guidance from them.
 
            The Committee also impresses upon the Planning Commission to provide support for having some officers at
the regional level who would be able to monitor as well as coordinate the activities of the NY Kendras in those regions.
 
ACTION TAKEN
MPs/MLAs and public representatives are invited to the meetings of the District Advisory Committee on Youth
Programmes (DACYP) as special invitees.  Instructions have also been issued to Distt. Youth Coordinators to send
minutes of the meetings of DACYP to the respective MP/MLA for suggestions.

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 
Regarding providing staff support by Planning Commission at the regional level, it is submitted that there were
offices in existence monitoring mechanism at the regional level.  However, based on the recommendations of the
Expenditure Reform Commission, the Committee of Secretaries had decided to abolish the offices of Regional
Coordinators.  The decision has been implemented during 2004-05.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee does not approve of the abolition of the posts of Regional Coordinators because it would
certainly affect the monitoring of this scheme. Monitoring at the regional level is one of the important aspect of any
Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends strengthening of the monitoring mechanism at
regional level. Elected representatives of various levels from Gram Panchayats upto  MPs/MLAs may also be suitably
associated for this purpose.
 
VI.       NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS)
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.4           There may be only a marginal increase in the utilization position, if expenditure in NE States is also
taken into account.  A glance at following table reveals a different picture.  The Committee notes that a large number of
universities/colleges/schools are yet to be covered by NSS.
 
 Total With NSS
Universities 271 192
Colleges 18558 8875
Boards/Councils 31 31
Schools 39,544 6735
Technical Institutions 3135 1104
 
ACTION TAKEN
The utilization position during 2004-05 for NSS scheme has been 100%.  Infact an additional amount of Rs. 9.79
crore was re-appropriated to meet the higher requirements under the scheme.  NSS, a voluntary scheme meant for
student youth, aims at ‘Development of the personality of student youth through Community Service’. Efforts are being
made to open more NSS Units in the Universities/Colleges and  +2 Councils of the country as well as to introduce the
scheme in all Secondary Schools for the students of IX and X standard.  The proposal for strengthening and deepening
of the scheme stands submitted to the Planning Commission.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee has been emphasising time and again  that re-appropriation of funds was not at all a healthy
trend.
NSS is a noble scheme aimed at the development of the personality of student youth through community service.
The Committee reiterates its demand to expand this scheme in a big way and calls upon the Ministry to plead this case
with the Planning Commission effectively and expeditiously.
The Committee notes that the Ministry has not indicated any details regarding opening more NSS units in
Universities / Colleges and plus 2 Councils. The Committee hopes that in the scheme submitted to the Planning
Commission these things have been elaborated. After all the Ministry should have some targets for opening new NSS
units in the coming years. The Committee hopes that such details would be reflected in Ministry’s document in future.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 6.11        The 15 training and 4 research centers fully supported by the Union Ministry are there to provide training
to all the NSS functionaries.  When the Committee expressed its own doubt about the impact of training, the Ministry
replied: “they have been in existence for a long time but they have not been effective”.  The Committee feels that
number of training and research centres are inadequate for the entire country.  Even the existing training and research
centres are not functioning properly.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the training aspect of this scheme

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
must be strengthened and their number also must be increased to ensure that there is no gap in providing training to NSS
functionaries.
 
ACTION TAKEN
In order to cover the backlog, number of participants for each orientation and refresher course has already been
enhanced from 35 to 40. The number of orientation and refresher courses for each Training and Orientation
Centres/Training Orientation and Research Centres (TOC/TORC) has been doubled. Proposal has also been sent to the
Planning Commission increasing the number of TOCs and TORCs from 4 to 14 to 10 and 20 as part of the expansion of
the NSS.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee while appreciating the doubling of number of orientation and refresher courses for each TOC/
TORC, wishes to underline the need to see that quality of training was not compromised in any measure. Increase of
participants might affect the quality adversely. The Committee would like the Ministry to take up the issue with the
Planning Commission for expeditious disposal of its proposal regarding increasing the number of TOCs & TORCs.
 
VII.     NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME (NDS
)
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 7.4          It appears very surprising to the Committee that the Ministry has not made a serious attempt even to
assess the exact amount of liability (State-wise) so far.  The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for
ascertaining the number of such Instructors, State-wise.  The Committee is of the considered view that a complete
assessment about the status of NDS Instructors may be made without any further delay to settle their cases.  The
Committee would like to be apprised about the same.
 
ACTION TAKEN
This Ministry has sought more funds under Non-Plan Budget for various schemes including NDSI for the
financial year, 2005-06.  Ministry of Finance did not agree to the enhanced budget and due to other committed liabilities
of the Ministry, the provision of NDSI was reduced from 5 crores to one crore.  It is estimated that the Ministry has very
large amount of liability, an overall liability of Rs.300 crores.  Details of the exact liabilities and the number of
instructors State-wise has been sought from the State Governments but the information was not forthcoming.  Only the
State Governments of Punjab, Gujarat, M.P., Rajasthan and Bihar have furnished requisite information to assess the
total amount payable to them towards pay and allowances of NDS staff absorbed in the services of State Governments. 
The State Governments have been requested to send the estimates of liabilities along with a Certificate that during this
period  no person was recanted with similar qualifications.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
                        The Committee would like to reiterate its concern about the manner in which this problem was being
allowed to acquire alarming proportions. The Committee, therefore, feels that this issue now required more serious and
proactive approach than by merely writing letters to the State Governments. It would like the Ministry to take it up at
the highest level in the State Government.
 
IX.       SCHEME OF PROMOTION OF NATIONAL INTEGRATION
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 9.3          The Committee finds the idea behind the scheme to be very good.  The Committee, however, observes
that despite satisfactory financial performance, the expanse of the scheme is too small to be felt at the national level. 
Just 150 camps every year for our youth (15-35 years) which constitutes around 40% of our total population, are not
adequate enough.  There is apparent need for holding more and more such camps for which Ministry will have to be
given additional funds at the RE stage.  A permanent site may be identified for conducting the camps on regular
intervals in each State.
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
ACTION TAKEN
As directed by the Committee, the Ministry will ask for additional funds at the RE stage for implementing the
Scheme of Promotion of National Integration.  As regards their permanent site, it is felt that a National Youth Center at
Delhi and State Youth Center at the State Headquarters would be required.  This initiatives has been identified in the
Xth Five Year Plan and the matter is pending with Planning Commission for in-principle approval.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee during its visit to J & K found that such camps have had strong impact on the youth who
attended these camps held in parts of the country. They demanded such camps to be held at regular intervals frequently.
 
            The Committee is surprised to note that even after the lapse of three years of Tenth Five year Plan, the
Ministry’s initiative regarding the permanent sites for conducting camps in each State was still pending with the
Planning Commission. The Committee hopes that the Planning Commission would also appreciate the need for
permanent sites and expedite its approval on the project pending for its consideration.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 9.4          The Committee finds no physical targets fixed for this Scheme.  It reflects lack of desired enthusiasm in
the Ministry about this scheme, which is meant basically for promoting national integration.  It, therefore, recommends
that targets must be fixed every year for holding camps and exchange programme etc.
 
Targets for physical achievements have been fixed for conducting National Integration Camps according to the
amount provided in the budget for the Scheme.
 
Target Quarterly Performance/Achievements 2005-2006
No. of Programmes
(PHYSICAL)
1
st Quarter 2nd Quarter 3rd Quarter 4th Quarter
 30 80 150 250
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is happy to be informed about the details of the targets fixed for conducting national integration
camps. It would however, have been better had this statement reflected the budget earmarked for such camps on
quarterly basis as well as the achievements of the targets in the first quarter.
 
X.        YOUTH HOSTELS
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 10.5        The Committee is astonished to see the fate of this scheme.  Delays of twenty to twenty five years in
getting the Hostels constructed is simply unbelievable.  The Committee is not satisfied by the explanation given by the
Ministry that in case the required details in respect of hostels are not received within the specified period, the approval
of yet to be started hostels will be cancelled and the grant already released will be recovered.  The Committee feels that
this proposed line of action is too late.  It appears to the Committee that Ministry has left everything to the States.  It
shows lack of regular monitoring of this scheme resulting in such a huge backlog.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that this matter be taken up at the level of Minister/Chief Secretaries for expediting the construction of
Hostels.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken in this regard within three months.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The matter for expediting the construction of hostels was taken up by the Secretary (YA&S) with Chief
Secretaries of all the concerned States on 17.02.2005.  This resulted in receipt of progress reports of hostels being
constructed at Warangal (Andhra Pradesh); Sirsa, Rewari and Yamunanagar (Haryana); Sogalu(Karnataka); Khajuraho
(Madhya Pradesh); Thoubal, Bishnupur and Churachandpur (Manipur); Ajmer, Udaipur (Rajasthan);  and Ooty (Tamil
Nadu).  The Ministry has released approved financial assistance for the hostels, the progress reports of which were

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
found in order, and it is expected that with the regular monitoring of on-going projects, the situation will improve
considerably.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
It is surprising to note that Government had asked State Government of Manipur to ensure immediate start of the
construction work of the project after releasing three instalments ( Total Rs.69 lakhs) for the Vishnupur, youth hostel.
Intereastingly, the first instalment was released way back in March 2000. This, according to the Committee does not
present a good picture. The Committee, no doubt is aware of the limitations of the Scheme, it however, believes that a
noble scheme like this needs a more proactive & serious approach. The Committee feels that the process of releasing
instalments for construction of youth hostels as well as the progress report of construction leave much to be desired.
This is evident from the details of seven Youth Hostels projects for which grants have been released during March to
July, 2005.
 
            Whatever may be the veracity of the progress report and the criteria of the release of instalments, the Committee
observes that still no time frame for construction of the project is fixed by the sanctioning authority which indicates lack
of effective monitoring. The Committee would like the Ministry to seriously review the whole scheme of things in
consultation with the State Governments and the implementing agencies to avoid time and cost overruns.
 
XVI.    NON GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 16.3        The Committee finds the amounts given to the NGOs under different schemes mind-boggling, for which
utilization certificates are pending from 2001-02 onwards.  The Committee is more concerned about the fact that the
entire amount seems to have been wasted.  Recovering these amounts appears to be impossible as most of the erring
NGOs change their addresses and get the money in different name next year.  The Ministry does not take any action
against defaulting NGOs except, not releasing further grants to them.  This has led to a strange situation.  The
Committee feels that this situation must be remedied immediately.  The Ministry should proceed legally against the
defaulting NGOs and strengthen its monitoring mechanism carefully.  While selecting NGOs, State Governments and
District Collectors should also play a major role.  The District Collector, being the key officer in a district having
enormous manpower and authority, can play avery effective role in keeping an eye on the working of the NGOs.  He
may be asked to prepare a list of NGOs having a good track record of at least three years of working.  The Ministry may
give grants to only those NGOs who are in that list.  As and when, a new NGO qualifies; it may also be put into that
list.  Besides, we may also utilize NYKS and NSS officers for verifying and getting feedback about NGOs.
 
ACTION TAKEN
All efforts are being made to obtain pending UCs.  Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened.  Copies of the
sanctions are marked to NYKS and NSS of the District concerned and NGOs are advised to invite the representatives of
NYKS & NSS in their programme.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee expresses its unhappiness on the slipshod reply to its specific observations/recommendations on
an important issue of large number of NGOs taking public money and not reporting back. The Committee would like to
have the details of the amount released to the NGOs that failed to submit Utilisation Certificate during last three years.
In fact, the names of defaulting NGOs should figure in public through print media and the Ministry’s website on
internet.
           
The Committee is also not satisfied with existing monitoring mechanism for the functioning of the NGOs.
Simply inviting the representatives of NYKS and NSS in their programmes would not have the desired impact, although
it may be a good idea. The Committee would like to emphasize that services of NYKS and NSS officers may be utilized
for verifying and getting feedback about NGOs. The Committee would also like to reiterate that the District Collector,
being the key officer in the District can play a very effective role in monitoring the functioning of NGOs. He may be
actively involved in verifying the antecedents of NGOs active in his District. In fact, on the basis of the feedback
received from NYKS and NSS officers the District Collector should be in a position  not only to prepare a list of NGOs

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
having a good record but also  help in monitoring of their activities and such issues of Utilisation Certificates can be
taken care of in a better way.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 16.6        The Committee had in the past expressed serious concern over non-submission of UC s by a large
number of NGOs given financial assistance under various scheme.  Yet, there is a long list of such NGOs having
government funds lying with them from 2001-02 onwards.  The Committee underlines an urgent need for having an
element of accountability at every level – Centre/State/District to ensure proper and effective implementation of various
schemes.  The Committee, therefore, recommends to devise a fool-proof mechanism for selection as well as monitoring
of activities of the NGOs.  Efforts should also be made to avoid concentration of many NGOs in one particular district
in view of an equitable distribution of benefits of this scheme.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Against 6 and 250 outstanding UCs for the years 2001-02 and 2002-03 respectively indicated earlier, these have
now come down to 5 and 200.  In most of the remaining cases, UCs/Accounts etc submitted are not as per requirement
and we have asked them to submit revised documents at the earliest.    The Ministry also does not approve fresh
proposals of defaulting NGOs till the earlier accounts are settled.  It is expected that with regular monitoring, the
number of outstanding UCs will come down.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is of the view that the manner in which the outstanding Utilisation Certificates were being
followed up over the years leaves much to be desired. For example, only one case of the outstanding UC for the year
2001-02 and 50 cases pertaining to 2002-03 could be settled. With the present level of monitoring the problem of
outstanding UCs will   go from bad to worse with new additions in coming years. The Government needs to take urgent
remedial measures to ensure settlement of pending UCs in a time bound schedule. The Ministry’s claim for regular
monitoring of the status of outstanding UCs has not borne fruit.  The Committee would also like to emphasize that
efforts should be made to avoid concentration of many NGOs in one particular District. The Committee strongly feels
that there is an urgent need for taking into account the number of NGOs already handling a particular programme in a
District before inviting a new NGO. This aspect may be included in the eligibility criteria for NGOs.
 
XVII.   SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 17.3        The Committee would like to have details of the latest position obtained in this regard and also the
initiatives being undertaken to complete the pending works.
 
ACTION TAKEN
For the current financial year, it is being ensured that the funds allocated for infrastructure development/up-
gradation of existing infrastructure are utilized fully.  The purchase of sports and scientific equipment is also being
given priority so that the various SAI Centres are equipped as per requirement. A comprehensive Plan to upgrade the
infrastructure at the STC level also has been prepared.  The target will be to upgrade all the infrastructure in the STCs at
a very high standard by 2010.  The better quality equipment is also being procured for centres.  It may be noted that the
first quarter expenditure in 2005-2006 has been same as the grant released by Government.
 
            There were some operational problems in the past.  New quality action plan has been made giving financial and
physical targets.  Close monitoring is being done and all the pending works are likely to be completed and various
centres have started becoming operational now, for example Bhopal, Sonepat and Lucknow.  All the regional centres are
also upgraded as per the latest standards.
 
Statement showing the details of the latest position of ongoing/sanctioned work/project and initiatives
undertaken including up-to-date expenditure done by the Constructing Agency and the amount released, obtained from
SAI is placed at Annexure-VII.

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Ministry has not indicated the details of the new Quality Action Plan made for achievement of financial and
physical targets. The details of initiatives undertaken are also missing. The Ministry’s assertion about likely completion
of pending works and improvements in targets in the absence of detailed information is, therefore, not convincing.
Present status in respect of various items of work in Hazaribagh and Lucknow have not been given in the annexure VII.
Most part of the reply pertains to the works to be taken up in future rather then steps taken to complete the pending
works.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 17.7        The Committee is given to understand that a proposal for transfer of internal revenue generated by SAI to
a Corpus Fund is presently pending before the Ministry.  The Committee would like to be informed about the
initiatives/steps being undertaken by the Ministry to expedite the proposal and the outcome thereof.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The proposal for transfer of internal revenue generated by SAI to a Corpus Fund is under consideration of
Ministry of YA&S.  SAI has been asked to submit a concrete proposal to the Ministry.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The purpose of the Committee in highlighting the proposal for transfer of internal revenue generated by Sports
Authority of India to a corpus fund was to emphasise on the urgency of its clearance by the Ministry. It appears that the
proposal is still shuttling between the Ministry and the Sports Authority of India. The Committee reiterates the urgency
of such corpus fund to enable SAI to prioritize those schemes which need urgent financial needs. The Committee would
like the Ministry to expedite the proposal without further delay.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 17.8        The Committee notes that four new SAI sub-centres, which have been sanctioned at different places in
the country are yet to be opened or fully operationalised.  The Ministry should take up the matter with the State
Governments for removal of bottlenecks in setting up/operationalising these sub-centres without any further delay.  The
SAI centres/sub-centres should be opened preferably in those States, which have shown commendable performance in
the national as well as international events.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Out of 4 SAI Sub Centres, which were approved to be set up at Lucknow (UP) in Central Zone, Hazaribagh
(Jharkhand) in Eastern Zone, Pune (Maharashtra) in West Zone, Chennai (Tamil Nadu) in South Zone, the Sub Centre at
Lucknow (UP) has been made functional from the current financial year (2005-06).  The construction in respect of Sub-
Centre at Hazaribagh is in progress.  As regards Sub-Centre at Pune, the Maharashtra Government could not provide the
required 50 acres of land and its share of Rs.1 crore, hence in the absence of concrete proposal the sub-Centre at Pune
could not take off.  The matter with regard to sub-Centre at Nagercoil, the Government of Tamil Nadu is yet to provide
the requisite land at Nagercoil.  SAI is presently running a SAG Centre (Non-residential) at Nagercoil.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee expresses its concern at the  poor progress in respect of the new SAI sub-centres. The Ministry
has  either not been able to impress upon the State Governments of Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu to expedite land
allotment or the norms fixed for the purpose are coming in the way. In either case, the Committee would like the
Ministry to seriously pursue for the expeditious disposal of other two sub-centres with the respective State
Governments. It should in consultation with the State Government finally settle the outstanding issues.
 
XVIII.  COMMONWEALTH GAMES, 2010
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
Para 18.3        The Committee hopes that the report of Task Force would be submitted in time so that the action in this
regard is initiated timely.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should be provided adequate fund at RE stage
so that the works pertaining to Commonwealth Games, 2010 were not delayed.  A plan should be chalked for phase-
wise development of the infrastructure and the money be spent judiciously.  The Committee feels that efforts should be
made to build proper infrastructure in time-bound manner with a view to avoiding last minute pressure of work.
 
            While creating infrastructure for the Commonwealth Games, we should not ignore preparation/training of our
sportspersons.  This should be treated as an opportunity to enhance our nation’s prestige by winning more and more
medals.  Selection and training of prospective participants must take place now so that they get enough time to prepare
themselves.
 
ACTION TAKEN
Based on the time-schedule of Commonwealth Games from 3–14 October, 2010 and Commonwealth Youth
Games from 1-7 October, 2008, a preliminary schedule as per Annexure-VIII has been prepared by the Ministry so as
to take up the projects for ensuring completion of projects well in time. The conditional survey of the SAI existing
Sports Infrastructure has been completed by CPWD under the Task Force. 
As regards funds, a Finance Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship of Hon. Finance Minister to deal
with all financial matters relating to the Commonwealth Games 2010 has been constituted.   An allocation of Rs.45.50
crores has been made for the year 2005-06.  An ad-hoc advance of Rs. 10.00 crore has been given to the Organizing
Committee.  Based on requirements and subject to approval of Finance Sub-Committee and Group of Ministers,
additional funds will be asked for at RE stage, if required.  The modalities of funding the venue infrastructure, civic
infrastructure etc. is under active consideration.
All steps are being taken to create a world-class infrastructure and to ensure smooth conduct of Games in time
bound manner.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee hopes that the crucial areas such as selection and training of sports persons for future games was
also being adequately addressed. The Committee is happy to learn that the creation of infrastructure for the
Commonwealth Games 2010 was being taken up in time bound manner. The Ministry has outlined the milestones of
survey, concept plan, tender process and work completion ranging up to March 2010. The Committee however,
observes that with regard to renovation of stadia, Action Plan simply mentions the implementing agencies, i.e.
SAI/DDA/NDMC and survey to be completed by August, 2005. The Committee would like to point out that our
sportspersons need to be prepared/trained with world class training facilities to compete with other sporting countries.
The Committee emphasizing the need for adequate practice, training and exposure to our sportspersons in different
events prior to Commonwealth Games 2010. For that, our existing stadia need to be made fully operational. The
Committee, therefore, emphasizes that this task should also be completed in a time bound manner.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 18.6        The Committee is of the opinion that unless all those responsible for promoting sports, particularly, the
Ministry, the SAI, the State Governments, Sports Federations/Associations take it up as a challenge and work in tandem
with each other, a significant impact cannot be made.  The present tendency of shifting responsibility on one another has
to be stopped.  We should have to work in a time-bound manner with the dynamic categorization of sports disciplines,
transparent selection procedure, country-wide talent hunting, modern training facilities, etc.  The Committee in this
regard would like tomention about “Operation Gold” Scheme launched by the Kerala Sports Council in which district
Panchayats have been involved in talent search from the local level.  The Committee feels that this scheme can be
applied as a sports model at the national level also.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The models being adopted in States like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Haryana have been studied.  The new initiatives
like dynamic categorization of the sports disciplines, streamlined selection procedure, Promotion of National Champion
initiative etc. have been undertaken.  The detailed information from People’s Republic of China has been sought
through diplomatic channels.
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee expects precise replies to all the aspects pointed out in its recommendations/observations, which
is missing here. The Committee has found the Ministry non-responsive to its queries about the working of National
Federations. The Committee would like to have Ministry’s response about Kerala Scheme mentioned in its
recommendation. A copy of the China model also be sent to the Committee for its consideration. The Committee hopes
that the Ministry would practically liaise with all sports bodies and State Governments to move ahead with a pragmatic
approach.
 
XIX.    INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS ACTIVITIES
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 19.4        The Committee has been informed that under the Rural sports programme during 2003-04 due to non-
receipt of accounts of grants released earlier from State Government and availability of unspent balance with SAI, there
was variation in allocation of funds at the RE stage.  Under this scheme, sports tournaments are organized at block,
district and State level.  For block level tournaments, State Governments utilize their own resources.  For district level
sports tournament, NGOs including NYKs are provided Rs. 30,000/- per discipline.  Assistance for holding State level
tournaments is provided to SAI @ Rs.50,000/- per discipline.
 
            From the figures made available, the Committee finds that the performance of Bihar in holding block, district
and State level tournament/Sports tournaments during 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003-04 has been quite impressive.
 
2001-02 2002-03 2003-04
 Block Distt. State Block Distt. State Block Distt. State
Bihar 75,000 15,000 2091 1,00,000 20,000 2424 90,000 16,000 1610
 
In states/UTs like AP, Delhi, Gujarat, Goa, Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, Chandigarh, Lakshdweep, Pondicherry,
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, not even one game at any level was held.  In other States
like Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, UP, Uttranchal, West Bengal, Assam,
only state level tournaments were organized by SAI but not on yearly basis.  The Committee would like to be apprised
about any assessment made so far about the impact of active participation of Bihar in this programme and non-
inclination of participation by other States.  The Committee would also like to know about the role of NGOs in holding
these tournaments in different States during this period.  The Committee has been given to understand that for holding
national level tournaments under this programme, SAI is given a grant of Rs. 2,50,000/- per discipline in various States
by rotation.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the various national tournaments organized by SAI during
the Tenth Plan so far (State-wise).
 
ACTION TAKEN
As regards the active participation of Bihar in the Rural Sports Programme, it has been observed that they have
held more tournaments at Block level in comparison to district and State level tournaments. Therefore, Bihar has
encouraged the participation of boys and girls at the grass-root level in the development of sports and games. Thus, all
States/UTs should encourage the grass-root participation of boys and girls in sports.
 
Therefore, in order that these tournaments are held by all the States/UTs at Block level, it may be made
mandatory for all States/UTs to hold Block level tournaments for seeking financial assistance for District and State level
tournaments.
 
As regards the role of NGOs in holding of tournaments in different states, it may be mentioned that there is no
uniformity of network of NGOs in all the States/UTs. The financial assistance for district and State level tournaments is
given to the State Govt./UT Administration, which have their own set up at the lower level for organizing the
tournaments.
 
The details of National level Competitions held in groups during the year 2001- 02, 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-
05 is given at Annexure-IX.

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply provided by the Ministry because it does not give reasons for not
holding tournaments at Block, District and State level every year by various States.  Committee, would like to know the
constraints being faced by the defaulting States in not organizing the tournaments at various levels for three consecutive
years.  The Committee would also appreciate if details of participation by Bihar in National level competitions during
the last three years are made available to it.
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 19.7        This lower utilization of funds, the Committee feels, was mainly due to non-release of a large amount
under one of its components i.e. Pension for Meritorious Sportspersons.  The Committee notes that these four schemes
are very crucial for nurturing sports talent in our country.  They have, however, suffered lesser allocation of funds in
2004-05.  The only exception has been the scheme for pension for meritorious  persons.  However, here also, out of Rs.
17 crores provided for this component in RE 2004-05, only Rs. 1.25 crores could be utilized.  The Committee feels that
the merged scheme is one of the main schemes of the Ministry encompassing important components in it such as
Promoting Rural Sports, Sports and Games in Schools as well as providing Sports Scholarships, Pension for Meritorious
Sportspersons and Sports Development Fund.  The performance of this scheme as a whole does not inspire enough
confidence.
 
The Committee would like to point out that all these components have been in existence as independent schemes
for quite a few years. There were inherent shortcomings in their earlier forms. Mere merger of these schemes will not
succeed in eliminating those shortcomings. What is needed is a proactive role to be played by SAI/Department in
regular co-ordination with State Government/implementing agencies. The Committee is of the opinion that components
like Rural Sports Programme, Promotion of Games and Sports in Schools and Sports Scholarships need more focus. The
Committee also feels that the allocation for the scheme is not commensurate with its importance and that also needs to
be suitably enhanced.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.    
As per the procedure of utilization of funds allocated under the Scheme of Pension for Meritorious Sports
persons, the amount allocated for a particular year is drawn with the approval of Finance Division and kept in the bank
in the Scheme account.  Thereafter, as and when the pension to the sportspersons is approved, LIC is requested to work
out the purchase price for the payment of pension.  Thereafter, the cheques are issued to the LIC for the purchase price
and the pension is started to the sportspersons through the LIC of India. During the year 2004-05, an amount of Rs.
7,26,67,010/- was paid to LIC for payment of pension to the sportspersons. This is a continuous process. The balance
amount is carried forward to the next year. Since the rates of pension have been revised recently in 2004 and some new
categories like paralympic have been
added for grant of pension, more applications are expected to be received during the current year and more funds are
expected to be utilized under this scheme.
 
Sports Authority of India has also initiated action for strict supervision and effective monitoring of the Scheme
of Rural Sports Programme through its Regional Centres /Coaches, spread throughout the country.
 
The Scheme of Promotion of Sports and Games in Schools has been assigned to Netaji Subhas National Institute
of Sports, Patiala under SAI. SAI is taking all possible steps to monitor this Scheme through its Regional Centres.
 
Further efforts are also being made to streamline other schemes in consultation with Sports Authority of India as
well as State Govts. /UT administrations.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee is of the view that despite the Ministry’s initiatives being taken to improve the outreach and
impact of the schemes relating to nurturing of sporting talents in the country, the performance level of this scheme is not

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
at all satisfactory.   The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation and stresses that the inherent
shortcomings of the schemes needs to be rectified with strict supervision and effective monitoring by the SAI, State
Governments/Union Territory administrations and others.
 
XX       SPORTS AMONG DISABLED
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 20.2 The Committee was informed that only token provision was made for the scheme during the first three years
of the Tenth Plan because the scheme could not be formulated. The scheme is being merged in the umbrella scheme
relating; to events. The Committee expresses its displeasure at the manner in which the scheme meant for disabled
persons was being handled. It reflects our insensitivity towards them who need special support and motivation to enable
them to join the mainstream. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this scheme should be finalized for
implementation from this year itself. There are different words in vogue now-a-days for such persons. The Committee
feels that name of the scheme should be suitably changed.
 
ACTION TAKEN
A special scheme for Physically Handicapped is under formulation.  However, Assistance to Physically
Challenged Sportsperson is admissible under the existing Schemes on receipt of recommendations by the concerned
recognized NSF of the game concerned.  The recognition of National Paralympic Committee is under active
consideration of the Ministry.  At present, for this category only one federation for ‘Deaf’ is recognized. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is quite amazed to learn that a special scheme for physically handicapped which was scheduled
to be implemented in 2002-03, was still in the formulation stage.  It is also not clear by when the scheme is going to be
finally approved.  The Committee emphasizes upon the Ministry to formulate the scheme without much delay so that it
could be implemented at the earliest.
 
XXI.  INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEMES
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 21.3         The Committee notes that four schemes relating to creation of sports infrastructure have been transferred
to the State/UT governments since 1
st April, 2005.  This, according to the Committee, amounts to virtually abandoning
all these schemes.  Due to financial constraints, currently the States/UT governments are not in a position to provide
their share towards the cost of projects already approved.  As a result, 508 projects were lying pending for completion
involving financial liability of around Rs. 160 crores on the Central Government.  Keeping in mind the financial
constraints of the States, the Committee is of the firm opinion that it will not be possible for the States to fully fund the
sports infrastructure projects.  The Committee fails to understand how this financial liability will be taken care of.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The Ministry had requested the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
to review the decision regarding the transfer of the Sports Infrastructure schemes to the State Government w.e.f.
1.4.2005   keeping in view the pending liability of the sanctioned projects in all the infrastructure schemes as per the
details given below and also the financial constraints of the State Government to create sports facilities out of their
limited resources.  The above recommendation was brought to the notice of the Planning Commission as well as
Ministry of Expenditure. The Planning Commission has in July 2005 informed that committed liabilities of the
incomplete sanctioned projects shall be met during the remaining period of Xth Five Year Plan.  The State Governments
have been informed accordingly.  Funds for the purpose shall be sought through revised estimates.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is happy to note that the Planning Commission has given its approval for meeting the committed
liabilities of incomplete sanctioned projects regarding sports infrastructure during the remaining period of Tenth Plan.

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
The Committee, however, observes that this can only be considered a stop-gap arrangement. Problem of long pending
sports infrastructure projects due to the undue delay in submission of utilization certificates by State Governments
would still remain. The Committee strongly feels that for nurturing of sports talent at the grass root level, infrastructure
projects need to be expedited. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a through view of these schemes should be
undertaken by the Ministry without any further delay.
 
XXIII.GRANTS TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 23.5        It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that outstanding dues amounting to Rs.1, 35,59,180/-
against various Federations in respect of Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium and Rs. 1,69,15,993/- for other stadia in Delhi on
account of rent are pending. The Committee would like to be apprised of the amounts due, federation-wise, as also the
steps being taken by the Ministry to settle these dues.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The details regarding Federation-wise outstanding dues towards rent of various stadia in Delhi being occupied
by the various Federations is at Annexure-X.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to note that despite recommendations being made in its earlier reports also on the
issue of settling of outstanding dues towards rent of various stadia being occupied by different federations, the situation
has remained unchanged.  Moreover, the Ministry has failed to apprise the Committee about the steps being taken to
settle these dues.  This infact shows the lack of seriousness on the part of the Ministry in this regard. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should initiate action to remedy the situation and, apprise the Committee of the steps
being taken against the erring federations.
 
********
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
XVI.    NON GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
 
Para 16.4        Only 50 per cent of money should be given to the NGOs in the first instance, rest 50% can be given after
they submit necessary papers and report is received from the office of the District Collector.  The Ministry should
ensure that good NGOs should not be harassed and money should come to them smoothly so that work does not suffer.
 
ACTION TAKEN
The matter will be examined after report of the evaluation being done by NPC is received.
OBSERVATONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE   GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
II.        NATIONAL YOUTH POLICY, 2003
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee opines that Action Plan on the National Youth Policy 2003 is long overdue. It is surprising that
the Action Plan is being chalked out two years after the announcement of the policy. The Action Plan should always
follow immediately after the policy is announced. The Committee feels that with the reports from the Chairpersons of
the eight sub-groups in hand, the Committee on Action Plan should be in a position to discuss these at the earliest so as

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
to enable the Inter Sectoral Committee to expedite the Plan of Action within the extended period of time without fail.
(Para 2.2)
 
IV.       BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is surprised to see that the Department has chosen not to respond to its observations about the
strengthening of promotion of sports among disabled. The Committee reiterates its concern about lack of seriousness in
implementing this scheme for the underprivileged class of the society. It appears to the Committee that the scheme is
existing on papers only.
As regards poor performance of Youth and Sports Schemes mentioned in its recommendations, the Committee
finds the same old problems like non-receipt of proposals/suitable proposals, delay in submitting UCs etc. extended
again for slow implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The Committee would request the Ministry to supply a
note on these issues hampering the progress of the schemes separately for its consideration. (Para 4.3)
 
V         NEHRU YUVA KENDRA SANGATHAN (NYKS)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Committee’s attention had been drawn by the low achievement level of physical targets under various
programmes conducted by Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan during the year 2004-05. The Committee has now been given
to understand that physical targets indicated the achievement made upto November, 2004. However, as on 31 st March
2005, achievement figures touched 91% to 137%. The Committee would like to point out that as per the Performance
Budget (2005-06) of the Ministry, achievement figures for various programmes of NYKS covered the period upto 31 st
December, 2004. Committee observes that as compared to the first three quarters, last quarter of the year 2004-05 must
have been very hectic and eventful. All the activities, be it Awareness Generation Camps or Sports Promotion
Programme or Seminars/Workshops or Work Camps, seems to have been held in the last quarter only. The Committee
would like to emphasize that all programmes should be evenly spread round the year. Only then it could be said that
programmes are being implemented as per the prescribed norms. Committee would appreciate if the Ministry takes
remedial steps in this regard. The Committee is disappointed to note the very low level of female participation under
this scheme. It, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation of raising the number of female beneficiaries upto the
desired level by fixing the targets. (Para 5.3)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is happy to learn that after its recommendation, the Ministry’s proposal for filling up of existing
vacancies as well as its demand for additional posts in NYKS has been reopened by the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee feels that if the goal of universalisation of NYKS is to be achieved in real sense, the process of filling up/
creation of additional vacancies and also opening new Kendras cannot be postponed any further. The Committee
appreciates the limitations of Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports in getting these proposals accepted. The Committee
would like the Ministry to urgently place their proposal before the Committee of Secretaries as suggested by Ministry of
Finance. There should not be any excuse for delay in that regard. (Para 5.4 & 5.9)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee does not approve of the abolition of the posts of Regional Coordinators because it would
certainly affect the monitoring of this scheme. Monitoring at the regional level is one of the important aspect of any
Centrally Sponsored Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends strengthening of the monitoring mechanism at
regional level. Elected representatives of various levels from Gram Panchayats upto  MPs/MLAs may also be suitably
associated for this purpose. (Para 5.11)
 
VI.       NATIONAL SERVICE SCHEME (NSS
)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee has been emphasising time and again  that re-appropriation of funds was not at all a healthy
trend.

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
NSS is a noble scheme aimed at the development of the personality of student youth through community service.
The Committee reiterates its demand to expand this scheme in a big way and calls upon the Ministry to plead this case
with the Planning Commission effectively and expeditiously.       
The Committee notes that the Ministry has not indicated any details regarding opening more NSS units in Universities /
Colleges and plus 2 Councils. The Committee hopes that in the scheme submitted to the Planning Commission these
things have been elaborated. After all the Ministry should have some targets for opening new NSS units in the coming
years. The Committee hopes that such details would be reflected in Ministry’s document in future. (Para 6.4 )
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee while appreciating the doubling of number of orientation and refresher courses for each TOC/
TORC, wishes to underline the need to see that quality of training was not compromised in any measure. Increase of
participants might affect the quality adversely. The Committee would like the Ministry to take up the issue with the
Planning Commission for expeditious disposal of its proposal regarding increasing the number of TOCs & TORCs.
(Para 6.11 )
 
VII.     NATIONAL DISCIPLINE SCHEME (NDS
)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
                        The Committee would like to reiterate its concern about the manner in which this problem was being
allowed to acquire alarming proportions. The Committee, therefore, feels that this issue now required more serious and
proactive approach than by merely writing letters to the State Governments. It would like the Ministry to take it up at
the highest level in the State Government. (Para 7.4 )
 
IX.       SCHEME OF PROMOTION OF NATIONAL INTEGRATION
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee during its visit to J & K found that such camps have had strong impact on the youth who
attended these camps held in parts of the country. They demanded such camps to be held at regular intervals frequently.
            The Committee is surprised to note that even after the lapse of three years of Tenth Five year Plan, the
Ministry’s initiative regarding the permanent sites for conducting camps in each State was still pending with the
Planning Commission. The Committee hopes that the Planning Commission would also appreciate the need for
permanent sites and expedite its approval on the project pending for its consideration. (Para 9.3)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is happy to be informed about the details of the targets fixed for conducting national integration
camps. It would however, have been better had this statement reflected the budget earmarked for such camps on
quarterly basis as well as the achievements of the targets in the first quarter. (Para 9.4)
 
X.        YOUTH HOSTELS
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
It is surprising to note that Government had asked State Government of Manipur to ensure immediate start of the
construction work of the project after releasing three instalments ( Total Rs.69 lakhs) for the Vishnupur, youth hostel.
Intereastingly, the first instalment was released way back in March 2000. This, according to the Committee does not
present a good picture. The Committee, no doubt is aware of the limitations of the Scheme, it however, believes that a
noble scheme like this needs a more proactive & serious approach. The Committee feels that the process of releasing
instalments for construction of youth hostels as well as the progress report of construction leave much to be desired.
This is evident from the details of seven Youth Hostels projects for which grants have been released during March to
July, 2005.
 
Whatever may be the veracity of the progress report and the criteria of the release of instalments, the Committee
observes that still no time frame for construction of the project is fixed by the sanctioning authority which indicates lack
of effective monitoring. The Committee would like the Ministry to seriously review the whole scheme of things in
consultation with the State Governments and the implementing agencies to avoid time and cost overruns. (Para 10.5)

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 
XVI.    NON GOVERNMENT ORGANISATIONS
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee expresses its unhappiness on the slipshod reply to its specific observations/recommendations on
an important issue of large number of NGOs taking public money and not reporting back. The Committee would like to
have the details of the amount released to the NGOs that failed to submit Utilisation Certificate during last three years.
In fact, the names of defaulting NGOs should figure in public through print media and the Ministry’s website on
internet.
            The Committee is also not satisfied with existing monitoring mechanism for the functioning of the NGOs.
Simply inviting the representatives of NYKS and NSS in their programmes would not have the desired impact, although
it may be a good idea. The Committee would like to emphasize that services of NYKS and NSS officers may be utilized
for verifying and getting feedback about NGOs. The Committee would also like to reiterate that the District Collector,
being the key officer in the District can play a very effective role in monitoring the functioning of NGOs. He may be
actively involved in verifying the antecedents of NGOs active in his District. In fact, on the basis of the feedback
received from NYKS and NSS officers the District Collector should be in a position  not only to prepare a list of NGOs
having a good record but also  help in monitoring of their activities and such issues of Utilisation Certificates can be
taken care of in a better way. (Para 16.3)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee is of the view that the manner in which the outstanding Utilisation Certificates were being
followed up over the years leaves much to be desired. For example, only one case of the outstanding UC for the year
2001-02 and 50 cases pertaining to 2002-03 could be settled. With the present level of monitoring the problem of
outstanding UCs will   go from bad to worse with new additions in coming years. The Government needs to take urgent
remedial measures to ensure settlement of pending UCs in a time bound schedule. The Ministry’s claim for regular
monitoring of the status of outstanding UCs has not borne fruit.  The Committee would also like to emphasize that
efforts should be made to avoid concentration of many NGOs in one particular District. The Committee strongly feels
that there is an urgent need for taking into account the number of NGOs already handling a particular programme in a
District before inviting a new NGO. This aspect may be included in the eligibility criteria for NGOs. (Para 16.6)
 
XVII.   SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Ministry has not indicated the details of the new Quality Action Plan made for achievement of financial and
physical targets. The details of initiatives undertaken are also missing. The Ministry’s assertion about likely completion
of pending works and improvements in targets in the absence of detailed information is, therefore, not convincing.
Present status in respect of various items of work in Hazaribagh and Lucknow have not been given in the annexure VII.
Most part of the reply pertains to the works to be taken up in future rather then steps taken to complete the pending
works. (Para 17.3)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The purpose of the Committee in highlighting the proposal for transfer of internal revenue generated by Sports
Authority of India to a corpus fund was to emphasise on the urgency of its clearance by the Ministry. It appears that the
proposal is still shuttling between the Ministry and the Sports Authority of India. The Committee reiterates the urgency
of such corpus fund to enable SAI to prioritize those schemes which need urgent financial needs. The Committee would
like the Ministry to expedite the proposal without further delay. (Para 17.7)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee expresses its concern at the  poor progress in respect of the new SAI sub-centres. The Ministry
has  either not been able to impress upon the State Governments of Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu to expedite land
allotment or the norms fixed for the purpose are coming in the way. In either case, the Committee would like the
Ministry to seriously pursue for the expeditious disposal of other two sub-centres with the respective State
Governments. It should in consultation with the State Government finally settle the outstanding issues. (Para
17.8)

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
 
XVIII.  COMMONWEALTH GAMES, 2010
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee hopes that the crucial areas such as selection and training of sports persons for future games was
also being adequately addressed. The Committee is happy to learn that the creation of infrastructure for the
Commonwealth Games 2010 was being taken up in time bound manner. The Ministry has outlined the milestones of
survey, concept plan, tender process and work completion ranging up to March 2010. The Committee however,
observes that with regard to renovation of stadia, Action Plan simply mentions the implementing agencies, i.e.
SAI/DDA/NDMC and survey to be completed by August, 2005. The Committee would like to point out that our
sportspersons need to be prepared/trained with world class training facilities to compete with other sporting countries.
The Committee emphasizing the need for adequate practice, training and exposure to our sportspersons in different
events prior to Commonwealth Games 2010. For that, our existing stadia need to be made fully operational. The
Committee, therefore, emphasizes that this task should also be completed in a time bound manner. (Para 18.3)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
            The Committee expects precise replies to all the aspects pointed out in its recommendations/observations, which
is missing here. The Committee has found the Ministry non-responsive to its queries about the working of National
Federations. The Committee would like to have Ministry’s response about Kerala Scheme mentioned in its
recommendation. A copy of the China model also be sent to the Committee for its consideration. The Committee hopes
that the Ministry would practically liaise with all sports bodies and State Governments to move ahead with a pragmatic
approach. (Para 18.6)
 
XIX.    INCENTIVES FOR PROMOTION OF SPORTS ACTIVITIES
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply provided by the Ministry because it does not give reasons for not
holding tournaments at Block, District and State level every year by various States.  Committee, would like to know the
constraints being faced by the defaulting States in not organizing the tournaments at various levels for three consecutive
years.  The Committee would also appreciate if details of participation by Bihar in National level competitions during
the last three years are made available to it. (Para 19.4)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is of the view that despite the Ministry’s initiatives being taken to improve the outreach and
impact of the schemes relating to nurturing of sporting talents in the country, the performance level of this scheme is not
at all satisfactory.   The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation and stresses that the inherent
shortcomings of the schemes needs to be rectified with strict supervision and effective monitoring by the SAI, State
Governments/Union Territory administrations and others. (Para 19.7)
 
XX       SPORTS AMONG DISABLED
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is quite amazed to learn that a special scheme for physically handicapped which was scheduled
to be implemented in 2002-03, was still in the formulation stage.  It is also not clear by when the scheme is going to be
finally approved.  The Committee emphasizes upon the Ministry to formulate the scheme without much delay so that it
could be implemented at the earliest. (Para 20.2)
 
XXI. INFRASTRUCTURE SCHEMES
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is happy to note that the Planning Commission has given its approval for meeting the committed
liabilities of incomplete sanctioned projects regarding sports infrastructure during the remaining period of Tenth Plan.
The Committee, however, observes that this can only be considered a stop-gap arrangement. Problem of long pending
sports infrastructure projects due to the undue delay in submission of utilization certificates by State Governments

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
would still remain. The Committee strongly feels that for nurturing of sports talent at the grass root level, infrastructure
projects need to be expedited. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a through view of these schemes should be
undertaken by the Ministry without any further delay. (Para 21.3)
 
XXIII.             GRANTS TO NATIONAL SPORTS FEDERATIONS
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to note that despite recommendations being made in its earlier reports also on the
issue of settling of outstanding dues towards rent of various stadia being occupied by different federations, the situation
has remained unchanged.  Moreover, the Ministry has failed to apprise the Committee about the steps being taken to
settle these dues.  This infact shows the lack of seriousness on the part of the Ministry in this regard. The Committee
recommends that the Ministry should initiate action to remedy the situation and, apprise the Committee of the steps
being taken against the erring federations. (Para 23.5)
********
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
VIII
EIGHTH  MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 8
th December, 2005, in
Room No. 63, First  Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Vayalar Ravi                      ¾        Chairman
 
      RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3. Smt. Brinda Karat
4. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
 
      LOK SABHA
 
5. Shri Basudeb Barman
6. Shri R. L. Jalappa
7. Shri Manoj Kumar
8. Dr. Thokchom Meinya
9.
      Shri Krishna Murari Moghe
10. Shri M. Rajamohan Reddy
11. Shri A.R. Shaheen
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Committee Officer
Smt Meena Kandwal, Research Officer
 
2.         x                      x                      x         
 

169th Report of Committee on Human Resourse Development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/169threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:24:39]
3.         Thereafter, the Committee took up the 169 th Action taken Report on the recommendation/observation contained
in 163 rd report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) in respect of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. The
Committee adopted the same with some modifications.
4.                  The Committee decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Tuesday, the 13th December, 2005. The Committee authorized the Chairman, and in his absence, Prof.
Ram Deo Bhandary to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and  Shri Basudeb Barman and in his absence Dr.
Thokchom Meinya to lay the Reports in the Lok Sabha. 
5.
                  The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.55 a.m. to meet again at 3.30 p.m. on Wednesday,  the 14 th December,
2005.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
xxx relates to other matter.