• 
SECRETARIAll 

• 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. Composition of the Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (i) 
2. 
3. 
Introduction 
Report: 
(iii) 
I. Elementary Education ..................................................................... , . . . . . . 2 
II. Secondary Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
III. Higher Education ...... .......................................................... :................. 7 
IV. Adult Education .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . .. . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . 9 
V. Promotion of Languages ······························'·········································· 10 
VI. Vocationalisation of Education . :. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
4. General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN 
RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (1993-94) 
1. Shri Ram Naresh Yadav - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA S~BHA 
2. Prof. Saurin Bhattacharya 
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury 
4. Dr. Jinendra Kumar Jain 
5. Miss Saroj Khapardc 
6. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
7. Shri T. Chandrasckhar Reddy 
8. Shri Md. Salim 
9. Shri Pravat Kumar Samantaray 
10. Prof. I.G. Sanadi 
11. Shri Ashoke Kumar Sen 
12. Shri Vishnu Kant Shastri 
13. Shri P. Upendra 
14. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
15. Dr. Yiswanatham Kanithi 
16. Dr. V. Rajeshwaran 
17. Prof. (Smt.) Savithri Lakshmanan 
18. Shri Mani Shankar Aiyar 
19. Dr~ Vasant Niwrutti Pawar 
20. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
21. Shri Subash Chandra Nayak 
22. Shri Bapu Hari Chauro 
23. Shri Z.M. Kahandole 
24. Shri Datta Meghe 
25. Shri lshwarbhai Khodabhai Chavda 
26. Shri K. Thulasiah Vandayar 
27. Shri Aslam Sher Khan 
28. Shri Inder Jit 
29. Dr. Ramesh Chand Tomar 
30. Shri Chinmayanand Swami 
31. Shri Dau Dayal Joshi 
32. Prof. K. Venkatagiri Gowda 
33. Or. K. D. Jeswani 
34. Dr. Mahadeepak Singh Shakya 
35. Dr. G. L. Kanaujia 

*36. Vacant 
37. Shri Braja Kishore Tripathy 
38. Shri Rambadan 
39. Shrimati Malini Bhattacharya 
40. Shri Ram Chandra Dome 
41. Shri Brahmanand Mandai 
42. Prof. Ummareddy Venkateswarlu 
43. Shri Suraj Mandai 
44. Shri Kanshi Ram 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri R. C. Soperna - Deputy Secretary 
Shri Om Parkash - Under Secretary 
Shri A. K. Singh - Committee Officer 
*Shri Chandrajeet Yadav resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 13.4.93. 

INTR-ODUCTION 
I; the · Chairman of the Department Rela~ed Parliamentary Standing Committee ori 
~uman Resource Development having been authorised by the Conimittee to present 
the Report on irs behalf, do hereby present this First Report of the Committee on the 
Demands for Grants of the Department of Education , Ministry of Human Resource 
Development for the year 19~3-94. 
2. The Standing Committee on Human Resource Development , like other Standing 
Parliamentary Committees on various Ministries of the Government of India was 
constituted on the 8 April, 1993. The functions of the Standing . Commit~ees as laid 
down in Rule 20 of the" Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of 
States (Rajya · Sabha) are as under:- ' 
"270. Each of the Standing Committees shall have the following functions, 
namely:-
. I 
(a) to consider the Demands for Grants of the related'Ministries/Departments and 
report thereon. The report shall not suggest anything of the nature of cut · 
motions; 
(b) to examine . Bills, pertammg to the· related Ministries/ 
Departments , referred to the Committee or the Chairman or the Speaker, as 
the case may be, and report thereon; 
(c) to consider the annual reports of the Ministries/Department and report 
thereon; and 
(d) to consider national basic long term policy documents presented to the Houses , 
if_referred to the Committee by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may 
be, and report thereon: 
_Provided that the Standing Committees shall not consider matters of day~ to-day 
administration of the related Ministries/Departments." 
3. The Committee, held its first meeting on 16th April, 1993 to have a general 
discussion on the procedure for the transaction of its work. The Committee decided to 
take up the Demands relatin~ to the Department of Education, Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (Dema-nd No. 47) !or its consideration. 
4. The Commj.ttee also considered the various documents and papers received from 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development and also heard the Secretary (Educa­
tion) and other officials of the Department of Education on the said Demands for 
:Grants. 
5. The Committee considered the Demands for Grants in three sittings and 
considered and adopted the report at its sitting held on the 1st May, 1993. 
6. In this Report the Committee have addressed itself only to the task of examining 
the Demands for grants (No. 47) for 1993-94 of the Department of Education of the ~ 
Ministry of Human Resource Development, in the limited time available ·to the 
Committee. 
NEW DELHI; 
1 MAY, 1993 
t1 V AISAKHA, 1915 (SAKA) 
RAM NARESH YADAV 
Chairman, 
. Department related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development 

REPORT 
The Ministry of Human Resource Development was created in 1985 for integrating all 
efforts for the development of human potential in the areas of education, culture, youth and 
sports, women and children. 
The Department of Education is responsible for universalisation of Elementary Education 
(UEE) , adult education, equalisation of educational opp9rtunities, women's education and 
development , vocationalisation of school education, consolidation of higher education, 
modernisation of technical education, improvement of quality, content and process of 
education at all levels. 
The functions of Department of Education are to evolve educational policy in all its 
aspects and to coordinate and determine the standard in higher education including research. 
This Department is also responsible to expand and develop technical education, to improve 
quality of textbooks, to administer scholarships and other schemes, to foster and encourage 
studies and research in Sanskrit and other classical languages, to develop activities in the 
field of non-formal education , to promote adult education and to co-ordinate pro·grammes of 
assistance and other activities with UNESCO. 
The Department of Education had been classified under the following major heads:-
A. Elementary Education 
B. School and Physical Education 
C. University and Higher Education 
D. Adult Education 
E. Scholarships 
F. Book Promotion 
G. Hindi 
H. Modern Indian Languages 
I. Sanskrit 
J. Technical Education 
K. Indian National Commission for Cooperation with UNESCO. 
L. Education Planning. 
The Ministry has sought an outlay of Rs. 850.01 crore for non-plan expenditure and 
Rs. 1309.30 crore for plan expenditure making· a total of Rs. 2159.31 crore which accounts 
for 25.16 per cent increase in the revised estimates for the year 1992-93. For the educational 
development of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes about 13 per cent of the divisible 
outlay for the year 1993-94 has been allocated for special component Plan for Scheduled 
Castes and 10 per cent for special component plan for Scheduled Tribes. They account for 
5 per cent and 4 per cent of the total outlay of the Department of Education. 
Inspite of the efforts made in the field of education the country has not so far achieved 
the·set targets. Yet , there are some positive indicators which cannot be set aside. The 1991 
census results reveal a literacy rate of over 52 per cent, with a higher rate. of growth for 
female literacy. All necessary steps may be taken to achieve the broader goal of 'Education 
for All' (EFA) by 2000 A.D. 

DEMANDS FOR GRANTS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (1993-94) 
Demand No. 47 
The various heads of expenditure in the Demands for grants and relevant clarifications 
mentioned in the documents together with the views of the Secretary and other officials of 
the Ministry are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs. 
I. ELEMENTARY EDUCATION 
The Schemes of Elementary Education are being implemented mainly through State 
Govern ments and Union Territories. 
Over the years, the Centre and the States have made considerable investments in 
promoting elementary educa tion. As a result 94.06 per cent of the rural population are being 
served with Prim ary Schools/Sections within a walking distance of 1 kilometer and 85.39 per 
cent of them are being served with middle school/section within a distance of 3 kms. 
The Eighth Plan outlay on Education (Centre and States) at Rs. 19599.7 crore is higher 
than the Seventh Plan expenditure of Rs. 7632.9 crore by 2.6 times. Within the 'plan outlay 
there is a marked shift in the inter se allocation of resources for education. The outlay on 
elementary education increased from 33 percent in the Sixth Plan to 37.33 per cent in the 
Seventh Plan and to 46.95 per cent in the Eighth Plan. 
A. Operation Blackboard 
The Scheme of Operation Blackboard which was started in 1987-88 was launched to bring 
about a substant ial qualitative improvement in the primary school environment. The Scheme 
was to be implemented in three phases and aimed at providing (i) a building comprising at 
least two reasonably large all weather rooms with a deep verandah and separate toilet 
facilities for boys and girls (ii) at least two teachers in every school, as for as possible one of 
them a woman and (iii) essential teaching-learning material including balckboards, maps, 
charts. toys and equ ipment for work experience. Funds .for construction of school buildings 
are provided mainly from rural development schemes. Funds for the other two components 
are provided by the Depart ment of Education. 
The first phase of the Scheme (1987-88) has been evaluated by various agencies. The 
findings reveal inter-alia that the Programme has resulted in the creation of better 
infrastructure. Woman teachers were fotlnd to be more knowledgeable and were using the 
aids more frequ ently than men justifying the important provision in the Operation 
Blackboard Scheme that the second teacher added to the Schoo l should prefe rably be a 
woman. However, the prescribed norms regarding classroom size, verandahs, toilets etc. 
have not been performed , there was also no quality check on the items that were supplied . 
The evaluation reports provided the following valuable feedback on which the programme 
is sought to be modified:-
(a) Flexibility in the Scheme for purchase of equipment. 
(b) Qua lity Control mechanism to ensure good quality material. 
(c) Strengthening teacher training programmes to maximise the utilisation of equipment. 
(d) Ensuring that 50% of the teachers are women. 
It is also proposed to expand the Operation Black Board Scheme towards the later part of 
the Eighth Five Year Plan period to provide three teachers and three rooms where 
enrolment exceeds 80. 
In order to achieve the objective Rs. 149.53 crores , 175.53 crores, and 175.17 crores have 

been spent in the years 1990-92, 1991-92 al)d 1992-93 respect ively and Rs. 179 crores have 
been allocate<:l during the year 1 993-94. 
Durin g the period from 1987-88 to 1991-92, 5376 blocks (84%) having 413546 (76.96%) 
primary schools in the country have been covered and 8% blocks would be covered in 1992-
93 and the remaining 8% are propo~cd to be ·covered by 1993-94. 
The Committ ee is of the opinion that the number of schools in rural areas may be 
increased. Proper buildings for schools, ade quate number of teachers and other essential 
facilities may be provided. 
The Committ ee also expresses deep concern over the high drop out rate of Scheduled 
Tribes and Scheduled Castes students, which is Scheduled Tribes 86.72%, Scheduled Castes 
79.88.% against the over all dro p out rate of 75.36%. 
The Commit tee is unhapp y over the situation that the sp irit of Operation Black board has 
not been fulfilled. 
B. Mid-day Meal Programme 
Mid-day Meal Programm e with varying degree of coverage either as a programm e to help 
the educationa l efforts or as an anti-poverty programme has been launched and is effectively 
working in various States. At present, 17 State Governments are implementin g Mid-day 
Meal Programme for primay school children of the age group 6-11 years. In the study 
conducted to fi nd out the impact of the Mid-da y Meal, it has been reporte d that the higher 
retention rate was not not iced in respect of districts with Mid-day Meal Progra mme t han 
those without them. The impact on girl students belonging to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes Communities were also not found to be satisfactory. 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry during the course of 
oral evidence by the Secretary (Education) that the Primary School Teacher s and their 
organisations have been resentful of taking up Mid-Day Meal Programme on the ground that 
functions and responsibilities in this regard make serious inroad s into their teaching time. The 
Committee recommends that concerted efforts should be made to implement the programme 
in an effective way. 
The Committee also recommends that this work should be entrusted to some voluntary 
organisation as is being done in some Stat.es: 
C. Non-Formal Education 
In 1979-80, the Scheme of Non-forma l Education was introd uced as an alternative ) trategy 
. to impart education to childre.n, who, for various reasons , cannot attend formal schools. 
It is said that where there is abse nce of schooling opportunities this will be compensated 
by non-formal education. While non-for mal education may be a potent antidote to illiteracy 
at the above-15 s tage, for children under that age non-formal education cannot be a 
substitute for regular schooling. At most, it can serve as an entr y point to regular schooling 
system. There is also no provision in the demand s for enabling labouring children to be 
released from their boudge and be integra ted in the education system. The perception of 
non-formal education as a s ubstitute for regular schooling a t the primary and seco ndary 
stage fs an abd ication of responsibility on the part of the Gove rnment. 
The scheme was revised in 1987-88. Although its focus is o n the e ducation ally backward 
States , but it has been extended to cover urban slums, hilly tribal and desert areas and areas 
with concentration of working children in the other states as well. Und er the Scheme , 
financial assistance is given to the States/Union Territ ories in the ratio of 50:50 and 90:10. 
The Committee feels, that the grants are very meagre. Government must ensure that the 

funds allocated for the purpose should not be misused and there should be a proper 
monitoring. 
D. Teacher Education 
The Centrally sponsored Scheme of Teacher Education is being implemented since 1987-
88. Its main objectives are to impart suitable pre-service and in-service training to school 
teach ers so as to provide all-rou nd academic and resource support to the school. During the 
years 1987-92, 306 District Institutions of Education and Training have been sanctioned 
covering all States except West Bengal and Union Territorie s of Delhi and Pondicherry. 
During the same period , 43 Secondary Teachers ' Training Institutes have been up-graded 
and a sum of Rs. 164.36 crores has been sanctioned under this scheme to State 
Governments. 
The Committee does not understand under what circumstances West Bengal and Union 
Territories of Delhi and Pondicherry have been )eft out of the scheme and recommends that 
the same tnay be included in the next year positively. 
E. National A wards to Teachers 
The National Awards carry a cash grant of Rs. 5000/- to the recipients meant only to be a 
token grant; not a cash reward. The real prestige to the awardee accrues on account of the 
distinction that it is a National Award conventionally given away by the President of India. 
The budget grant of Rs. 27 lakh for 1993-94 to meet the cost of cash component of a total of 
295 National Awards to be given for 1992 and for the incidental expenditure in connection 
with Awardees TA/DA , function expenses etc. does not seem to be sufficient. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the grant as well as the number of Awardees 
should be increased so that more teachers are covered under the Scheme. 
. In Bihar Education Project the revised estimate for 1992-93 has been reduced to Rs. 6 
crores from the Budget Estimate of Rs. 12 crores and whereas in 1993-94 again it is being 
raised to Rs. 20 crores. 
The Committee is not convinced with the Demand for Grants on this account and feels that 
it should be at the level of last year Budget Estimate. 
The Committee is unhappy to note that in the year 1991-92 only Rs.2 crores were spent 
against the budgetary allocation of Rs. 6 cFores and again in the year 1992-93 budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 12 crores was reduced to Rs. 6 crores in the revised estimate. 
The Committee feels that budgetary allocations were not utilised properly. 
The Committee fails to understand the rationale for not allocating any funds for the 
Monitoring of Universalisation of Elementary Education, Operationalising Micro Planning and 
Improvement of Learners' achievement for which Rs. 86 lakhs, Rs. 3 crores and Rs.2 crores, 
respectively were allocated in the Budget Estimate of 1992-93. 

SECONDARY EDUCATION 
It has been the constant endeavour of Government to improve the extstmg education 
system and innovate further to make education socially relevant. In this field the main 
institutions are:-
(i) Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan. 
(ii) Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti. 
(iii) National Open School. 
(i) Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan:- Kendri ya Vidyalaya Scheme was started by the 
Department in the academic year 1963-64. The main objectives of the scheme are: (i) to 
meet the educatio nal needs of the children of transferab le Central Governme nt employees 
including defence personnel by providing common programme of edcuat ion; (ii) to develop 
the Vidyalayas as model schools in the context of the national goal of education; (iii) to 
initiate and promote exper imentation in education in collaboration with other bodies; and 
(iv) to promote national integration. 
The Budget Estimates (Non-Plan) of Kendriya Vidyalaya, was Rs. 163.01 crores for the 
year 1992-93, the Revised Estimate (Non-Plan) for the same year was Rs. 165.55 crores, 
while the Budget Estimate (Non-Plan) for the year 1993-94, is Rs.185.46 c rores. 
The Committee feels that there is a continuous backlog in providing good low cost school 
e~ucation which causes proliferation of private schools and creates pressure on Kendriya 
Vidyalayas which are basically meant for children of Central Government employees with 
transferable jobs. The capital outlay is not sufficient to make up for this backlog. This is 
likely to make the goal of universal education an everreceding one. 
The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the number of Kendriya Vidyalayas, and 
recommends that the allocation of funds be enhanced so that the number of Kendriya 
Vidyalayas be increased with a view to impart education to sufficient number of students. 
The Committee also recommends that the Government should explore the possibility of 
opening Kendriya Vidyalayas in those areas, where there is heavy concentration of Central 
Government employees for whom there are no sufficient educational facilities. 
The demand for opening more Kendriya Vidyalayas may be given top priority. 
(iii) Navodaya Vidyalaya 
In order to provide good quality modern education to the talented children predominantly 
from the rural areas Government of India launched in 1985-86 a scheme to establish 
Navodaya Vidyalayas one in each district. So far 280 Navodaya Vidyalayas have been 
established in the country. 
The specific objective of these Vidyalayas is to ensure that all students may attain the 
reasonable level of competence in three languages, and to serve as focal point in each district 
for improvement in quality of education through sharing of experience while availing the 
facilities. 
The budget allocation for Navodaya Vidyalayas has increased from Rs. 55 crores in 1990-91 
toRs. 131.71 crores in 1993-94 for plan expenditure. As on 31st March , 1992, 7,849 students 
were on the rolls of these co-educational Vidyalayas. Admission of children from urban areas 
is restricted to one-fourth and children belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
communities are admitted in proportion to their population. 
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Navodaya Vidyalayas are very few in 

. number vis-a-vis the rural population and feels that the Ministry should make sincere effortS 
·to establish Navodaya Vidyalayas atleast one in each district, on an average, as per their 
target. 
The Committee feels that the . budget allocation for vocationalisation of education and 
providing hostel and boarding facilities for girl students in the Navodaya Vidyalayas be 
substantially increased and the Ministry should be very careful in spending of money in these 
programmes. 
The Committee stresses that the scheme for migration of 30 per cent students for a period 
of two years at class IX level from one Vidyalaya to another in a different linguistic region to 
promote national integration, be implemented effectively. 
The Committee feels that no assessment of students coming out of Navodaya Vidyalayas and 
their positive contribution to society has been made so far. Therefore, proper assessment may 
be made whether the purpose of these Vidyalayas which are being give more and more 
financial assistance is being served or not. 
NATIONAL POPULATION EDUCATION PROGRAMME 
The National Population Education Project was launched in 1980 with the main objective 
of institutionalising population education in school education system. The Project is currently 
running in 29 States and Union Territories. The Committee feels that the Budget Estimates 
of Rs. 98 lakhs for 1993-94, for this Project should be increased as Government proposes to 
substantially increase the activities and expand its net work during the Eighth Plan. 
(iv) National Open School 
The National Open School was registered on 23rd November, 1989 to provide secondary 
education of quality to the disadvantaged sections of the society through Distance 
Education. 
The education is imparted through distance teaching methods with the help of accredited 
institutions all over India . In comparison to 143 accredited institutions in 1991, there are 303 
such institution s and the target for 1992-93 is to have 350 accredited institutions. 
The Committee is not satisfied with the outlay asked for in the Demands for Grants of Rs. 
3.24 crores, for the year 1993-94 from Rs. 1.54 crore (RE. 1992-93) and recommends that 
more realistic view should be taken in formulating and calculating the Demands for Grants, 
which may not result in substantial decrease in the Revised Estimates for 1993-94. 

1 IDGHER EDUCATION 
Higher Education is imparted through yarious universities and a large ·number of arts, 
science, commerce and professional colleges affiliated to them. The Demand for Grants 
relating to higher education for, the year 1993-94 is Rs. 161 crores (Plan) and Rs. 339.88 
CfOres (Non-Plan). The total Plan allocation for University anq Higher Education for 1993-
94 in relation to that of 1991-92 is as under:-
Year 
1991-92 
1993-94 
Plan allocations 
(Rs. in crores) 
155.00 
161.00 
The Committee observes that the share of higher education in the· total allocation for 
iducation has gone down drastically in the seventh and the eighth plans. No alternative 
arrangement has been made for resource mobilisation in colleges and universities. Capital 
outlay for colleges and universities in the States has become so limited that it is impossible for 
the states to fulfil the demand for higher education. UGC is asking colleges and universities to 
mobilise their own resources from non-governmental sources. Taking this in view efforts may 
be made to fmd out and augment resources for higher education. 
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERISTY 
The Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) was established in September , 
1985 by an Act of Parliament for the introduction and promotion of Open University and 
Distance Education Systems in. the educational pattern of the country and for the co­
ordination and determination of standards in such systems. The University has set up 9 
Schools in various disciplines. 
The University spent Rs. 1.2 crore during 1991-92 and the budget allocation during 1992-
93 was Rs. 17.53 crores which has been increased to Rs. 21.9 crores for 1993-94. 
The Committee feels that the amount be increased so that more centres of learning can be 
opened benefitting larger number of students. 
B. Indian Council of Historical researsch 
Indian Council of Historical Research was set up in 1972 as an autonemous organisation to 
promote the objectives of research in and writing of history. 
In 1992-93, the Council sanctioned study grants including travel contingent grant to 97 
scholars. 
The Committee stresses that the funds allocated for the Council may be utilised in 
conducting research to find out solutions to Indian problems and it whould have an Indian 
Orientation. 
C. Book Promotional Activities by Voluntary Organisations 
Under the Scheme, grants are given on ad hoc basis to Voluntary Organisations, 
belonging· to writers, publishers, book-sellers, etc. for organising seminars, training courses, 
workshops, annual conventions, surveys, etc. related to Book Promotional Activities. 75% 
of the approved expenditure on an event is met by the Mini~try and the remaining 25% is 
met by the voluntary organisations concerned. 
During the course of delibarations the representatives informed that for the last 2 years, 
the Ministry of Finance has imposed a ban on the expenditure on seminars work-shops, 

training programmes, etc. For the year 1993-94 Rs. 5 lakhs have been demanded which the 
representatives informed are meant for meeting emergent demands in relaxatoin of the ban 
in consultation with the Ministry of Finance. 
The Committee recommends that the ban be lifted and budget allocations the revised 
accordingly. 
D. Setting up of National Society of Authors. 
There was a provision of Rs. 2 lakhs in the Budget Estimate of 1992-93 for setting up of a 
National Society of Authors. In 1993-94, the same provision of Rs. 2 lakhs has been made. 
The Committee sought to know as to whether the amount allocated for the purpose has 
been spent and whether the Society has been set up? 
It was informed by the Ministry that the Society has not yet been set up. The Budget 
provision for 1992-93, therefore , could not be spent. The allocation for 1993-94 is a token 
provision only, as final decision to set up the Society is yet to be taken. 
The Committee recommends that the setting up of Societies like National Society of Authors 
be expedited. · 

ADULT EDUCATION 
The National Literacy Mission was launched on 5th May, 1988 with the objective of 
functional literacy to 80 million illiterates in the 15-35 years age-group by 1995. The 
successful implementation of the Mission is evident from the emergence of a large number of 
neo-literates who needed to be guided from teacher dependent learning to self-guided 
learning. 
The literacy campaign is marked by characte.ristics like it is area-specific, time-bound, 
delivered through voluntarism, cost effective and outcome-oriented and .is being 
implemented by Zilla Saksharata Samitis constituted under the District Collector. The 
members of the Samiti are drawn from all sections of society, especially the women , the 
weaker sections of the society etc. 
56 total Literacy Campaign projects including 6 projects sanctioned during 1992-93 have so 
far been sanctioned to 46 voluntary . agencie~.: 
21 State Resource Centres continue to function to provide academic and technical 
resource support to the Adult Education Programme throughout the country. 14 of them are 
functioning in the voluntary sector, 3 in Universitie s and four in Departments of Adult 
Education in various States. 
In the Demand for Grants for the year 1993-94 for Adult Education Programmes an 
outlay of Rs. 177.97 crores for plan expenditure and Rs. 2.63 crores for non-plan 
expenditure have been asked. . 
During the course of evidence the Secretary (Education), was asked to state the reasons 
for curtailment in the plan allocation on Non-Formal Education for women and girls (Adult 
Education). 
The Committee does not understand the reasons for decline in the non-plan expenditure and 
suggests that like the preceding years the amount should be increased proportionately. 
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply given during the course of oral evidence 
that this allocation has been kept for activities implemented with UNICEF assistance and 
recommends that some more allocation should have been made for this. The Committee was 
also not satisfied with reply given by the Ministry regarding Budget Estimates for 1993-94 
which are on the lower side than the Revised Estimates of the earlier year, for the education 
of women and girls. 
NEHRU YUV A KENDRA 
The Nehru Yuva Kendras (NYK) have been undertaking Adult Education Programme 
since the launching of national Adult Education Programme for eradicating illiteracy during 
the specified period. 
The Committee feels that it should be ensured that the proper utilisation of funds be made 
and an assessment of the performance of these Kendras may be undertaken. 

v 
PROMOTION OF LANGUAGES 
Languages being the most important medium of Education, their development octupies an 
jmportant place in the National Policy on ~_<!_qc_ation. Therefore, promotion and 
development of Hindi and other languages-listed in_ the VIII Schedule to the· Constitution of 
Jmdia including Sanskrit and Urdu on the one hand and English as well as foreign languages 
on the other hand , received due attention. 
1 
HINDI: To encourage voluntary organisations engaged in -promotion, development and 
propagation of Hindi , the Central Government has been providing them financial assistance 
since .the First Five Year Plan . 
With a view to assisting the States/Union Territories in imple_menting the three language 
Formula , the Government of India has started , since the Second Five Year Plan , the 
schemes of (i) Appointment of Hindi Teachers; and (ii) Opening/strengthening of Hindi 
Teachers Training Colleges in non-Hindi speaking areas 100% assistance is provided for this 
purpose. The total outlay of Rs. 11.14 crores for 1993-94 have been asked for the 
developm~nt of Hindi Language. The Propagation of Hindi is to be achieved through 
various - mstitutions. 
URDU: For Tarraqi-e-Urdu Board asum of Rs. 1.20 crore has been qemanded for the year 
1993-94 against the Revised Estimate of Rs. 1.02 crore for 1992-93. 
SAN~KRIT: In the year 1970 the Rashtriya Sanskrit Sansthan was established with the 
objective of preservation , propagation and modernisation of traditional learning and research 
in Sanskrit. For the development of Sanskrit a sum of Rs. 10.04 crores has been asked for in 
the -Budget Estimate 1993-94 against the Revised Estimates of Rs. 9.47 crores in 1992-93. 
SINDf;II: The Government has decided to establish a Sindhi Vikas Board for promotioQ and 
development of Sindhi. Under the Scheme it is proposed to purchase 90 books for free 
distribution to libraries and organisations. Apart from this Vofun'tary Organisations/ 
Agencies will be given grant-in-aid for language promotion activities. A provision of Rs. 24 
lakhs fo.r Budget Es.timate-1993-94 has been made against Revised Estimate-1992-93 of 
Rs. 10 l'aRhs for the establishment of Sindhi Vikas Board. 
The Committee expresses its concern over the dismal progress made in the development of 
Modern Indian Languages as given ~ the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution and 
recommends that more concerted efforts should be made to. p~operly monitor the propagation 
and promotion of Modern Indian Languages. The Plan outlay for ·the development of 
Languages for the year 1993-94 is Rs. 28.34 crores which is not enough to implement the· 
three language formula and promote nation~ unity. 

VI 
VOCA TIONALISATION OF EDUCATION 
In pursuance of the National Policy on Education 1986, a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
Vocationalisation of Secondary Education was started from February, 1988 under which 
financial assistance is provided to the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations 
for Introduction of Vocational Courses in schools at the + 2 stage. Assistance is also given to 
the voluntary organisations for taking up innovative programmes in the field of vocational 
education. 
The Committee feels that the involvement of voluntary organisations in the field of 
vocational education should be encouraged. More Centres of Vocational Education be set up 
and resources required by these organisations be augmented. 

GENERAL 
(A) QUALITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRA:\IME- COMMUN ITY POLYTECHNICS 
As regards Demands for grants under sub-head D .5(1 )-Grant for quality 
improvement programme-Community Polytechnics. the Committee feels that the amount 
of grant for community polytechnics and Centres for Development of Rural Technology 
be substantially increased so that more institutions are covered under the Scheme during 
1993-94. 
r (B) SANSKRIT EDUCATION 
The Committee sought to know why the nomenclature of budget head No.C.5.(3) is 
Sanskrit Education even though the grant is utilised for other classical languages also. 
During the course of evidence it was informed that under the provision made for 
Sanskrit education, assistance is given to · desen ·ing voluntary organisations and 
institution s engaged in teaching/promotion of other classical languages. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that henceforth the Head Sanskrit education be 
changed to Sanskrit and other Classical Languages Education. 
(C) COMPUTER EDUCATION 
For familiarising school students with computers and their use and "hands-on" 
experience, a project on 'Computer Literacy and Studies in School' is being 
implemented jointly by the Department of Electronics and Department of Education 
since 1984-85. 2598 Secondary /Se nior Secondary Schools were provided two BBC micros 
which was increased to five from 1987-88 onwards. An expenditure of Rs. 48.30 crores 
upto 1992-93 has been incurred on the implementation of the project by the 
Dapratment of Electronics and the Department of Education. 
The Committee is unhappy to note that in view of the resource constraints of the 
government, it is not possible to provide subsidy to individual students and recommends 
that government should find ways and means to help those students who intend to 
procure and install a computer at home. 
(D) FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO NATIONAL PROFESSORS 
The Government of India had instituted in 1949, a Scheme of National Profes sorship 
to honour distinguished scholars in recognition of their valuable contribution to 
knowledge. Persons of eminence who have attained the age of 65 years and who have 
made outstanding contribution in their respective fields and are still capable of further. 
productive research are considered for appointment as National Professors. 
The total number of National Professors that can be there at a time 12, as per the 
Scheme. 
The Committee was informed that at present there are only t\vo National Professors 
receiving honorarium. 
The Committee expresses concern in this regard and recommends that appointment 
for all the posts of National Professors may be expedited. 
(E) YOGA IN SCHOOLS 
The Scheme of Introduction of Yoga in schools was started in 1989-90 but cou ld take 
of only in 1990-91. Since the commitment of the State Government is pre-requisite for 
implementation of the Scheme and since few State Governments have come forward 
with this commitment, it has not been possible to expand the implementation of the 
1') 

Scheme till now. The Committee was informed that the implementation is expected to 
improve during the 8th Plan. 
The Committee recommends that the efforts to speed up and expand the implementation 
of the scheme of Yoga education be made effective!). 
(F) INTEGRA TED EDUCATION FOR DISABLED CHILDRE N 
The Scheme of Integrated Education for Disabled Children provides 100% financial 
assistance to State Govts I UT Admini!:-.trations and voluntary organisations for creating 
necessary facilities in the schools. 
Voluntary organisations under the Scheme arc given financial assistance throu.gh the State 
Governments. These Organisations supplement the work being done by the State 
Government. 
In the Budget Estimate for the year 1993-94 the allocation is Rs. 40 lakhs. The Committee 
feels that this amount may be increased and the participation of voluntary organisations in 
this field may a lso be enco ura ged. 
(G) DELINKI NG OF DEGREE FROM JOBS 
The New Polic y on Education (N PE) 1986, as modtfied in 1992 visualises delinking of 
degrees from jobs in selected areas, especia lly in service~ for which a University degree need 
not be a necessary qualification. 
The National Evaluation Organbation (N EO) \\as registered in December, 1991, to 
facilitate the process of del inking. b] conducting test'> 011 a \ oluntar) basis to determine the 
suitab ility of candidates for specific jobs and to evolve norms of comparable competencies 
across the nati on and to bring about an overall improvement in tc~ttn g. and measurement. 
The Committee was informed that the National Evaluation Organisation is yet to become 
operational. The various steps for rendering NEO functional are under way. 
The Committee feels that there has been an enormou s delay and recommends that the NEO 
may be set up and made operational at the earliest. 
(H) ILLIT ERACY AMONG WOMEN AND GIRLS 
The Committee was informed that according to the 1991 census the rate of literacy amo ng 
the women and girls is 39.29 against the All India rate of 52.21. 
The Committee is unhappy with the present rate of literacy and recommends that all out 
efforts be made '"ith the assistance of voluntary organisations to increase the rate of literacy 
among women and girls specially Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
MGIP(PLU)MRND-3483R5-24-9·93---1200Copies 