         
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2020 /Pausa, 1942 (Saka) 
REPORT 
NO. 
317 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND   SEVENTEENTH        
REPORT 
"Preparation for Olympic Games, 2021"  
 
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on24th December 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 24th December, 2020) 
 

 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, 
WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED AND   SEVENTEENTH             
REPORT 
 
"Preparation for Olympic Games- 2021" 
 
(Presented to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha on24th December 2020) 
(Forwarded to the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 24th December, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2020 /Pausa, 1942 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 


  
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THECOMMITTEE…...................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. REPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1-4 
3. RECOMMENDATIONS ………………………………………………………………..5-10 
5. *  MINUTES…................................................................................................….............11-28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
i 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Arpita Ghosh  
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
7. Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai 
10. Shri G.K. Vasan 
  
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.       Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
12. Shri D. M Kathir Anand 
13.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
14.  Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
15. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
16. * Vacant  
17.  Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
18. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
19.  Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
20.  Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
21 Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
22.  Shri Balak Nath 
23.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
24.  Shri T. N. Prathapan 
25.  Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
26.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
27. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
29. Shri Dharambir Singh 
30.       Shri S. Venkatesan 
31.       Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
 Sh. Jayadev Galla nomination changed from DRPSC EWCY&S to DRPSC IT wef 16/10/2020 
 
 

  
ii 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and FinancialAdvisor 
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt. Suman Khurana, CommitteeOfficer 
Smt. Meera Nair, Assistant Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
１ 
REPORT 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports having been authorized by the Committee to 
submit the report on the subject “Preparation for Olympic – 2021” on its behalf, present this 
report. 
2. Keeping in view India’s dismal performance in the last three Olympics and the fact that  
Tokyo Olympic 2021 being a few months away, the Committee decided to make an in -depth 
analysis of the subject “Preparation for Olympic – 2021” and to suggest a way forward.   
3. The Committee held a total of five meetings i.e. on 22nd October, 2019, 27th October, 18th 
November, 7 th& 23rd December, 2020 in all and a tabular summary of the  extensive 
deliberations on the subject Preparation for Olympics 2021 of the Committee is given below:- 
 
Sr No Date of 
Meeting 
Stake-holders who deposed 
before the Committee 
Number of Members 
who attended the 
meeting 
 
1. 22nd 
October, 
2019 
Department of Sports 
Shri Radhey Shyam Julaniya, Secretary 
Mrs. Kiran Soni Gupta, AS&FA 
 
Sports Authority of India 
Shri Sandeep Pradhan, DG 
Commd. Raja Gopalan, CEO (TOPS) 
 
20 
2. 27th 
October, 
2020 
Department of Sports 
Shri Ravi Mital, Secretary 
Mrs. Kiran Soni Gupta, AS&FA 
 
Sports Authority of India 
Shri Sandeep Pradhan, DG 
Commd. Raja Gopalan, CEO (TOPS) 
 
Indian Olympic Association 
Shri Rajeev Mehta,  
 
Journalists 
Shri Rajesh Kalra,  
Executive Chairman,  
Asianet News. 
Shri Vijay Lokapally,  
Eminent Sports Journalist. 
Hockey India 
Shri Gyanendro Ningombam, Officiating 
14 

  
２ 
President 
Ms. Ealena Norman, CEO 
 
Boxing Federation of India: 
Shri Ajay Singh, President 
Shri R.K. Sacheti, Executive Director 
 
National Rifle Association of India 
 
Shri Raninder Singh, President 
Shri Rajiv Bhatia, Secretary  
Shri Ajay Singh, Member 
 
Wrestling Federation Of India 
Shri V.N. Prasood, Secretary General 
Shri Vinod Tomar, Asstt. Secretary 
 
Indian Weightlifting Federation 
Shri Sahdev Yadav, SG 
Shri Suneet Chopra, Assistant Secretary 
 
Department of Sports 
Shri Ravi Mittal, Secretary 
Shri L.S. Singh, Jt. Secretary 
 
3. 18th 
November, 
2020 
Hockey India 
Md Mushtaque Ahmad, Sr Vice 
President 
Ms. Ealena Norman, CEO 
 
Boxing Federation of India: 
Shri Ajay Singh, President 
Shri R.K. Sacheti, Executive Director 
 
Wrestling Federation Of India 
Shri V.N. Prasood, Secretary General 
Shri Vinod Tomar, Asstt. Secretary 
 
Indian Weightlifting Federation 
Shri Sahdev Yadav, SG 
Shri Suneet Chopra, Assistant Secretary 
 
Archery Association of India 
Shri Virendra Sachdeva,  
16 

  
３ 
Member Core Committee 
 
Eminent Sportsperson & Olympians 
 
Shri Gagan Narang 
Shri Sushil Kumar 
 
 
4. 7th 
December, 
2020 
Department of Sports 
 
Shri Ravi Mital, Secretary 
Shri L.S. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Sports Authority of India 
 
Shri Sandeep Pradhan, DG 
Commd. Raja Gopalan, CEO (TOPS) 
 
17 
 
Three Member sub -
committee under the 
Chairmanship of Shri 
Jyotiradtiya M. Scindia 
along with Dr. Sasmit Patra 
and Shri Lavu Sri Krishna 
Devarayulu was constituted 
by the Chairman to draft a 
report for the consideration 
of the Committee 
5. 23rd 
December, 
2020 
Draft report considered and adopted by 
the Committee 
 
-------- 
 
The Committee also decided to issue a Press Release inviting views / suggestions from 
individuals / sportspersons / experts / former recipients of Olympic/International Medals and 
other organizations interested in the subject. 
7. The Committee in its meeting held on 7 th December, 2020 decided to constitute a three 
Member sub-committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Jyotiradtiya M. Scindia along with Dr. 
Sasmit Patra and Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayulu to draft a report for the consideration of the 
Committee.  
8. While drafting the Report, the Committee relied on the following documents: 
 i. Background note received from Department of Sports, Sports Authority of India, 
Indian Olympics Association, National Sports Federations, sports journalists.; 
 ii. replies to questionnaires furnished by the Department of Sports, Sports Authority 
of India, and National Sports Federations; 
 iii.       NITI Aayog Olympics Action Plan Booklet; and 
 iv.  PMs Olympic Task Force Report. 
 
9. The sub -committee submitted its report on 14 th December, 2020. Accordingly, a draft 
was prepared and circulated to the Members. 
10.  The Committee in its meeting held on 23 rd December, 2020 took up the draft report for 
consideration. After a brief discussion the Committee adopted the Report.  
11.  The Committee wishes to place on record its gratitude to Department of Sports, Sports 
Authority of India, Indian Olympics Associati on, eminent sports journalist Shri Rajesh Kalra 

  
４ 
and Shri Vijay Lokapally, representatives of Hockey India, Boxing Federation of India, 
National Rifle Assocation of India, Wrestling Federation of India, Archery Association of India 
and Indian Weightlifting Federation, Gagan Narang and Shri Sushil Kumar eminent 
sportspersons and Olympians for necessary information/documents and rendering valuable 
assistance to the Committee in its deliberation. The Committee also wishes to express its 
gratitude to Shri Desh Deepak Verma, Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha who shared his valuable 
experiences and insights gathered while working as DG, SAI in one of his earlier assignments. 
 
 
(Dr. Vinay P. Saharabuddhe) 
Chairman 
NEW DELHI                                                                             Department-related Parliamentary  
24th December, 2020                                                                Standing Committee on Education,  
Pausa 03/ 1942 (Saka)                                                              Women, Children, Youth & Sports 
  

  
５ 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and 
Sports examined the subject Preparation for Olympics – 2021. After exhaustive deliberations with all the 
concerned stakeholders the Committee recommends the following. 
 
1. Recovery from COVID impact 
a. Undertaking physiological, mental, and nutritional assessment of all athletes in the Olympics 
contingent to find strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and th reats in their preparation. Making 
it mandatory for athletes to undergo indepth cardio-pulmonary function tests to monitor recovery 
to top fitness level.  Also arranging for very scientific Musculo -skeletal rehab to original fitness 
to avoid injuries due t o sudden loads, specially at remote centers if athletes are not training at 
main centers.   
b. Providing athletes with support and training customised to the results of the assessment report 
card. 
c. Identifying the  training facilities, stadiums, and sports cent res for Olympic qualified athletes 
which have not opened yet. Re-open these centres at the earliest or relocatinc athletes to alternate 
centres which have opened. 
d. Due to lockdown and travel restrictions, there was loss of international/national competition  
exposure which has hugely affected the training of the athletes. The Department and NSFs must 
ensure that players get an opportunity to play maximum international tournaments before the 
2021 Olympic Games. International competitions should be accorded pri ority as they prepare 
athletes for pressure situations they may find themselves in during actual Olympics. 
e. It has been observed that travelling to far away tournaments is a big challenge for athletes. 
Besides, countries like France and Germany that host to urnaments at home, have produced more 
champions. India should host more international tournaments, so that players can reduce travel to 
collect more points and move up the ranking ladder. Also, a larger number of athletes can benefit 
from the same amount that India spends on sending athletes abroad for exposure. 
f. Due to the halting of domestic and international sporting competitions, athletes may not have 
experienced adequate competition in the run up to Olympics 2021. This need may be felt more 
severely in competitive sports, illustratively wrestling and badminton. It is important to identify 
and organise competitive matchups to give the necessary experience to the qualified athletes. 
2. Bio-Bubbles 
a. Creating bio -bubbles in the training facilities such that athletes can be isolated in a secure 
environment and train with minimal possibility of being infected. 

  
６ 
b. Using bio -bubbles for ensuring championship participation in games for athletes and 
sportspersons before the Olympics commence in foreign countries. 
c. Ensuring bio-bubbles for the Indian athletes and sportspersons at the Olympics. 
d. Giving individualized programs to athletes capable of reaching finals or medal hopefuls and also 
providing for sending them abroad as soon as possible in a bubble environment where  top 
scientific infrastructure is available. 
 
3. Institutional Support 
a. Swift decision making:  The government should be swift in making decisions and granting 
approvals, viz, financial grants, equipment, representation in international competitions, etc. to 
avoid unnecessary delays. GOI should be prepared in dealing smoothly and quickly with any 
unforeseen situations that may arise due to COVID. 
b. Selection process:  Qualification and selection of the olympic core probables should be 
completed on time. The selecti on schedule should be announced well in advance and the 
timeline should be adhered to. All efforts should be made to avoid any last minute selections. 
c. Coaches: 
i. Several foreign coaches resigned and returned to their respective countries in the course 
of the pandemic. Besides, most sporting disciplines have foreign experts who are either 
65 or above. Those above 65 were asked by their respective NSFs to not visit training 
venues. 
ii. About 561 vacancies exist of Coaches. This is unacceptable. These should be fill ed up 
within specific time-bound manner so that Olympic preparations don’t suffer. 
iii. Additionally, an immediate survey should be carried out in collaboration with the NSFs 
to gauge requirements for coaches, including personal coaches for athletes. 
iv. The Depart ment should lay out timelines to recruit vacancies for foreign experts and 
coaches. 
4. Human and Technical resource Support 
a. Appointing a chief procurement officer in the Mission Olympic Cell (MOC) created under the 
Chairmanship of the Director General, Sports  Authority (DG, SAI) as part of The Olympics 
Podium Scheme (TOPS) to coordinate and fast track procurement of training equipment which is 
in shortage. 

  
７ 
b. Asking head coaches to undertake a sports equipment availability analysis across their respective 
sporting facilities. Requests for essential equipment in shortage should be immediately escalated 
to the MOC who can fast track procurement and provisioning of the equipment. 
c. Governing bodies for respective sports like Wrestling Federation of India, National Rifl e 
Association of India, Hockey India can coordinate special training camps to concentrate training 
efforts for qualified athletes. 
d. Creating a dedicated digital portal for all athletes to list their equipment, training, and nutritional 
requirements. Fulfilment of these requirements can be centrally coordinated by the MOC, TOPS. 
e. Engaging professional sports performance analysis experts to assist in statistical  and data backed 
inputs to athletes on their performance and techniques. 
f. Engaging domestic ex-players, regularised sportspersons, as well as global experts/consultants in 
a virtual mode to guide preparations of the athletes in the final stages of preparation for 
Olympics 2021. 
g. Asking head coaches to create a customised 200 -day plan for every qualified athlete. The plan 
should list the focus areas for training, guidelines for preparation, and nutritional advice that 
athletes can follow to streamline their preparation. 
 
5. Medical& Doping 
a. Medical facilities : Medical staff and other medical equipment (like X -Ray and MRI) should be 
made available within select SAI and other training centres. This will ensure that athletes do not 
lose any time for treatment and recovery. This will also keep them from travelling to hospitals 
where the chances of contracting COVID are the highest. 
i. Dedicated physiotherapists should be made available in all the national training centres. 
b. Medical Insurance :  Sport injury insurance schemes should be put in place for sportspersons, 
through a collaborative framework by the central and state governments. The insurance schemes 
should be tailored as per the needs of each sports discipline, each state, and should cover players 
from different categories 
c. COVID-19 Vaccination : Athletes as well as coaches and support staff going for the Olympics 
should be put in the priority group for the vaccination process. 
d. Doping Sensitization:Regular webinars and e -learning courses should be organized to educate 
athletes and coaches about doping. 
e. World Anti-Doping Code :They should also be made aware of the changes in the 2021 World 
Anti-Doping Code. 

  
８ 
f. NADA as an independent body:  Expedite efforts to setup NADA as an autonomous body 
independent of government. 
g. National Anti -Doping Authority (NADA) helpline : They should have access to a full time 
functional National Anti-Doping Authority (NADA) helpline where they can seek advice in case 
of any doubt.It should be made clear to all the athletes that instances of doping will not be taken 
lightly. 
 
6. Corporate Sponsorship 
For the 2016 Rio Olympics, Indian Olympic Association (IOA) had signed up with a sport management 
firm and a huge amount as sponsorship was raised from the private and corporate sector. However, due to 
COVID, many NSFs have lost their sponsors this time  - as has been pointed out by IOA in their 
presentation to the Committee. It is suggested that IOA should sign up with a sponsorship management 
firm on an immediate basis for this edition of the Olympics as well, and try to rope in the private sector for 
funds. 
 
7. Women athletes 
a. Gender sensitization: Gender sensitization of all male athletes and coaches should be done to prevent 
incidences of sexist behaviour and sexual harassment. 
b. All schemes and incentives designed for the athletes should be gender neutral. 
c. Women should be encouraged to participate in as many sporting events as possible so that atleast 
50% of the Olympic contingent consists of women in the near future. 
 
8. Financial aid for athletes during their tenure as Sportspersons 
a. The committee recommends undertaking a National Olympic Scholarship Programme in a phased 
manner. It must guarantee minimum, but fixed financial aid to every athlete who does well at the 
national level. This funding needs to be scaled up as athletes begin to compete on the world stage. 
b. Private funding to individual athletes is still very low, as compared to other nations. Athletes should 
be trained to raise funds from private sources as well. Besides, incentives to donors and sponsors will 
also spur such private sector participation. 
 
9. Financial Security for medal winning athletes and their coaches during and post their sports 
careers 
a. The Ministry must place before the Standing Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth 
and Sports a formula at the earliest for ensuring financial security for medal winning athletes and 
their coaches during and post their sports careers. The Ministry must formulate such a formula 
based on the sportsperson and coach’s contribution to the Flag for the Sports. This formula must 

  
９ 
take care of financial security as mentioned above including consideration regarding stipends, 
jobs, post-retirements annuities, etc.  
b. There have been several instances of athletes not getting government jobs even after bringing 
medals in major international games. There should be an assured 3% sports quota reservation in 
government jobs for all the medal -winning athletes. For the p eriod of unemployment, the 
Department should grant easily accessible financial aid. 
c. The Ministry must give the cover of Life Insurance and Health Insurance to all Olympians as a 
mark of respect for their services to the country.  
10. Budgetary Allocation 
a. Increased allocation for TOPS programme: TOPS is being used as a top -up programme for 
covering discretionary expenses that NSFs cannot fund. This is unacceptable. TOPS as an 
independent programme should be reaffirmed and increased allocation for Olympic prepara tions 
should be made at the earliest.  
b. Stop practice of slashing “Support to NSF” funds:  It has become a practice to keep slashing 
funds in Revised Estimates (RE) as compared to Budgeted allocation under “Support to NSF”. 
This fund should not be seen as a soft target and funds slashed indiscriminately which affects 
Olympics preparations. 
 
11.  Best Practices 
a. Talent Spotting: In the identified Priority and High Priority Sports by the Ministry, the focus 
should be on talent spotting from the bottom -up, from the Panchayats, Blocks and Districts of 
India. Talent should be spotted from the School levels and nurtured to the Olympics level. 
b. Comparative analysis: of top medal winning Countries in these priority and high priority Sports 
and strategies employed by them in their: 
i. Talent Spotting 
ii. Training 
iii. Event-Day peaking and build-up for the Sportsperson and Athlete 
iv. Nutrition, Diet and Physio Support 
c. Ministry should work towards building world -class infrastructure and facilities as per 
international standards. A sincere a nd institutionalized effort should be made to ensure 
maintenance of the infrastructure so created. 
d. Training abroad: Focus should be on sending sportspersons and athletes for training abroad so 
that they have the best training at international standards of excellence. 

  
１０ 
e. Specialisation in Supporting Staff and their dedicated availability: To ensure that the 
Supporting Staff for the athletes and sportspersons have the requisite specialisation or are 
provided substantial training for improving their specialisatio n and their dedicated availability is 
ensured. 
f. There have been cases of high -performing players being excluded from the TOPS scheme. It is 
suggested to reassess the list, and create a wider net to include those deserving and left out from 
the TOPS list. 
g. Though the Department of Sports has already identified High priority Disciplines and Priority 
Disciplines based on winning potential, an outcome -oriented approach should be deployed in 
training of the athletes belonging to these disciplines. 
h. With the postponement of the games, India can gain from a bigger pool of athletes who could 
win an Olympic quota for the 2021 games. A transparent selection process, along with the 
calendar for each priority discipline should be laid out. 
i. States should recognise ‘s ports’ as an industry via their respective industrial policies to provide 
an impetus to the sector, and encourage investment in infrastructure development. This would 
open up opportunities for availing of subsidy, loan and assistance from private and gover nment 
sources. 
j. The Department should consider encouraging private investments in the sector. Current CSR 
contributions to sport only amount to about a paltry 2% of all CSR funds. Providing special 
incentives to invest in sports will aid in attracting the corporate world. 
 
 
 
 
  

  
１１ 
 
II 
SECOND   MEETING 
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met on Tuesday, the 22nd October, 2019 at 3.00 
p.m., in Committee Room No. A, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1.   Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya - Chairman 
2.   Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
3.   Shri Sasmit Patra 
4.   Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
5.   Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
6.   Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
7.   Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
8.   Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
9.   Dr. Jaisiddeshwar Shivacharya Mahaswamiji 
10. Shri Balak Nath 
11.  Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar 
12.  Shri Chandeshwar Prasad 
13. Shri T. N. Prathapan 
14. Shri Ratansinh Magansinh Rathod 
15. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
16. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
17. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
18. Shri Dharambir Singh 
19. Shri S. Venkatesan 
20. Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Additional Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Under Secretary 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer  
Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
 

  
１２ 
 
WITNESSES 
DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
1. Shri Radhey Shyam Julaniya, Secretary 
2. Mrs. Kiran Soni Gupta, AS&FA 
3. Shri Sandeep Pradhan, DG(SAI) 
4. Shri L.S. Singh, Joint Secretary  
5. Shri Inder Dhamija, Joint Secretary 
6. Shri Rohit Bhardwaj, Director 
7. Shri Amin Kumar Yadav, Director 
8. Commd. Raja Gopalan, CEO (TOPS) 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them 
about the agend a of the meeting i.e., major programmes and policies being implemented by the Department, 
achievements made so far, constraints faced by the Department in this regard and views to accomplish its 
programmes and policies as well as status of Khelo India Sche me, preparation for Tokyo Olympics 2020, and 
status of Sports University at Manipur, Imphal. Thereafter, the Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor of the 
Secretariat briefed about the achievements of the Chairman and his contributions made to the Committee.  
3.  The Chairman then welcomed the Secretary, Department of Sports and his team to the meeting and 
requested them to brief the Committee on the major programmes and policies being implemented by the 
Department, achievements made so far, constrains faced  by the Department in this regard and views to 
accomplish its programmes and policies as well as status of Khelo India Scheme, preparation for Tokyo 
Olympics 2020, and status of Sports University at Manipur, Imphal. The Chairman also desired to know about 
the status of contribution to NSDF, the Fit India initiative and other recent steps taken by the Department in the 
field of Sports. 
4.  The Secretary introduced himself and other officers accompanying him to the Committee and then 
made a brief power point presentation covering the different aspects of the agenda of the meeting.  
5.  The Secretary informed the Committee that National Sports Policy, 2001 has twin objectives of broad -
basing of sports and achieving excellence in Sports at National and Internati onal levels. He further highlighted 
the various schemes of Department of Sports like, Khelo India Scheme, Assistance to National Sports 
Federations, Human Resource Development in Sports, Sports Institutions, Sports Awards Scheme and so on. 
6.  The Secretary informed that NSDF has been operational since 1998 and the objective is of promotion of 
sports for achieving excellence at both National and International levels. He further added that the present 
corpus is of Rs. 106 crore and the total funds received s o far are Rs. 160.76 crore. The Committee was also 
briefed about the other major policies of the Department.  
7. The Members thereafter sought clarifications on the following issues:- 
(i)  the funding pattern of the sports infrastructure projects, with special regard to Indian sports like Kabbadi, 
Wrestling, Kho-Kho etc. 
(ii)  the steps taken to increase the presence of SAI centres in the country and the budget outlay for SAI; 
(iii) the steps taken to motivate the corporate entities to give funds under t heir corporate social responsibility 
initiative to sports and even try to adopt villages and blocks for sports development; 
 
(iv)  road map for inviting private contributions to sports on the lines of PPP initiatives; and  
(v)   road map to expedite the National Sports University at Imphal and the steps taken so far.  
8.  The Secretary, Department of Sports further informed the Committee about the shortage of coaches in 

  
１３ 
SAI. He described that the present strength of coaches is 780 only and there is alarming  shortage of 720 
coaches. As regards the shortage of Funds, he apprised the Committee that there is acute shortage of funds and  
he was compelled to borrow Rs. 40 crore from NSDF to manage salaries and expenses of sports hostels upto 
November, 2019. He also informed the Committee about the area specific talent available in country whom the 
Department needs to focus in order to promote sports. 
9.  The Chairman appreciated the efforts made by the Department and its associated organizations in 
promoting sports and providing support and motivation to the athletes in the country. He, however, was of the 
opinion that more efforts were needed to identify and groom the athletes so that they can bring glory to the 
country in sports. 
10.  The Secretary, Department of Sports replied to some of the queries of the Members. With regard to 
queries not answered orally, the Chairman directed the Secretary to send the written replies to the Secretariat, at 
the earliest. 
(The Witnesses then withdrew) 
11.     The Chairman, on the basis of inputs received from the  Members, made an announcement about the 
selection of following subjects by the Committee for examination during the year   2019-20:- 
I.   Department of Higher Education: 
(i)  National Education Policy-Education and its Management within available                      resources. 
(ii)  Faculty position in higher education sector. 
(iii) Education loan facilities available to Students.  
 
II.   Department of School Education & Literacy 
(i) Functioning of Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya.  
(ii)  Better implementation of the Provisions of RTE Act with special emphasis on Section 12(i) (c) 
on EWS reservations. 
(iii)  Teacher recruitment and Training;  
(iv) Functioning of C.B.S.E. 
 
 
III.   Ministry of Women and Child Development: 
 
(i)  Functioning of Central Adoption Resource Agency (CARA). 
(ii)  Evaluation of Anganwadi services-Objectives, achievements, infrastructure in Anganwadi Centres and 
working conditions of Anganwadi workers/Anganwadis helpers and adequacy of their honorarium. 
 
IV.      Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
(i) Preparation for 2020 Olympic Games;  
(ii) Implementation of Khelo India Programme; and 
(iii) Status of National Sports University, Manipur 
 
12.  A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was kept. 
13.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 pm. 
  

  
１４ 
I 
FIRST  MEETING 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 10.30 A.M on Tuesday, 27th October, 
2020 in Committee Room- ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2.  Smt. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri D.M. Kathir Anand 
7. Shri Santokh Singh Chaudhary 
8. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
9.  Shri. Sdashiv Kisan Lokhande 
10.  Shri Asit Kumar Mal 
11. Shri Balak Nath 
12.  Shri T.N. Prathapan 
13. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
14. Shri Dharmbir Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
2. Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
3.  Smt. Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
5. Smt. Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
SPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
1.  Shri Sandeep Pradhan, Director General 
2.  Commander Rajagopalan, CEO (TOPS) 
 
INDIAN OLYMPIC ASSOCIATION 
3.  Shri Rajeev Mehta, Secretary General 
4.  Shri George Mathew 
 
JOURNALISTS  
5.  Shri Rajesh Kalra, Executive Chairman, Asianet News. 
6. Shri Vijay Lokapally, Eminent Sports Journalist. 
 
SPORTS FEDERATIONS  
 
HOCKEY INDIA 
7.  Gyanendro Ningombam, Officiating President,  

  
１５ 
8.   Ms. Ealena Norman, CEO 
 
BOXING FEDERATION OF INDIA 
9.  Shri Ajay Singh, President  
10.  Shri R.K. Sacheti, Executive Director 
 
NATIONAL RIFLE ASSOCIATION OF INDIA 
11.  Shri Raninder Singh, President 
12. Shri Rajiv Bhatia, Secretary 
13. Shri Ajay Singh, Member 
 
WRESTLING FEDERATION OF INDIA 
14.  Shri V.N. Prasood, Secretary General 
15. Shri Vinod Tomar, Asstt. Secretary 
 
INDIAN WEIGHTLIFTING FEDERATION 
16. Shri Sahdev Yadav, SG 
17. Shri Suneet Chopra, Assistant Secretary 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
18. Shri Ravi Mital, Secretary 
19. Shri L.S. Singh, Jt. Secretary 
20. Shri Arun Kumar Yadav, Director 
21. Shri SPS Tomar, Deputy Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the first meeting of the newly constituted 
Committee and informed them regarding the proposed name change of the Committee due to the change in the 
nomenclature of the Departments/Ministries dealt under i t. He stated that the name of the Committee usually is 
synonymous of the Ministries it represents and it is, therefore, under the consideration of the Hon’ble 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha.  He further welcomed the newly nominated Members to the Committee meeting and 
informed the Members regarding the agenda of the meeting.  
3. The Chairman informed the Members regarding the importance of the subject taken up by the Committee and 
stated that although the Olympic Games 2020 has been postponed due to COVID - 19 pandemic, it is scheduled 
to happen in 2021. Therefore it is expected from our athletes/ sportspersons that they would continue with their 
preparation and become victorious in the upcoming Olympic games. He further stated that the meeting, 
therefore, is to delib erate on the aforesaid issues and to discuss a new roadmap for the proper alignment of 
resources and priorities. 
4. The Chairman then welcomed the Director General, Sports Authority of Indiaand CEO (TOPS) to make their 
submissions regarding the preparednes s done, the strategies adopted or needed to be incorporated and the 
impediments faced in addressing the issues pertaining to the preparation for the upcoming Olympic Games 
2021 in specific, international games in general and way forward.  

  
１６ 
5. The Director G eneral, Sports Authority of India, informed the Committee that, the Olympic Games are 
organized by the International Olympic Committee and its recognized national associations in every country. In 
our country it is coordinated through the Indian Olympic As sociation (IOA), which has under it all different 
sports played in the Olympics and all the National Sports Federations (NSF).  He further mentioned that w hen 
Olympic Games are held in any country, it is the International Olympic Committee that decides the sports and 
the respective events and intimates it to the Indian Olympic Association. Thereafter, the National Sports 
Federation selects the sportspersons and teams, who represent India in the international games. The entire 
procedure related to organizatio n, coordination and accreditation is done by IOA and SAI works closely with 
the Olympic Association and the National Sports Federation in this regard.  
6. The Director General also mentioned about the two important schemes of the Government i.e. Assistance  to 
National Sports Federation scheme, which provides funds and all facilities to the National Sports Federation 
and for the overall upliftment of the game and the scheme which is designed to assist an individual athlete - 
Target Olympic Podium. He further informed the committee that the TOP Scheme comes under the high 
priorities disciplines and hopes to win the medals in 2021 and 2024. He also briefed about the quota system 
existing in Olympics which decides how many players can represent a country in a giv en event. He also 
informed the Committee regarding the funding given to Boxing (12 times) for foreign exposure, the year round 
training programmes undertaken by the federations and the status of appointment of foreign coaches and 
support staff by the sports federations. 
7. The Chairman, Committee on HRD, and Members raised concerns regarding Quota system and the status of 
India in the international arena, position of foreign coaches and information on foreign teams who come to 
India for training, etc. The C hairman also requested statistics regarding the foreign training provided to hockey 
team, the foreign competitions they have attended, duration of their camping days etc.  
8. Replying to the queries raised by the Chairman and Members, Director General, sta ted that in the last 4 years 
about 37 million rupees have been contributed to the Gopichand Academy, through different schemes, most of 
which was contributed to organising national camp, for securing equipments and to fund individual player. He 
further stated that, there is no statistics on the training provided and camps attended by the Indian teams and 
players.  
9. While explaining the quota system in the Olympics and answering the queries of the Chairman, Committee 
on HRD, CEO (TOPS) informed the Committ ee that with the quota system increases the number of athletes 
who qualifies for the game. He gave examples of Hockey and Archery in this regard and stated that in hockey 
there are two separate quota for women and men teams which qualifies 16 players from each team alongwith 
the 2 extras in each team, whereas, in archery, if a team qualifies, then the individual members of that team can 

  
１７ 
also take part in the games and thus every federation has different rules with regard to quota system. He also 
answered in affirmative on the query on training of foreign teams in India. He stated that whenever there is an 
international competition in India, the foreign teams reach 10-15 days in advance to get acclimatize. 
10. Thereafter the Members raised various concerns re garding the status and importance of equestrian sports in India, 
shortage of foreign coaches, vacant/inactive training centers under many sports federations etc.  
11. In the concluding submissions, Director General, SAI, stated that Indian Government has s pent 3.5-4 crores 
of rupees in previous four years to provide extra support and training facilities to International players. He 
stated that the government had spent Rs.47 lakhs for the treatment of the injuries, assignment of coach and a 
physiotherapist of an international player alone. He also mentioned about the measures taken to coordinate with 
the Olympic-bound athletes scattered in different centers through SOPs, allocation of coloured badges to the 
public in Green, Yellow and Red zones, to alert athl etes and the planning done for 2024 and 2028 by declaring 
23 SAI Training Centers as National Center of Excellence for the preparation of the Olympics jointly by 
Federation and SAI for 2024 and 2028 games.  
12. Thereafter the Chairman invited the represent atives of Indian Olympic Association, to make their 
submissions.  
13. Secretary General, IOA, in his submission stated that IOA has received immense support from the Ministry 
in funding and coordinating classes through Zoom App. He stated that about 90 to 130 players are expected to 
qualify for the Olympic Games and the selection process is still going on.  He stated that they are now focusing 
on the travel and accommodation arrangements of the players. He stated that, the biggest problem they 
currently face is with regard to the training/ practice of the athletes. He stated that to tackle the problem they 
have distributed masks in collaboration with the IIT students, which have been given to some players for trials.  
14. Thereafter, the Members raised conce rns on Target Olympic Podium and the eight disciplines selected, the 
preparation for Olympic Games in the post pandemic situation, the challenges faced to meet the targets, 
international exposure and tournaments, sponsorships, vacant posts of support staff , coaches, doctors and 
related positions, leveraging technology through artificial intelligence to boost stimulation of the players,  
selection of non-sportsmen or non -sports officials were travelling along with Olympic athletes. The Members 
also asked ques tions on the preparations initiated or need to be initiated for the future Olympic games 
happening after 15-16 years, the mode of selection and training of future athletes, provision made for the under 
privileged children to come to the mainstream games, g uaranteed jobs for the retired players to attract more 
youth to sports, the expenses incurred on Indian Olympic participant to win a medal and the expenses incurred 
from 2016 to 2020 etc. Members also suggested the integration of sports and education in th e school level, 
objective selection of the athletes and sportspersons, and providing an open platform to the sport talents of the 

  
１８ 
country like in Indian idol and promotion of Olympic Games disciplines from the ground level and inclusion of 
Kabbadi in the Olympic discipline. 
15. Secretary, IOA, answering to the queries raised by the Members, stated that the reason why India is behind 
in the medal tally is due to the lack of infrastructure. He stated that India and China have same population ratio 
however Chi na has 1, 69,000 stadiums whereas many Indian states are completely empty with no indoor 
stadiums/stadiums/ athletic grounds or Astro turfs. He further stated that the IOA is providing scholarships for 
those players whose sponsorship has been cancelled due to COVID-19. 
16. Answering to the queries raised by the Members, Director General, SAI, stated that they would like to 
answer most of the questions raised in writing as there are issues which need to be clarified. He also stated that 
there has been planning and preparations done for 2024-28, that information will also be furnished in writing.  
17. Further, there were suggestions from the Members on the integration of the sportspersons, corporate 
industry with the resources and of the States. The Members su ggested IOA, SAI to prepare a comprehensive 
project which is useful not only for the current Olympics, but also for future Olympics as well.  
18. Appreciating the suggestions made by the Members, the Chairman on HRD, recalled the attention of the 
Members to the recommendations made by the Committee previously on ‘Khelo India’ Report which stated that 
the Department, in coordination with the State Government, should identify  private residential schools having 
sports infrastructure and facilities for at leas t four sports discipline of international specified standards and 
develop them under 'Khelo India' Scheme as model residential sports schools or centers of excellence in sports 
where children are allowed to nurture and develop their sports talent. The Chai rman further reminded the 
witnesses that the Committee has the standing of a mini Parliament and it has to be given importance, or, need 
to be provided with reasons why its recommendations cannot be implemented.  
19. Thereafter, Chairman invited the Shri R ajesh Kalra, Executive Chairman, Asianet News and Shri Vijay 
Lokapally, Eminent Sports Journalist, to provide their insight and recommendations to the Committee.   
20. Addressing the Committee, Shri Rajesh Kalra, stated that the Olympic Task Force constitu ted by the Prime 
Minister in 2017 had submitted its report regarding all the issues raised in the present Committee meeting. He 
further stated that the report had recommendations for long -term, short -term and medium -term, which are 
required by the country to be done and which are practical, however it was never implemented. He further 
stated that, the country has enough resources to deliver the result. He further briefed the recommendation 
provided under the report, like three -fold strategy, which is athlet e centric, demarcating the policy regulations 
and operational functions, constitution of independent, autonomous and accountable, inclusion of sports under 
the Concurrent List, National Sports Regulatory Board to regulate all stakeholders, redefine the rol e of Sports 
Authority of India to run excellence academies focusing on identifying the Olympic sports alone, creation of an 
Athlete Development Board to ensure well -being of athletes, including their grievances and post -retirement 

  
１９ 
benefits etc.  
21. Therea fter, Shri Vijay Lokapally, gave his submission and stated that, the Government need to ensure 
COVID vaccination for all Tokyo-bound athletes as a first priority. He also stated that another major area which 
the countries overlook is the mental health of s portsmen. He gave suggestions regarding employing 
psychologists who can prepare and help the athletes who are in bio -bubble, increasing dope testing to ensure 
that the sportsmen get enough competitions before they go to the Olympics and best coaches to tra in Under-16 
players. 
22. Thereafter, the Chairman asked the witnesses to provide opinion as to who can be held as the most 
responsible for whatever happening or not happening in the field of sports, to which they named Sport 
Federations pointing out their lack of dynamism and accountability and scientific approach, as reasons.  
23. Thereafter, the Chairman invited the representatives of various Sports Federations for making their 
submissions. He further stated that due to the shortage of time, the Committee will hear the Sport Federations in 
brief and invite them again in November to have an elaborate discussion.  
24. The representatives of the Sports Federations in their submission briefly explained the Committee regarding 
the categories and disciplines under which they are sending participants to the Olympics. They also provided a 
brief medal winning history under each category/ discipline. They also informed the Committee regarding the 
preparatory championship and tournaments attended by the Olympic aspirants. They have also mentioned about 
measures undertaken to attract the talents from the grassroot levels like televisionising the sports through live 
telecast, live streaming on YouTube etc. 
25. Thereafter, the Chairman invited the Secretary, Department  of Sports, to make his submission on the 
preparations for 2020 Olympic Games. He informed the Secretary that due to the shortage of time, the 
Committee will hear the department briefly and would reinvite them in November to have a detailed hearing 
and discussion.  
26. Secretary, Department of Sports, in his submission had stated that the Department would like to know the 
recommendations of the Committee, so that they could implement them.  He briefly stated about the approved 
Sports Code, 2011and the draft  Sports Code, 2017. He stated that the Government appointed a Committee 
under a retired Supreme Court Judge to review the draft Code, to invite suggestions. However the hon. High 
Court stayed the Committee. Subsequently a PIL was filed in the Supreme Court , and is pending for last 10 
years.  He further stated that the Department has implemented the major recommendations with regard to the 
preparation for the Olympics and would send the Committee a detailed Action Taken Report on the work done. 
27. Thereafte r the Chairman requested information on the major exercise done to critically assess the 

  
２０ 
performance in Olympic Games, recommendations made and actions taken.  Members also raised questions on 
important issues namely status of implementation of the recomme ndations made by the Committee previously 
and its progress, status of implementation of schemes constituted to increase or strengthen the infrastructure in 
the rural areas, funding provided under MPLADS, for the construction of indoor stadiums or stadiums, roadmap 
made for providing infrastructure in the schools, universities and urban areas etc. 
28. The meeting then adjourned at 1.35 p.m. 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  

  
２１ 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth And Sports met at 10.30 A.M on 
Wednesday, 18th November, 2020 in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2.  Smt. Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri. Bhubaneswar Kalita 
4. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
5. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
6.  Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
7.  Shri Gopal Narayan Singh 
8.  Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Rajendra Agarwal 
10. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
11.  Shri Sangamlal Kadedin Gupta 
12.  Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
13.  Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
14.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
15. Shri Dharmbir Singh 
16.  Shri S. Venkatesan 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
2. Shri Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
3. Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
SPORTS FEDERATIONS  
HOCKEY INDIA 
1. Shri Mohammad Mushtaq Ahmad, President 
2. Ms. Ealena Norman, CEO 
BOXING FEDERATION OF INDIA 
1.  Shri Ajay Singh, President 
2.  Shri R.K. Sacheti, Executive Director 
 
WRESTLING FEDERATION OF INDIA 
1. Shri Vinod Tomar, Asstt. Secretary 
2. Shri Satyapal Deshpal, Treasurer 
INDIAN WEIGHTLIFTING FEDERATION 

  
２２ 
1. Shri Suneet Chopra, Assistant Secretary 
2. Shri Pal Singh Sandhu, Dronacharya Awardee 
ARCHERY ASSOCIATION OF INDIA 
1. Shri Viren Sachdeva, Member Core Group 
EMINENT SPORTSPERSON AND OLYMPIAN 
1. Shri Gagan Narang 
2. Shri Sushil Kumar 
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members and informed them that the Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, had  changed the name of the DRPSC on 
Human Resource Development to DRPSC on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports. 
3. The Chairman informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to hear the representatives of 
Sports Federations and eminent sportspersons and Olympians, S/Shri Gagan Narang and Sushil Kumar, 
regarding their perception, views and assessment on preparation for Olympic Games, 2021. He further informed 
the Committee that an advertisement had been issued in the newspapers inviting comments from public and 
representatives of National Archery Federation who had responded to the advertisement and hence they have 
also been invited to appear before the Committee on their request. He further informed that the Committee 
would hear the Secretary, Department of Sports and DG, SAI on a later date as they have recently come in 
contact with COVID-affected staff and hence as a precautionary measure they have been exempted to attend the 
meeting.   
4. Thereafter representatives of Hockey India appeared before the Committee to share their views about 
preparations for the Tokyo Olympics. The CEO Hockey India informed that t hey were facing difficulties in 
scheduling matches and planning tournaments in the pandemic time as after undertaking a journey, players had 
to go into quarantine. She discussed about creating a bio-bubble facility where the players could still have some 
training away from public. For which she informed about the need of last minute approvals, multiple visas, 
allowance for taking maximum number of players for international tournaments, additional funds for 
international travels for accelerating training, fi tness, preparations and Ministry's cooperation for the same. She 
further informed that since MRI and X -Ray facilities were also needed within the SAI Centre which currently 
are not available. Having such facilities at the SAI Centers would reduce quarantin e period for players who had 
to visit hospitals outside their training camps for availing medical facilities. 
5. On being asked by the Chairman about the unique nomenclature and legal identity under which they 
were operating, she informed that they were a Society registered in Delhi, formed by amalgamating Indian 
Men’s Hockey Federation and Indian Women’s Hockey Federation. The Chairman asked the representatives to 
share details of the assessment exercise undertaken to evaluate the lacunae or shortcomings d uring the last four 

  
２３ 
years, i.e. after 2016 Olympics. 
6. Members sought details regarding bio -bubble, negotiations with foreign countries in easing quarantine 
norms, options for multiple visas or twelve -month open visas for players, increased funding to sup port and 
reimbursement cost of tournaments in case of foreign travel and postponement, provision for MRI machine, 
filling up of staff vacancies, coaches with TCUP training, doctors, action plan for conducting foreign 
tournaments etc. which were suitably re plied by the representatives of Hockey India. Further clarification 
sought by Members regarding the jurisdiction and authority of multiple entities in implementing the game 
strategies, organizational structures, steps taken to identify talents from the gra ssroots and authority responsible 
for popularizing the game in India etc. were also replied suitably. 
7. Thereafter the representatives of the Boxing Federation of India in their submission before the 
Committee stated that Government was giving around 50 c rores rupees to them which was spent primarily on 
camps and sending players to international tournaments directly by the Government in a joint programme i.e. 
Annual Calendar for Training and Competitions’ (ACTC) under the ‘Scheme of Assistance to National Sports 
Federations’. He further stated that present focus was more on International Championships and they had 
requested for some reallocation of funds for holding international championships in India and also organizing / 
promoting National Championships. He also stated that they were also raising fundsfrom corporate sponsors for 
meeting the requirements which were not covered under the government funding. He also stated that the entire 
Olympic contingent had been sent to Assisi, Italy for practice as ther e are no camps and tournaments currently 
operational in India. He further stated that more High Performance Centres are required to be set up and the 
existing sports facilities in India, e.g. Patiala Centre, needs to be upgraded to attract more foreign pla yers and 
tournaments. Another area of concern was increasing funding for soft skills viz. coaches, medical staff, 
nutritionists, psychologists etc. who had low salary band due to which the best talent in the field moved 
elsewhere. There was also a need to increase our referee judges who play a vital role in case of close bouts. He 
also stated that the long -term goal for India would be to develop skilled trainers within the country rather than 
resorting to foreign coaches and trainers. 
8. The Members sought to know whether any blueprint had been prepared for including more talents from 
every province of the country, responsibility for the performance or non -performance of the players etc. and 
asked them to share details thereof. 
9. Thereafter the representati ves of Wrestling Federation of India in their submissions to the Committee 
highlighted that the process of recruiting the foreign coaches was lengthy and requested to make it flexible for 
the ease of appointing foreign coaches for a longer period of time. He also emphasized upon the requirement of 
two coaches and one physiotherapist on which the Members desired to know as to why two coaches were 

  
２４ 
needed, the representative clarified that one coach was needed to keep an eye on the score board and the other 
for assisting the weightlifters for warm-up. 
10. During the interregnum between departure and appearance of further witnesses, the Chairman asked the 
Members to share their preference of the subjects which they intended the Committee to take up for 
examination during its current term and asked them to inform in writing. 
11. Thereafter the representatives of Archery Association of India in their submissions before the 
Committee stated that archery was impacted more by COVID restrictions in comparison to other games, being 
an outdoor game as the shooting ranges of 70 meters and 90 meters are situated in open and there was lack of 
indoor practicing facilities in India. He further  suggested that a compulsory chapter on Olympic game as 
education must be included i n the syllabus 6 th class onwards for introducing children to the games early. The 
representative of the Archery Association replied to the queries of the Members regarding the availability of 
psychological training of sportspersons according to global stan dards, Olympic Medal probabilities as 
compared to the success rate in other world championships etc. 
12. The representative of the Archery Association further stated that psychological training was an 
important factor in individual sports and a permanent m ental health trainer and yoga instructor was required for 
the team on a long term basis as long term associations benefits the player. 
13. Thereafter the eminent sportspersons and Olympians appeared before the Committee for sharing their 
perspective about the preparation for Tokyo Olympic games. They apprised the Committee that so far 74 Indian 
athletes including 2 teams have been qualified for Tokyo Olympics and after a poor performance in shooting 
2016, presently 15 shooters are qualified for 2021 games. He further stated thatTokyo Olympics could be the 
most spread out games till date due to the changes made in structure of the games because of Covid -19 and 
making logistics a challenge as competition venues are not very close to athlete villages. He sugges ted that in 
the present scenario the athletes need to be self -reliant more than ever as the support and management teams 
will be spread too thin across various venues. He further stated that players needed 4 -14 days for acclimatizing 
to various factors on  a foreign land such as heat & humidity which affects endurance and recovery levels. He 
further stated that period required to recover from jetlag and travel fatigue is of crucial importance and is often 
overlooked while planning the travel. He also mentio ned the importance of support staff, pre -acclimatization 
trips, high-pressure competition structure, venue and facility familiarization video etc. and finalization of the 
teams as early as possible for early planning for their travel etc. 
14. Discussing the challenges, he further stated that the current sports administrative system in India had too 
many stakeholders involved, which leads to delay in decision making and distribution of responsibility. He 

  
２５ 
further mentioned about the importance of financial and functional autonomy of sports bodies as presently the 
National Sports Federations were heavily reliant on Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports for funding and had 
little accountability in terms of the implemented policy to develop its respective sport. He  also emphasized on 
the need to work with local manufacturers and the manufacturing industry to produce more home -grown 
products rather than importing them from competitor countries to reduce our heavy reliance on imported 
equipment and consumables. He also suggested a four-point action plan for Indian ecosystem considering short 
term and long term Olympic Perspective along with developing Indian sporting culture. He emphasized that 
there was a need for a system to retain the athletes post their peak within the sporting ecosystem and benefit 
from their vast experience and knowledge. They informed the Committee about the impact of delay in 
appointing foreign coaches, the importance of having individual and specialist coach for a longer period of time 
etc. They also suggested that it would be good if the current national coaches work with the players individual 
coaches, as individual coaches deal with players day in and day out. They further suggested that Olympic 
games medal winners being role models, may be ta ken to the camps run by SAI in villages, block and district 
levels etc. for popularizing the games and boosting players. 
15. On being asked by Members about the minimum number of accreditation passes required for essential 
staff, physical and psychological trainers etc, the Committee was informed that for individual sports, one coach 
and one physiotherapist were needed, the number of accreditation passes depended on the size of contingent, 
but if a local team plays and they liaison well with the Organising Committee more accreditation passes could 
be secured. 
16. The Chairman thereafter requested the Members to send their suggestions in writing. 
17. The meeting then adjourned at 12.52 PM. 
 
  
  
 

  
２６ 
Confidential 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, WOMEN, CHILDREN, YOUTH AND SPORTS 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee on Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports met at 2.00 P.M. on Monday, the 7th 
December, 2020 in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe - Chairman 
2. Smt Arpita Ghosh 
3. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
4. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
5. Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia 
6. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh  
7.  Shri G.K. Vasan 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Rajendra Agarwal 
9. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
10. Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu 
11. Shri Sadashiv Kisan Lokhande 
12. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
13. Shri Jagannath Sarkar 
13. Shri Vishnu Dutt Sharma 
14. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
15. Shri Dharmbir Singh 
16. Shri S. Venkatesan 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr.    Shikha Darbari, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor 
Shri   Rajiva Srivastava, Director 
Shri   Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Smt.  Himanshi Arya, Deputy Secretary 
Shri   Mohit Misra, Committee Officer 
Smt.  Suman Khurana, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
1 Shri Ravi Mital, Secretary 
2 Shri Sandeep Pradhan, DG, (SAI) 
3 Shri L. S. Singh, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Arun Kumar Yadav, Director 
 

  
２７ 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and informed 
them that the Committee would deliberate with the Secretary, Department of Sports and DG, SAI on the issues 
raised in the course of the discussion on the subject "Preparation for Olympic Games 2021".  
2. The Chairman then sought clarifications on the following issues from the Secretary, Department of 
Sports i.e. (i) Whether the concerned Sports Federations had made any assessment reports on the steps needed 
to be taken to on the basic of performance in Rio Olympics, 2016, if so, the details thereof; (ii) Steps taken to 
co-ordinate the efforts of different organisations preparing for Olympics; (iii) reasons for persistence of coaches 
vacancies in SAI; and (iv) whether there has been on overall reduction in funds to SAI & NSDF over the years, 
if so, was it adversely effecting Olympics preparations.  
3. The Committee, then sought further clarifications on the following issues i.e. (i) Whether the 
Department can propose a modification of the slogan Beti Bachao Beti Padhao can be modified by adding Beti 
Khilao as this would help motivating the girl child to take up sports as a career; (ii) whether private schools and 
colleges have been made a part of the initiative wherein 15  lakh schools were associated for promoting hockey 
at grass -root level. In this respect; (iii) steps taken for setting up a National Sports Regulatory Board and 
National Sports Development Board and a portal for demand and supply of coaches; (iv) what are the 
difficulties faced by the players on resumption of training post -covid lockdown and the steps taken to remove 
them; (v) steps taken to ensure that the swimmers are able to get sufficient training in the winter season 
especially in North - India; (vi) st eps taken to create a bio -bubble in collaboration with other countries, 
concerned NSFs and MEA so that the players get sufficient training and match practice before the main event; 
(vii) whether the PSUs are offering jobs to all the players or is it restri cted to only cricket and hockey and 
whether any proposal to set-up an Olympics scholarship for the players is being considered; (viii) steps taken by 
SAI and other organizations to promote and encourage Indian coaches; (ix) issue regarding discrimination 
between Paralympics winners and normal athletes. In this respect, what steps are being taken to ensure financial 
support to differently-abled athletes; (x) steps taken by the Department for providing sports quota upto 3% and 
for relaxing the educational requirements in government jobs; (xi) Steps taken to expedite the trials of the medal 
winners in the government jobs, as the same got stalled due to lockdown; and (xii) steps taken to ensure jobs for 
winners in special Olympics/Paralympics and for lowering the need for educational qualifications for them. 
4. The Secretary, Department of Sports informed that a restructuring exercise was going on for last few 
years in SAI and as soon as it is done, recruitment of coaches would be done. However, a large number of  
coaches have been engaged under Khelo India to ensure there was no shortage of coaches. He also informed 
that the prize money for the medal winners had also been increased in the recent past. The Committee was 
further informed that the training of players  was done through NSFs and NSDF, TOPs comes into the picture 

  
２８ 
when some expenditure cannot be met through NSDF and it is especially for the elite players. 
5. As regards, co -ordination between different agencies, it was informed that SAI makes all possible 
efforts to provide the best possible venues for training of the players selected for Olympics and even co -
ordinates with private academies for the purpose. The Committee was further informed that the players were at 
present training in bio-bubble conditions and as of date no request had been received from the NSFs for proving 
bio-bubble conditions in other countries for training and conduct of competitive matches. 
6. The Department further informed that they are trying to increase the educational levels of t he 
sportspersons to help them get jobs. The Department was in the process of training a scheme for providing both 
training and education to the players so that they become eligible  for different jobs.  
7. The Chairman, thereafter decided to constitute a s ub-Committee with Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia as its 
convenor and Dr. Sasmit Patra and Shri Lavu Sri Krishna Devarayalu as members to prepare a report on the 
subject for the consideration of the Committee. He further stressed upon the Department to furnis h detailed 
comments/clarifications on the issues raised in the meeting at the earliest.  
8. The meeting then adjourned at 3.49 P.M. 
 
NEW DELHI RAJIVA SRIVASTAVA 
7th December, 2020 DIRECTOR 
 