 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2017/Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
288 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
Demands for Grants 2017-18 (Demand No. 58) of the  
Department of Higher Education  
(Ministry of Human Resource Development) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2017) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2017) 

 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
Demands for Grants 2017-18 (Demand No. 58) of the  
Department of Higher Education  
(Ministry of Human Resource Development) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2017) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2017) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2017/Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...........................................................  (i)-(ii) 
2.         INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS ……….......…............................................................                               (iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…............................ 
5. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE ...   
6. *MINUTES............................................... ............................................... ................    
7. *ANNEXURES.............................................. .................................................... ..   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2016) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri Nihal Chand 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali  Patil 
15.      Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16.       Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.      Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shrimati Neelam Sonkar 
30.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
 
 
  
  
 (i) 

           SECRETARIAT 
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its be half, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Eighty eighth Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No. 
58) of the Department of Higher Education for the year 2017-18.  
2.  The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the 
Department of Higher Education and also heard the Secretary and other Official s of that Department on the 
said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 16th February, 2017. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting  held on the 17th 
March, 2017.  
4. For the facility of reference & convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
NEW DELHI 
March 21-, 2017 
Phalguna 30 1938 (Saka) 
  
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary  
              Standing Committee on  Human Resource Development        

A C R O N Y M S 
 
AICTE :  All India Council for Technical Education 
CBES:  Choice Based Credit System 
CEC:  Consortium  of Educational  Communications  
EOC:  Equal Opportunity Cells 
GER:   Gross Enrolment Ratio 
 ICT:  Information and Communication Technology 
GIAN:  Global Initiative of Academic networks 
HEFA:  Higher Education Financing Agency 
IIIT:  Indian Institute of Information Technology 
IIM :  Indian Institute of Management 
IISER:  Indian Institute of Science Education and Research 
IIIPRS:  Indian Institute of Intellectual Property Rights Studies 
 IIT:  Indian Institute of Technology 
IMPRINT: Impacting Research Innovation and Technology 
MOOCS: Massive Online Open Courses 
NIRF:  National Institutional Ranking Framework 
NIT:  National Institute of Technology 
NMEICT: National Mission On Education Through  ICT 
  NQRI:  National Quality Renaissance Initiative 
NSQF:   National Skill Qualification Frameworks  
PMMMNT: Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching 
 PPP:  Public Private Partnership 
RUSA:   Rashtriya Ucchatar Shiksha  Abhiyan 
SWAYAM: Study Webs Of Active-Learning For Young Aspiring Minds 
UAY:  Ucchatar Avishkar Yojana    
UBA:  Unnat Bharat Abhiyan 
UGC:  University Grants Commission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

REPORT 
 
I.   INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The mission of the Department of Higher Education is to provide greater opportunities of 
access to higher education with equity to all the eligible persons and in particular to the vulnerable 
sections, improve and expand education in all sectors.  The Department's role also includes the 
policy formulation, implementation, knowledge management, research and innovation, co-
ordination with stakeholders and training and capacity building in higher education sector. 
1.2 The Department's function also include expanding access by supporting existing 
institutions, establishing new institutions, skill development so as to reap the benefits of 
demographic advantage of the country, engage with State Governments, civil society and 
international community for furthering  knowledge, language and culture and  also strengthen 
research, innovation and encourage institutions to expand frontiers of knowledge. 
II  BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
2.1 The Secretary in his presentation before the Committee gave the proposed demand and the 
actual allocation for the Department of Higher Education for 2017-18 are shown below:- 
 
 
Financial 
Year 
Projected 
Demand 
Actual Allocation Percentage  increase of 
actual allocation from 
the  previous  year  
2016-17 49713.83 28840.00  
15.56% 
2017-18 49269.19 33329.19 

2.2  The Department in its presentation also gave the sub-sector wise break-up of the Budget 
allocation as under:- 
 
Name of Major 
Head 
Annual Outlay 2016-
17 
Proposed 
Outlay 
2017-18 
Actual 
Outlay 
2017-18 
Percentage 
share of 
Sub-Sector 
Universities & 
Higher Education 
13895 14096 19373 14,000 42.01 
Student Financial 
Aid 
2220 2135 4300 2380 7.14 
Open and distance 
Education & ICT 
623 596 1018 605 10.82 
Book Promotion 68 57 65 47 .14 
Language 
Development 
433 433 500 414 1.36 
Planning Admin, 
& Global 
Engagement 
217 224 303 258 .77 
Technical 
Education 
11,384 12,162 23,709 15,585 46.76 
Grant Total 28,840 29,703 49,269 33,329 100 
 
The Department further submitted that during Annual Budget 2016-17 actual expenditure is Rs. 
23, 234 crore as on 15 th February, 2017 which is 78.22% of RE 2016-17. The Department further 
informed that total allocation for BE 2017-18 is Rs. 33,329.70 crore which is an increase of 15.56 
% from Rs. 28,840 crore in BE - 2016-17.  
2.3 The Department further submitted before the Committee that the government investment in 
higher education is being increased from current 1.34% of GDP to 1.5% of GDP by 2020. 
2.4 The Department further added that IITs have been allocated Rs. 7856 crore for the year 
2017-18 against Rs. 4983.71 crore in 2016-17 which is an increase of 57.76%, NITs allocation has 
been increased from Rs. 2629.95 to Rs. 3440 crore which is an increase of 30.80%, IIMs allocation 
has been increased to Rs. 1030 crore from Rs. 730 crore, which is an increase of 41.1% and 
Central Universities allocation has increased to Rs. 6515.93 crore from Rs. 6358.93 which is an 

increase of 2.31%.The Members pointed out that the IIMs and IITs are getting a large amount of 
budgetary allocation as compared to the Central Universities.  The Members then  pointed  out  
that  that during the visits of the Committee many of the Central Universities submitted that they 
were running short of funds.  The Committee was told by them that because of lack of adequate 
funding the Central Universities are not able to compete with the world universities. 
2.5 The Committee was further informed that the allocation for UGC and AICTE has been 
increased to Rs. 5176.94 crores from Rs. 4972.94 crore which is an increase of 4.10%. 
2.6 The Committee was further informed that there are four schemes being implemented since 
11th Plan were continued in 12 th Plan. The Budgetary and Financial status of these schemes was 
given to the Committee as under:  
             
  (Rs in crores) 
Schemes Actual 2016-17 (as 
on 8.2.2017) 
Total BE 2017-18 
Setting up of New 
Polytechnic 
81.97  
 
 
250.00 (as part of 
RUSA) 
Strengthen of existing 
Polytechnic 
32.51 
Construction of Women 
Hostel in polytechnics  
7.81 
Commit Development 
through Polytechnics 
(CDTP) 
23.43 
Total 145.72 
 
2.7  The Committee appreciates that the amount in the Budget has been increased by 
15.56%.  The Committee observes that the funding for technical and management 
institutions in the budget has seen an increase of 57.76% and 41.1% respectively.  The 
Committee would like point out that the funding for Central Universities has seen an 
increase of just 2.31%.  The Committee observes that this increase for Central Universities is 
just meagre as compared to their infrastructure, faculty and number of students.  Th e 
Committee recommends that Central Universities have a larger number of students enrolle d 

in them as compared to the technical and management institutes; therefore the Depart ment 
should increase the funding for the Central Universities appropriately. 
III   GROSS ENROLMENT RATIO 
 
3.1 The Department during its presentation informed the Committee that the Higher Education 
system in India is extensive with 757 universities of which 111 are under Government of India.  
There are 38,056 colleges and total enrolment is 3.32 crores (of which regular enrolment is 2.93 
crore). However, the Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in higher education continues to be low and is 
much below the world average (44%), and way behind that of the developed countries (58%).  
3.2 The Department further added that GER is presently 24.5% now and efforts are being made 
to increase it to 30.1% by 2020. The Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) for different categories in 
Higher Education is given below:-  
Years  Higher Education 
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16(P) 
All 
Categories 
23.0 24.3 24.5 
SC 17.1 19.1 19.9 
ST 11.3 13.7 14.2 
 
3.3 The Committee was also informed that in order to increase the GER of SC/ST and 
Minorities in the Higher Education Sector, reservation is being provided to SC’s, STs and OBC’s 
students under the Central Educational Institutions (Reservations in admissions) ACT, 2006.  In 
order to strengthen its efforts, the Government has also undertaken several initiatives such as 
opening of new institutions, scholarship and interest subsidy on education loans availed by 
students. Extensive use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) applications is also 
being made in furtherance of higher education in the Country.  
3.4 The Committee takes note of the work done by the Department in the increase of 
Gross Enrolment Ratio.  The Committee emphasizes the need for promotion of skil l 
improvement as it has always been neglected. The Committee recommends that the 
Department should make efforts not only to increase the content and length of the skill  
development courses, but also strengthen the industrial linkage. 

3.5 The Committee observes that Gross Enrolment Ratio of SC/ST students at 19.9 and 
14.2 respectively, is below the national average of 24.5.  This needs to be improved by taking  
all the necessary steps by the Department. The Committee desires that the Department 
should ensure the benefit of scholarships and reservation being provided to SC/ST/OBC and 
minority students reach them   and therby result into enhanced GER in these categories.  
The Committee, however, would like to reiterate that the Department should not only take 
steps to bridge the gap between the general category students and the SC/ST/OBC and 
minorities students but also take initiatives so that students from these sections do not leave 
their education in between.  
IV. RASHTRIYA UCHCHATAR SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (RUSA) 
 
4.1   The Department submitted to the Committee that Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
(RUSA) has been launched with the aim to achieve equity, access and excellence in State higher 
education system. The Scheme supports components such as upgrading autonomous colleges to 
universities, clustering colleges to establish a university, setting up of new professional colleges in 
un-served and underserved areas as well as providing infrastructure grants to universities and 
colleges to scale up capacity. It is an overarching scheme, operated in mission mode for funding 
the state universities and colleges in order to achieve the aims of equity, access and excellence.   
4.2   While elaborating the Scheme the Department informed that the central funding flows 
from MHRD to institutions through the State Governments and the funding to States are made on 
the basis of critical appraisal of State Higher Education Plans (SHEPs). These plans describe each 
state’s strategy for addressing the issues of equity, access and excellenc e in higher education. 
Currently, all the States and Union Territories except UT of Lakshadweep have submitted their 
willingness to be a part of the scheme. The central funding is in the ratio of 60:40 for general 
category States and 90:10 for special category States (North-Eastern States, Sikkim, J&K, 
Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand and cent per cent for Union Territories.  An amount of Rs 
2253.23 crore has been released as on 31 st January, 2017 for various components under RUSA 
Scheme since its inception. 
4.3 The Department further added that the RUSA Mission Authority delineates overall policy 
and planning, reviews function of Project Approval Board (PAB) etc. The Secretary, Higher 
Education chairs the PAB which approves SHEPs, assesses performance of States and institutions 

and approve release of funds. So far, 11 meetings of the PAB have been held.   These two bodies 
are supported by the Technical Support Group (TSG) which examines and appraises SHEPs, 
monitors flow of funds and information and provides all operational, technical, logistical and 
managerial support.   The project is steered in each State/UT through State Higher Education 
Councils (SHEC).  The SHECs are supported in turn by the State Project Directorate (created by 
the State Government and State TSGs).  These bodies would be responsible for management, 
coordination, implementation and monitoring of the project at the State/UT levels. 
4.4 The Committee pointed out that under Central Government infrastructure grants to State 
universities; Rs. 570.98 crore has been approved by the Project Appraisal Board (PAB) of RUSA 
out of which Rs. 370.882 crore is central share.  The Committee further added that out of this Rs. 
171.023 crore has been disbursed and Rs. 41.615 crore has been utilized since its inception. 
4.5  The Committee is astonished to note that only 46% of the total Central share has 
been released and 24.7 % of the released fund has been utilized so far.  When  enquired the 
Department could not furnish the desired details of fund earmarked for RU SA and also 
failed to give explanation why so less fund has been released and further why only 11% of 
the total central share was utilized. The Committee therefore, calls for the details as well as 
the reasons for the above under utilization.  Further the Committee would like to kn ow how 
the State share of Rs. 200 crore was utilized.  The Committee may be apprised accordingly 
by the Department in its Action Taken Replies.    
4.6 The Committee observes that out of Rs. 171.023 crores only Rs. 41 crores have been 
utilized till date and the rest of the money remains un-utilized.  Ideally, the entire mone y 
should have been utilized by the State Government.  The Committee points out that su ch 
under-utilization itself casts aspersions on the functioning of this scheme.  The Co mmittee 
has reasons to believe that both Centre and State Governments have not hand led the scheme 
efficiently and also it seems that there is hardly any coordination between the two 
Governments. The Committee wants that Central & the State Governments should en sure 
success of this scheme be taking all the necessary measures in consultation with each other. 
4.7     The Committee notes that there appears to be the complete absence of monitoring  
mechanism so far as implementation of the scheme is concerned. The Commit tee, 
accordingly, recommends that the Department should have a robust monitoring mechanism 

for the effective utilization of these funds. The Committee, further, recommends that there 
should be incentives and rewards for the State Governments who have used the fu nds 
optimally. 
4.8 Further, the Committee recommends that the higher amount of financial support  
may specially be provided to the institutions which are in rural regions, remote areas an d 
hilly terrain.  The Committee, also recommends that Department should focus on  the up-
gradation of autonomous colleges which have the potential for excellence.  The Depart ment 
should in collaboration with State Governments develop Cluster college/Universities and 
introduce integrated UG/PG programmes for improving the skills of the student. 
V.  IITs, IIMs AND NITs 
 
IITs 
5.1   The Department submitted that it has been decided to establish 6 IITs each at Jammu, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka.  The Union Cabinet in its Meeting held 
on 25.5.2016 inter-alia approved amendment to the Institute of Technology Act, 1961 for 
incorporation of the six new IITs at Tirupati (AP), Palakkad (Kerala), Dharwar (Karnataka), Bhilai 
(Chhattisgarh), Goa, Jammu (J&K), and conversion of ISM Dhanbad to an IIT under the IT Act, 
1961.  The Lok Sabha passed the Institute of Technology (Amendment) Bill, 2016 on 25.7.2016 
and the same has been passed by the Rajya Sabha on 02.08.2016. The 6 IITs have been 
accordingly incorporated in the IT Act, 1961. The status on establishment of each of these IITs is 
as follows:   
(a) IIT Goa:-  A site measuring about 318 acres land in Loliem Village, Canacona Taluka, 
South Goa District, Goa, has been approved for the permanent campus of IIT Goa and Goa 
Engineering College at Farmagudi, Ponda, has been approved as Temporary Campus.  IIT 
Bombay is the Mentor Institute of IIT-Goa. Academic Session has commenced in 2016-17 
at IIT Goa, with an intake of 90 students. Rs. 10 cr. have been released to IIT Goa through 
its Mentor as on date.  
(b) IIT Jammu:- The Khanpur Nagrota site has been approved for setting up of the 
permanent campus of IIT Jammu and the KCS College of Education, Jammu, will be used 
as temporary campus in 2016-17 (with a provision to extend its usage for the 2 nd year, i.e. 
2017-18), with the construction of the transit campus at the main campus being done 
parallelly, for being operationalised in 2017-18. IIT-Delhi is the Mentor Institute of IIT-
Jammu. Academic Session has commenced in 2016-17 with an intake of 90 students.  An 
amount of Rs. 69.34 crore has been released to IIT-Jammu through its Mentor Institute as 

on date.   
(c) IIT Bhilai  :- A site measuring 349 acres at Kutelabhata Village, Bhilai, District Durg, 
along with 88 acres of land in village Sirsa, subject to State Government ensuring 
protection of submergence of Sirsa land and proper road connectivity between the main 
campus at Kutelabhata and Sirsa, has been approved for permanent campus. It has also 
been decided that the Government Engineering College, Raipur, will be used as the 
Temporary Campus for IIT at Chhattisgarh. Also, 10 acres land at Naya Raipur, which 
was identified by the State Government, shall be allotted for setting up Industry Interaction 
Centre and Research Park of the IIT.  Academic Session has commenced in 2016-17 with 
an intake of 120 students. An amount of Rs. 15.00 crore has been released to IIT Bhilai 
through its. 
(d) IIT Palakkad :- A  land measuring 400 acres at Pudussery West, Palakkad has been 
approved for permanent campus and Ahalia Integrated Campus, in Palakkad has been 
approved for temporary campus. 
IIT-Madras is the Mentor Institute of IIT-Palakkad.  The 
academic Session of the Institute has been commenced from the year 2015-16 with a 
sanctioned strength of 120 students- 30 each in Civil Engg., Computer Science Engg., 
Electrical Engg. and Mechanical Engg.  
IIT Palakkad has been incorporated in the 
Institutes of Technology Act, 1961, through the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) 
Act, 2016, w.e.f. 6 th September, 2016. 
An amount of Rs.50.65 crore has been released to 
IIT Palakkad through its Mentor Institute as on date.  
(e) IIT Tirupati :- A land measuring 589.55 acres at Merlapaka Village, Yerpedu (Mandal), 
Chittoor District (Near Tirupathi) has been approved for permanent campus and 
Chadalwada Venkata Subbaiah College of Engineering, Renigunta Road, Tirupati has 
been approved as the temporary campus. IIT Madras is the Mentor Institute of IIT 
Tirupati. The academic Session of the Institute has been commenced from the year 2015-
16 with a sanctioned strength of 120 students- 30 each in Civil Engg., Computer Science 
Engg., Electrical Engg. and Mechanical Engg. 1 st Board meeting was held on 
12.1.2016. 
 An amount of Rs.39.49 crore has been released to IIT-Tirupati through its 
Mentor Institute as on date. 
(f) IIT Dharwad, Karnataka: A site measuring about 470.21 acres, 1.2 km inside the main 
road in Kelagari village, Dharwad has been approved as the Permanent Campus and Water 
& Land Management Institute (WALMI) has been approved as the temporary campus.  IIT 
Bombay is the Mentor Institute of IIT Dharwad.  Academic Session has commenced in 
2016-17 at IIT Dharwad, with an intake of 120 students. An amount of Rs.15.00 crore has 
been released for operationalization of IIT Dharwad to IIT-Bombay, as on date. 
IIMs 
 
5.2 Indian Institutes of Managements (IIMs) are autonomous institutions under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Human Resource Development. Presently 20, IIMs are in 

functional position all over India. During the year 2014-15, six more IIMs have come into 
existence located at Amritsar (Punjab), Bodh Gaya (Bihar), Nagpur (Maharashtra), Sambalpur 
(Odisa), Sirmaur (Himachal Pradesh) and Viskhapatnam (Andhra Pradesh). The academic sessions 
of these IIMs have commenced from academic year 2015-16 from their temporary campuses.  In 
addition, IIM Jammu in the State of Jammu & Kashmir has also been established and commenced 
academic section from 2016-17 from its temporary campus.  All 2 nd  generation IIMs like IIM, 
Rohtak, IIM Shillong, IIM Raipur, IIM Trichy, IIM Kashipur and IIM Udaipur and 3 rd generation 
IIMs, located at Amritsar, Bodh Gaya, Nagpur, Sambalpur, Sirmaur and Vishakhapatnam are 
given full funding for their construction activities and recurring expenditure. The details of grants 
released to each of these IIMs during the year 2016-17 are as under:- 
S.No. Institute Amount released (in 
Lakhs) as on 01.02.2017 
1 IIM, Rohtak 7,900.00 
2 IIM, Raipur 6,242.80 
3 IIM, Ranchi 2,300.00 
4 IIM, Trichy 10,850.00 
5 IIM, Kashipur 8,250.00 
6 IIM, Udaipur 10,195.00 
7 RGIIM, Shillong 3500.00 
8 
IIM, Andhra 
Pradesh 1,193.00 
10 IIM, Nagpur 500.00 
11 IIM, Amritsar 500.00 
12 IIM, Bodh Gaya 500.00 
13 IIM, Sambalpur 500.00 
15 IIM, Sirmaur 500.00 
16 IIM, J & K 1,880.50 
 
5.3 On the status of construction of infrastructure of the new NITs the Department submitted 
that out of 11 new NITs, 08 NITs (Arunachal Pradesh, Delhi, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Puduchery and Andhra Pradesh) have got land for permanent campus from the 

respective State Governments and the work for construction of infrastructure has been augmented 
in 07 NITs (except NIT, Andhra Pradesh). NITs located at Goa, Uttarakhand and Sikkim are yet to 
get land for construction at the permanent campuses. All the NITs, except NIT, Nagaland are 
presently functioning from their respective temporary campuses provided by the State 
Governments. 
5.4 The Committee is happy to note that new IITs and IIMs have been opened in the last 
few years to cater to the increasing demand for quality higher technical educ ational 
institutions.  The Committee, however, would like to point out that while creating new  IITs 
and IIMs, the Department should also ensure provision of adequate funds for the 
development of infrastructure in these higher educational institutions.  
5.6 The Committee desires that the Department should ensure that these institutions are 
set up expeditiously.  A time line needs to be drawn and all efforts need to b e made in co-
ordination with all stakeholders including the State Government to facilitate the sett ing up 
these institutions.  The Committee also desire that since all these institutions will be our 
premier institutions of national importance and so all required resources, financial or  
otherwise should be adequately given. 
VI. PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALAVIYA NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS & 
TEACHING (PMMMMNMTT) 
 
6.1 The Department submitted that with the fast pace of expansion of the education system in 
the country, both at school and higher education stages, improving quality has come to occupy 
centre stage in educational development and that teachers hold the key for success of any effort in 
this direction. Attention, therefore, has to be focused on the preparation of teachers and their 
working conditions in classrooms, schools and colleges, as also their continuous professional 
development.  Hence, Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya National Mission on Teachers & Teaching 
was launched. 
6.2 The Mission aims at addressing comprehensively all issues related to teachers, teaching, 
teacher preparation, professional development, curriculum design, and developing assessment & 
evaluation methodology, research in developing effective Pedagogy. This is one of the major 
thrust areas of action of the Government.  The Mission addresses current and urgent issues such as 
supply of qualified teachers, attracting talent into teaching profession and raising the quality of 

teaching in schools and colleges. On the other, the Mission will pursue long term goals of building 
a strong professional cadre of teachers by setting performance standards and creating top c lass 
institutional facilities for innovative teaching and professional development of teachers.  
6.3 The Mission focuses on these goals in a holistic manner dealing with the whole sector of 
education without fragmenting the programmes based on levels and sectors as school, higher, 
technical etc. This is an umbrella scheme aimed at creating synergies among the various ongoing 
initiatives on Teachers and Teaching under Ministry of HRD and other autonomous institutions. A 
total of 14 proposals from various Universities/Institutes from all over the country have been 
approved in the year 2016 bringing the total number of approved proposals to 41 as of now for 
setting up institutional arrangements under various components of the Scheme.  
6.4 The Mission consists of the following components:- 
(i) Schools of Education (in Central Universities) - 30 
(ii) Centers of Excellence for Curriculum and Pedagogy -50 
(iii) Inter-University Centers for Teachers’ Education - 2 
(iv) National Resource Centre for Education - 1 
(v) Centers for Academic Leadership and Education Management - 5 
(vi) Innovations, Awards, Teaching Resource Grant, including Workshop & Seminar 
(vii) Subject Networks for Curricular Renewal and Reforms 
 
6.5 The Committee notes that this scheme has been formed with a vision of making  
teaching jobs attractive and restoring it to a level of a dignified profession.  The Committee is 
constrained to note that the Scheme since its inception i.e., from 2014 has not made any 
progress.  The information submitted by the Ministry gives a picture that so far only Rs. 1.25 
crore have been spent and 41 proposals has been received from universities/in stitutes from 
all over the country and out of 88 centres only 59 have been set-up till date. The Committee 
would like to recommend that the mission should look at teacher's education and tr aining in 
holistic manner and strengthen the institutional mechanism at all levels right from school to  
colleges.  The Committee also impresses upon the Department of Higher Edu cation to 
expedite the pace of the scheme. 
VII.   SWAYAM & NMEICT 
7.1 The Committee was informed that the UGC INFONET Digital Library Consortium is 
major initiative of University Grants Commission (UGC) to bring qualitative change in academic 
libraries in India. The main objective of the UGC INFONET Digital Library Consortium is to 

provide access to qualitative electronic resources including full-text and bibliographic databases to 
academic institutions at a lower rates of subscription. The major aims and objectives of the UGC-
Infonet Digital Library Consortium are as follows:  
a.  to provide access to a high-quality and scholarly electronic resources to a large number of 
academic institutions including universities and colleges at substantially lower rates of 
subscription and at most favorable terms and conditions;  
b. to promote rapid and efficient access to scholarly content to the users and to create and 
promote use of ICT in teaching and learning in universities in India;  
c. to extend the benefit of Consortium to its associate members including private universities 
and colleges;  
d. to impart training to the users, librarians, research scholars and faculty members of the 
institutions in use of electronic resources with an aim to optimize their usage;  
e. to promote use of e-e-resources with gradual decrease in print subscription; 
f. to promote interaction and inter-library cooperation amongst the participating universities;  
g. to evaluate the usage of the subscribed resources and to identify new resources that are 
required to be subscribed under the programme;  
h. to bring qualitative change in teaching, learning and research with an aim to meet the ever 
growing challenges of globalization of higher education; and  
i. to increase the research productivity of the institutions both in terms of quality and quantity 
of publications. 
 
7.2 The Consortium provides current as well as archival access to more than 5,000 core and 
peer-reviewed journals and nine bibliographic databases in different disciplines from 23 publishers 
and aggregators. The access to all major e-resources was given to 50 universities in first phase in 
the year 2004. It has now been extended to 157 universities in three different phases. In terms of 
number of users, the UGC-INFONET Digital Library Consortium is the largest Consortium in 
India with a vision and plan to reach out to all universities and colleges affiliated to these 
universities, over a period of time. 
7.3 The Committee recognizes the use of information and communication technology 
(ICT) to improve the quality of teaching and learning.  The Committee recommends that 
new technologies such as online teaching, virtual class rooms etc. must be used for enhanced 
learning experience for the students.  The faculty must be encouraged to leverage ICT for 
better learning outcomes and also deployed for assessment of student's performance.  The 
information and communication technology needs to be used as a tool across all institution 
and necessary infrastructure must be made available to institutions. 
  

VIII.   IMPACTING RESEARCH INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY (IMPRINT) 
8.1  Impacting Research Innovation and Technology  (IMPRINT), a flagship national initiative 
of the Government, launched on November 5, 2015, aims at addressing and providing solutions to 
the most relevant engineering challenges faced by the nation by translating knowledge into viable 
technology (products or processes) in selected technology domains to enable, empower and 
embolden the nation for inclusive growth and self-reliance. It is a pan IITs and IISc Joint Initiative 
to develop a roadmap for research .  The domain areas identified for the focus of the IMPRINT 
Initiative are health care,  energy, sustainable habitat, nano technology hardware,  water  resource s 
and river systems, advanced materials,  Information and communication technology, 
(manufacturing,  security and defense, and ( environmental science and climate change.  
8.2  The Department informed that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed 
between 25 Participating Ministries/ Departments on 31 st March, 2016, to ensure that coordinated 
action is taken to support research under IMPRINT. In 2016-17, a provision of Rs. 50.00 crore has 
been made in the BE 2016-17. Consequent to an SFC Meeting, chaired by Secretary (HE), MHRD, 
held on 4-7-2016, implementation of the IMPRINT Initiative at an estimated cost of Rs. 487.00 cr. 
over a period of 3 years as per the table below bifurcation has been approved. 
                                                                   (Rs. in crore) 
            Items 1st Year 2nd Yea
r 
3rd Year 
Funding for 
Proposals 
175 150 150 
IMPRINT 
Cell 
4 4 4 
Total 179 154 154 
Grand Total 487  
 
8.3    A total of 2612 project proposals were submitted across these ten technology domains  
and identified under this scheme.  Of these, 259 proposals have been approved by the Apex 
Committee chaired by Secretary (Higher Education), MHRD. The cost of the project is met to the 
extent of 50% by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) and the remaining 50% 

by the participating Ministry/Department. 90 proposals out of 259 have been accepted for funding 
by participating Ministry/Department.  As on date, a sum of Rs. 35 crore has been released to IIT 
Kanpur (National Coordinator of the Scheme) for implementation of this Initiative. 
 
8.4  The Committee appreciates the Department for taking the initiative for enhancing 
the quality of research and innovation in the country.  However, the Committee would like to 
recommend that the Department should follow some parameters like outcome based 
research funding; liberal research grants for both social sciences and basic sciences; sett ing 
up incubation centers with enough seed money to do innovative research, coll aborate with 
R&D in industry, setting up of research parks, inter-disciplinary research, establ ish centers 
in frontier areas of research and viable Public Private Partnership in research; and 
innovation.  
IX   GIAN (GLOBAL INITIATIVE OF ACADEMIC NETWORKS)   
9.1   The Department submitted that Government had launched the GIAN Scheme on 
30th November, 2015, which aimed at inviting eminent faculty, scientists, and entrepreneurs from 
premier educational and scientific institutions across the world to teach in the higher educational 
institutions in the country with a view to give international exposure to Indian students.  Under this 
scheme, 801 course proposals have been approved so far and out of these, 597 courses have been 
organized. Grants of Rs. 20.00 crore have also been released to IIT, Kharagpur for GIAN initiati ve 
during 2016-17. 
9.2  The Committee was informed that so far, 78 foreign academicians have agreed and been 
approved to teach the courses at Government educational institutions.  It is a part of the ongoing 
process to raise academic standards; promote international synergies, partnerships and 
collaboration and bring internationally reputed and recognized academicians to India. 
9.3 The Committee observes that this scheme by the Department to bring world class 
teachers to teach courses in Government educational institutions is commendable.  The 
Committee, however, would like to recommend that the Department should provid e 
adequate facilities and research facilities in the premier educational and scientific 
institutions so that these institutions not just attract global faculty but also international 
students. 

X.  TECHNICAL EDUCATION-QUALITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME (TEQIP) 
10.1 The Department submitted that AICTE is conscious of the shortage as well as the 
availability of quality faculty in technical institutions. Apart from prescribing norms and standard 
for faculty requirement and cadre ratio for giving approval to technical institutions, AICTE is 
making concerted efforts to upgrade the skills of faculty by way of providing opportunities to 
faculty through short term and long term quality improvement program conducted in QIP Centers 
promoted by it in various parts of the country.   
10.2 The Department further added that under its Quality Improvement Scheme (AQIS), AICTE 
has taken several initiatives to promote quality in Technical Education through Research, 
Institutional and Faculty Development Program (RIFD) with ultimate aim to attract and motivate 
young generation to join faculty, pursue higher study and carry out research. The facult y is given 
enormous chances to improve their educational qualification under Quality Improvement Program 
(QIP), and develop research under Research Promotion Scheme (RPS). Faculty Development 
Program (FDP) also provides opportunities to faculty member of AICTE approved 
Colleges/Institutions to facilitate up-gradation of knowledge and skill. In addition, under Travel 
Grant Program (TG) meritorious faculty gets opportunities to interact at International Level 
Seminars, and Symposia, both within and outside India, Teachers from AICTE approved 
Technical Institutions/University departments are eligible for this grant. Various Schemes also 
provides financial assistance to faculty members for quality education/ research and capac ity 
building programs as follows: 
i. Quality Improvement Program (QIP) : To upgrade the expertise and capabilities of the 
faculty members of the degree level institutions in the country. The aim is to enable the 
teachers to acquire Master’s/Doctoral degrees. Scholar -ships are paid @ Rs.9000/- per month 
for M.Tech (Polytechnic) and Rs.15,000/- per month for Ph.D. for a maximum period of two 
and three years respectively. 
ii. Research Promotion Scheme (RPS) : Is aimed to create research ambience in the Institutes 
by promoting research in engineering sciences and innovations in established and newer 
technologies; and to encourage  Master’s and Doctoral candidates to augment the quality of 
faculty and research personnel in the country. Maximum grant per research scheme is 
Rs.25,00,000/- for a duration of three years. 
iii. Adjunct Faculty:  To appoint Adjunct Faculty for bringing external perspective to regular 
teaching to make classes more interesting and to enrich knowledge of regular faculty 
members too. The limit of funding is Rs. 6 Lakhs/ Faculty/ Institute. 
iv. Trainee Teacher Scheme : The scheme is intended towards attracting bright Undergraduate 
and Postgraduate students to teaching profession by providing scholarships for M.Tech/Ph.D 

Fellowships and assured job for advancing their professional growth. The maximum funding 
is Rs.2.5 lakhs over and above other financial assistance/scholarship, if any.  The duration of 
the project is for three years. Trainee Teacher Scheme was launched in 2016.  
v. Faculty Development Program:  The Faculty Development Program intends to provide 
financial assistance to facilitate up-gradation of knowledge and skill. Total funding of Rs.7 
lakhs is provided and the project duration is 2 weeks. 
vi. Scheme Of Seminar Grant (SG):  Scheme provides financial assistance to institutions for 
organizing seminar/ workshop at National and International level in various fields of 
Technical education and also extending opportunities to the academicians and working 
professionals for sharing the knowledge, experience, innovation and inventions. Total funding 
is up to Rs. 2 lakhs for National and Rs.3 lakhs for International seminars. 
vii. Scheme of Travel Grant (TG): The scheme is aimed at promoting research and development 
activities in various areas of Technical Education for meritorious faculties to interact at 
international level to update the global changes in the field of concerned fields of 
specialization. Total funding of Rs. 1.5 lakh (reimbursement of Airfare, Registration fee and 
per Diem) once in three year. 
 
10.3 The Committee endorses the existing/ongoing schemes of AICTE towards faculty 
development.  The Committee further wishes that in addition to these schemes, the AICT E 
should also explore the possibilities of providing enhanced research fellowships an d also 
ensure strong industry faculty association.  The Committee further suggests strengthenin g 
and empowering of affiliated colleges by giving autonomy so as to enable them to design 
specialized courses considering the need of the industry.  The Committee stron gly feels in 
order to gain the credibility, it is essential to ensure transparency in these institutions both in 
the government and private as regards its governance and financial management.  
XI.   FACULTY POSITIONS 
11.1 The Department informed the Committee that Recruitment of faculty is a continuous 
process and the vacancies keep arising due to retirements, resignations and additional requirements 
on account of enhanced student's strength. The Institutions are engaging contract, adjunct and 
visiting faculty as well as using online mode of teaching to overcome these shortages. To make the 
teaching profession more attractive, the faculty is encouraged to undertake consultancy and are 
given start-up financial support. 
11.2  The Department further added that since, arising of vacancies and filling them up 
with suitable, qualified candidates is a continuous process, the IITs have been taking measures to 
attract quality faculty, which include year-round open advertisements, invitation through search-

cum-selection procedures to alumni/scientists/faculty, advertisements in international journals, and 
appointment of NRIs and PIOs to faculty positions on the same terms as applicable to regular 
faculty.  In addition, Institutes are engaging contract, adjunct and visiting faculty.  The 
Government has also launched the Global Initiative for Academic Networks (GIAN) to enable 
foreign faculty to teach some courses in the higher educational institutions.  Steps such as 
outstanding young faculty awards, mobility of faculty from one Central Educational Institute to 
another, and pay parity to faculty have also been taken to attract best faculty in these  Institutions.  
There is no adverse effect on studies in the institute due to shortage of faculty, as the same is 
adequately compensated by the research scholars, contract, adjunct and visiting faculty. 
11.3 The faculty status (both in government and private engineering institutions) from 2014-15 
onwards is as follows: 
Year Faculty positions Actual 
2014-15 663708 636528 
2015-16 714021 699023 
2016-17 724455 684302 
 
In NITs, at present 7489 faculty posts stand sanctioned to 31 NITs and IIEST, Shibpur against 
which a total number of 5718 (including 1760 on contract) faculty is presently engaged in these 
institutions. The sanctioned strength of faculty in respect of 11 new NITs is 473, against which 
146 are lying vacant. The revision of pay scale of university and college teachers had been 
implemented by all the State Governments. The orders regarding enhancement of age 
superannuation and payment of salary arrears had been sent to the Chief Secretaries/ Principal 
Secretaries of State Government. 
11.4 As informed by the Department of Higher Education, Central Universities are adopting 
different methods/process to address faculty shortages in order to ensure that studies of students 
are not affected, which inter-alia, include hiring ad-hoc faculty, Guest Faculty, Contract Faculty  
and Re-employed. The total number of sanctioned teaching posts in various Central Universities is 
17006 (2412 Professor, 4788 Associate Professor and 9806 Assistant Professor). Out of the total 
sanctioned teaching posts 6141 teaching posts are lying vacant (1334 Professor, 2250 Associate 
Professor, 2557 Assistant Professor).  

 
 
The details of faculty employed in Central Universities on ad-hoc basis, Guest Faculty, are as 
under:- 
Adhoc Guest 
Faculty 
Contract 
basis 
Re-
employed 
Total 
163 1602 725 118 2608 
 
After taking into account the above ad-hoc/guest faculty/contract/ re-employed positions,  the 
teaching vacancy positions comes about 21% as on 01.01.2017. In order to meet the situation 
arising out of shortage of teachers in universities and other teaching institutions and the 
consequential vacant positions therein, the age of superannuation for teachers in Central 
Educational Institution has already been enhanced to sixty five years; vide the Department of 
Higher Education letter No. F.1-19/2006-U.II dated 23.3.2007.  
11.5 Besides, subject to availability of vacant positions and fitness, teachers shall also be re-
employed on contract appointment beyond the age of sixty five years up to the age of seventy 
years. Re-employment beyond the age of superannuation shall, however, be done selectively, for a 
limited period of 3 years in the first instance and then for another further period of 2 years purely 
on the basis of merit, experience, area of specialization and peer group review and only against 
available vacant positions.   
11.6 Further, UGC initiated a scheme called Operation Faculty Recharge for augmenting the  
research and teaching resources of universities to tackle the shortage of faculty in university 
system. Two modalities have been evolved for their engagement with the university system: The 
“Adjunct faculty” route has been initiated for younger and mid -career professionals within the 
target groups, and the ‘scholar -in-residence’ avenue for senior professionals and specialists.  
Adjunct faculty will be expected to facilitate the setting of workshops and labs, providing hands on 
training in the relevant domain areas, development of soft skills, and focus on ensuring 
competency based learning outcomes among students.  
11.7 The UGC has sanctioned 706 adjunct faculty positions for the entire university system in 
the country, with Central Universities allowed five such positions each, State Universities two 

each, and Deemed Universities one each. UGC also framed the guidelines for empanelment of 
Adjunct Faculty in Universities and Colleges. These guidelines enable higher educational 
institutions to access the eminent teachers and researchers who have completed their formal 
association with the University/College, to participate in teaching, to collaborate and to stimulate 
research activities for quality research at M. Phil and Ph.D. levels; and to play mentoring a nd 
inspirational role.  
11.8 As per this guideline, Adjunct faculty will be provided travel cost, as per entitlement, from 
his/her institution/place of stay and back, maximum six (06) times per academic year. No 
reimbursement for hiring accommodation will be permissible. However, she/he will be provided 
free lodging and boarding in the guest House. Beside the above, an honorarium of Rs. 1000/- (Rs. 
One Thousand only) per lecture to a maximum, of Rs. 4000/- (Rs. Four Thousand Only) per day of 
service subject to a maximum ceiling of Rs. 80,000/- (Rs. Eighty Thousand Only) per month 
would  also be  given. The Adjunct Faculty will work at the host institution for a minimum of 02 
days per visit. 
11.9 The faculty position in IITs was given the Department:- 
Sl. No. Name of IITs Faculty 
strength 
sanctioned 
by MHRD 
Current faculty 
position 
Vacant Vacancy 
percentage 
1. IIT. Bombay 985 700 295 30% 
2. IIT. Delhi 776 508 268 35% 
3. IIT. Guwahati 560 411 149 27% 
4. IIT. Kanpur 657 415 242 37% 
5. IIT. Kharagpur 1153 619 534 46% 
6. IIT. Madras 800 574 226 28% 
7. IIT. Roorkee 807 443 364 49% 
8. IIT. BHU 502 265 237 47% 
9. IIT. 
Bhubaneswar 
170 111 59 35% 
10. IIT. 
Gandhinagar 
120 107 13 11% 

11. IIT. Hyderabad 207 174 33 16% 
12. IIT. Indore 90 91 -1 -1% 
13. IIT. Jodhpur 90 55 35 39% 
14. IIT. Mandi 90 97 -7 -8% 
15. IIT. Patna 126 101 25 20% 
16. IIT. Ropar 110 84 26 24% 
17. IIT. Tirupati 18 11 7 39% 
18. IIT. Palakhad 18 13 0 28% 
19. IIT. Jammu 0 0 0 0% 
20. IIT. Bhilai 0 0 0 0% 
21. IIT. Goa 0 0 0 0% 
22. IIT. Dharwad 0 0 0 0% 
23. IIT. Dhanwad 455 293 162 36% 
Total 7744 5672 2672 35% 
 
11.11 The Committee expresses its concern over the shortage of faculty positions in all the 
institutions including the private ones.  It points out that there can be only two possibilitie s, 
either our young talented students are not attracted towards the teaching profession or the 
recruitment process is a prolonged one and involves too many procedural formalities. In 
either case, the Department being the nodal authority for the entire country so far as higher 
education sector is concerned has to take proactive role so as to expedite the filling up  a 
existing vacancies.  
11.12 The Committee has been voicing its concern from time to time on the acute shortag e 
of faculty in higher educational institutions across the country. The Committee is anguishe d 
to find out that all kinds of institutions right from well established Central Universities to 
those set up recently, State universities as well as private universities, premier institutions 
like IITs, NITs and IIMs, this problem has emerged as the biggest handicap for the 
development and growth of Higher Education vis-a-vis maintaining the quality of education. 
Situation continues to be grim with no improvement being foreseen in the near future. The 

Committee points out that the availability of adequate and qualified faculty is a pre-requ isite 
for quality education. So far, the efforts of the Department, the regulatory bodies like  UGC, 
AICTC etc. and the universities and other institutions have not been adequate enough  to 
reach a satisfaction level. The Committee therefore impress upon all the stakeholders to 
expedite and ensure that shortages are eliminated or minimized. 
 11.13 The Committee, however, recognizes the steps taken by Department like increase in 
the retirement age up to 65 years and improvement of salary structures.  
11.14 The Committee recommends that recruitment process should start well in ad vance 
before the post is vacated so that after retirement, the newly recruited person takes up  
position immediately. The Ministry should work in tandem with Institutions to have this 
exercise on yearly basis and recruitment must be done in advance so that shor tage does not 
develop into crisis. While taking note of the steps taken up by the Department for filling u p 
the vacancies, the Committee observes  that  in order to make the teaching profession m ore 
attractive, the government's effort to allow and encourage the faculty to undertake 
consultancy and the financial support, for setting up start up have to be lucrative enough so 
as to meet the expectations of the aspirants. The Committee accordingly directs the 
Department of Higher Education to explore the possibilities and take necessary steps on 
priority basis. 
11.15 The Committee further recommends that in order to improve the position there 
should be an increase in the number of research fellowships for M.Phil , PhD and Post 
Doctoral Program to create potential faculty for universities and colleges and also incre ase 
the number of fellowship and amount through NET.  The Department should also provide 
an opportunity to the teachers to present papers in academic conferences seminars or 
participate in workshops; exchange knowledge and ideas; and the young faculty member  to 
spend a short period of two weeks to two months at institutions of their choice for a better 
academic exposure. 
XII. SCHOLARSHIPS 
 
12.1 The Committee was apprised about the following scholarships schemes of the Department 
of higher education. 
  

 SAKSHAM  
12.2 The Department submitted that All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) is 
implementing Saksham Scholarship Scheme to provide encouragement and support to differently-
abled students to pursue technical education in a year.   
12.3 The Department further added under Saksham Scheme 1000 scholarships are disbursed 
every year.  Out of which 50% scholarships are available at each degree /diploma level and also 
transferable in the event of non availability of eligible applicant in any of the of degree/ diploma 
level programme.  Number of Scholarship is further distributed among different categories -15% 
for SC, 7.5% ST and 27% for OBC candidate/applicant.   Amount of scholarship constitutes of 
contingency amount Rs. 2000/- per month for 10 months as incidentals each year and Tuition Fee 
of Rs. 30000/- or at actual, whichever is less.  
12.4 The Department further submitted that Saksham Scheme is using DBT (Direct Benefit 
Transfer) through which the sanctioned amount is transferred directly to the students bank account 
and Institute is not linked in this transaction. Due to lack of applications received last year 
Saksham scheme has been revamped and following changes have been suggested by the experts. 
In case of candidates availing Tuition fee waiver/reimbursement, and amount of Rs. 30000/- may 
be reimbursed to the candidates selected for this scheme by the way of reimbursement for 
a) Purchase of books, 
b) Purchase of equipments, software 
c) Purchase of Laptops. 
d) Purchase of Desktops 
e) Purchase of customized vehicle. 
f) Fees paid towards competitive examination application forms/exam fees for all e xaminations 
related to higher education / employment. 
g) Purchase of specific equipments/software for visually impaired/speech and hearing disabled. 
12.5 The Committee was further informed that under the Central Sector Scheme of scholarships 
for College & University students, Central Reservation Policy is followed and under Special 
scholarship scheme for Jammu & Kashmir and State reservation Policy of Jammu & Kashmir is 
followed. Under both schemes, 3% reservation is provided for differently- abled candidates. 
12.6 The Department apprised the Committee that ''PM Research Fellows'' has been launched. 
The Department pointed out that the quality of the research is contingent upon the quality of the 

students enrolled in the PhD Programmes. In order to improve the quality in research, it is 
essential to encourage bright students completing their B. Tech. to register for direct PhD 
programmes. The Kakodkar Committee constituted by the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development to suggest a roadmap for autonomy and future of IITs in order to make them world 
class institutions for research and higher learning, in its report recommended that special efforts be 
made to identify and pick up bright 3rd year students of IITs and other institutions to initiate them 
into the PhD programmes. The Committee also recommended augmenting the intake of PhD 
students from the industry. The objective is to promote research of the highest order in the area of 
cutting edge technologies and to meet the demands of indigenous industries for supplementing 
Government of India’s flagship programmes such as “Make in India” and “Start-up Initiative.” 
12.7 The Scheme has the following broad contours:  
(a) The Scheme allows direct admission into the PhD programme for a period of 5 years.  
(b) Those students in the final year of B Tech programme in IITs who secure a minimum of 8.5 
CGPA shall be eligible for the fellowship. 
(c) The students to be offered fellowship shall be required to write the outline of the research 
project they would like to take up as a part of the PhD programme. These would be examined 
by a Committee constituted by the BoG of each IIT and accordingly, the suitable students 
shall be selected for the PMRF.  
(d) The number of students selected to be offered the fellowships will be 500 in 2017-18, 750 in 
2018-19 and 1000 in 2019-20. 
(e) Those selected, will be offered a fellowship of Rs.60,000/- per month for the period of 
research not exceeding 5 years from the date of registration along with a suitable research 
grant which could cover the expenses for attending international conferences etc.  
(f) In case the student leaves the fellowship before securing his PhD, the entire fellowship 
amount thus far released shall be returnable in one lump-sum.  
 
12.8   The M. Tech.  programme in IITs has been formulated to prepare the students for an 
eventual research work. The students in the M.Tech. programme are admitted through GATE and 
a counseling process. Each of the students admitted in the programme is paid a monthly fellowship 
of Rs.12, 400. In the year 2015, there were 14,600 students in the M. Tech. programme.  The 
Department informed that this programme had an annual intake of more than 8,000 students.  
Although the programme has been designed as the first step towards a career in research/teac hing, 
it was found that many students taking admission in the M. Tech. programme desert the course 
mid-way for a variety of reasons such as securing a job or getting better opportunities elsewhere. 

The objective is to incentivize meritorious students to take up M.Tech Programme and help in 
better transacting B.Tech  programme through their teaching assistantship. 
12.9 The Scheme seeks to offer 1,000 Teaching Assistantships per year in the M. Tech. 
programme in the IITs, not exceeding 20% of the total intake in any discipline, consisting of the 
toppers in the GATE exam in the respective disciplines. Each M. Tech. Teaching Assistantship 
(TA) would be required to mandatorily work as TA for the B. Tech. students as specified by the 
Institute, and will be offered a Teaching Assistantship of Rs.25,000 per month, with the condition 
that in case the student leaves the programme mid-way, the entire amount thus far released to the 
would be repayable in one lump-sum. The Scheme will run for a period of four years beginning 
2017-18. Therefore, it would cover 3 academic batches, viz., 2017-19, 2018-20 and 2019-21. 
Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship for College and University Students 
 
12.10 The objective of the scheme is to provide financial assistance to those meritorious students 
who are above 80 th percentile of successful candidates in the relevant stream from a particular 
Board of Examination, in class XII and having family income of less than Rs.6 lakhs per annum. 
The total number of scholarships per year is 82000 (41000 for boys and 41000 for girls). The rate 
of scholarship is Rs. 10,000/- per annum for the first three years and Rs. 20,000/- per annum for 
the fourth and fifth year.   
 
 
 
 
Special Scholarship Scheme for Jammu & Kashmir Students 
 
12.11 The Special Scholarship Scheme for Jammu and Kashmir is for the students of Jammu and 
Kashmir having family income of less than Rs. 6.0 lakh per annum, who have passed class XII 
from the State and secured admission outside the State in Institutions which are either approved 
under Section 12B of UGC Act or recognised by AICTE or respective regulatory body. 
Scholarship is provided to meet expenses towards tuition fees, hostel fees, cost of books and other 
incidental charges. It is envisaged to provide 5000 fresh scholarships every year. The scholarships 
are distributed in the ratio of 4500 for General courses, 250 for engineering course and 250 for 
Medical studies. 
  

Pragati Scholarship 
 
12.12 To provide encouragement and support to Girl Child to pursue technical education “Pragati 
Scholarship” has been launched by the MHRD from the year 2014 -15 and implemented by All 
India Council for Technical Education (AICTE).  Pragati is a scheme of AICTE aimed at 
providing assistance for Advancement of Girls participation in Technical Education. Total Number 
of beneficiaries benefited from Pragati Scheme is 2719 and amount disbursed is Rs. 7.61 cr (upto 
31.1.2017). Women education is one of the important components of UGC in its policy of equity 
and access. The Commission has launched several schemes to encourage the enrolment and 
promotion of girls in higher education:  
a)Financial Assistance to universities and colleges for construction of women’s hostels. 
b)Financial Assistance for establishment of Day Care Centers to help women to continue 
their academic career. 
c)Indira Gandhi Scholarship to Single Girl Child.  
d)Assistance for capacity building for women managers in Higher Education. 
e)Post Doctoral fellowships for women.     
f)Establishment of Women’s studies centers. 
g)Additional assistance to universities & colleges with more women enrolment.  
 
 12.13  The Committee gathers from above that from the scholarships run by AICTE/UGC 
etc., more than one lakh research students / scholars are benefitted.  The Com mittee 
observes that the Department has to ensure that all the schemes of scholarships are 
implemented in its true spirit and it should reach to the beneficiaries strictly according to the 
rules, guidelines and other eligibility criteria provided there for.  At the same tim e, it is also 
obligatory on the part of the Government to review these schemes time to time considering 
its relevance and also that the beneficiary students / research scholars get the financial 
assistance or other support adequately.  The Committee apprehends that there can b e 
institutions where students give up their research without completing it.  The Department 
has also informed that the students enrolled for M.Tech. in the IITs desert their course m id-
way for getting opportunity elsewhere.  The Department should take all measures to avoid 
such a situation. 
XIII.   HEFA 
13.1 The Department submitted that it has been decided to set up a Higher Education Financing 
Agency (HEFA) with an initial capital base of Rs.1,000 crores. The HEFA will be a not-for-pr ofit 

organization that will leverage funds from the market and supplement them with donations and 
CSR funds . These funds will be used to finance improvement in infrastructure in our top 
institutions and will be serviced through internal accruals.  
13.2 On the Status of Implementation, the Department informed that the Cabinet, in its meeting 
held on 12 th September, 2016, considered and approved the proposal of establishment of Higher 
Education Financing Agency (HEFA) with the stipulated provisions/governing structure. Canara 
Bank has been appointed as the joint promoter on behalf of the Government. It is expected that 
HEFA will be operational by end of May 2017, after its registration as NBFC. 
13.3 The Committee was informed that the HEFA would finance the academic and research 
infrastructure through a 10-year loan and principal portion of loan will be repaid through internal 
accruals of these institutions.   All the Centrally Funded Higher Educational Institutions would be 
eligible to joining as members of HEFA. 
13.4        The Committee during its interaction with the universities and other academic institutions 
gathered the universities or institutions which are not in the domain of Central Government also 
desire to be covered by HEFA.  The representatives of those institutions pleaded that it would not 
be in the fitness of things that this scheme covers only the universities of Central Government.  
This scheme should also be extended to the premier state universities / institutions. 
13.5          The Committee takes note of the proposed scheme which is expected to take off by 
the end of May.  The Committee feels, since the scheme was anounced last year, the 
Department and other agencies should have taken adequate efforts, so as to avoid delay in 
launching of this scheme.  The Committee now emphasise upon the Departmen t of Higher 
Education to ensure that no further delay takes place and the scheme takes off as proposed 
now.  The Committee realises that the scheme is meant for the Centrally Funded Universities 
and other premier institutions.  The Department may consider the demand raised b y the 
State universities and private universities / institutions for coverage under this scheme. 
XIV.   UNNAT BHARAT ABHIYAN AND UCCHATAR AVISHKAR           ABHIYAN 
 
14.1 Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) had launched Unnat Bharat Abhiyan 
(UBA) on 11th November, 2014 to enable higher educational institutions to work with the people 
of rural India in identifying development challenges and evolving appropriate solutions for 
accelerating sustainable growth. MHRD has advised all the Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs) 

which are funded by the Central /State Government and all institutions which are under approval 
by the regulatory bodies to adopt clusters of backward Gram Panchayats / villages in their vicinity 
and apply their knowledge & expertise to improve the living conditions & livelihoods in the Gram 
Panchayats (GPs). The suggested inputs will be incorporated in the Gram Panchayat Development 
Plans to be considered for implementation by the District authorities. 
14.2 Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi has been designated as the Coordinating 
Institute for Unnat Bharat Abhiyan. A National Steering Committee has been constituted with 
eminent scientists, technologists, educationist as well as representatives from different nodal 
Ministries of Government of India. Presently, 40 HEIs have identified clusters of villages after 
consultation with District Collectors. 26 HEIs have signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with IIT Delhi to carry out further steps.  
Ucchatar Avishkar Abhiyan 
 
14.3 Hon’ble HRM announced in the IIT Council meeting on October 6, 2015, that an annual 
investment of Rs. 250.00 crore with a view to promoting innovation of a higher order that directly 
impacts the needs of the Industry and thereby improves the competitive edge of Indian 
manufacturing.  The projects should have collaboration between the academia and industry – 
within or outside India.  The funding pattern of the projects selected would be 25% by 
Industry/Industries; 25% by participating Department/Ministry; and, 50% by MHRD.  Director, 
IIT- Madras is the National Coordinator of the Scheme.  The Apex Committee of the UAY in its 
meeting held on 13 th May 2016, sanctioned 92 proposals costing Rs. 282.65 crores. The overall 
picture of the 92 projects recommended for approval as per the fund sharing pattern is as under: 
 Total 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
First Year 
(Rs. in Lakh) 
Total cost of the projects  28265.34 17645.46 
50% to be met by MHRD 14132.67 8822.73 
25% to be funded by participating Ministries 7066.34 4411.36 
 
14.4 The Budget allocation under the Scheme “Uchhatar Avishkar Abhiyan” for the FY 2016 -
17 is Rs. 75.00 crore, out of which an amount of Rs. 52.50 crore has been released to the National 

Coordinator to the Scheme i.e. IIT- Madras for implementation of the Projects.  The Scheme 
“Uchhatar Avishkar Yojana” has already been approved by the SFC during its meeting held on 
17.12.2016.  A meeting to review the progress of projects sanctioned under the Scheme ‘Uchhatar 
Avishkar Yojan a” was held on 10 th& 11 th January, 2017.  The PIs and the heads/In charge of 
Institutions participated in the meeting through video-conferencing. The National Coordinator of 
the Scheme has informed that 67 Industry partners have signed MoUs, 43 Industry Partners have 
released the fund amounting to Rs. 11.30 crore as on 25.1.2017.  24 Industry Partners are yet to 
release initial funds although MoUs have been signed.  Further 6 participating Ministries have 
sanctioned the initial funds amounting to Rs. 361.49 lakhs (Rs.187.21 lakhs by Ministry of Steel; 
Rs. 11.15 lakhs by Ministry of Textiles and Rs. 19.17 lakhs by M/o Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation; Rs.29.19 lakhs by M/o Space, Rs. 55.63 lakhs by M/o Power and Rs. 59.14 lakh by 
M/o Road Transport & Highways. 
14.5  The Committee takes note of the two schemes being implemented by the Department.  
The Committee would like to point out that till date 40 institutes have adopted gram 
panchayats/villages under this scheme in their vicinity.  The Committee recommends that 
adequate resources should be made available to the institutes to help solve the problems  and 
improve living conditions and livelihoods in these villages. The   Committee observes that 
these schemes should have  inclusive academic system by providing knowledge and practices  
for  different professions and  upgrade the capabilities  responding to the developmen t needs 
of rural India.  
XV.   MISCELLANEOUS 
National Testing Service 
15.1 A new initiative to create a specialized independent, professional and specialist 
organization named National Testing Service for conducting all entrance examinations and 
fellowship tests for admission into higher educational institutions or for grant of fellowships and 
such other benefits is being considered in consultation with all stakeholders. The objectives of the 
NTS are-  
a. To conduct efficient, transparent and international standards tests in order to access the 
competency of candidates for admission, and recruitment purposes.  
b. To undertake research on educational, professional and testing systems to identify gaps in the 
knowledge systems and take steps for bridging them.  

c. To identify experts and institutions in setting examination questions.  
d. To produce and disseminate information and research on education and professional 
development standards 
 
15.2 In order to start its operation, the NTS would be provided a onetime grant of Rs. 50.00 
crore (Recurring- Rs.10 crore and Non-recurring - Rs. 40 crore ) in 2017-18.  From 2018-19 
onwards, NTS would be funded by the exams fees of over 40 lakh students.  Considering the exam 
fee paid by students in the entrance examinations currently being held, and the fees concession or 
exemption for SC/ STs /PWDs and girl candidates provided, average fees per student is estimated 
to be Rs. 500.  Since approximately 40 lakh students would appear in the exams conducted by 
NTS each year, Rs 200 crore would be generated by NTS each year, which will be sufficient to 
meet its recurring and non- recurring expenditure. A CEE (Committee on Establishment 
Expenditure) Memorandum has been prepared and sent to the all concerned Ministry/Department 
for comments.  
15.3 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department to create new 
specialized organization for conducting entrance examinations and fellowships for admiss ion 
into higher educational institutions.  The Committee believes that this testing agency wou ld 
be able to meet its expenditure and conduct examinations in a free and fair mann er.  The  
Committee  also  hopes that  this  agency  would  make  the  examination  reliable .  
Project Vishwajeet: 
15.4 The IIT-Council in its 50 th Meeting held on 23.8.2016 at IIT-Delhi inter-alia approved in 
principle the project Vishwajeet which proposed specific interventions for strengthening the 7 IITs 
to help them to come up in to the Top 100 World University Rankings.  The aim of the Project 
‘Vishwajeet’ is to assist the IITs, especially the top (7) IITs namely IIT -Bombay, IIT-Delhi, IIT-
Kharagpur, IIT-Madras, Guwahati, IIT-Kanpur and IIT-Guwahati, to reach the top (100) Global 
University ranks (both THE and QS) by 2018 and the top (50) by 2020.  The financial outlay for 
the Scheme is Rs. 20,018.19 Cr to be implemented for a 5 year period starting from 2017-18. 
Ministry of Finance vide O.M. dated 20.12.2016 has been requested to accord approval in-
principal for the scheme; however, the approval from MoF is still awaited.   
15.4 The Committee takes note of the financial outlay for the scheme for improvement of 
ranking of the seven IITs.  The Committee recommends that apart from providing  funds the  
Department  should  also  take  steps  like improving the  infrastructure, increase  research 

in  new  fields , recruit   international   faculty and  enroll  more international  student in 
these  institutions. These  steps  would   not only  help in  making  our  prem ier institutes  
compete  with  other  world  class institutes but  also  improve  their  world  rankings. 
15.5 The Department apprised the Committee that a new scheme was launched 'National 
Initiative for Design Innovation' in the 12 th Plan.  Under this initiative, 20 new Design Innovation 
centers, one open Design School and a National Design Innovation Network (NDIN) linking 
together all these schools would be set up at an estimated cost of 240 crores.  Under this scheme, 
20 DIC's would be set up by co-locating them in existing publicly funded institutes of national 
reputes like NITs, IITs, Centre and State Universities, to facilitate optimal utilization of the 
existing resources including faculty and land.  Each of the DIC's would be provided a financial 
support to the extent of Rs. 10 crore.  DIC's with be identified based on the geographical spread to 
cover length and breadth of the country and are expected to cover from science and technology to 
liberal acts.  ODS would ensure maximum reach of design education and practice in the country 
through serious collaborative education programmes, and free sharing of its courseware through 
the internet.  NDIN would be a network of design schools that works closely with other leading 
institutions of industry and academic, NGOs and government to further reach and access of design 
educations to promote design innovation in all sectors, and to develop wide ranging collaborative 
projects between institutions. 
15.6 In view of its observations in the foregoing paras the Committee further adds that 
quality assurance in higher education has to become top of policy agenda and education has 
to prepare graduates with new skills, broad knowledge base and a range of competenc ies to 
enter a more complex and interdependent world. Quality is a multi-dime nsional concept and 
several mechanisms for quality assurance and management at individual and institution al 
level are needed.  The Committee further points out that system of accountability and 
accreditation with a robust regulatory mechanism are essential to process of sustaining and 
improving quality and developing performance indicators and benchmarks for assessing 
outcomes in higher education.  The Committee accordingly, urges upon the Depar tment of 
Higher Education to take all measures so as to ensure the quality in higher educat ion 
matching will the global standards.  
**** 