 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2017/Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) 
  
REPORT NO. 
286 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Two Hundred 
Seventy Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2016-17 (Demand 
No. 98) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2017) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2017) 

 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Two Hundred Seventy Seventh Report on Demands for 
Grants 2016-17 (Demand No. 98) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and 
Sports 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2017) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2017) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2017/Phalguna, 1938 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …...........................................................  (i)-(ii) 
2.         INTRODUCTION.............................................................................................................  (iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS ……….......…............................................................                               (iv) 
4.  REPORT.........................................................................................…........................... 
      CHAPTER - I   Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government................................................... 
CHAPTER - II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply......... 
CHAPTER - III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee........................... 
CHAPTER - IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government ar e 
still awaited.............................................................................   
5. *OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE ...   
6. *MINUTES............................................. ................................................. ................    
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________ 
*Appended on printing stage 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2016) 
 
1. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya      Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Prof. Jogen Chowdhury 
3. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda 
4. Shri Anubhav Mohanty 
5. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa  
6. Shri Vishambhar Prasad Nishad 
7. Shri Basawaraj Patil 
8. Shri Sharad Pawar 
9. Shrimati Sasikala Pushpa 
10. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shrimati Santosh Ahlawat 
12.  Shri Bijoy Chandra Barman 
13.  Shri Nihal Chand 
14.       Shrimati Bhawana Gawali  Patil 
15.      Shrimati Kothapalli Geetha 
16.       Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
17.       Prof. Chintamani Malviya 
18.       Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra 
19.       Shri Chand Nath 
20.       Shri Hari Om Pandey 
21.      Dr. Bhagirath Prasad 
22.       Shri N.K. Premachandran 
23.       Shri K.N. Ramachandran 
24.       Shri Mullappaly Ramachandran 
25.       Shri Sumedhanand Saraswati 
26.       Shri M.I. Shanavas 
27.       Dr. Nepal Singh 
28.       Dr. Prabhas Kumar Singh 
29.       Shrimati Neelam Sonkar 
30.       Shri P.R. Sundaram 
31.       Shrimati P.K. Sreemathi Teacher 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
(i) 

           SECRETARIAT 
Shri K.P. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mahesh Tiwari, Director 
Shri Vinay Shankar Singh, Joint Director 
Smt. Himanshi Arya, Assistant Director 
Shri R.K. Mecolt Singh, Assistant Director 
Shri K. Sudhir Kumar, Research Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource 
Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its be half, do hereby 
present this Two Hundred Eighty sixth Report of the Committee on the Action Taken by Government on 
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Two Hundred Seventy Seventh Report on Dem ands 
for Grants 2016-17 (Demand No. 98) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports. 
2.  Two Hundred Seventy Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Sta nding 
Committee on Human Resource Development was presented to Rajya Sabha on 27 th April, 2016 and 
simultaneously laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 th April, 2016.  Replies of the Government to the 
recommendations/observation contained in the Report, were considered by the Committee at  its meeting 
held on the 17th March, 2017. 
3.  The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 17 th 
March, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI 
March 17, 2017 
Phalguna 26, 1938 (Saka) 
  
 
DR. SATYANARAYAN JATIYA  
Chairman 
       Department-related Parliamentary  
              Standing Committee on  Human Resource Development        

ACRONYMS 
 
1. ASGO  Assistance to Scouting & Guiding Organisations 
2. CTP  Commonwealth Youth Programme 
3.  IC  International Cooperation 
4. INSTAL Scheme for Identification and Nurturing of Sports Talent 
5. LNIPE  Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education 
6. NYKS: Nehru Yuva Kendra Sanghathan 
7. NYLA: National Youth Leadership Awards 
8. NYLP:  National Young Leadership Programme 
9. NSS  National Service Scheme 
10. NPYAD National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development 
11. NDS  National Discipline Scheme 
12. NSS:  National Service Scheme 
13. NSTSS National Sports Talent Search Scheme 
14. NDTL  National Dope Testing Laboratory 
15. NYAC: National Youth Advisory Council 
16. NSDF   National Sports Development Fund 
17. NYC :  National Youth Corps 
18. NADA  National Anti-Doping Agency 
19. PYKKA Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan 
20. RGNIYD:  Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development 
21. RYSK  Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram 
22. RGKA  Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan 
23. SAI  Sports Authority of India 
24. SFC  Standing Finance Committee 
25. USIS  Urban Sports Infrastructure Scheme  
26. UAV  United Nations Volunteers 
27. UNDP  United Nation Development Programme 
28. W ADA World Anti-Doping Agency 
29.. YFDP:  Youth For Development Programme 
30. YH :  Youth Hostel 
(iv) 
  

REPORT 
 
The Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in its Two Hundred Seventy Seventh Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(Demand No. 98) of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports  for the year 2016-17. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the 277th Report have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by he Government – 
paras – 7.4,  7.5,  9.4,  10.2,  26.01, 29.1,  30.6  
                     (Chapter-I)Total – 7 
 
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s r eply – paras – 4.3,  5.5,   6.2,  7.6,  8.3,  8.4,  13.3, 
19.05, 23,  24.1,  25.1,  28.1,  31.01,  32.01,  33.04,  35.1,  35.2, 36.1,   37.1,  40.01,  
41.2 
(Chapter-II) Total – 21 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee –  
paras –7.7,  11.1,  11.2,  12.1,  14.1, 15.3,  16.2,   33.3,  39.1,  40.01,  42.1 
(Chapter-III) Total – 11 
 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government are still 
awaited.-Nil - 
(Chapter-IV)Total - Nil 
 
 
 
  

CHAPTER - I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee observes that  for the BE 2016-17, the allocation proposed for NYKS 
amounting to Rs.205.10 crore is only marginally higher than the allocations during RE stage of the 
year 2015-16. The Committee feels that this increase will not be adequate even to take care of 
normal increase in liabilities on account of salaries and pensions. The Committee hopes that the 
Department will make efforts, with available resources, to overcome all impediments adequately; 
inclusive of shortage of staff needs as well and make this component of Umbrella Schemes as a 
praise-worthy scheme. 
(Para 7.4) 
 
Action Taken 
 
It is true that funds allocation under ‘Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan’ component has only 
marginally increased. However, it is stated here that NYKS is also provided funds from other 
components of the Rashtriya Yuva Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK) like National Youth Corps, 
National Young Leaders Programme and National Programme for Youth and Adolescent 
Development for taking up various programmes. There has been substantial increase in allocations 
under these components, which will enable the Department to make available additional resources 
to NYKS.  In addition, efforts for mobilisation of funds for NYKS from other Ministries/ 
Departments for taking up various projects/ programmes are also being further intensified. This 
will augment the resources of NYKS. Further, efforts will also be made to get the allocations 
under ‘Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan’ component increased at RE stage.  The endeavour will be 
to utilise all available resources in most optimal matter for achieving maximum impact. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
The Committee notes that within the limited manpower and resources available with 
NYKS, efforts are being made to finalise the most optimal Annual Action Plan for 2016-17 so tha t 
the resources can be put to most effective use for achieving best possible results. The emphasis 
should be on timely release of funds and close monitoring of implementation of the programmes. 
In addition, NYKS will make serious efforts to mobilise more resources from other Departments/ 
Agencies for taking up collaborative programmes with them. NYKS has been orienting its 
activities to bring focus on creating awareness/ participation in the important initiatives/ 
programmes of the Government like Swachh Bharat Mission, Jan Dhan Yojana, Social Security 
Schemes, Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Abhiyan, Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana, Digital India, Skill 
India, etc. This will be further intensified during 2016-17. The Committee hopes that as envisaged, 
the requisite funds are mobilised within the stipulated time-line from concerned Ministries/ 
Departments for NYKS as proposed in the Budget Plan. 
(Para 7.5) 

 
Action Taken 
 
 NYKS has been making proactive efforts to collaborate with other Ministries/ Departments 
and mobilise funds from them for taking up programmes.  For instance, NYKS has signed an MoU 
with Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India, on 30.08.2016, under which NYKS 
will mobilize youth to undertake awareness generation campaigns, physical Swachhta activities, 
social media campaign and other cleanliness activities to bring about behavioral change regarding 
healthy, sanitation & waste management under Swachh Bharat Mission, in urban areas. Initially, a 
Pilot Project will be taken up in Urban Local Bodies of the National Capital Region with a budget 
of Rs.4.70 crores.  NYKS will further intensify such collaborative efforts. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
The Committee hopes that initiatives are taken to ensure that integration of NPYAD with 
NYKS/NYC under the Umbrella Scheme, RYSK, would enable the Department to leverage NYKS 
setup for affecting monitoring of the activities carried out under the assistance given to NGOs. The 
Committee recommends that the desired result is achieved in the current fiscal by fulfilling the 
expectations with enhanced allocation in BE in 2016-17 which has been proposed due to receipt of 
more number of proposals from various agencies. 
(Para 9.4) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The integration of NPYAD with NYKS/ NYC under the Umbrella Scheme, RYSK, is 
helping in better monitoring of the activities of NGOs to whom assistance is given. Nehru Yuva 
Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) has been nominated as the Monitoring and Evaluation Institution for 
the NPYAD Scheme. All the NGOs are being verified through field officials of NYKS before 
being considered for sanction of Grants- in-Aid. The implementation of the programmes by NGOs 
is also being closely monitored. With enhanced allocation in BE for 2016-17, it would be possible 
to sanction funds to NGOs for larger number of youth development programmes. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee notes that under International Cooperation, the increase in BE 2016-1 7 
amounting to Rs.12.00 crore from Rs.9.00 crore in RE and Rs.7.00 Crore in BE 2015-16 is due to 
Bilateral Agreements and also for programmes to be carried out. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that with the enhanced allocation of funds in the current fiscal, the proposed 
activities/ works are achieved within the stipulated time frame with pro-active steps of the 
Department of Youth Affairs. The Committee urges the Department to assess the impact of these 
initiatives and also to have a mechanism in place to obtain feedback from the participants and the 
concerned agencies and apprise the Committee of the same. 
(Para 10.2) 
 
  

Action Taken 
 
 The International Youth Exchange Programme are continuing with the countries with 
whom MoUs have been signed, in a planned manner.  During current year, Indian Youth 
Delegations have visited China, South Korea, Vietnam and Maldives.  Similarly, India has so far 
received Youth Delegations from South Korea, Maldives. Other such youth exchange programmes 
are scheduled in later part of the year. India also hosted BRICS Youth Summit, 2016 at Guwahati 
during 01-03 July, 2016.  The Department has put in place a mechanism to assess impact of these 
initiatives. Feedback is being regularly obtained from the Officials and Participants visiting other 
countries as part of Indian Youth Delegations.   
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
The Committee notes that under the enhancement of Sports Facility at J&K, the target is 
for construction of indoor halls at 12 locations and also upgradation of two existing stadia. The 
Committee emphasizes that the funds earmarked for Rs. 75.00 crore during this financial year 
2016-17 are fully utilized and paves the way for the improved sports culture in terror and 
insurgency ridden state of J&K. 
(Para 26.01) 
Action Taken 
 
The Ministry has already released a sum of Rs. 50 crore to Sports Authority of India (SAI) 
during 2015-16 for further release to J&K State Sports Council in two installments – (a) 60% 
immediately as first installment and (b) 40% after sited inspection and evaluation of the progress 
made. SAI has already released a sum of Rs. 30 crore to J&K State Sports Council. The J &K 
Government has been requested to intimate the progress report of each work so that arrangements 
could be made for site inspection and evaluation of the progress. Further funds to J&K State Sports 
Council will be released on the basis of progress of work. It will be endeavor of the Ministry that 
the allocation funds of Rs. 75 crore for enhancement of sports facility at J&K are fully utilize d by 
constantly monitoring the progress of work. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
The Committee finds that the amount allocation for this scheme to the tune of Rs. 2.00 
crore is not adequate and needs enhancement. At present there are 650 beneficiaries under this 
scheme. However, the slabs of different pension rates for beneficiaries require to be reviewed and 
readjusted suitably. 
(Para 29.1) 
Action Taken 
 
Budgetary allocation of Rs. 2 crore during current financial year for the Scheme of Pension 
to Meritorious Sportspersons is sufficient for disbursement of pension to the meritorious 
sportspersons, whose applications are received during the period 2016-17. In case more 
applications are received and it is felt that the allocated amount is not sufficient, the Ministry  
would ask for enhanced allocation at RE stage. The Department will separately examine the issue 
of revision of amount of pension under the Scheme.   
Recommendations/observations 

 
The Committee notes that Archery Association of India and Indian Amateur Boxing 
Federation have been suspended for not accepting Government Guidelines. These Sports possess 
potential medal winning prospects for Rio Olympics 2016. The Committee, therefore, desires from 
the Department to furnish details as to how the preparation/training and participation of players of 
suspended Sports Federations in International events would be handled ? 
(Para 30.6) 
Action Taken 
 
Although Archery Association of India have been de-recognized and Indian Amateur Boxing 
Federation have been suspended for not accepting Government Guidelines, this has not affected 
the preparations/training and participation of players in the International events such as Rio 
Olympics 2016. Sports Authority of India (SAI) takes on the responsibility of training/coaching 
requirements and competitive exposure of the sportspersons belonging to those sports disciplines, 
which  have either been de-recognized or suspended.  
  

 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee hopes that the enhanced allocations of funds in Budget Estimate of the 
current fiscal to the Ministry, though marginal, would not be reduced at the RE stage and the 
proposed objectives and key results of projects/schemes are achieved on time. By effective 
monitoring from the experience of the past, it has to be ensured for full and optimum utilization of 
allocated funds. The Committee desires that under the current level of allocations, the Ministry 
would also endeavour for expansion of assigned schemes. Besides, the Committee recommends 
that operational difficulties are tackled with requisite zeal and dedication. Moreover, the 
Committee is of opinion that follow-up for stepping up of allocations at revised stage also needs to 
be undertaken through concerted efforts. 
(Para 4.3) 
Action Taken 
 
The implementation of Schemes is being closely monitored to ensure timely and effective 
utilisation of the allocated funds, so that the intended objectives and results are achieved. The 
issues arising during the course of implementation of schemes are being resolved in a prompt and 
effective manner. The matter will be taken up at RE stage for stepping of allocations for the 
Department. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee notes that the Budget Allocations (BE) have been much lower than the 
Projected Demand, year after year. Not only that, the BE has often been reduced further at RE 
stage, not because of inability of the Department to utilize the funds, but due to budgetary 
constraints of the Government.  The utilization of funds in terms of actual expenditure has been 
consistently very high, year after year.  Even during last year, 94.8% of the Revised Estimates 
have already been spent by 15.03.2016 and the same is expected to reach close to 100% by end of 
year 2015-16. The Committee further notes that the pattern under Non-Plan is similar to Plan. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that allocation of the Departments is increased 
considerably at the RE stage of 2016-17.  The Committee would further like to underline the 
satisfactory performance of the Department in terms of utilization of funds.  Here the Committee is 
encouraged to observe, had the allocations been higher in line with the projected demands, the 
utilization and achievements also would have been still much better.    
(Para 5.5) 
 
  

Action Taken 
 
 The Department continues to strive for timely and effective utilisation of the allocated 
funds, for achieving the intended objectives. The matter will be taken up at RE stage for increase 
in the allocations for the Department. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee hopes that current structure of the Umbrella Scheme, which is a Central 
Sector Scheme, will achieve the desired results for what it has been meant for in the curre nt fiscal. 
It has been envisaged that by subsuming the standalone programmes which lack the ground 
presence, would be effectively leveraged by the administrative presence and structure of NYKS 
and NYC.  The key focus would be NYKS set up comprising NYKS offices and NYC volunteers 
as well as Youth Clubs. The Committee recommends that the Department will not leave anything 
unturned by taking all requisite initiatives to accomplish the target within the stipulated time frame 
and also overcoming all hurdles coming in the way of execution of the Umbrella Scheme so as to 
make it a note-worthy Central Sector Scheme. 
 
(Para 6.2) 
Action Taken 
 
 The Department is making and will continue to make all possible efforts to build and 
intensify synergies between different components of the umbrella scheme, namely, Rashtriya Yuva 
Sashaktikaran Karyakram (RYSK). This will help in improving the effectiveness of the 
programme implementation and its impact at field level. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee further notes that the difficulty has been that NYKS, due to its limited 
resources, has not been able to offer programmes to all the youth clubs. This time, under 
Neighbourhood Youth Parliament Programme, efforts are being made to involve all the youth 
clubs. An amount of Rs.1,200 per annum for each youth club has been provided for to enable the 
youth clubs to meet their contingent expenditure in connection with holding of neighbourhood 
youth parliament programmes. The Committee urges the Government to initiate pro-active steps to 
get this amount enhanced appropriately and at least making it double. 
 
(Para  7.6) 
Action Taken 
 
 The issue regarding finance assistance to youth clubs under ‘Neighbourhood Youth 
Parliament’ Programme, also came up for discussions in the meeting of the Board of Governors 
(BoG) of the NYKS held on 21.09.2016. The BoG of NYKS resolved to send recommendation to 
the Department of Youth Affairs for enhancing the assistance to youth clubs from Rs.1,200/- per 
annum to Rs.2,400/- per annum, since the Scheme was formulated by the Department and 
therefore, the necessary modifications will have to be done by the Department after obtaining the 

approvals as per laid down procedure. The Department will now take further necessary steps to 
seek approvals in this regard.   
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee intends to draw the attention of the Government that the amount of fund 
allocation at BE 2015-16 to the tune of Rs.33.00 crore was reduced to Rs.21.65 crore at the stage 
of RE due to less number of registered volunteers for imparting training/programme activities. The 
Committee is dismayed to note that almost the same scenario was noticed in BE 2014-15, wherein 
the allocated fund amounting to Rs.33.00 crore was reduced to Rs.22.46 crore at the RE Stage of 
2014-15 and that too for the same reason. The Committee, therefore, recommends that particularly 
in this fiscal, the Department would resort to all necessary measures to ensure that the required 
number of Volunteers are registered and the allocated fund is not slashed at the RE Stage for this 
reason. 
(Para 8.3) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 NYKS is making all possible efforts in this direction and it is expected that during the 
current year, the budget allocation will be fully utilized. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee, while dwelling upon the issue of honorarium to volunteers and increase in 
the number of volunteers per block, brings to notice of the Government the Committee's 
recommendations made vide 266th report of the Committee on the DFG 2015-16 for enhancing the 
honorarium @Rs.5000/- per month. The Committee can only reiterate its earlier view for 
enhancing the honorarium to volunteers as well as increasing the number of volunteers per block 
and relating to this the budgetary constraints would not be a hurdle as the allocated fund had got 
reduced in financial year 2014-15 as well as 2015-16 at RE stage for want of less number of 
registered volunteers. 
(Para 8.4) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 Considering the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee, the 
Honorarium of the NYC volunteers (now called National Youth Volunteers or NYVs) has been 
increased from Rs.2,500/- per month to Rs.5,000/- per month with effect from 1 st October, 2016.  
Regarding number of volunteers per Block, the Board of Governors of NYKS has recommended to 
increase the number of NYVs from 2 NYVs per Block to 4 NYVs per Block. This would have 
substantial additional financial implications, esp. considering that the Honorarium of the NYVs 
has also been doubled from 1 st October, 2016.  The matter will now be considered in the Ministry, 
since this a Scheme of the Ministry, which is implemented through NYKS. 
 
Recommendations/observations 

 
 The Committee notes that during last 3 years and current year, the budget allocation under 
this Head was meager Rs.2 crore per annum. In order to speed up the process of liquidating the 
liability, Non-plan budget allocation of Rs.5.00 Cr. has been proposed for BE 2016-17. Further, as 
regards the enhanced budget allocation of this scheme in Non-Plan side of the current fiscal, the 
Committee came to know that it has been provided for clearing long time pending huge liabilities 
from various State Govts on account of arrears and salaries of NDS Instructors as well as other 
incidental expenses. The Committee shows its serious concern to undertake sustainable all out 
measures to wind up the reimbursement process at the earliest. The Committee is highly 
constrained to recommend that a thorough probe be made so as to ensure the veracity of claims 
made by the various State Govts. Further a status note be made available to the Committee that by 
when in the continuing process of making reimbursement, the entire liability of making 
reimbursement would be completed. This is intriguing that even after more than forty four years 
since the transfer of the scheme in 1972, such a liability is continuing. 
(Para 13.3) 
Action Taken 
 
 Since National Discipline Scheme (NDS) is not a live Scheme, the only action at present is 
to reimburse expenditure incurred by States in respect of NDS Instructors that were transferred to 
them by Govt. of India, for which Govt. of India had agreed to reimburse the expenditure. There is 
a committed liability of about Rs.238 crores on this account. Necessary communication with States 
is being made to ascertain the veracity of the claims being made by them. Regarding one-time 
settlement, effort is being made to get the required additional allocation from the Ministry of 
Finance. The final outcome will depend on the response of the Ministry of Finance.  
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
The Committee observes that the “Khelo India” under the National Programme fo r 
Development of Sports (Umbrella Scheme) is yet to be formulated. However, the budgetary 
provision has been made in the current fiscal where out of eight schemes under this Umbrella 
Scheme, three schemes, viz., Urban Sports Infrastructure, Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan (erstwhile 
PYKKA) and National Sports Talent Search System have been subsumed. With a consolidated 
budgetary provision for Rs. 140 crore, the  Committee hopes that the Department would take 
adequate measures under the new regime to achieve the desired result for RGKA and apprise the 
Committee of the progress made in this regard.  
(Para 19.05) 
 
 
Action Taken 
 
A new Central Sector Scheme namely ‘Khelo India - National Programme for 
Development of Sports’ has already been introduced w.e.f  22.4.2016  for implementation from 
2016-17.  Khelo India Scheme has three components viz., competitions, talent and sports 
infrastructure.  
Objectives of the scheme are mass participation of youth in annual sports competitions through a 
structured competition, identification of talent, guidance and nurturing of the talent through 

existing sports academies and new set up either by the central Government or State Government or 
in PPP mode and creation of Sports Infrastructure at mofussil, Tehsil, District, State levels, etc.  
The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports will implement the Khelo India Scheme in consultation 
with the State Governments, Sports Authority of India and will apprise the Committee of the 
progress made.  
Recommendations/observations 
 
The Committee expresses its concern for National Physical Fitness Programme Resource 
Centre of LNUPE Gwalior and Scheme for Identification and Nurturing of Sports Talent for which 
the budget provision of Rs. 10 Lakh and Rs. 50 lakh have been made. However, as informed by 
the Department, these schemes are yet to be finalized. The Committee hopes that the magnitude of 
allocation of fund though may be less, the intended achievements are reached within the required 
time schedule. 
(Para  23) 
Action Taken 
 
The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports is still in the process of finalizing the National 
Physical Fitness Programme, in which various other stakeholders such as Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, State Governments etc., are also involved. Issue of setting up of National 
Physical Fitness Programme Resource Centre will be examined only after the National Ph ysical 
Fitness Programme is finalized. However, the issue of promoting mass participation in sports 
aiming at physical fitness of school going children and youth of the country is being taken care of 
under the other Schemes of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports the Sports Authority of India  
viz., Khelo India and Come & Play Scheme.  
As regards the Scheme for Identification & Nurturing of Sports Talent (INSTAL) by 
establishing District Level Sports Schools (DLSSs) in the country, the concept of INSTAL was 
changed in December, 2013. It was decided that instead of creating new DLSSs, the Schools 
already existing in the county with adequate sports infrastructure be explored with suitable 
methodology to identify the sporting talent amongst the students in those schools. Thus, the initial 
idea of establishing DLSSs for Identification & Nurturing of Sports Talent (INSTAL) was dropped 
and the same has been shelved. 
After General Elections to 16 thLok Sabha, the Hon’ble President of India, in his joint 
address to both the Houses of Parliament on 9 th June, 2014, had stated that his Government will 
launch a National Sports Talent Search System. Thus, the erstwhile INSTAL was modified and  
converted into National Sports Talent Search System (NSTSS), which was launched in February 
2015.  
While the follow up action for implementation of NSTSS scheme was being taken during 
2015-16, it was intimated by Finance Secretary in October, 2015 that the ongoing schemes in the 
Department may be suitably restructured as Central Sector Scheme. 
Hence, after a thorough review of schemes of Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan (RGKA), Urban 
Sports Infrastructure Scheme (USIS) and National Sports Talent Search Scheme (NSTSS), a new  
Central Sector Scheme viz., ‘Khelo India - National Programme for Development of Sports’ has 
been launched for implementation from the financial year 2016-17 onwards. Khelo India Scheme 
has three components viz., Search of talent  through competitions, grooming of the talent and 
providing sports infrastructure. The Scheme provides for mass participation of youth in annual 
sports competitions through a structured competition, identification of talent, guidance and 
nurturing of the talent through existing sports academies and new set up either by the central 
Government or State Government or in PPP mode and creation of Sports Infrastructure at Tehsil, 
District, State levels, etc.  

Thus, the original concept of INSTAL has now been incorporated as part of the Khelo 
India Scheme.   
Recommendations/Observations 
For Urban Sports Infrastructure, the Committee would like to note that Rs. 40 crore was 
allocated for the purpose in BE 2014-15 and it was reduced to Rs. 25 crore in RE 2014-15. The 
reduction was on account of non-receipt of UCs by the implementing agencies. An amount of R s. 
25 crore was kept in BE 2015-16 for this Scheme and it was enhanced to Rs. 60 crore at RE stage 
of the year 2015-16. The Committee is convinced to state that this is a very good scheme and 
hopes that the initiatives would be taken definitely by the Department of Sports so that allocated 
fund is not affected adversely during the RE stage of the current fiscal and proposed 
actitvities/works are achieved on time.  
(Para  24.1) 
Action Taken 
After a thorough review of schemes of Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan (RGKA), Urban Sports 
Infrastructure Scheme (USIS) and National Sports Talent Search Scheme (NSTSS), in terms of the 
Ministry of Finance’s D.O. Letter No.  32/PSO/FS/2015 dated 28 th October, 2015, a new Central 
Sector Scheme viz., ‘Khelo India - National Programme for Development of Sports’ has been 
launched for implementation from the financial year 2016-17 onwards. Thus, Urban Sports 
Infrastructure Scheme (USIS) stands subsumed in the newly introduced ‘Khelo India’ Scheme, 
which has three components viz., Search of talent  through competitions, grooming of the talent 
and providing sports infrastructure. The Scheme provides for mass participation of youth in annual 
sports competitions through a structured competition, identification of talent, guidance and 
nurturing of the talent through existing sports academies and new set up either by the central 
Government or State Government or in PPP mode and creation of Sports Infrastructure at Tehsil, 
District, State levels, etc.  
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee, as regards National Sports Talent Search Scheme (NSTSS), observes that this is a 
novel scheme wherein talent hunt is to be made for both boys and girls in the age group 8-12 years 
in schools all over the country. It was launched in 2014 and estimated expenditure for 5 years was 
worked out for Rs. 210 crore. The Committee hopes that the Department would take requisite 
initiatives to accomplish NSTSS within the stipulated time frame and all impediments coming in 
the way of execution of the scheme are taken care of effectively so as to make it a  worth-while 
scheme. 
(Para 25.1) 
Action Taken 
As stated in reply to Recommendation No. 23 above, the aims and objects of the National 
Sports Talent Search Scheme (NSTSS) has now been incorporated into the recently introduced 
Central Sector Scheme, known as “Khelo India - National Programme for Development of Sports” 
to be implemented during 2016-17. Under the Khelo India Scheme, the talented sportspersons 
from amongst the participants of the competition for the age group of above 6- under 12 and above 
12- under 18 at District, State and National Level will be identified through structured 
competitions.  
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee is appreciative of the intent of this scheme and notes the enhanced 
allocation in BE-2016-17, as compared to RE stage of year 2015-16. The Committee is of the 
opinion that the Department should not fail this time to fully utilize the fund so as to encourage 
and motivate the sportspersons for their achievements at the International events. The Committee 
is also of the firm view that complete transparency is maintained while giving special cash awards 
and the prescribed criteria are also adhered to strictly. 

(Para 28.1) 
 
Action Taken 
A budgetary allocation of Rs. 30 crore has been made for the Scheme of Cash Awards in 
the current financial year 2016-17 as compared to allocation of Rs. 24 crore made in the previous 
financial year  at RE stage. Amount allocated will be used towards giving cash awards to the 
medal winners in international sports events and their coaches, which will be done strictly in 
accordance with the provisions of the scheme of cash awards. The Department is quite hopeful of 
using the entire allocated amount for disbursement of cash awards to sportspersons and their 
coaches for the medals won during 2016-17 as well as for clearing the backlog of pending 
applications of cash awards after due verification of their achievements.     
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee is displeased to find that the allocation funds was reduced at the RE stage 
on account of receipt of less number of proposals. The Committee recommends that initiatives are 
taken by the Govt. to encourage and motivate the concerned prospective applicants as to fully 
utilize the allocation funds under this scheme during the current fiscal. 
(Para 31.01) 
Action Taken 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation. The Ministry will give wide publicity 
to the Scheme of Human Resource Development in Sports among Sports Authority of India, 
Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education, National Sports Federations, Indian Olympic 
Association etc., so that more applications from eligible applicants are received and the allocated 
grant of Rs. 5 crore is utilized.   
It is relevant to mention that SAI regularly avails of assistance under the Scheme of Human 
Resource Development in Sports for foreign training of its coaches, sports scientists and other 
support personnel.  
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee finds it disheartening that the allocation funds to the tune of Rs. 4.00 crore 
for this scheme was reduced to Rs. 2.10 crore at the RE stage of year 2015-16 and the de crease 
was proposed on account of lack and non-receipt of UCs at RE stage. The Committee, therefore,  
strongly recommends that efforts be made to fully utilize the allocated funds and lackadaisical 
approach should not be exhibited during quarterly review of this scheme affecting the reduction of 
allocated funds as was done during the year 2015-16. 
(Para 32.01) 
 
Action Taken 
Concerted efforts will be made to utilize the allocated amount of Rs. 4 crore for the 
Scheme of Sports & Games for Persons with Disabilities.   
Recommendations/Observations 
Through this report, the Committee wishes to reach out to all the Government as well as 
non-governmental organisations, including the public/private corporate sector and resident as well 
as non-resident Indians, to contribute for promotion of sports and games in the country. The 
Committee strongly recommends that the Department of Sports should play the nodal role in co-
ordinating with concerned organisations for getting the funds to NSDF. The Committee also 
suggests the Department of Sports to identify and use the services of celebrities/icons to publicize 
and boost the contribution to this funds. 
(Para 33.04) 
Action Taken 

For augmenting the contributions to NSDF, the Government is regularly interacting with 
CPSUs/PSBs for contribution to the NSDF. They are also encouraged to contribute to the NSDF 
under CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility). Further, the Ministry has decided to organize 
meetings with important PSUs in Delhi in association with the Department of Public Enterprises 
and also with PSBs in association with the Department of Financial Services for creating 
awareness about NSDF and their role in CSR in order to mobilize funds for NSDF. The Ministry 
has also written letters to CMDs of PSUs in Coal Sector, Petroleum Sector and Banks for 
contributing funds to NSDF. 
The Ministry will compile a list of potential donors both in the private sector and public 
sector. The Ministry will write to such potential donors requesting them to contribute to NSDF. 
The Ministry will also organize seminars/workshops in major cities to create awareness about 
NSDF. The Department will also depute its teams to potential donors explaining them about 
existence of NSDF and requesting them to contribute to NSDF. The Ministry will also prepare 
publicity material such as brochures, pamphlets, videos etc. about NSDF and distribute the same 
among donors. 
The Ministry has also taken note of the Committee’s suggestion  for identifying and u sing 
the services of celebrities/icons to publicize and boost the contribution to NSDF.  
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee is dissatisfied to note that total amount to the tune of Rs. 404.39 crore in 
BE 2015-16 was slashed to Rs. 345.82 crore and it was explained that the decrease in RE is based 
on progress of expenditure. Viewing the enormous task of sports development bestowed on SAI, 
the Committee shows its serious concern that BE 2016-17 amounting to Rs. 416.30 crore is not 
reduced at the RE stage. 
(Para 35.1) 
Action Taken 
Following table gives an account of the BE proposed for Sports Authority of India (SAI) 
for 2015-16, allocation made at BE Stage, expenditure made upto August 2015, expenditure made 
from September 2015 to March 2016, grant for SAI proposed at RE stage and grant allocated to 
SAI at RE stage for 2015-16. 
 
 
BE proposed 
2015-16 
Allocation att 
B.E. Stage : 
2015-16 
Exp. 
up to   
Aug 
2015  
Exp. 
from 
Sept 
2015 to 
March 
2016  
R.E 
proposed  
2015-16 
Allocation at R.E. Stage 
2015-16 
      
PLAN =  
436.17 
PLAN = 310.78 177.43 461.27 638.70 310.78 
NER =     
59.89 
NER = 35.00   25.35 85.20 110.55 35.00 
TOTAL= 
496.06 
Total 
PLAN=345.78 
202.78 546.47 749.25 345.78 
NON 
PLAN=69.40 
NON PLAN = 
58.61 
57.88 15.62 73.50 62.18 
TOTAL = 
565.46 
TOTAL     = 
404.39 
260.66 562.09 822.75 407.96 
 

As would be seen from the above table, it would be incorrect to infer that decrease in 
allocation to SAI at RE stage was based on progress of expenditure.  Allocation of Rs. 345.7 8 
crore under Plan for SAI at BE stage for 2015-16 was retained at same level at RE stage. 
Allocation under Non-Plan of Rs. 58.61 core for SAI at BE stage was increased to Rs. 62.18 crore 
at RE stage.  
As regards budget allocation of Rs. 416.30 crore (Rs. 345.30 crore under Plan and Rs. 
71.00 crore under No-Plan) for SAI for 2016-17, it is stated that entire allocated grant will be 
utilized and the Ministry will ask for additional funds at RE  Stage.  
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee notes that vacancy of coaches available in SAI and recommends that 
initiatives should be taken to fill up vacant post of coaches urgently, needed for every sports 
discipline and ensure that they get updation and exposure through foreign training regularly. The 
Committee expresses its serious concern that in absence of adequate competent coaches, we 
cannot compete with other nations at international sports events. 
 (Para 35.2) 
Action Taken 
Consequent upon approval of the competent authority in January 2011, the process to fill 
up the vacant posts of Assistant Coaches by direct recruitment were initiated in a phased manner 
keeping in view the requirement of coaches in various sports discipline at SAI Centres. During 
2013-2014 170 Assistant Coaches were recruited in the discipline of Archery, Athletics 
Badminton, Boxing, Cycling, Fencing, Hockey, Gymnastics, Judo, Kayaking & Canoeing, Rowing 
Shooting, Swimming & Diving, Taekwondo, Volleyball, Weightlifting, Wrestling and Wuhu. 
Further, SAI also recruited 90 coaches on contract basis in 2015 in view of the immediate 
requirement in various discipline at various SAI Training Centre. Three Para-Olympians were 
recruited on regular basis in 2013 and three Para-Olympians were recruited in January-February 
2016.  
The recruitment process for appointment of 180 more Assistant Coaches on regular basis in 
various sports disciplines is under way and the whole process (including inviting of the 
applications, scrutiny of applications, conducting of written test / skill test etc) for appointment / 
recruitment of Assistant Coaches is  likely to be completed by December, 2016.  
Concerns of the Committee to abreast the knowledge and exposure of in-house coaches to 
foreign training has been noted and efforts have been made to send the SAI coaches for Hig h 
Level Training Abroad.  Accordingly three coaches were sent for 2-Star Ce rtificate Course in 
Boxing at ALMATY (Khzakhstan) from 29 th February to 6 th March 2016 and six coaches were 
deputed for 1-Star Certificate Course in Boxing at Astana Khzakhstan from 12 th to 18th May 2016. 
Further, to upgrade and enhance the knowledge / skills of the coaches in sports sciences, 14 
coaches have been sent for 2-weeks Course at University of Birmingham (U.K) from 20 th August 
to 3rd September 2016.    
As far as training of elite Indian Sportspersons preparing for participation in International 
sports events is concerned, services of Indian and Foreign Coaches/Experts having proven track 
record at International level have been engaged through various schemes of the Ministry.  
Furthermore, under the Target Olympic Podium (TOP) Scheme and National Sports Development 
Fund (NSDF), elite sportspersons are also hiring the services of renowned Foreign 
Coaches/Experts as personal coaches. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
Visualising the enhanced allocation of fund amounting to Rs. 66.60 crore in the current 
fiscal, the Committee recommends that the initiatives would be taken to improve the quality of 

academic infrastructure and also the support to the students. Further, the training skills and 
administrative support to the students are also strengthened. 
(Para 36.1) 
Action Taken 
Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education (LNIPE) is taking initiatives to 
improve the quality of academic infrastructure and the support to the students. Further, the efforts 
are being made to strengthen the training skills and administrative support to the students. An 
amount of Rs. 45 crore has been allocated to the LNIPE, Gwalior and NERC, Guwahati in BE 
2016-17 under Plan and Rs. 21.60 crore under Non-Plan.  
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee hopes that Quantifiable deliverables/physical targets for NDTL concerning 
the samples to be tested as well as research papers are achieved on time. The Committee also 
expresses its satisfaction over the initiatives taken by NDTL for achieving drugs free sports 
environment to the extent possible. 
(Para 37.1) 
Action Taken 
National Dope Testing Laboratory (NDTL) is expected to achieve  all quantifiable 
deliverables/physical targets concerning the samples to be tested as well as publication of research 
papers.  
Recommendations/Observations 
 The Committee notes with anguish that this scheme is yet to be finalized.  The Committee, 
therefore, hopes that this scheme gets fully functional as envisaged in the plan during this fiscal. 
(Para 40.01) 
Action Taken 
 The progress with regard to setting up National Institute of Sports Coaching (NISC) is 
furnished below : 
 The proposal for setting up National Institute of Sports Coaching (NISC) was considered 
by the Expenditure finance Committee (EFC) on 12.09.2012.  It, inter alia, suggested that a 
detailed feasibility report containing the budgetary requirement, item-wise cost estimates, along 
with project viability, be brought before the EFC through a revised proposal.  As a follow-up to the 
observations of the EFC, Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports sought the assistance of National 
Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) for preparing a feasibility report, NSDC, in turn entrusted 
this task to M/s. Ernst & Young.  As the report was considered sub-standard, a te4n-Member 
Committee under the chairmanship pf Dr. L.S. Ranawat, Vice-Chancellor, Rajasthan Sports 
University, was constituted with the mandate to prepare a project viability report, keeping in view 
the observations of the EFC.  The Committee has since submitted its report, which is under 
consideration in the Ministry. 
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee notes that land has been allocated by the Government of Manipur and 
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Limited (HSCL), a Central Public Sector Undertaking has 
been selected as Project Management Consultant for getting up the University. The Committee 
feels that the various needs lacking for setting up of this University are addressed to in a 
sustainable manner to get the desired results. 
 (Para 41.2) 
Action Taken 
The work for setting up of National Sports University (NSU) in Manipur is progressing in 
an organized manner. The initial requirement was for 200 acres of land for the proposed 
University. However, keeping in mind the future expansion of the proposed University, 336.93 
acres of land at the Thoubal district of Manipur has been handed over by the State Government to 

this Ministry and the Hon’ble CM of Manipur has assured that another 34 acres of the site, which 
is under litigation, will be handed over shortly. As per advice of the Ministry of Finance, this 
Ministry can sanction uptoRs 50 crore for pre-investment activities, and Hindustan Steelworks 
Construction Limited (HSCL), appointed as Project Management Consultant (PMC) for the 
Project, has already started preliminary work on pre-investment activities at the site. Most 
importantly the Draft National Sports University Bill, 2016, which is to be placed in Parliament for 
setting up the proposed University, has been approved by the Hon’ble Ministry of Law and Justice. 
The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports will now send the Note for Cabinet and the Draft National 
Sports University Bill, 2016 for obtaining the approval of the Cabinet. 
 
  

 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee dwelt upon the establishment and administrative matters of NYKS and is 
intrigued to observe that the total sanctioned strength of NYKS is 2,273 posts, of which 1,463 
posts are filled-up at present (including 29 posts filled up temporarily by taking officers on 
deputation and 29 posts filled up temporarily through engagement of UNV-DYCs under the 
UNV/UNDP Project). The remaining 810 posts are vacant. The Committee expresses its serious 
concern that a major proportion of vacancies are in the category of District Youth Coordinators 
(DYCs) and Accounts Clerk-cum-Typists (ACTs).  This is adversely affecting work. The situation 
is currently being managed by giving additional charge of Districts to existing DYCs and ACTs.  
As most of the posts have remained vacant for over a year, the same have lapsed. The matter is  
being taken up with Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, for revival of the posts. 
Once approval of Ministry of Finance is received, steps will be taken for filling up of the posts. 
The Committee, therefore, extends its serious concern and obligates the Department to make 
follow up steps vigorously so as to get the approval of Ministry of Finance and take sustainable 
time-bound efforts for filling up the vacant posts. 
 
(Para 7.7) 
 
Action Taken 
 
 The matter is being pursued in a proactive manner for seeking the approval of the Ministry 
of Finance for revival of the posts that have lapsed. The matter was first taken up with Internal 
Finance Division (IFD) of the Ministry as per procedure, who had raised some queries. The 
queries have since been replied after obtaining information from NYKS. The matter is being 
followed up.  
 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the details of steps taken in  
follow up of the matter in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 The Committee impresses upon the Department of Youth Affairs to take up the issue of 
encroachments with the respective State Governments for removal of the encroachments from the 
youth hostels. The Committee takes a serious view of not holding the regular meetings of HMC.  
The Committee, accordingly, desires the Department to ensure that HMCs function as per the 

rules. Nevertheless, the Committee, appreciates initiatives that NYKS has been entrusted to work 
as field organization for the Department for closer interaction with State/ UT Governments under 
the newly evolved Umbrella Scheme (RYSK) of the Department. 
(Para 11.1) 
 
Action Taken 
 Youth Hostel scheme is joint venture between Centre and State Government wherein the 
ownership lies with the Centre but the physical possession is with the State Governments. The 
Ministry is requesting the State Governments repeatedly to get the Youth Hostels vacated from the 
unauthorized occupants, but it has not yielded results. The issue of encroachments is taken up 
regularly with the respective State Governments at all levels. Secretary, Department of Youth 
Affairs has also written to the Chief Secretaries of the concerned states for removal of the 
encroachments from the youth hostels. The Department will continue to impress upon the States to 
ensure that the Youth Hostels are used only for the purposes for which these were constructed.   
 
As per the Rule No. 14 of Youth hostel Manual, meetings of the Hostel Management 
Committees (HMCs), as far as possible, should be held in the Youth  Hostel once in six months. 
The HMCs are chaired by DMs/ Dy. Commissioners (in case of youth hostels in Districts) and by 
State Secretaries of Youth Affairs (in case of youth hostels at State HQs). The Department will 
continue to closely monitor this aspect, to ensure that HMC meetings are held regularly as per the 
rules.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is anguished to know that no progress has been made to remove the 
encroachments in Youth Hostels.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the Youth 
Hostel-wise extent and nature of encroachments and recommends to the Departmen t to 
make a roadmap of concrete action that should be taken by the Ministry to carry out the 
above task of removal of encroachments in pursuance of the Committee’s recommen dation.  
Further, the Committee would like to know how many times and the places where  as per the 
Rule No. 14 of regular meetings of HMCs have been violated in the past.   
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee is dissatisfied to note that the present budget allocation amounting to 
Rs.1.5 crore only in BE 2016-17 is adequate only for meeting the expenditure on account of the 
honorarium to the Managers and Wardens and for periodic minor face-lifting activities of the 
Youth Hostels.  The maintenance work is normally expected to be taken up out of revenues of the 
Hostels. The Committee understands that required maintenance of Youth Hostels are being done 
by the revenue generated internally and also assistance by State Governments, if any. The 
Committee desires to make available a status note in this context, covering financial details 
thereof. 
(Para 11.2) 
 
Action Taken 
 

 The details regarding expenditure incurred for repair/ renovations of youth hostels out of 
their own revenues or out of funds received from State Governments, are being collected. The 
details regarding funds provided by the Department of Youth Affairs, Government of India for 
repair/ renovation/ construction of youth hostels during since 2013-14 are as follows: 
 
2013-14 Total expenditure of Rs.87.35 lakhs was incurred, of which Rs.50.61 lakhs was 
released for completion of ongoing construction of youth hostel at Roing in 
Arunachal Pradesh and remaining Rs.36.74 lakhs was for construction of youth 
hostel at Khajuraho. 
2014-15 There was no expenditure on repair/ renovation/ construction of youth hostels. 
2015-16 Total expenditure of Rs.90.00 lakhs was incurred, of which Rs.52.34 lakhs was 
released for completion of ongoing construction of youth hostel at Roing in 
Arunachal Pradesh and the remaining amount was spent for face-lifting of youth 
hostels at Chennai, Thiruvananthapuram and Lucknow. 
2016-17 Total Rs.90 lakhs is earmarked for repair/ renovation/ construction of youth 
hostels, of which Rs.15 lakhs is earmarked for North-East Region. 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
 The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the 
expenditure incurred for repair/renovation of Youth Hostels out of their own revenues or out 
of funds received from the State Govts. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee notes that for Scouting and Guiding Organisation, the issue of adequacy of 
funds does not arise in the sense that this Department is not the only source of funds for the 
scouting and guiding organisations rather the funds are mobilised from other sources too. The 
utilisation of funds is closely monitored by obtaining performance reports, utilisation certificates, 
etc., as per laid down procedure. The Committee hopes that this Scheme of the Department will 
achieve the desired result in the current fiscal for what it has been meant for. 
(Para 12.1) 
Action Taken 
 
 The activities of the Scouting and Guiding Organisations are being closely monitored to 
ensure that they achieve the desired objectives.  
 
Comments of Committee  
 
 The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry has not given the details of steps 
taken by the government on the recommendations of the Committee.  The Committee would 
like to know the action taken by the Ministry in pursuant to Committee’s recommendation. 
 
Recommendations/observations 
 

 The Committee finds it a discouraging situation that this new scheme is not fully 
operational as envisaged in the light of budget provisions made during the last year. The 
Committee recommends that during the current fiscal proper operational processes are established 
and field staff gets the orientation about this new scheme. The Committee emphatically hopes that 
this Programme will get implemented in full swing and a progress report is made available in this 
regard to the Committee. The Committee also wishes for this Programme to become a novel one. 
 
(Para 14.1) 
Action Taken 
 
 All possible efforts are being made to improve the implementation of various components 
of National Young Leaders Programme (NYLP) during current financial year, with active 
involvement of NYKS and NSS.   
 
Comments of Committee 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the steps taken  by 
the Ministry in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation. 
Recommendations/observations 
 
 The Committee recommends that in view of the prevailing situation in NSS, there is an 
urgent need for substantial enhancement in budget allocations for NSS and the Department will 
take the requisite initiatives in this regard. On the other hand, the Committee further recommends 
for effective execution of this scheme so as to achieve the desired goals. The Committee also 
wishes that veracity of details of backlog expenditure incurred by the State Govts/UTs is 
ascertained by the Department and a status note be made available to the Committee, in this 
context. 
(Para 15.3) 
Action Taken 
 
 Despite the budgetary constraints, the target for NSS volunteer strength has been increased 
from 34 lakhs to 36 lakhs during the current year.  Efforts will continue to be made in future to 
further increase the target, subject to availability of budget.  The implementation of the programme 
is being closely monitored to ensure high quality of programme implementation. Funds are 
released only after satisfactory submission of utilisation certificates and progress reports, to 
eliminate the possibility of any misuse of funds. During 2016-17, funds are being released to only 
those States/ UTs who submit complete utilisation certificates and progress reports in respect of 
funds released upto 2015-16.  
 
Comments of Committee 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the timeli ne for 
completion of this task in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation. 
 
Recommendations/observations 

 The Committee is constrained to note that the allocation is still quite inadequate, in the 
context of the plan to make RGNIYD a Centre of Excellence in the field on youth development. In 
BE 2016-17, an allocation of Rs.30 crore (under Plan) has been proposed (as against Rs.20 crore 
during 2015-16). This higher allocation, the Committee hopes, will enable the Institute to take up 
larger number of programmes. Efforts are also needed to complete on-going infrastructure pr ojects 
and start utilising the facilities for the betterment of the Institute as also to initiate other necessary 
infrastructure projects. The Committee recommends that Department would endeavour for higher 
allocation of funds for RGNIYD than what is proposed in BE 2016-17 in order to bring about a 
significant upgradation in their infrastructure/ activities. 
(Para 16.2) 
 
Action Taken 
 The implementation of various initiatives is being closely monitored to ensure expeditious 
and optimal utilisation and available resources. Efforts will be made to obtain additional allocation 
at RE stage. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of all the steps taken by 
the Ministry with regard to close monitoring at their end in the matter. 
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee notes this with satisfaction that funds received from corporate entities, both 
in public sector and private sector, for contribution to National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) 
are being utilized for customized training of medal prospects for international sports events 
including Olympic Games, Commonwealth Games and Asian Games. The Committee also 
acknowledges the recent contributions made to NSDF from CSR as:- 
 India Infrastructure Company Limited (IIFCL):         Rs. 1000.00 Lakh 
 The Oriental Insurance Company Limited:   Rs. 5.82 Lakh 
 Bank of Baroda:     Rs. 100.00 Lakh 
 Bank of Maharashtra:      Rs. 10.00 Lakh 
 
Nevertheless, having ascertained the fact that till now the contribution of govt. of India is only to 
the tune Rs. 66.41 crore as against the contribution of Rs. 97.51 crore from various sources; the 
Committee recommends that the matching grant expected from the Govt. be made in this financial 
year itself. This will give a healthy message to all and sundry relating to contribution to NSDF. 
(Para 33.3) 
Action Taken 
Allocation of fund to various schemes in the Department of Sports depends on the overall 
allocation of fund to the Department. Budgetary allocation of Rs. 5 crore has been made in the 
current financial year for making contributing to National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) as 
Government’s matching share.  
As on 30.9.2016, NSDF has received contributions to the tune of Rs. 97.46 crore from 
corporate entities and individuals.  The Government has contributed Rs. 76.44 crore to NSDF as 
its matching contribution to the Fund. 
The Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports will endeavour to  ensure tha t Government’s 
matching grant is made in the next financial year. 
Comments of the Committee 

 
The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee would like to be appr ised of the 
concrete action so as to fulfill the commitment of the Government made for matc hing grant 
to NSDF.  Otherwise the basic objective of the programme shall get defeated. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
Given to understand that this scheme is yet to be finalized, the Committee emphasizes that 
concerted efforts are made to get the desired results in the current fiscal for what it has bee n meant 
for. If the scheme fails to get going as envisaged, the veracity of scheme formulation becomes 
questionable. It also does not augur well on the very basis of proposing new viable schemes by the 
Government. 
 (Para 39.1) 
Action Taken 
Concerted efforts are being made to make the Indian Institute of Sports Science and 
Research (IISSR) functional.  
Meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for setting up of IISSR was held on 
04.06.2015. EFC, inter alia, approved the proposal and directed that the Project would be spread 
under the 12th and 13th Five-Year Plans. The EFC also directed that a Cabinet Note be prepared for 
setting up of IISSR and its manpower requirement be sent to the Personnel Wing of the 
Department of Expenditure. In pursuance of the directives of the EFC, a Draft Cabinet Note was 
sent to the Ministry of Finance and the same has been approved by the Ministry of Finance. 
Further necessary follow-up action is being taken for obtaining approval of the Cabinet. In the 
meantime, the manpower requirement of IISSR has been projected for approval to the Personnel 
Wing of the Department of Expenditure. 
Comments of Committee 
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the action 
taken by Ministry to carry out the above task.  Also, the Ministry should fix timeline for 
completing this task. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
The Committee notes with anguish that this scheme is yet to be finalized. The Committee, 
therefore, hopes that this scheme gets fully functional as envisaged in the plan during this fiscal. 
(Para 40.01) 
Action Taken 
The progress with regard to setting up National Institute of Sports Coaching (NISC) is furnished 
below: 
 The proposal for setting up National Institute of Sports Coaching (NISC) was considered 
by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 12.09.2012. It, inter alia, suggested that a 
detailed feasibility report containing the budgetary requirement, item-wise cost estimates, along 
with project viability, be brought before the EFC through a revised proposal. As a follow-up to the 
observations of the EFC, Ministry of Youth Affairs  & Sports sought the assistance of National 
Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) for preparing a feasibility report, NSDC, in turn, 
entrusted this task to M/s. Ernst &Young. As the report was considered sub-standard, a T en-
Member Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. L.S. Ranawat, Vice Chancellor, Rajasthan 
Sports University, was constituted with the mandate to prepare a project viability report, keeping 
in view the observations of the EFC. The Committee has since submitted its report, which is under 
consideration in the Ministry. 
  

Comments of the Committee 
 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the timeline  for 
completion of this task in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
The plea of the Department of Sports that due to lack of wherewithal to maintain data base 
of medal winning sportsperson in national and international sports events employed in 
Central/State Government offices, their Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies etc., 
against sports-quota vacancies is unacceptable. Since the Department has sought more time to 
prepare the data base, the Committee hopes that by the middle of this year this target is achieved 
and the Committee is apprised accordingly. 
 (Para 42.1) 
Action Taken 
The Department of Sports has sought information in a prescribed proforma about the medal 
winning sportsperson in national and international sports events employed in Central/State 
Government offices, their Public Sector Undertakings/Autonomous Bodies etc., against sports-
quota vacancies but only a few Ministries/Departments, Public Sector Undertakings have 
submitted the information. The Ministry will again write to them for furnishing the desired 
information. The Ministry will compile the information and apprise the Committee of the same.  
Comments of Committee 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the further 
developments in the matter. 
 
 
**** 
 
 