187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
HUNDRED EIGHTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE HUNDRED SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2006-2007 (DEMAND NO. 55)
 OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION AND LITERACY
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 1ST MARCH, 2007)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 1ST MARCH, 2007)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA)
 
 
CONTENTS
 
1.      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.      PREFACE .
3.      REPORT .
CHAPTER I      Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the        
Government.   
CHAPTER II                  Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
                        desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply
CHAPTER III
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
                        the Government have not been accepted by the Committee .
CHAPTER IV
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of    the
                        Government are still awaited
4.      OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE.       
5.      MINUTES
6.      ANNEXURES
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HRD
(2006-07)
     
1
        Shri Janardan Dwivedi            --            Chairman
 
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
 
2
        Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3        Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4        Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5        Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6        Shri Uday Pratap Singh
7        Shrimati Brinda Karat
8        Shri S. Anbalagan
9        Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
10    Shri Ali Anwar
 
LOK SABHA
 
11    Shri Ashok Argal
12    Shri Basudeb Barman
13    Shri Harishchandra Chavan
14    Shri Harisinh Chavda
15    Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan
16    ^Shri R.L. Jalappa

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
17    Shri Ramswaroop Koli
18    Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar
19    ##Shri Manjunath Kunnur
20    Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
21    Smt. Archana Nayak
22    Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
23    Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
24    #Shri M. Raja Mohan Reddy
25    Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
26    Shri Chengara Surendran
27    Dr. Meinya Thokchom
28    Shri K. Virupakshappa
29    #Dr. Kunwar Devendra Singh Yadav
30    *Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
31    @Shri Rahul Gandhi
32    @Shri Ram Lakhan Singh
 
^ Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f .28.11.2006
## Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f. 31.8.2006
# Ceased to be a member of the committee w.e.f. 25.09.2006
* nominated w.e.f. 25.09.2006
@ nominated w.e.f. 10.10.2006
(i)
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji, B., Committee Officer
 
(ii)
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Human Resource Development, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this
Hundred Eighty-seventh Report on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in its Hundred Seventy-third Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 55) of the Department of School Education and
Literacy for the year 2006-07.
 
2.
                              The Hundred Seventy-third Report of the Committee was presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 22 nd May, 2006. Replies of the Government to the recommendations/observations
contained in this Report, were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 25th January, 2007.
 
3.                              The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on 25th January, 2007.
NEW DELHI;
January 25, 2007
Magha 5, 1928(Saka)
JANARDAN DWIVEDI Chairman,
 Department-relatedParliamentary Standing Committee on  Human Resource Development
 
(iii)
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee contains response/comments of the Committee on the actions taken by the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in its One Hundred Seventy-third Report onDemands for
Grants (Demand No.55) of the Department of Elementary Education and Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development for the year 2006-2007.
 
2.         Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in its 173
rd Report have been categorized as follows:
 
(i)                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
3.14, 3.15, 3.17, 3.18, 3.19, 3.22, 3.23, 4.3, 4.4, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 8.4, 8.5, 9.5, 9.6,  
9.7, 10.7, 11.2
(Chapter I) Total – 19

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
 
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
2.7, 3.4, 3.5, 3.8, 3.10, 3.13, 4.5, 10.8, 12.3
             (Chapter II)  Total – 09
 
(iii)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
2.5, 2.6, 3.6, 3.7, 3.16, 3.21, 4.8, 4.9, 5.4, 5.5, 5.9, 6.5, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 12.2, 12.4
 (Chapter-III)  Total - 22
(iv)              Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:
                  5.6
                (Chapter-IV)  Total -1
CHAPTER - I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
 
III.            SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN (SSA)
Recommendations/Observations
3.14     Supply of free textbooks is a major initiative for girls and children of weaker section under SSA.  The Committee notes that against a target of 6.14 crore students to be distributed free textbooks, achievement level has
been 5.35 crores i.e. 87% by December, 2005.  However, as per the state-wise figures made available to the Committee, status of distribution of free textbooks in the following states cannot be considered satisfactory:-
 
State
Target
Achievement
Andhra Pradesh 3,66,034 1,29,226
Bihar 41,82,188 10,81,138
Gujarat 4,87,074 3,67,500
Haryana 14,49,223 6,49,814
Jharkahand 29,56,123 0
Punjab 17,04,816 14,42,413
Utteranchal 6,37,941 5,01,548
West Bengal 36,92,428 19,98,420
 
The Committee was informed that due to delay in finalization of tender for free textbooks by the State Government, eligible students of Jharkhand were deprived of free textbooks.  The Committee hopes that before the start of
the next academic session, free textbooks would be available for the students.  The Committee also recommends that the Department should pursue the fulfillment of this target with the concerned State Governments.
Action Taken
            The department has noted the recommendation of the committee for compliance. The issue of timely distribution of free textbooks has been taken up with States/UTs in several ways such as meetings and workshops at the
National and Regional levels, in the meetings of the Executive Committees etc. The status of distribution of free textbooks in the year 2006-07 has improved in all States, including the eight listed in the Committee’s report.
Recommendations/Observations
3.15     To provide additional teachers to the existing schools with inadequate teacher strength is another important component of SSA.  The Committee notes that out of 7.72 lakh teachers sanctioned, 4.92 (64%) lakh teachers
have been appointed by December 2005.  Court cases and enforcement of model code of conduct were the main constraints faced by states like Rajasthan, MP, Bihar, Chattisgarh, W. Bengal and Andhra Pradesh which has
delayed the process of recruitment of teachers in these states.  The Committee has, however, been given to understand that these problems have been resolved and recruitment process is ongoing/completed or some interim
arrangements have been made.  The Committee notes that this problem continues to bethere in some other States like Goa, Manipur, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry where inspite of teachers being sanctioned, not even a single
teacher has been appointed  till date. Position is also very discouraging in states like Mizoram, Jharkhand, Manipur, Sikkim, Chandigarh and Dadra & Nagar Haveli.   The Committee is of the view that the Centre should continue
pursuing with all these State Governments, the issue of appointment of sanctioned teachers without any further delay.   Under SSA, it is also envisaged that teachers are exposed to annual in-service training.  The Committee was
informed that out of 89,60,745 teachers, training of only 24,02,566 teachers could be completed/in progress as on 31.12.05 The Committee feels that teacher training has not been given the due importance.  The Committee would
like to point out that only trained teachers would be in a position to give a direction to our future generation.  Hence, teacher training should be taken up in a mission mode.
Action Taken
(a) As per latest report the Union Territory of Daman & Diu recruited 95% teachers against the sanctioned post. Goa and Manipur alongwith Pondichery started the SSA programme late. The States/UT’s have been instructed to
expedite filling of teacher post sanctioned under SSA and this is being monitored monthly. Similarly the State of Mizoram, Jharkhand, Sikkim and Dadar & Nagar Haveli reported recruitment of 100%, 82%, 85% and 69%
respectively as on 31
st March 2006, which shows better progress.
(b) In the year 2005-06, overall progress in annual in service training was 77 percent, while the achievement in induction training and training of untrained teachers was 56 and 65 percent respectively. The recommendation of the

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
Committee regarding teacher training is noted for compliance.
Recommendations/Observations
3.17     The fact that more than a crore (1,34,59,734) children in the age-group of 6-14 years are still reeling under the stigma of illiteracy is an area of great concern and the Department needs to brace itself to cover these left-
outs.  The Committee finds that Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Jharkhand are still to go a long way to bring every child in school.  The Committee recommends that the Department take up
the matter with these states urgently and make special arrangements for education with them.  In fact, the Committee desires that this special arrangement be made for all the twelve states where percentage of out of school
children is more than the national level
Action Taken
            The Department has taken up the matter of enrolment of all out-of-school children with all States and UTs during the national level review meetings of Project Approval Board (PAB) meetings, national level review
meetings with Education Secretaries and State Project Directors of SSA, State-specific review meetings etc. Each State/UT has provided a commitment during the PAB meeting to address this issue very seriously.  The 5 States of
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan have been treated as Special Focus States since they have almost 69% of all out of school children in the country.  These States have been allocated higher
outlays for improving school infrastructure, appointment of teachers and strategies for ‘out of school’ children.  During 2006-07, 51% of the total outlays under SSA have been allocated to these 5 States. 
            Most States/UTs have carried out intensive enrolment drives to enroll all younger children.  A large number of residential and non-residential bridge courses have been planned during 2006-07 to enroll older children and
children in difficult circumstances before they can be mainstreamed into regular school.  The opening of 64330 new schools sanctioned in 2006-07 would also help in reducing the out of school children.  The State-wise targets
enrolment of out of school children through Education Guarantee Scheme and Alternative Innovative Education centre (EGS & AIE) are as follows: -
S.No. State/UT Target (No. of children) 2006-07
1 Bihar 12.66  lakhs
2 Uttar Pradesh 0.37   lakhs
3 West Bengal 1.47   lakhs
4 Madhya Pradesh 0.25  lakhs
5 Rajasthan 2.61  lakhs
 
The remaining children would be directly mainstreamed in to schools.
Recommendations/Observations
3.18     The Committee notes that the Department has targeted 48 districts with highest number of out of school children with specific interventions for the year 2006-07.  The Committee appreciates this proposal of the
Department and at the same time desire that the Department must come out with innovative techniques to ensure that once a child is enrolled, he does not drop out.  The Department needs to take stock of the situation because it
has been noticed by the Committee that though enrolment ratio in schools is quite impressive, drop-out rates are equally discouraging.   Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Manipur, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Sikkim
and Tripura have higher drop-out rates (class 1-V) when compared with the All India average of 31.47 %.   The Committee strongly feels that effective and urgent action has to be initiated to reduce the drop-out rates. 
Action Taken
            48 districts with more than 50,000 out of school children have been targeted as special focus districts during 2006-07.  States/UTs have proposed Annual Work Plans for these districts more intensively and reflected the
entire infrastructure gap (new schools, school buildings, additional classrooms and additional teachers in their AWPs.
            The AWPs of these 48 districts were scrutinized individually during the appraisal for these districts to close the infrastructure gap.  The strategies and targets for out of school children have also been augmented whenever
required.
            The goal of reducing dropout has received highest priority under SSA since 2005-06.  District wise dropout rates have been worked out and States/UTs are implementing several strategies for dropout reduction.  These
include tracking children’s attendance, strategies for improving quality of education especially for improved learning outcomes of children, remedial teaching, mobilization of parents and community to prevent dropouts etc.
Specific strategies for more vulnerable groups eg. Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya (KGBV) for adolescent girls, seasonal hostels and work-site schools for migrating children and uniforms for girls (under the National
Programme for Education of Girls at Elementary Level, NPEGEL) are also helping to retain children in schools.
            The opening of more upper primary schools also will contribute to higher transition from primary to upper primary stage, thus preventing dropouts after class IV/V.
Recommendations/Observations
3.19     The Committee is of the view that states having the maximum number of out of school children and also having a higher drop out rate need to be focussed more.    The Committee notes that though the Mid-Day Meal is
one of the major attraction for children and it has to some extent even increased the enrolment in the schools.   But the SSA needs more interventions such as inclusion of sports as an integral part of the syllabus, so as to maintain
the interest of children.   This would not only make school attractive but also prepare the children psychologically as well as physically strong to feel motivated to go to schools.   Another intervention, according to the
Committee, should be to make anti-child labour campaign an integral part of SSA.   The Committee feels that social mobilization programme to check child labour could help in withdrawing the children engaged as labourers to
alternate sources of education.  The INDUS project is a welcome step in this direction and the Committee appreciates the Department’s association with this project.  The Committee opines that eradication of child labour should
become one of the prominent objectives of SSA so as to ensure inclination of the society towards educational needs of the children. A step in this direction could be to work in coordination with the Ministries of Labour and
Social Justice and Empowerment.             
Action Taken
            As mentioned in para 3.17 States and districts with large number of out of school children have been specifically targeted for appraisal of Annual Work Plan (AWP), specific review and capacity building for
implementation of strategies for out of school children.  States and UTs have been advised to give importance to sports and physical education (As per Annexure-VII
). 
            Several initiatives are being implemented in States and UTs to enroll working children into regular schools or Alternative Education Centres.  This work is being done in collaboration with the Labour Department that has

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
the primary responsibility of withdrawal of children from work. The good practices in some of the States of coordinated efforts of Education Department/SSA and Labour Department and other agencies in targeting child labour
has been shared with other States in several workshops.  SSA is also supporting the National Child Labour Project (NCLP) by providing textbooks, teacher training and also facilitating mainstreaming from NCLP schools to
regular schools.
            The Mid Day Meal Scheme that presently covers the entire country (12 crore children) has greatly contributed to retention of children.
            All States and UTs have now shifted focus from mere enrolment to retention and this is reflected in the Annual Work Plans (AWPs) that identify strategies for retention of children.
            The Department maintains close association with the Ministries of Labour and Social Justice & Empowerment. 
            Recently all State Project Directors of SSA have been advised to take up challenge of enrolment of children who may be withdrawn through the efforts of the Labour Department from Dhabas, tea stalls and restaurants as
well as from domestic work in view of these occupations being notified as hazardous under the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986.
Recommendations/Observations
3.22     The Committee observes that under SSA there are already a number of components which take care of infrastructure to be in place at schools and also required number of teachers.  The Committee would, however, like to
point out lack of qualified teachers and also their low motivation level fail to attract and retain students.  In service training at regular intervals can successfully fill this gap.   More emphasis is required to be made on the training
component under SSA.   The Committee understands that the Department with the help of NCERT has recently operationalised a quarterly quality monitoring system.   The Committee feels that with all these measures, things
should improve.  Perhaps what is required now is an element of accountability and sense of involvement by all concerned.
Action Taken
            SSA places great emphasis on preparing  teachers for teaching, by building their capacities through a series of training programmes. The Scheme provides for regular 20-day in service training for every teacher every year,
along with facilities for 30 day training for newly recruited teachers and 60 day training for teachers that have not received pre service training. The main objectives of teacher training under SSA are to a) train teachers on
curricular transaction, content upgradation, pedagogy and contextual issues related to Elementary Education b) provide training to untrained/newly recruited teachers on a continuous basis and c) Strengthen capability of Block
Resource Centers/Cluster Resource Centers for providing academic resource support to teachers. About 7200 Block Resource Centers and 66,000 Cluster Resource Centers have been established across the country to decentralize
the provision of academic resource support to teachers and help their performance.
Training is generally not provided at a stretch but is staggered through the year .The cascade model of training is most frequently used. Institutional training is imparted at the BRCs/DIETs and follow up training is mostly
at the level of BRCs/CRCs.States are now also using the distance mode (through teleconferences, self learning print /audio/video material etc) for training teachers.
Teachers without professional pre service qualification are being sponsored by States (like Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and North Eastern States) for acquiring professional training through the certificate
courses run by IGNOU and Madhya Pradesh Bhoj Open University  in collaboration with the State governments concerned. The duration of these courses varies between six months to two years.
In 2005-06,Rs. 63058.48 lakhs was allocated for teacher training under SSA.In 2006-07; the amount is Rs. 63691.27 lakhs.
SSA recognizes the close relationship between the schools and the local community and promotes community based monitoring and teacher support in several ways. There is a provision of training upto eight community
members in every village for their role in such monitoring and school support. This will bring about accountability of the school towards the local community.States are using the provisions of the Panchayati Raj Acts to facilitate
transfer of authority and responsibility for school functioning to the local PRIs, Parent Teacher Associations / Village Education Committees or School Management Committees.  This trend will lay the foundation for a
constructive and proactive role by the local community in making schools function better and helping teachers discharge their duties more faithfully.
Recommendations/Observations
3.23            Teachers at primary and upper primary level under SSA are supposed to possess NCERT prescribed qualifications.   However, ground realities seem to be quite different.    The Committee has been observing that in
order to meet the increasing demand of teachers, they are being recruited on temporary basis.   In some states, such teachers have gone to Courts.   The Committee is of the firm opinion that alongwith the fulfillment of targets,
quality aspect also needs to be given its due importance. The Committee does not share the Department’s explanation that a two-month in-service training is sufficient to enable these para-teachers qualified enough to undertake
the task of teaching. The Committee recommends that the Department take initiatives to stop this type of ad-hocism. The Committee opines that in the event of unavoidable appointment of para-teachers it should be ensured that
they are qualified to be appointed as teachers. The Committee recommends that such teachers may be given better emoluments.  It would not be out of context to point out that since Education is on Concurrent List, the Centre
can prevail upon the States in the larger interest of education and the society.
Action Taken
 
            SSA supports State Governments in funding teacher salaries only as per norms of 2 teachers for every new primary school, 3 teachers for every new upper primary school and additional teachers to improve teacher-pupil
ratios to 1:40.  The terms and conditions of recruitment of schoolteachers are set by the respective State Governments concerned as the State governments need to sustain the teacher salary component after closing of the SSA
funding from the Central Government. Present estimates show that only 8% of the total elementary school teachers in the country are local teachers on contract.
            As indicated in the reply to para 3.22, SSA places great emphasis on building capacities of teachers through various types of training. Teachers without professional pre service qualification are being sponsored by States
(like Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, NE States etc.) for acquiring professional training through the certificate courses offered by IGNOU.  Madhya Pradesh is supporting the training of its contract teachers without pre service
qualification, through a two year distance learning programme offered by MP Bhoj Open University. Currently, nearly 1 lakh teachers are enrolled in this programme in Madhya Pradesh. Thus, States are making special efforts to
enable such teachers acquire professional qualification.
IV.            NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT TO PRIMARY EDUCATION (MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME)
 
Recommendations/Observations
4.3       The Committee welcomes the enhancement in cooking cost as this would bring an improvement in the variety and quality of the food served.  However, the Committee has its doubts about the matching contribution
required from the States/UTs.  The Committee desires that the Department should prevail upon all the States/UTs to give their share towards cooking cost.  Further, the Committee is a little worried about the impact this little

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
enhancement would have on the variety and quality of the meal served.  The Committee is of the opinion that even the increased Central assistance towards cooking cost is not adequate.  The Committee understands that there are
other Ministries/Departments that are implementing other schemes for providing nutritious food to our children.  The Committee recommends that convergence and close coordination may be brought among these schemes so as
to have the best results.
Action Taken
            Under the revised scheme of June, 2006, the norm for cooking cost is minimum of Rs. 2 per child per school day, cost breakup of which worked out in August, 2005, is given below: -
 
Food Item
Quantity in grams Cost of Qty. Recommended
(in Rs.) Calories
Protein content in grams
Foodgrains (Wheat/Rice) 100 Supplied free 340 8
Pulses 20 0.50 70 5
Vegetables (incl. leafy) 50 0.50 25 0
Oil & Fat 5 0.25 45 0
Salt & Condiments -- 0.10 -- --
Fuel -- 0.20 -- --
Labour & other administrative charge -- 0.40 -- --
Total --    1.95 480 13
  Minimum
Rs. 2
Minimum 450 Minimum 12
 
Of the above norm of Rs. 2 per child per school day, Central assistance to NER States is Rs. 1.80 per child per school day and Rs. 1.50 for other States/UTs. The States/UTs are accordingly required to make following minimum
contribution: -  
i.                     States of NER:       20 paise
ii.                   Other States/UTs:  50 paise.
            It is mandatory for the States/UTs to ensure that they provide the minimum contribution and that their budgetary allocation for the MDM programme (Plan & non-Plan) is not reduced below the level of BE 2005-06. This
is being checked by the Department at the time of releasing funds.
            There is convergence with the School Health Programme implemented by the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). Under the NRHM, children would be provided regular health checkup and micronutrients
supplementation & de-worming medicines.   
Recommendations/Observations
4.4       The Committee however, is apprehensive of the quality, variety and hygiene of the food served under the scheme  in view of the fact that there are many reported and unreported cases of children falling ill after taking
their mid-day meal.  Such incidents take away the spirit out of the scheme.  On a specific query about cases of irregularity notice in MDM scheme, the Department has given details of instances which have taken place in some
states during 2005-06.   All these cases indicate diversion misuse of foodgrains by those very authorities which were responsible for implementation of the scheme.  The Committee  would like to have full details of all these cases
alongwith the follow up action taken  thereon.   The Committee wonder, that inspite of such well-planned monitoring mechanism how such instances could have taken place.   The Committee can only conclude that monitoring
and surprise inspections need to be done vigorously.   The Department needs to be more proactive instead of acting only after receipt of complaints.   
Action Taken
            As regards quality, variety & hygiene aspect, detailed guidelines have been issued to the States, relevant extract of which is given at Annexure-VIII. Department is continuously urging the States to follow these simple
principles to ensure that good quality meals are available to children. 
 
        Certain irregularities regarding implementation of the Scheme had come to the notice of the Department. An Action Taken Report on the same is given at Annexure-IX.
 
        Following important monitoring mechanism are in place: -
(i)
                  Quarterly Progress Report seeking information on important parameters of the scheme, such as number of children availing mid-day meal, foodgrains lifted, funds utilized, availability of pucca kitchen-cum-store etc.
 
(ii)                Food Corporation of India which supplies Fair Average Quality foodgrains also has established mechanism of joint inspection of foodgrains with the State officials.
(iii)               Steering cum Monitoring Committees are constituted at State, District and Block level to supervise and monitor the MDM programme.
(iv)              States have also been advised to undertake regular inspection, on an average 25% of the primary schools, every quarter.
 
            In addition to above, States have been requested to display in each school, information under the Right to Information Act.  Such information would include–
 
(i)                 Quantity of food grains received, date of receipt.
(ii)               Quantity of food grains utilized
(iii)             Other ingredients purchased, utilized
(iv)              Number of children given mid day meal.
(v)                Daily Menu
(vi)     Roster of Community Members involved in the programme.

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
VI.            DISTRICT PRIMARY EDUCATION PROGRAMME (DPEP)
Recommendations/Observations
6.2       The Committee notes that at present DPEP is in operation in 7 States viz. Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Orrisa, U.P, Uttranchal and West Bengal covering 104 districts.  As the programme will complete its term in four
more states on 31.3.2006, DPEP will be in operation in three states only viz. Rajasthan, Orissa and West Bengal during 2006-07. The detailed targets and achievement under DPEP till last financial year is as under:
                Cumulative Targets and Achievements 2005-06
(DPEP)
Sl. No. Item Cumulative Target upto 2005-06 Cumulative Achievement upto 30.9.2005 % Achievement
1. School Opened 6894 5781 84
2. Total No. of Teachers Appointed 25128 22671 90
3. Total number of children to whom free Text Books distributed 7711511 2973991 39
4. In-service training of teachers (no. of trainee days) Teacher Training 1329570 867588 65
5. Number of toilet constructed 40465 31033 77
6. No. of Drinking water facility provided 21213 10417 49
7. No. of additional classroom constructed 34159 23969 70
8. Civil works no. school buildings constructed 15516 9854 64
 
Recommendations/Observations
6.3       The Committee takes note of the targets and achievements made under DPEP till the year 2005-06.  The Committee notes that as per the table given above the achievements of the Department as such is not very
impressive, especially as regards free text book distribution, in service training of teachers, drinking water facility.  The Committee recommends the Department to undertake sincere steps to achieve the targets fixed under DPEP.
Action Taken
            Presently the DPEP programme is in operational in three States i.e. Rajasthan, Orissa and West Bengal covering 22 districts. The detail state-wise cumulative targets and achievement under DPEP for the year 2005-06 is
enclosed (Annexure-XI). There is substantial improvement in achieving the targets during the year 2005-06 which may be seen in Annexure-XI  enclosed.
Recommendations/Observations
6.4       The Committee is further at a loss to find out the level of achievements against the various targets fixed for 2005-06, particularly in respect of Bihar, Jharkhand, UP and Uttaranchal whose project period was completed on
31.3.2006.   The Committee is not happy with the  attempt of the Department to give data on targets and achievements in cumulative format as this prevents the Committee from drawing conclusive inference. The Committee
recommends the Department to give data on targets and achievement on yearly basis.
Action Taken
The progress of State of Bihar, Jharkhand, U.P. and Uttaranchal for the year 2005-06 is Annexure-XI enclosed.
VIII.    MAHILA SAMAKHYA
Recommendations/Observations
8.4       The Committee is dismayed to note that the Department could not even spend the reduced allocation as its total expenditure which has been a mere Rs.19.00 crore.    The Committee is more astonished to see that despite
non-utilization, the States getting the grants have more or less achieved the targets fixed, in some cases, the targets have been surpassed over and above the limit.   The Committee fails to understand this phenomenon and would
like to be enlightened.
Action Taken
            The RE for the year 2005-06 was initially reduced at Rs.24.00 crores but later had to be reduced to 19.00 crores which was fully utilized by the MS programme.  The main reasons for reducing the allocation, as already
informed to the Committee, were (i) delay in expansion proposal in two additional States and in 20 additional districts in the existing MS States, (ii) the process of registration of independent MS Societies in Bihar and Jharkhand
also could not be completed as expected and (iii) the MS programme in Madhya Pradesh and Chhatisgarh is now posed to start only from 2006-07.No State has fully achieved or surpassed all the targets set for 2005-06.  Targets
were more or less achieved or even surpassed, in some programme activities, for the following reasons:
 
i)
                    Most of the activities of Mahila Samakhya like training etc. are conducted at the cluster and village level where voluntary resource support is provided by panchayati raj institutions and sangha women help bring
down costs. Surplus funds are then utilized in conducting more training programmes than were originally envisaged.
ii)                   In accordance with the MS 10th Plan guidelines, about 75 to 150 additional villages in the older districts have to be covered through the MS federations and this coverage is not funded through the MS programme.
Thus, expansion of coverage to new villages in old districts becomes possible without entailing expenditure from MS programme funds.
iii)                 State MS Societies implement a number of other Government schemes like KGBV, SSA (NPEGEL) and Adult Education schemes whose objectives are convergent with MS programme objectives.   Since MS staff is
involved in implementation of these schemes, the targets are reflected as MS targets though these are funded from KGBV, SSA (NPEGEL) and Adult Education schemes.   As such, achievement of targets in KGBV,
NPEGEL and Adult Education by State MS Societies are unrelated to funding from the MS programme itself.
iv)                 In AP and Assam, most of the training activities were held at mandal or cluster level which led to less expenditure in terms of food and travel of the participants. Also, for training programmes, govt. or panchayat
buildings were taken with the result that the venue cost was substantially less.  In so far as Literacy camps in Assam are concerned, these are wholly run by the Sangha and Mahasangha (Federation) women and with
cost having been minimized, a much larger number of literacy camps could be held.
v)                  In Andhra Pradesh, baseline surveys were conducted with the help of Sangha Federation women because of which the overall expenditure was less. Two Mahila Shikshan Kendras (MSKs) were handed to Sangha
Federations because of which there were savings under this Head as well. The Sangha and Federations members worked as Resource Persons for the training programmes and did not charge any resource fee leading to
reduced expenditure. Evaluation studies in AP were taken up with internal team members and no professional cost was paid to them with the result that there was less expenditure.

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
vi)                 Uttaranchal had a target of 185 literacy camps but achieved 254 because 69 camps were held at the Sangha level and all these camps were non-residential. Since these were single day workshops, the expenditure was
substantially less. Similarly for health and legal literacy, former MS staff and women of old MS areas were involved as resource persons with the result that expenditure was much less.
vii)               In the case of Gujarat, workshops were held at the Cluster level and the expense was borne by the federations in some cases.   The State conducted para legal training programme for women who were associated with
Nari Adalats, as a result, two Nari Adalats started in Badodara district.  MS Gujarat is not giving any financial support to these Nari Adalats.   Last year, one Nari Adalat in Sabarkantha district became inactive and
stopped functioning.
viii)              In Uttar Pradesh, savings arising out of the head for some budgeted items was spent on achieving and exceeding the targets set under many programme activities.  The State was able to utilize 80% of the budgeted
amount in the financial year 2005-06.
            In Kerala, savings under the Management Head due to vacancies resulted in availability of funds that were used for achievement of programme related targets. Funds available with MS Kerala from the State budget under
educational interventions and vocational training were utilized to achieve the target for coverage of new villages. 
Recommendations/Observations
8.5       The Committee has been informed that Rs.30.00 crores has been projected as BE for 2006-07 since the MS programme is set to expand to two new States of MP and Chhatisgarh as well as to 20 additional districts in the
existing States. Apart from that funding for Bihar and Jharkhand will also be made from the MS Budget in 2006-07, which was earlier being made from DPEP funds. This projected BE in the Department’s opinion would be
sufficient to cater to the needs of existing programme as well as the proposed new districts under the MS programme.  The Committee feels that the present allocation is not sufficient to run the scheme efficaciously.   It
recommends that the Department ensure that the scheme does not get affected for want of funds.
Action Taken
            In view of expenditure pattern of State MS Societies during the past years, the budget of Rs.30.00 crores will be sufficient to take care of all the financial needs of the MS Societies.  In case of need of any additional funds
arises, a request to increase the budget at RE stage will be mooted at that time.
IX.            CONTINUING EDUCATION FOR NEO-LITERATES
Recommendations/Observations
9.5      The Committee notes that Plan allocation for Continuing Education for Neo-literates was reduced from Rs. 165.92 crores in BE 2005-2006 to Rs. 149.12 crores in RE 2005-2006.   The Department has informed that this
was done in view of the priority given to covering the illiterates in 150 low literacy districts.  For this purpose an amount of Rs. 15 crore was re-appropriated from the Scheme of Continuing Education for Neo-literates to the
Scheme of Literacy Campaigns and Operation Restoration for taking up Special Literacy Drive  in those districts.   The Committee disapproves the reappropriation of Rs. 15 crore from the Plan allocation for Continuing
Education Scheme.   The Committee feels that given the fact that the annual expenditure per district under this scheme is Rs. 2.50 crores and in view of nearly 300 districts covered under this scheme in 2005-06, the BE itself can
be considered less than required.   Re-appropriation from this lesser amount cannot be commended.   The Committee is of the view that the Department should have made separate provision for the special Literacy Drive.
Action Taken
            Separate budget allocation for Special Literacy Drive could not be made as it was decided by the Council of NLMA only in April, 2005 to launch this drive in 150 districts of the country having the low literacy rates by
which time the budget estimates under each scheme had been finalized. Hence, there was no alternative in the absence of additional resources but to resort to re-appropriation of Rs.15 crores from the Scheme of Continuing
Education to meet the immediate requirement for launching special literacy drive.  The recommendation of the Committee has, however, been noted for compliance in future.
Recommendations/Observations
9.6           Looking into the grants released under the scheme of Continuing Education for Neo-literates during the last three years, the Committee notes that Karnataka,   Madhya Pradesh, Maharasthra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh
etc. have higher allocation in 2004-05 in comparison to 2003-04, while other States have reduced allocation for the same period.   The Committee is of the opinion that an effective implementation of the scheme should have
resulted in lesser requirement of funds than previous year.   But the argument is that effective implementation mean larger people in the ambit of the scheme and consequent increased funding, then, States like Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Mizoram, West Bengal seems to be poorly performing States.  Whatever is the position, the Department needs to look into the performance of  the Scheme sincerely and do the needful to make the scheme efficacious.
Action Taken
            Under the Scheme of Continuing Education Programme (CEP), funds are not allocated State-wise.  CEP is launched in the districts where Post Literacy Programme (PLP) has been successfully completed and accounts of
TLC/PLP have been settled.  State Literacy Mission Authority (SLMA) forward the proposal to National Literacy Mission Authority (NLMA) after getting it approved by the Executive Committee of State Literacy Mission
Authority.
            The grants are released to various states under the scheme of Continuing Education Programme depending upon the implementing agency fulfilling the requisite conditions for release of grants in aid.  The 100% central
funding for the scheme is for a period of three years.  Each year’s grant is supposed to be released in two instalments.  The next instalment of grant becomes due when 75% of the first instalment has been spent and submission of
utilization certificate in respect of the same and Operationalization of the Continuing Education Centre (CEC) along with progress report.
The grants are released to states depending upon the proposals received from them and to what extent they have fulfilled the conditions for release of the grant in aid.  It may be mentioned that quantum of grant released to a
particular state is also entirely dependent on the number of districts which are in the CE phase or on the proposals received from the concerned district and the extent to which satisfactory progress has been made in the
implementation of the programme.  Hence, the release of grant to various states would vary and not be uniform.
            The recommendation of the Committee to look into the performance of the scheme sincerely and to make the scheme efficacious has been duly noted and steps have already been taken in this direction to review the
performance of various states through Regional Review meetings.  Three such review meetings have already been held in Jaipur, Trivandrum and Dehradun where the status of the programme in the various States of the region
were reviewed.  In cases where settlement of accounts of the previous grants are a constraint, workshops with the representatives of the State Literacy Mission Authorities and the respective Zilla Saksharata Samitis are being held
to sort out the pending matters amicably.
           Therefore, State-wise release depends upon the pace of expenditure by the concerned State. 
Recommendations/Observations

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
9.7      The Committee also notes with concern that Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, A & N Island, etc. have not been released any fund from 2002-03 to 2004-05.    Also, States like Bihar, Delhi,
Himachal, Jharkand, Nagaland, Orissa, Sikkim have been provided grants only once during 2002-2003 to 2004-2005.   The Committee is unhappy with such a pattern of funding.   It recommends the Department to take urgent
steps to ensure proper implementation of the scheme.
Action Taken
            It may be clarified that in respect of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Andaman & Nicobar Islands etc., no grants have been released during the last three years as all these states have
not yet entered the Continuing Education phase of the literacy programme.  Similarly, in respect of Delhi, the CE project was sanctioned in 2003-04 but no grant was released in the subsequent years as the State Government has
not yet taken up the programme for implementation.  In Himachal Pradesh, only one district viz. Mandi was sanctioned the programme.  The final instalment for the third year in respect of this district was released in 2003-04 and
thereafter no further grant could be released, as the State Government did not abide by its commitment to fund 50% share of the cost of the project during the fourth year.  In respect of Nagaland and Sikkim, both the states have
not yet entered the CE phase and are still in the basic literacy phase. However, some money was released in 2003-04 to Sikkim and during 2004-05 to Nagaland as the annual grant for the State Literacy Mission Authority in these
states.  In Orissa, only three districts are in the CE phase and the state government is being advised to conclude the TLC/PLP projects in the other districts and settle their accounts so that the CE proposals in the other districts
could be considered.
            During 2002-03 to 2004-05, only one new district was covered under CEP in Bihar and Jharkhand as in most of the districts, TLC and PLP was being implemented.  In some districts, launch of CE was delayed due to non-
settlement of accounts of previous projects i.e. TLC/PLP.
            The recommendation of the Committee to take urgent steps to ensure proper implementation of the programme has been noted and the Department would try to ensure that as many number of districts in these States move
to the CE phase at the earliest opportunity.
X.            LITERACY CAMPAIGNS AND OPERATION RESTORATION
Recommendations/Observations
10.7    The Committee notes that the Literacy Campaigns and Operation Restoration saw an increase in allocation form Rs. 22.50 crores in BE 2005-06 to Rs. 37.50 crores in RE 2005-06.  As regards the reasons for this increase,
the Department informed that the main reason for increase in the allocation for the Scheme of Literacy Campaigns & Operation Restoration is to provide financial assistance for launching of Special Literacy Drive in 150 low
literacy districts of the country.  Based on the proposals received so  far, Special Literacy Drive has been approved in 23 districts of Bihar, 23 districts of Uttar Pradesh, 11 districts of Rajasthan,  12 districts of Jharkhand, 4
districts of Karnataka and 1 district of  Punjab.  So far, an expenditure of Rs. 27.85 crores has been incurred under this scheme.  The Committee expresses its unhappiness over the non-utilization of the funds under the scheme. 
The Committee notes that there was an increase of  Rs. 15.00 crores at the RE stage in 2005-06 mainly for the Special Literacy Drive in 150 low literacy districts, however, the Project Approval Committee (PAC) of NLMA has
approved the proposals of only 74 districts.  The Committee finds this situation worrisome and recommends that Special Drive be conducted as a special measure.  The unspent balance indicates the apathy of the Department
towards the scheme in general and special drive in particular.  The Committee would like the Department to eradicate illiteracy in an effective manner and not sink the drive in the whirlpool of rules and regulations.  The
Committee recommends the Department to simply and rationalize the rules and be accommodative to the genuine constraints of states and expedite the process to cover all the 150 districts.
Action Taken
So far, 134 districts, out of 150 districts, have been covered under the special literacy drive.   While projects of 74 districts have been approved by the PAC of NLMA, in 60 districts, the literacy programmes are already
being implemented and these districts are already covered.  The programme in remaining 16 districts is yet to be sanctioned as either the project proposals have not been received or the accounts of the previous programmes have
not been settled.  These districts have already been advised to settle the accounts and submit project proposals immediately. 
            The Department has taken due note of the suggestion to simplify rules and regulations and be accommodative to the genuine constraints of the states.
XI.            SUPPORT TO NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
Recommendations/Observations
11.2    The Committee notes that the Plan allocation under the scheme of Support to NGOs in the field of Adult Education in BE 2005-2006 was 25.00 crores,  but only Rs. 19.10 crore was released finally on account of non-
receipt of viable proposal from NGOs.   The Committee is of the view that in case of non-receipt of viable proposals, the Department should utilize the funds through Zilla Saksharta Samitis. The Committee is, however,
dismayed to note that even out of the reduced allocation, the Department has managed to spend only 11.10 crores till 17
th February, 2006.   The Committee strongly recommends that the Department should ensure timely
utilization of the funds and prevent last minute rush.  The Committee also notes that the allocation under the scheme in BE 2006-07, is Rs. 7.00 crores.  As regard the cut in the BE 2006-07 it is stated that the outlay projected for
2006-07 was Rs. 25.00 crores, against which an allocation of Rs. 7.00 crores only has been provided.   The adult neo-literates are mostly covered under Continuing Education Programme implemented by the Zilla Saksharata
Samities. The Committee endorses this reduction and is also of the considered opinion that the allocation should completely utilized.
Action Taken
            Under the Scheme of Support to Non-Governmental Organizations in the field of Adult Education, funds are provided to the registered NGOs for taking up the following activities:-
i)  Projects for basic literacy, post literacy, continuing education and other projects including evaluation of literacy/adult education programmes.
ii)  Grants to State Resource Centres for providing academic and technical resource support to the literacy programmes.
Plan allocation under the Scheme in BE 2005-06 was Rs.25.00 crores against which the expenditure was Rs.14.68 crores.
            It is a fact that the expenditure during the last month under the scheme is comparatively on the higher side.  It is important to note here that the third and final instalment of maintenance grant for 25 SRCs amounting to
Rs.2.56 crores was released in the month of March 2006.
            The Department has, however, noted the observations of the Committee and will ensure timely utilization of funds during the current financial year to prevent last minute rush.
            The Budget allocation under the scheme in BE 2006-07 is Rs.7.00 crores, against the projected outlay of Rs.25.00 crores.  The outlay would be enhanced at the RE stage depending upon the actual requirement of funds.
CHAPTER - II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLY
 

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
II.            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.7      The Committee notes that the total unspent balances with implementing agencies under different schemes as on 1.4.05 was Rs. 1,680.96 crore which increased to the tune of Rs. 3,310.29 crore within a span of six months,
i.e., on 30.9.2005.  What is more worrisome is that these  unspent balances are available  with implementing agencies other than state Govts./UTs, mainly in the voluntary sector.   The Committee wonders about the efficacy of
the monitoring mechanism which is supposed to be activated right from the level of Centre to district/panchayat level.   The Committee is of the firm opinion that remedial measures need to be initiated without any further
delay.   The Committee would also like to be apprised about the latest details of Utilization Certificates and unspent balances scheme-wise and state wise.
Action Taken
1)
                  Under SSA total unspent balance as on 1.4.2005 was Rs. 1231.74 crores, which was attributed due to release of commensurate State share funds to State Implementation Societies of SSA by the State Governments
following the release of the Second instalment of funds by Government of India in last quarter of the financial year.  The unspent balance was Rs. 3027.10 crores on 30.9.2005.  The main reasons of reflecting higher unspent
balance in the new financial year again was release of first installment in the month of May and June 2005 by GOI followed by State share releases by the States.  It must be noted that these funds are infact works in progress at
school level and other decentralized institutions at sub-district level and not as parked funds.  It must also be appreciated that SSA funds have to be transmitted from State level to all villages/schools/blocks and cluster centers
across each State/UT for undertaking SSA related activities.  SSA has tightened up financial management i.e. flow of funds and audit checks in quarterly and monthly review of GOI.  Flow of funds to Districts and States are
monitored as well as the adjustment of advances/bank reconciliation are also checked.  Timetable for independent audits have been laid down.  In addition, concurrent financial review of all States on random sample basis are also
conducted to check field positions independently.
2)
                  The UCs of all the States and UTs due for SSA, have been received upto the year 2004-05. SSA has been able to streamline collection of UCs based on clear instructions and monitoring under the Financial and
Procurement Manual of SSA launched in April 2004, which provides for an independent statutory audit by 30 th September of each year and specific instructions for instituting the auditing process through dates/calendar laid
down in the said Manual.  This has led to fruitful results that in such a vast programme UCs are able to be issued within the stipulated time of 1 year from closure of the financial year.
            Under MDM Scheme, as stated in the above para, no UC is pending.  Position of unspent balance available with State/UT as of 30.6.06 is given the Annexure-II.
            In so far as Teacher Education is concerned, the position regarding details of Utilization Certificates and Unspent Balances Scheme-wise and State-wise is the same as explained in para 2.6 above.
            In regard to Mahila Samakhya Scheme, the total unspent balance as on 1.4.2005 for all seven States Mahila Samakhya Societies was Rs. 389.52 lakhs.  This was because the Andhra Pradesh Mahila Samatha Society
received the grant of an amount of Rs. 100.00 lakhs in the last week of March, 2004.  The unspent Balance as on 1.4.2005 is adjusted at the time of release of the 1
st installment in the following year and the unspent balance as on
3.9.2005 is based on the grants released during the financial year 205-06.
In respect of Adult Education, the unspent balance as on 31.3.2005 was Rs. 144.15 crore and as on 30.9.2005, it was Rs.218.84 crore.  The higher quantum of funds reflected as on 30.9.2005 is mostly due to the fresh releases
made by this Department to the State Literacy Mission authorities/Zila Saksharata Samitis.  The process of utilization of funds is llow to begin with but gains momentum subsequently.  It may be mentioned that the delay in
disbursement at the State level or district level may also be procedural as they essentially follow the various government procedures for purchases/payments etc.  Statements showing the scheme-wise and state-wise position of
unspent balances as on 31.3.2005 and 30.9.2005 as also on 30.6.2006 are enclosed at Annexure-III,IV &V
 respectively.
            In order to ensure that the funds are utilized quickly, a time limit is generally fixed for utilization of funds, particularly in the CE Programme.  Any amount pending beyond this time limit is taken as unspent balance and
adjusted in the next instalment of grant. In regard to pending Utilization Certificates, it is now made mandatory that until and unless a particular district furnishes its UC and audited accounts, no further grants are released to it.
III.            SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN
Recommendations/Observations
3.4       The Committee has been given to understand that provision of state share by states has improved over the years.  Presently, only Kerala (Rs. 21.67), crores, Manipur (Rs.2.07 crores) and Sikkim (Rs. 3.89 crore) have
outstanding state share for 2004-05.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the status of state share during 2005-06.  The Committee would also like to be informed about the final decision of the Government in respect
of provision of some relief to NE states and Sikkim in the percentage of their contribution to SSA.
Action Taken
 
            During the year 2005-06, only the States of Kerala and Sikkim were not able to clear backlog of State shares to the amount of Rs.3.89 cr and Rs.1.56 cr. respectively. The Government of India has agreed to bear 15% of
State share of NE States through the Ministry for Development of North East Region.  Now NE States are required to make provision of only 10% State share for SSA for the year 2005-06 and 2006-07.
Recommendations/Observations
3.5            Allocation of funds under SSA since its inception has shown a phenomenal growth from Rs. 350.00 crore in 2000-01 to Rs. 7156.00 crore in 2005-06.  Allocation for 2006-07 is Rs. 11000.00 crores thus showing a
quantum leap over 2005-06.  The Committee observes that the Department has outwardly maintained the same level on the utilization front also.  However, data made available to the Committee reveals a new dimension.  Funds
under various schemes are being duly released by the Centre but somehow due to reasons not known to the Committee, increasing amount of funds remain unspent.  SSA being the flagship programme of the entire Elementary
Education Sector, and having the highest allocation is also the major contributor in unspent balances of Rs. 3091 crore out of total unspent balance of Rs. 3310 crore as on 30.9.05.  The Committee apprehends that the problem is
bound to aggravate further in line with the enhanced availability of funds.
Action Taken
            The unspent balance under SSA as on 1.4.2005 was Rs.1231.74 crores, which was attributed due to release of commensurate State share funds to State Implementation Societies of SSA by the State Governments
following the release of the second installment of funds by Govt. of India in the last quarter of the financial year. The unspent balance was Rs.3027.10 crore on 30.9.2005. The main reasons for seemingly higher unspent balance
in next year is due to release of first installments by GOI in the month of May and June 2005 followed by State share releases. These funds are infact works in progress at school level and other decentralized institution at sub-
district level and not parked funds. It is to be appreciated that SSA funds have to be transmitted from State level to all villages / schools/ blocks and cluster centers across each State/UT for undertaking SSA related activities. This
takes some time as well.

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
Recommendations/Observations
3.8       The Committee notes that the Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Plan by the Planning Commission indicated that some of the major states like U.P., Punjab, West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar and Jharkhand were  experiencing a
problem of resource absorption  under SSA.   The Department have informed that due to concerted efforts by State Governments and intensive  monitoring and capacity building initiatives of the Central Government, the position
of utilization of funds has improved  and fund utilization upto December, 2005 by UP is 74%, Punjab is 55%, West Bengal is 65%, Orissa is 57 % and Jharkhand is 74%.   The Committee is of the opinion that fund utilization by
the Punjab, West Bengal and Orissa is still unsatisfactory.   To this list state like Maharashtra may also be added which has utilized the funds to the tune of 50% only upto December, 2005. The Committee expresses its
reservation against slow pace of implementation and utilization of funds. The Committee would like the Department to ensure timely utilization of funds at least by the third fiscal quarter and restrain itself from last minute rush in
the utilization of funds that results in poor infrastructure and quality. The Committee hopes that the Department would take all possible steps to ensure allotment of land for schools in J&K, Nagaland and Andaman and Nicobar
Islands and utilization of sanctioned amount for civil construction in these states by July this year as promised by the Secretary before the Committee.
Action Taken
            The Government of India is regularly monitoring financial progress of the States through quarterly meetings and also through monthly and quarterly reports submitted by the States. The States are also provided support to
build the capacity of SSA personnel to execute various strategies under the programm. As can be seen from the financial progress upto 31
st March, 2006 (Annexure-VI), the progress of State of Punjab was  81%, West Bengal was
82%, Orissa was 74%,and Maharashtra was 74% respectively. The Department has taken steps to expedite approval of Annual Work Plan & Budget by the month of April-May itself, so that funds can be released to all the States
in the beginning of the year to give states adequate time for implementation in the year.  This year all the district/state plans were approved by 18 May 2006.
            Nagaland has shown a major turn around in SSA implementation and is executing the programme with zeal.  The fund utilized by Nagaland at the end of 2005-06 was 99.79% and 100% works has been completed or are
nearing completion. The State of J&K has shown improvement with 52% works.  The UT of A&N Island has resolved issues and committed to complete civil works during current year.
Recommendations/Observations
3.10     The Committee notes that utilization of funds under SSA is not commensurately reflected in the achievements made in respect of physical targets.    The Committee fails to understand as to why the physical targets like
construction of school buildings, additional classrooms, drinking water facilities, toilets, etc. are not completed despite one-third (34.21%) of the total outlay being assigned for civil works.  In fact, a World Bank- Harvard
University study has found poor infrastructure to be one of the factors behind teacher absenteeism.  The Committee feels that this may also be a factor for student drop-out.
Action Taken
The States/UTs have reported percentage of work completed and in progress as 92% as on 31.3.2006. Only in few places works could not be started due to dispute on site selection, prevalence of election model code of
conduct, hostile weather conditions etc.
Recommendations/Observations
3.13     The Committee is of the firm view that alongwith the Central assistance being released, progress of achievement level of physical targets has to be vigorously pursued with special focus on States/UTs lagging behind.  
Both, inherent drawbacks in the Scheme itself and lack of initiative  on the part of implementing agencies have to be attended to at the highest level, if need is felt.  Only then, it can be claimed that SSA has started achieving its
goal of reaching to the neediest.   The Committee understands that the targets for the year 2006-07 are being decided and will be finalized by the month of May, 2006 through the process of approval of Annual Work Plans of
States/UTs by the Project Approval Board of SSA.   The Committee feels that this exercise needs to be completed in the last quarter of previous year so that work starts from the first quarter of the next year itself.
Action Taken
            In 2006-07, this strategy of identifying special focus districts based on population of disadvantaged groups eg.  Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Minority (Muslim) and presence of large number of out of school
children, has been initiated.  There is also a special focus on two categories of States: (i) 5 States which together account for 69% of the country’s out of school children viz. Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal
and Rajasthan – 51% of the total SSA outlay for 2006-07 has been allocated to these 5 States. (ii) State like Bihar, West Bengal and Manipur whose performance has not been satisfactory.  A more intensive review of their
quarter-wise performance is being made along with measures of capacity building to help increase capacity for better programme implementation.
 
            The process of approval of Annual Work Plans (AWPs) of States/UTs has been completed.  This year, the approval process was started early i.e. from 1
st Mach 2006 itself.  It would be difficult to carry out this exercise in
the last quarter of the previous year since by then, the likely achievements and expenditure of the pervious year would not be available.  Further attempts will be made to ensure that AWPs are approved at the earliest.
 
IV.            NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT TO PRIMARY EDUCATION (MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME)
Recommendations/Observations
4.5            Committee’s attention has been drawn by a survey conducted by  the National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad which has pointed out that the growth of 50% children is adversely affected due to poor level of nutrition
in the MDM served in the country.  The Committee recommends that the Department take earnest measure to provide wholesome meal. For this purpose, the Committee feels that good quality cereal be released from the FCI
godowns and this should be supplemented by fruits and vitamin and iron tablets.
Action Taken
            As per available information, no survey has been conducted by National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad in the recent past. However, an evaluation was carried out by them in 6 States during 1990-1992, the period prior
to the introduction of MDM Programme at national level.
            The Central Government’s commitment to a universal cooked meal programme finds reflection in the budget speech of the Union Financed Minister in July 2004, which stated: The poor want basic education for
theirchildren: we shall provide it…We shall also make sure that the child is not hungry while she or he is at school..”
            The Department has in June 2006 revised the nutritional norm of mid-day meal to contain: -
(i)
                  Minimum 450 calories,
(ii)                Minimum 12 gms. of protein, and
(iii)               Supplementation of essential micronutrients and provision of de-worming medicines.
            States have been suggested to develop menus as per the local taste & culture. As stated in the Para above, FCI supplies Fair Average Quality of foodgrains.

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
X.            LITERACY CAMPAIGNS AND OPERATION RESTORATION
Recommendations/Observations
10.8     As regards the allocation for 2006-07, the Committee notes that a BE provision of Rs.30.00 crores has been made for the Scheme which includes a provision of Rs. 3.00 crores for NER, as against the projected
requirement of Rs. 45.00 crores.  The Department has informed that the position will be reviewed at the Revised Estimates stage depending upon the proposals received from State governments for augmentation of funds, if
needed.  The Committee recommends the Department to ensure required fund for the proper implementation of the scheme and see to it that there is no unspent balances under the scheme.
Action Taken
            The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
XII.     JAN SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN
Recommendations/Observations
12.3       As regards the allocation for 2006-07, the Committee notes that a BE provision of Rs.40.00 crores has been made, which includes an allocation of Rs.4.00 crores for NER.  The Committee notes that allocation is not
adequate to meet the requirements for the next year hence the allocation under the scheme should be suitably augmented at the RE stage but the allocation should be subjected to optional and timely utilization.
Action Taken
            The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
CHAPTER - III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
II.            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.5 The trend of expenditure during the first four years of the Tenth Plan clearly indicates that the Department has been successful in optimum utilization of funds allocated in the elementary education sector, quantum increase in
the allocation notwithstanding.   However,   the Committee is constrained to observe that the position with the entire Adult Education sector is different. The Department has not been able to sustain the level of expenditure,
particularly during the last two years, i.e. 2004-05 and 2005-06, in spite of there being only a marginal increase.  In fact, it would not be wrong to say that Adult Education sector appears to be the worst affected during 2004-05. 
Less than 50% of the total outlay (Rs. 261.00 crore) for Adult Education has been spent upto December 2005.  During the first three quarters of the year upto December, 2005, expenditure reported is Rs. 115.66 crore.  The
Committee is surprised to note that within a span of about one and a half month i.e. upto 17.2.2006, utilisation figures are Rs. 211.78 crore.   The Committee can only conclude that different programmes of Adult Education are
not being implemented as per the prescribed  norms.   One example would be sufficient to confirm this view.   Under the scheme of `Literacy Campaigns and Operation Restoration’ expenditure reported upto December, 2005
was nil.   However, by 17
th February, 2006 implementing agencies could manage to incur an expenditure of Rs. 30.00 crore.
Action Taken
            The year-wise allocation and the expenditure incurred during the last four years in respect of Adult Education Programmes is as under:-
Year BE RE Exp.
2002-03 233.00 233.00 216.29
2003-04 233.00 233.00 232.50
2004-05 250.00 250.00 236.47
2005-06 290.00 289.92 249.30
            The Budget allocation for years 2004-05 and 205-06 included an amount of Rs. 17 crores and Rs. 29 crores respectively for the North-Eastern Region.  Against this allocation, the expenditure of Rs. 12.85 crore during
2004-05 and Rs. 3.44 crore during 2005-06 could be incurred.  Savings were mainly under this head which could not be utilized as the bulk of the allocation were under CEP.  Except for Tripura, none of the other States in this
region have progressed to the CE stage and hence, the funds remained unutilized.  This resulted in non-utilization of almost the entire allocation for NER during 2004-05 and 2005-06.  Further, in the years 2004-05 & 2005-06,
the allocation under the Scheme of Support to NGOs and Directorate of Adult Education (DAE) could also not be fully utilized due to non- receipt of viable proposals from NGOs and less expenditure on Advertising & Publicity
in the DAE on account of the fact that authority to sanction projects was transferred from DAE to the Ed.CIL for production of audio-video programmes, who has now initiated action for production of these programmes.
            As regards the expenditure up to December 2005, the figures indicated in the report are not correct.  As per the records of the Department, a total expenditure of Rs. 184.40 crore was incurred till 31.12.2005 against the
budget allocation of  Rs. 290 crores.  Similarly, the expenditure under the Scheme of Literacy Campaigns & Operation Restoration was Rs. 16.48 crore as on 31.12.2005.  A copy of the Expenditure Statement prepared by this
Department for monitoring the pace of expenditure is enclosed as Annexure-I.  It may be seen therefrom that about 63.59% of the grant was utilized by the Department by 31.12.2005.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes the Department’s contention that funds could not be utilized under Adult Education mainly because of failure of North-Eastern States to use the funds, particularly under continuing Education
Programme.  The Committee has been informed that the bulk of the allocation was made underContinuing Education Programme andexcept Tripura, none of the other states in North-Eastern region could progress to the
Continuing Education Programme stage and hence, nearly entire allocation for NER during 2004-05 and 2005-06 remained unutilized.
 It is a matter of great concern that none of the NE states, other than Tripura, could progress to the Continuing Education Programme stage.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that such a dismal performance by
the NE States is in fact a poor reflection on performance as well as planning.  Moreover, it seems that the Department was not vigilant enough about such a position in North-Eastern Region, otherwise, they would not have been
caught unawares in this regard.  Department ought to have been more careful. The Committee recommends that the Department do the needful to prevent recurrence of such disturbing development.
Recommendations/Observations
2.6      Twin problems of pending utilization certificates and unspent balances available with the implementing agencies continue to persist.  The Committee has been observing that increase in the allocated funds has indirectly
contributed in aggravating these two problem areas.   The Committee has been given to understand that due to sustained efforts made by the Department, level of pending Utilization Certificates has been somewhat restricted. 
The Department has succeeded in extracting 471 UCs during the period from 1 st April to 31st December, 2005.  An amount of Rs. 3461.78 crores is still blocked as outstanding Utilization Certificates in respect of Grants/Loan

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
released upto 31st March, 2004. However, no information has been provided by the Department about the amount parked as outstanding UCs for the year 2004-2005 which must have increased further by the end of 2005-2006.
The Committee finds this situation to be very alarming and strongly feels that urgent steps need to be taken to eliminate the pending UCs.  At the same time, the Department may also take up with the concerned State
Governments, the problems, if any being faced by them in timely submission of UCs.
Action Taken
Efforts are being made by the Department to obtain the pending Utilization Certificates.  All the implementing agencies are being asked to submit the audited accounts and utilization certificates at the earliest so that the
pending UCs could be issued.  In so far as Adult Education is concerned, for the year 2004-05, UCs involving amount of Rs. 140.12 crore were pending.  Further, a tatal of 1907 UCs are still pending  as on 31 st March 2006
involving an amount of Rs. 704.50 crores.
            As regards MDM Scheme, no UC is pending in respect of any State/UT upto March, 06.
            Under the Scheme of Teacher Education, Central assistance is released to States/UTs for Recurring (such as Salary, Programmes, Contingencies etc.) and Non-recurring (such as Construction of Buildings, Purchase of
Equipment etc.)  components.  Based on expenditure position received from States/UTs, on yearly basis, the unspent balance under Recurring component is adjusted/deducted while releasing Central assistance for the subsequent
year.  As regards unspent balance under Non-recurring component, it is allowed, based on merit, to carry forward keeping in view the fact the Non-recurring Central assistance is released for specific purposes.  States/UTs have
already been requested to furnish figures of unspent balance as on 1-4-2006.
            In so far as Mahila Samakhaya is Scheme is concerned, the Utilization Certificates for the year 2004-05 have already been issued and there is no UCs pending for this period.
Comments of the Committee
Apprehension of the Committee about increase in the number of pending utilization certificates in 2005-06 when compared with the pendency position in 2004-05 have proved to be true with regard to the Adult Education
Programme.  The Committee views with serious concern the massive increase in the amount of pending UCs from Rs. 140.12 crore in 2004-05 to Rs. 704.50 crore at the end of 2005-06.  The Committee would emphasize once
again the need for urgent steps to be taken for elimination of pending UCs.
III.            SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN
Recommendations/Observations
3.6            Committee had the opportunity to see the Annual Report and Audited Accounts of SSA in six States/UTs.  Status of unspent balances as indicated below under SSA is an eye-opener for the Committee:-
                                                                                                           
                                                                                      (in Rupees)
State/UT Annual Report/Audited account year Grants received Carried
forward
Utilisation of
funds
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 2003-04 Rs.4,47,42,000 16,38,903 6,01,678
Himachal Pradesh 2003-04 Rs.64,47,84,000 12,70,84,934 63,31,79,782 
Nagaland 2004-05 Rs.26,67,49,000 3,71,52,846 27,92,04,891
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 2004-05 Rs.2,19,00,000 4,46,21,452 10,61,818
Assam 2004-05 Rs.226,54,00,000 36,19,79,876 226,04,96,950
U.P. 2004-05 Rs.1170,14,75,000 123,57,40,101 1251,73,90,166
Uttranchal 2004-05 Rs.91,44,70,000 8,68,36,000 96,37,22,000
Recommendations/Observations
3.7       The above details clearly indicate that the ground realities are varying from state to state about the actual status of utilization of SSA.  The Committee is compelled to claim that unspent balances will be available in respect
of other States/UTs also.  If that be so, the Committee can only conclude that States/UTs have simply not succeeded in sustaining the expenditure level.  The Committee can only hope that with the accounting procedure being
streamlined and monitoring mechanism fully activated, status of fund utilization under SSA will improve.
Action Taken
            Department of School Education & Literacy reviews financial progress every quarter with States/UTs and closely monitor expenditure levels. An expenditure statement for the year 2005-06 is enclosed as Annexure-VI
which reveals that the State reported expenditure of Rs.9993.35 cr which is 77% of available funds.  State shares received in the last quarter account for most of the balance as on 31st March, 2006.  The so called unspent balance
of Rs.2935.84 cr is accounted for as works in progress. 
Comments of the Committee
 (paras 3.6 & 3.7)
            The Committee notes that expenditure reported by the States/UTs under SSA for 2005-06 has been Rs. 9993.35 crore, which is 77 percent of available funds.  The Committee feels that this by no means can be treated as a
decent achievement in face of the fact that SSA, a flagship scheme of the Department, had already overshot the time schedule.  Such a pace certainly does not augur well for the success of the Abhiyan.  After an analysis, the
Committee also notes that there are only 13 States/UTs out of all the 35 States/UTs which have been able to utilize 80 or more percent of the available funds.  This situation, the Committee feels, call for the Department to be
more pro-active, vigilant and sincere to ensure optimum utilization of funds as well as achievement of physical targets under various components of the SSA.
            The Committee has been given to understand that financial progress of the programme is reviewed and expenditure levels are closely monitored every quarter by the Department SSA funds are to be transmitted from State
level to villages/schools/blocks and cluster centres.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that these compulsions cannot justify the ever increasing amount of unspent balances. The very fact that unspent balances are
there indicates that financial targets are not being achieved.  The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the Department should make every effort for optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds.
 Recommendations/Observations
3.16     The Committee has been informed that there has been a decline in the number of out-of-school children since 2001 when Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan was launched.  The Committee notes that all India sample survey of out-of-

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
school children commissioned by the Ministry was conducted by the Social and Rural Research Institute  in all the States and UTs during July to October 2005.  As per this survey, 8.09% children were out of school in the
country. The Committee notes that this survey besides the normal children, has also assessed the disabled children.  As per findings, 38.92 % disabled children do not go to school.  The Committee strongly feels that time has
come when a serious attempt is made to bring the disabled children also in the mainstream. The Committee recommends that all inclusive education for disabled and differently abled children should become a focused component
under SSA.
Action Taken
            The department has noted the recommendation of the committee for compliance. Inclusive education of Children with special needs (CWSN) is an important component of SSA. SSA framework provides that… “every
child with special needs, irrespective of the kind, category and degree of disability, is provided education in an appropriate environment”. SSA adopts a zero rejection policy with respect to children with special needs (CWSN). 
States are funded under SSA for a variety of interventions for CWSN like early identification and detection, functional and formal assessment, support services in the form of special resource teachers with degree/diploma
in special education, training of teachers on Inclusive Education, home-based education for severely disabled CWSN, creation of barrier free environment in schools etc.   At present, out of 20.17 lakh identified CWSN, 17.05
lakh children with special needs are enrolled in regular schools under SSA, 49,083 CWSN are enrolled in EGS centers and 63,216 CWSN are being provided home based education. SSA State Missions are collaborating with 530
NGOs to promote inclusion of CWSN in schools, and provide the required services to them. Ramps and hand rails have been constructed in 3,28,828 schools to promote barrier free access and aids and appliances have been
provided to 3,70,397 CWSN.  21,13,492 teachers have undergone a one day orientation training on Inclusive Education (IE) and further, 12,11,727 teachers have undergone 3-5 days training on IE.  27,252 teachers have
undergone 45-90 days training on IE.  4052 resource teachers with diploma/degree in special education have been appointed at the district/block levels, who operate in an itinerant mode to provide resource support to general
teachers and CWSN in schools.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department to cater to educational needs of children with special needs (CWSN) under the SSA. However, the Committee feels that more and more such fully equipped
schools for such children need to be opened under SSA.  The Committee recommends that more and more teachers be made to undergo longer duration training on Inclusive Education.  It strongly feels that there is an urgent need
to create a database regarding number/percentage of CWSN in various schools so that teachers specially trained for this purpose could be posted adequately in such schools. 
Recommendations/Observations
3.21     As per the national survey on “Learning Achievement of Students at the end of Class V” conducted by the NCERT in 2002, whose report shows that the mean achievement of students in Language, Mathematics & EVS at
the national level is 58.57%, 46.51% and 50.30% respectively.  The Committee finds this mean achievement to be a cause of concern and feels that the Department needs to take care that the quality aspect should not be sacrificed
in the race for achieving targets. 
 Action Taken
            The recommendation is noted for compliance. At the time of sanction of Annual Work Plan and Budget of States/UTs in 2006-07, Project Approval Board of SSA has undertaken a commitment from states that they would
work towards enhancement of student achievement levels and also try to institute independent pupil assessment systems to obtain periodic soundings on pupil achievement levels in different subjects. Teacher training under SSA
emphasizes child-centered pedagogy and competency based teaching learning. Classroom transactions can be meaningful only with an optimum Pupil teacher Ratio. Nearly 6 lakh teachers have been appointed under SSA so far.
PTR stands at 43: 1 for the primary stage and at 29:1 for the upper primary stage. Provision exists under SSA for remedial teaching also, and States are undertaking such programmes before or after regular school hours for
children requiring special support, including first generation learners. SSA has a provision for incentives in the form of free textbooks for all children belonging to the SC and ST categories and for all girls. Most first generation
learners belong to these categories and benefit from this provisioning. Free textbooks have been distributed to 5.35 crore children in 2005-06. SSA promotes sharing of experiences and best practices across States/UTs for
improvement in the quality of classroom transactions. State level academic resource groups have been set up in 24 States, for developing a vision and perspective regarding pedagogy, teacher training etc. and making classroom
transactions more activity based. States are funded under SSA for setting up sub district structures at block and cluster levels, to provide on site academic resource support to teachers in schools.7201 block resource centers and
66,140 cluster resource centers are operational at present.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is of the considered opinion that apart from universalizing elementary education, the SSA must lay added emphasis on quality of teaching- learning also.  Only then the SSA will be really successful.  The
lack of trained teachers is also a major factor resulting in dismal quality of education.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the efforts for having child-centred padagogy and competency based teaching must be given
added impetus.  In addition to this, in- service training should be provided to the teachers more frequently.
 
IV.            NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT TO PRIMARY EDUCATION (MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME)
Recommendations/Observations
4.8      The Committee is of the view that the community participation is not very effective or else the meal served under scheme would not have suffered in quality, variety and hygiene or there would have been no
misappropriation.  There is also a feeling in the Committee that education has taken a backseat in schools serving mid-day meal.  The Committee has been given to understand that the involvement of teachers in preparation and
distribution of meal has adversely affected the quality of education.   The guidelines clearly specify that a teacher’s main responsibility is to teach and not engage themselves in cooking process. In fact there is a provision for
engaging workers for the cooking of Meals. The Committee regrets that the remuneration to these workers are not only low but also varies from place to place. Even this meager amount is not given regularly. The Committee
would therefore recommend upward revision of wages/remuneration for those who are cooking food and also ensure to uniform rate. Strict monitoring of the guidelines is the need of hour.
Action Taken
            The task before the Department is to make the MDM programme a people’s programme.  The Department is urging States to involve Panchayati Raj Institutions in the implementation of the programme.
        States have informed that teachers are not involved in cooking and supplying of meals.  This aspect would be continuously pursued with them so that teaching learning process remains unaffected. 
        States have been advised to ensure that minimum wages as per the States’ prescription is provided to such staff.  
 Recommendations/Observations
4.9       It has been noted that attendance in the schools drops drastically during post-lunch session.  This, the Committee, feels is a big challenge to the entire objective of the programme and no intervention except vibrant
community participation can check this malice.  The Committee strongly urges the Department to take the matter with states which can actually ensure community participation through Panchayat and in true sense.  At the same

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
time, the Department is advised to carry out a scientific assessment of community participation in the Mid-Day Meal Scheme.
Action Taken
Noted.
Comments of the Committee
(Paras 4.8 & 4.9)
                The Committee wishes to reiterate its observation about non-participation of the community in the desired/required manner.  It has seen for itself that cooks/helpers are not employed in many schools, as a result teachers
have to involve themselves in cooking activities. The Committee feels that women Self Help Groups may be involved in the programme not only for cooking and cleaning activities but also for monitoring purpose. It is also of the
considered opinion that allocation for this purpose also needs to be suitably enhanced.   The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department make serious efforts to address the concerns of the Committee in this regard.
 
V.            STRENGTHENING OF TEACHERS EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
5.4       The Committee observes that against total 599 districts in the country, 556 DIETs have been sanctioned earlier and another 59 DIETs have been sanctioned recently.  However, functional DIETs as on date are only 466.
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, MP and Orissa are the states showing gaps between required, sanctioned and functional DIETs.  The Committee notes that DIETS play a major role in the development
of textbooks, teaching-learning material, quality, monitoring of schools etc.
 
Action Taken
            Factual position. However, 58 DIETs have been sanctioned recently instead of 59.
The States with a large number of non-functional DIETs are Arunachal Pradesh (5), Chattisgarh (9), Haryana (5), Jharkhand (4), Madhya Pradesh (7), Orissa (17), Punjab (5), West Bengal (5). The main impediments to
operationalising the sanctioned DIETs is delay in completion of civil works and recruitment/ deputation of faculty by the State Governments. Continuous efforts have been made with the States to fill up vacant positions and
operationalise the DIETs. The matter is also taken up in the meetings of the Teacher Education Approval Board (TEAB).
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee expresses its serious concern about a large number of sanctioned DIETS remaining non-functional for a long time in different states. To the Committee's dismay, the Department always comes up with
similar excuse every year.  In view of the important role of the DIETS, the Committee recommends that all the DIETs be made functional within a fixed time schedule.  The States be advised to expedite the civil constructions
and posting faculties during the period fixed in this regard.
 
Recommendations/Observations
5.5       This situation, the Committee feels, is more worrisome because the DIETs have also been assigned the role of monitoring the implementation of the MDM scheme.   The fact that many districts in poorly performing states
still do not have DIET will have an adverse impact on the monitoring activity in the district.   The Committee notes that in many DIETs, vacancies are there which affect various training programme.  The Committee would like to
draw the attention of the Department to the observation of Planning Commission made in the Mid Term Appraisal of Tenth Plan. “The institutional support organizations for teacher education and development of curriculums are
closely linked with the learning achievements of children and performance of teachers.  Teachers vacancies at all levels should be filled up urgently and there should be advance planning for future requirement too.”
Action Taken
            The Department has received proposals for sanction of DIETs from the following States:
1.
      Bihar: 13 DIETs
2.      Jharkhand:  12 DIETs
3.      Sikkim: 1 DIETs
4.      Haryana: 2 DIETs
5.      Pondicherry: 1 DIET; 2 DRCs
 
            The proposals of Jharkhand and Pondicherry have been approved in the TEAB; The appraisal process in respect of proposals from Bihar, Sikkim and Haryana is complete and these will be placed before the TEAB
shortly.  From time to time, this Department is urging States/UTs to fill up vacancies in DIETs.
 Comments of the Committee
            The Committee is of the considered view that vacancies in DIETs is an area of grave concern due to obvious reason.  It, therefore, calls upon the Department to make all out efforts to get the vacancies filled up on priority
basis.  It must be taken up with the States on higher levels. This has become all the more imperative because the DIETs have now been made the monitoring agencies for Mid-day Meal Scheme.
 
Recommendations/Observations
5.9       NCTE is also the statutory body for recognition of institutions for conducting various teacher education programmes.  In pursuance of this mandate, as on January, 2006, 5854 teacher education institutions offering 6647
courses have been recognized by the council with an approved intake of about 5.22 lakh teacher trainees.  The Committee would like to have full details of institutions state-wise, recognized during the last two years by the
Council.
Action Taken

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
            Statements showing (i) State-wise details of Institutions recognized upto 31.03.2004; and (ii) Institutions recognised during 2004-05 and 2005-06 are enclosed at Annexure-X and XA .
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that though there have been progress in recognition of institutions, but there is still a long way to go. Moreover, the Committee is surprised to note that the number of institutions recognized in the
states needing big push is only marginal.  The Committee desires that these states may be treated as special focus States to ensure that more and more institutions were recognized there for improving the situation in this regard.
VI.            DISTRICT PRIMARY EDUCATION PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
6.5       The Committee is dismayed to note that the four States viz., Bihar, Jharkhand, U.P. and Uttaranchal where the external assistance is going to close on 31
st March, 2006 has not made any significant stride towards the goal
of universalization of primary  education.   As regard total number of children admitted in a AIE centres, the cumulative achievement upto 2005-06 is little more than 50 percent in Bihar and less than 50 percent in Uttaranchal.
Again, the total cumulative achievement  upto 2005-06 for construction of toilets  is a poor 30 percent in Bihar.   Similarly, as regards construction of additional classrooms, Bihar had 2016 class rooms as against a cumulative
target of 2297 classroom Uttaranchal had 866 classroom  against a target of 1219 classrooms. TheCommittee would like the Department to submit a status paper within one month of the presentation of the Report as to why there
has been no achievement of the targets fixed for the abovementioned states under DPEP despite massive funding and its complete utilization.  One of the major objectives of DPEP is to reduce drop out rate to less than 10 per
cent.   The Committee is interested to have an idea about the level of achievement (district-wise) in the four states where project period has ended on 31.3.2006. 
Action Taken
            There is a improvement with regard to number of children admitted in AIE centers in the state of Bihar (80%) during 2005-06. There is also improvement in construction of toilet (81%) and additional classrooms (98%) in
Bihar and toilet (83%) and additional classrooms (52%) in Uttaranchal.  In Uttaranchal the progress is slow due to geographical constraint. The Internal Completion Report (ICR) of these states are under preparation and the
achievement of objectives including reducing drop-out rate to less than 10% will be provided to Parliamentary Standing Committee after completion of ICR.
Comments of the Committee
 
            In view of the Committee’s recommendation, the Department was supposed to furnish the status paper within one month of the presentation of the Report.  The Committee hopes that Department would be careful about
such directions in future.  The Committee's concern here was based on the fact that despite massive funding and its utilization, the achievement level of the targets fixed under DPEP has remained inadequate.  It does not agree
with the Department’s views that the situation in this respect has improved.  The Committee feels that with little serious and concreted efforts, Department could have achieved much better results.  The Committee, therefore,
desires that the Department must try to achieve targets fixed under the programme during the coming financial year. 
VII.            KASTURBA GANDHI BALIKA VIDYALAYA (KGBV) SCHEME
Recommendations/Observations
7.1       The Government of India has launched in August, 2004 Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalya (KGBV) Scheme for setting up 750 residential schools at upper primary level for girls belonging predominantly to the SC, ST,
OBC’s and Minorities in difficult areas in Educationally Backward Blocks (EBBs) where the female literacy is below the national average and gender gap in literacy is more than the national average.  
7.2       The schools will be opened in a phased manner over Xth Plan period at an estimated cost of Rs. 19.05 lakh as recurring cost and Rs.26.25 lakh as non-recurring cost, per school.  A provision of Rs.489 crore has been made
for the Xth Plan.  The pattern of financing will be 75:25 ratio of sharing between the Centre and the States during the Tenth Five Year Plan and 50:50 thereafter.  
            Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates for the year 2004-05 and 2005-2006 are as under:
                                                                                                            (Rs. in crore)
Year BE RE Funds Released
2004-05 100.00 100.00 92.56
2005-06 250.00 250.00 27.94
 
7.3       The Committee has been informed that all 750 KGBVs have been sanctioned by the Department of Elementary Education & Literacy and an amount of Rs. 120.50 crores has been released (till December, 2005) to the
concerned SSA State Implementation Society for KGBV implementation. 649 out of 722 KGBV schools sanctioned so far reported to have been operationalised and 32,541 girls have been enrolled in these schools.
7.4       The Committee notes the Government of India has approved the merger of the KGBV Scheme with the SSA from the XI
th Plan period in January 2006.  The norms and nomenclature of the approved KGBV scheme will
remain intact, as approved by the Government of India and the KGBV scheme will continue unaltered but as a component of the SSA.
7.5       The Committee observes that this scheme has not taken off as yet.   Fund utilization position seemed to be satisfactory in the first year of the scheme i.e. 2004-05.   However, in the very next year, against a provision of Rs.
225.00 crore utilization status stood at Rs. 27.93 crore as on 17.2.06.   Committee’s apprehension is further confirmed by the fact that as on 1.4.2005, unspent balances of Rs. 92.00 crore were available with different states which
increased to Rs. 103.29 crore within a period of six months.   The Committee views this development with serious concern and feels that position as on today instead of showing any improvement must have deteriorated further.   
7.6       The  Committee observes that the functional status of KGBV school as on 31
st December, 2005, reveals that out of 722 sanctioned schools, 649 have become functional Bihar and J & K are the two major defaulter  states
having only 29 and 1 school functional out of 62 and 14 sanctioned respectively.   The Committee is further constrained to note that in respect of Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and Uttaranchal, inspite of school becoming
operational, status of land availability is not known.  Details regarding construction agencies reveal that it would be long before construction would start and schools would be having their own building. 
7.7         The Committee urges the Department to take up this matter with State Governments on priority basis and ensure the process of land availability and completion of preliminary exercise for construction work expedited.
Otherwise, there is a looming danger of this scheme getting stuck causing undue delay in delivering the noble aims the scheme stands for.
7.8       The Committee notes that 430 new KGBVs sanctioned in February, 2006 to be made operational in 2006-2007  Proposal for additional 570 KGBVs  is being processed towards Finance Ministers commitment made in his
Budget Speech.   While  welcoming the ambitious plan of the Government, the Committee  has a word of caution.   The Committee is of the view that KGBVs already sanctioned and made operational need to be focused on

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
priority basis so that they have all the prescribed infrastructure.    Only then the Department should expand the scheme further.   This is also the proper time to have an assessment about the problem areas identified so far and
taking remedial action therefor and also for future KGBVs. 
Action Taken
(7.1 to 7.8)
The Government of India has sanctioned 1180 KGBVs (including the 4.30 KGBVs sanctioned in February 2006) and released an amount of Rs.316.87 crore upto March, 2006.  The list of KGBVs sanctioned and amount
released State wise, by GOI is annexed (Annexure-XII).  663 KGBVs of the 750 KGBVs sanctioned earlier were reported by States to have been made operational up to March 2006.
The progress in operationalization of the KGBVs has been reviewed recently by the Department in the meeting of the Education Secretaries and State Project Directors held on 28 th July 2006 in New Delhi.  16 more
KGBVs are reported to be made functional and all States have assured that these residential will be functional at the earliest. 
The Department has also written to the concerned Chief Secretaries of the defaulting States to have the sanctioned KGBVs operationalized by September end, failing which they will be diverted to other States. The KGBV
scheme will be got evaluated in 2006-07.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee feels that progress in regard to KGBV Scheme should have been better, had the States particularly the defaulting ones been sensitized properly about the significance of it.  It notes that only 663 out of total
sanctioned 1180 KGBVs have been made functional upto March, 2006.  The situation in Assam, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal is quite grim.  The Committee recommends that
Department take due measures to ensure that all the KGBVs are made functional in a fixed time frame. The Committee also express its concern over dismal percentage of expenditure incurred, i.e., 29.73% upto March, 2006. It
hopes that the Department will make efforts for utilizing the allocation made for KGBV during the coming financial year.
XII.     JAN SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN
Recommendations/Observations
12.2    The Committee is disappointed to see that there is reduction in the number of beneficiaries in 2004-05 by nearly 3 lakh from its previous year, 2003-2004.   The Committee takes this reduction very seriously, more so, in
face of the fact that allocations and expenditure under JSS has increased during the said period.
Action Taken
            Jan Shikshan Sansthans (JSSs) organize a large number of vocational courses with varying duration.  The duration ranges from up to 5 days to 6 months and above.  Every year, Jan Shikshan Sansthans plan the
programmes as per the need and demand and hence, the number of programmes including duration varies from year to year.  If the JSSs conduct more number of less duration courses, it can automatically increase the number of
beneficiaries.  In a scheme like JSS, it is not only the coverage or the number of beneficiaries which matters but it is the quality also.  In a particular year, many JSSs organize more number of long duration courses, there is a
chance for reduction in the number of beneficiaries covered.  Hence, reduction can be treated more as the quality improvement rather than reduction in the number of beneficiaries.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee does not quite agree with the argument of the Department that reduction in the number of beneficiaries was due to improvement in quality of education imparted.  Besides quality, there is also greater need
for increasing the number of beneficiaries at the same time, if this Scheme were to make any visible impact.  The Committee is of the view that the Department would do better if it concentrated also on increasing the number of
beneficiaries as well as ensuring optimal utilization of the infrastructure of these JSSs.
Recommendations/Observations
12.4     The Committee would, however, draw attention of the Department to very strong observation made by the Planning Commission in its mid-term review of the Xth Plan.   It has observed that only 16 JSS out of 80 could be
rated very good.   This is sufficient to indicate that monitoring work of JSS in particular and that of NGOs in general is not being carried out properly.   The Committee recommends that the Department put in sincere efforts to
see that the NGOs deliver all for which they are funded and no laxity on their part be tolerated.
Action Taken
            So far, 90 Jan Shikshan Sansthans have been evaluated.  Grading of JSSs based on score obtained was purposefully kept high by the Department at 80%  plus as ‘Very Good’.  If the scores obtained by the JSSs are
scrutinized, one can find out that out of 90 JSSs evaluated, 16 have got more than 80%, 68 have got more than 66%.  This means only 6 JSSs scored less than 50%.  As per the assessment of the Department and as per the
evaluation studies so far conducted, the JSSs found to be doing fairly well.
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee still desires that all the JSSs be monitored carefully and made to fulfil their mandate in such a manner that they deserved ‘very good’ instead of ‘fairly good’.      
CHAPTER - IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
V. STRENGTHENING OF TEACHERS EDUCATION
Recommendations/Observations
5.6       The very fact that the vacancy position of DIETs is now being reviewed in national meeting of Education Secretaries and meetings of Teacher Education Approval Board indicates that the position is quite grim.  The
Committee is disturbed to note that expeditious releases of Central assistance towards salaries are being ensured through regular meetings of TEAB.  The Committee would like to have full details about existing vacancies in
DIETs, since when and number of vacancies filled during 2005-06 (state-wise).  The Committee hopes that all remedial measures are being taken by the Centre so that the DIETs can become functioning in the real sense for
carrying out their assigned task.
Action Taken
            States/UTs have been requested to give complete details about existing vacancies in DIETs, the date of vacancies and number of vacancies filed during 2005-06.  The same is being compiled.

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
II.            BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee notes the Department’s contention that funds could not be utilized under Adult Education mainly because of failure of North-Eastern States to use the funds, particularly under continuing Education
Programme.  The Committee has been informed that the bulk of the allocation was made under Continuing Education Programme and except Tripura, none of the other states in North-Eastern region could progress to the
Continuing Education Programme stage and hence, nearly entire allocation for NER during 2004-05 and 2005-06 remained unutilized.
 It is a matter of great concern that none of the NE states, other than Tripura, could progress to the Continuing Education Programme stage.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that such a dismal performance by
the NE States is in fact a poor reflection on performance as well as planning.  Moreover, it seems that the Department was not vigilant enough about such a position in North-Eastern Region, otherwise, they would not have been
caught unawares in this regard.  Department ought to have been more careful. The Committee recommends that the Department do the needful to prevent recurrence of such disturbing development.                           
                                                                        (Para 2.5)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
Apprehension of the Committee about increase in the number of pending utilization certificates in 2005-06 when compared with the pendency position in 2004-05 have proved to be true with regard to the Adult Education
Programme.  The Committee views with serious concern the massive increase in the amount of pending UCs from Rs. 140.12 crore in 2004-05 to Rs. 704.50 crore at the end of 2005-06.  The Committee would emphasize once
again the need for urgent steps to be taken for elimination of pending UCs.                                                   (Para 2.6)
 
III.            SARVA SHIKSHA ABHIYAN
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee notes that expenditure reported by the States/UTs under SSA for 2005-06 has been Rs. 9993.35 crore, which is 77 percent of available funds.  The Committee feels that this by no means can be treated as a
decent achievement in face of the fact that SSA, a flagship scheme of the Department, had already overshot the time schedule.  Such a pace certainly does not augur well for the success of the Abhiyan.  After an analysis, the
Committee also notes that there are only 13 States/UTs out of all the 35 States/UTs which have been able to utilize 80 or more percent of the available funds.  This situation, the Committee feels, call for the Department to be
more pro-active, vigilant and sincere to ensure optimum utilization of funds as well as achievement of physical targets under various components of the SSA.
            The Committee has been given to understand that financial progress of the programme is reviewed and expenditure levels are closely monitored every quarter by the Department SSA funds are to be transmitted from State
level to villages/schools/blocks and cluster centres.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that these compulsions cannot justify the ever increasing amount of unspent balances. The very fact that unspent balances are
there indicates that financial targets are not being achieved.  The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that the Department should make every effort for optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds.                        
                                                            (Para 3.6 & 3.7)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department to cater to educational needs of children with special needs (CWSN) under the SSA. However, the Committee feels that more and more such fully equipped
schools for such children need to be opened under SSA.  The Committee recommends that more and more teachers be made to undergo longer duration training on Inclusive Education.  It strongly feels that there is an urgent need
to create a database regardingnumber/percentage of CWSN in variousschools so that teachers specially trained for this purpose could be posted adequately in such schools.                (Para 3.16)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee is of the considered opinion that apart from universalizing elementary education, the SSA must lay added emphasis on quality of teaching- learning also.  Only then the SSA will be really successful.  The
lack of trained teachers is also a major factor resulting in dismal quality of education.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the efforts for having child-centred padagogy and competency based teaching must be given
added impetus.  In addition to this, in- service training should be provided to the teachers more frequently.
(Para 3.21)
 
IV.            NATIONAL PROGRAMME OF NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT TO PRIMARY EDUCATION (MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
                The Committee wishes to reiterate its observation about non-participation of the community in the desired/required manner.  It has seen for itself that cooks/helpers are not employed in many schools, as a result teachers
have to involve themselves in cooking activities. The Committee feels that women Self Help Groups may be involved in the programme not only for cooking and cleaning activities but also for monitoring purpose. It is also of the
considered opinion that allocation for this purpose also needs to be suitably enhanced.   The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department make serious efforts to address the concerns of the Committee in this regard.      
                                                                                (Para 4.8 & 4.9)
 
V.            STRENGTHENING OF TEACHERS EDUCATION
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee expresses its serious concern about a large number of sanctioned DIETS remaining non-functional for a long time in different states. To the Committee's dismay, the Department always comes up with
similar excuse every year.  In view of the important role of the DIETS, the Committee recommends that all the DIETs be made functional within a fixed time schedule.  The States be advised to expedite the civil constructions
and posting faculties during the period fixed in this regard.                                                                                        (Para 5.4)
Comments of the Committee
           
The Committee is of the considered view that vacancies in DIETs is an area of grave concern due to obvious reason.  It, therefore, calls upon the Department to make all out efforts to get the vacancies filled up on priority

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
basis.  It must be taken up with the States on higher levels. This has become all the more imperative because the DIETs have now been made the monitoring agencies for Mid-day Meal Scheme.
(Para 5.5)
Comments of the Committee
            The Committee notes that though there have been progress in recognition of institutions, but there is still a long way to go. Moreover, the Committee is surprised to note that the number of institutions recognized in the
states needing big push is only marginal.  The Committee desires that these states may be treated as special focus States to ensure that more and more institutions were recognized there for improving the situation in this regard.
                                                            (Para 5.9)
 
VI.            DISTRICT PRIMARY EDUCATION PROGRAMME
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            In view of the Committee’s recommendation, the Department was supposed to furnish the status paper within one month of the presentation of the Report.  The Committee hopes that Department would be careful about
such directions in future.  The Committee's concern here was based on the fact that despite massive funding and its utilization, the achievement level of the targets fixed under DPEP has remained inadequate.  It does not agree
with the Department’s views that the situation in this respect has improved.  The Committee feels that with little serious and concreted efforts, Department could have achieved much better results.  The Committee, therefore,
desires that the Department must try to achieve targets fixed under the programme during the coming financial year.                 (Para 6.5)
 
VII.            KASTURBA GANDHI BALIKA VIDYALAYA (KGBV) SCHEME
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee feels that progress in regard to KGBV Scheme should have been better, had the States particularly the defaulting ones been sensitized properly about the significance of it.  It notes that only 663 out of total
sanctioned 1180 KGBVs have been made functional upto March, 2006.  The situation in Assam, Bihar, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal is quite grim.  The Committee recommends that
Department take due measures to ensure that all the KGBVs are made functional in a fixed time frame. The Committee also express its concern over dismal percentage of expenditure incurred, i.e., 29.73% upto March, 2006. It
hopes that the Department will make efforts for utilizing the allocation made for KGBV during the coming financial year.
(Para (7.1 to 7.8)
XII.     JAN SHIKSHAN SANSTHAN
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee does not quite agree with the argument of the Department that reduction in the number of beneficiaries was due to improvement in quality of education imparted.  Besides quality, there is also greater need
for increasing the number of beneficiaries at the same time, if this Scheme were to make any visible impact.  The Committee is of the view that the Department would do better if it concentrated also on increasing the number of
beneficiaries as well as ensuring optimal utilization of the infrastructure of these JSSs.                               (Para 12.2)
 
Comments of the Committee
 
            The Committee still desires that all the JSSs be monitored carefully and made to fulfil their mandate in such a manner that they deserved ‘very good’ instead of ‘fairly good’.                                                                        
            (Para 12.4)
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 
MINUTES
 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee on Human Resource Development met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 25
th January, 2007 in Committee Room 'E', Basement, Parliament House Annexe , New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1.         Shri Janardan Dwivedi                        ¾                    Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.                  Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
3.                  Shri Shantaram Laxman Naik
4.                  Shri Vijay Kumar Rupani
5.                  Shri Laxminarayan Sharma
6.                  Smt. Brinda Karat
7.                  Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
                  

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
8. Shri Ali Anwar
 
LOK SABHA
 
9.                  Shri Ashok Argal
10.              Shri Basudeb Barman
11.              Shri Harishchandra Chavan
12.              Shri Harisinh Chavda
13.              Shri Ramswaroop Koli
14.              Smt. Nivedita Sambhajirao Mane
15.              Smt. M.S.K. Bhavani Rajenthiran
16.              Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat
17.              Shri Ganesh Prasad Singh
18.              Dr. Thokchom Meinya
19.              Shri K. Virupakshappa
20.              Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
21.              Shri Francis K. George
22.              Shri Anantkumar Hegde
23.              Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
 
        SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Director
Shri Vimal Kumar, Under Secretary
Shri Swarabji  B., Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.  The Committee then considered the following draft reports:
 
(i)
     Action Taken Report on recommendations/observations contained in the 173rd Report on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department of School Education and Literacy;
(ii)    *********
(iii)  *********
(iv)  *********
(v)   *********
 
3.         The Committee adopted the reports with certain modifications. The Committee decided to present/lay the Reports to both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing Budget session.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.10 P.M. to meet again on 19th February 2007.
NEW DELHI
25
th January, 2007
VIMAL KUMAR
UNDER SECRETARY
 
 
________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter
Annxure-I
 ADULT EDUCATION BUREAU
 EXPENDITURE STATEMENT
 30.12.2005
     PLAN
     (Rupees in lakhs)
 
S.No. Name of the Scheme Budget Estimates 2005-
2006
Revised Estimates 2005-
2005*
Expenditure as on 30.11.2005 Expenditure as on 30.12.2005 (%)              w.r.t. BE
 1 2 3  5 5 6
 1 Literacy Campaigns 2250.00 3750.00 867.78 1588.29  
  NER 250.00 250.00 59.74 59.74  
   2500.00 4000.00 927.52 1648.03 65.92
 2 Continuing Education      
  SLMA 16392.00 14892.00 8938.78 13425.53  
  State Government 180.00 0.00 0.00 0.00  
  Union Territory 20.00 20.00 17.01 17.01  
  NER 1853.00 1853.00 0.00 0.00  
   18445.00 16765.00 8955.79 13442.54 72.88
 3 Support to NGOs 2250.00 1950.00 814.75 818.41  
  NER 250.00 250.00 45.00 58.02  
   2500.00 2200.00 859.75 876.43 35.06
 4 Jan Shikshan  Sansthan 3559.00 4039.00 2044.14 2311.14  
  NER 396.00 396.00 80.00 98.00  

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
   3955.00 4435.00 2124.14 2409.14 60.91
 5 Directorate of Adult Education 1237.00 1229.00 367.90 635.35  
  NER 138.00 138.00 0.00 0.00  
   1375.00 1367.00 367.90 635.35 46.21
 6 Population Edu. 112.00 112.00 56.00 56.00  
  NER 13.00 13.00 5.45 5.54  
   125.00 125.00 61.45 61.54 49.23
 7 NLMA 100.00 100.00 1.85 2.85  
  NER 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00  
   100.00 100.00 1.85 2.85 2.85
 8 NIAE 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00  
  NER 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00  
   0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00  
  Total (General) 26100.00 26092.00 13091.20 18219.23 69.81
  Total (NER) 2900.00 2900.00 184.74 221.30 7.63
  Grand Total 29000.00 28992.00 13275.94 18440.53 63.59
     Non-Plan
 
S.No. Name of the Schme Budget Estimates 2005-
06
Revised Estimates 2005-
2005
Expenditure as on 30.11.2005 Expenditure as on 30.12.05 (%)              w.r.t. BE
 1 Directorate of Adult Education 180.00 169.00 126.10 141.07 78.37
 
2 Jan Shikshan Sansthan, Delhi 37.43 37.43 21.87 24.51 65.48
  Total 217.43 206.43 147.97 165.58 76.15
        
 RE 2005-06 is subject to approval of M/o Finance
 
 
 
Annexure-II
Position of Unspent Balances reported by States/UTs for funds released under Cooking
Cost component of the MDM Scheme
  (Rs. in Lakhs)
   
S. No. States/UTs Unspent balance of funds released
during 2005-06
   
1 2 3
 States  
1 Andhra Pradesh 0.00
2 Arunachal Pradesh 91.97
3 Assam 5462.37
4 Bihar 7689.07
5 Chhattisgarh 0.00
6 Goa 0.00
7 Gujarat 1154.34
8 Haryana 830.35
9 Himachal pradesh 0.00
10 Jammu & Kashmir N.A
11 Jharkhand 0.00
12 Karnataka 0.00
13 Kerala 0.00
14 Madhya Pradesh 299.37
15 Maharashtra 3980.84
16 Manipur 73.33
17 Meghalaya 0.00
18 Mizoram 0.00
19 Nagaland 0.00
20 Orissa 2160.84
21 Punjab 0.00
22 Rajasthan 2994.98
23 Sikkim 87.65
24 Tamil Nadu 0.00
25 Tripura 0.00
26 Uttaranchal 0.00
27 Uttar Pradesh 3080.19
28 West Bengal 0.00
 Union Territories  

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
29 A&N Islands 0.00
30 Chandigarh 0.00
31 D&N Haveli N.A
32 Daman & Diu N.A
33 Delhi 1212.66
34 Lakshadweep  N.A
35 Pondicherry N.A
 Total 29117.96
   
* - No funds were released as the UT stated that it was already providing sufficient funds for
this component from the UT Budget.
 
 
Annexure-III
 ADULT EDUCATION BUREAU
 POSITION OF UNSPENT BALANCES AVAILABLE WITH THE 
 IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES AS ON 31.3.2005
    (Rs. In lakhs)
 
S. No. State/ UT Literacy Campaigns & OR                     (TLC/PLP) Continuing Education
 1 2 3 4
 1 Andhra Pradesh 0.00 0.00
 2 Arunachal Pradesh 125.42 0.00
 3 Assam 490.07 0.00
 4 Bihar 1550.79 17.12
 5 Chattisgarh 82.63 0.00
 6 Goa 0.00 0.00
 7 Gujarat 0.00 83.47
 8 Haryana 49.91 330.42
 9 Himachal Pradesh 37.23 0.31
 10 Jammu & Kashmir 311.10 0.00
 11 Jharkhand 475.97 30.33
 12 Karnataka 0.00 885.55
 13 Kerala 0.00 47.23
 14 Madhya Pradesh 0.00 1079.21
 15 Maharashtra 723.91 780.22
 16 Manipur 59.43 0.00
 17 Meghalaya 126.17 0.00
 18 Mizoram 0.00 0.00
 19 Nagaland 109.75 0.00
 20 Orissa 0.00 0.00
 21 Punjab 252.20 0.00
 22 Rajasthan 433.34 905.00
 23 Sikkim 3.15 0.00
 24 Tamil Nadu 14.69 27.37
 25 Tripura 0.00 144.51
 26 Uttar Pradesh 774.08 1932.16
 27 Uttaranchal 187.36 122.08
 28 West Bengal 0.00 2023.96
 29 Chandigarh 0.00 62.00
 30 Delhi 0.00 128.32
 31 Pondicherry 0.00 0.20
 32 Daman & Diu 0.92 0.00
 33 Andaman & Nicobar 0.00 0.00
 34 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.00 0.00
 35 Lakshadweep 0.00 7.28
  Total 5808.12 8606.74
 * Literacy Campaigns are being implemented in 322 districts (139 under TLC and 173 under PLP)
 ** CE Programmes are being implemented in 284 districts.
Annexure-IV
 ADULT EDUCATION BUREAU
 POSITION OF UNSPENT BALANCES AVAILABLE WITH THE 
 IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES AS ON 30.9.2005
    (Rs. In lakhs)
 S. No. State/ UT Literacy Campaigns & OR                     (TLC/PLP) Continuing Education

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
 1 2 3 4
 1 Andhra Pradesh 43.55 0.00
 2 Arunachal Pradesh 131.70 0.00
 3 Assam 182.65 2.82
 4 Bihar 1830.86 529.53
 5 Chattisgarh 108.04 1.71
 6 Goa 0.00 0.00
 7 Gujarat 0.00 2051.91
 8 Haryana 49.91 511.57
 9 Himachal Pradesh 0.00 0.31
 10 Jammu & Kashmir 236.26 0.00
 11 Jharkhand 292.55 12.42
 12 Karnataka 0.00 23.93
 13 Kerala 0.00 0.00
 14 Madhya Pradesh 0.00 756.55
 15 Maharashtra 723.91 586.41
 16 Manipur 44.60 6.07
 17 Meghalaya 126.17 0.00
 18 Mizoram 0.00 0.00
 19 Nagaland 142.42 7.50
 20 Orissa 519.48 0.00
 21 Punjab 218.56 319.31
 22 Rajasthan 433.34 2084.74
 23 Sikkim 3.15 0.00
 24 Tamil Nadu 0.00 2379.48
 25 Tripura 30.47 241.40
 26 Uttar Pradesh 1188.08 3494.78
 27 Uttaranchal 15.72 330.58
 28 West Bengal 200.00 1823.96
 29 Chandigarh 0.00 62.00
 30 Delhi 0.00 128.32
 31 Pondicherry 0.00 0.00
 32 Daman & Diu 0.92 0.00
 33 Andaman & Nicobar 0.00 0.00
 34 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.00 0.00
 35 Lakshadweep 0.00 7.28
  Total 6522.34 15362.58
     
 * Literacy Campaigns are being implemented in 304 districts (137 under TLC and 167 under PLP)
 ** CE Programmes are being implemented in 293 districts.
Annexure-V
 ADULT EDUCATION BUREAU
 POSITION OF UNSPENT BALANCES AVAILABLE WITH THE 
 IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES AS ON 30.6.2006
    (Rs. In lakhs)
 
S. No. State/ UT Literacy Campaigns & OR                     (TLC/PLP) Continuing Education
 1 2 3 4
 1 Andhra Pradesh 3.82 627.28
 2 Arunachal Pradesh 108.51 0.00
 3 Assam 354.66 0.00
 4 Bihar 2062.56 432.84
 5 Chattisgarh 12.27 0.00
 6 Goa 0.00 0.00
 7 Gujarat 0.37 1390.46
 8 Haryana 247.63 461.81
 9 Himachal Pradesh 0.00 0.31
 10 Jammu & Kashmir 224.69 0.00
 11 Jharkhand 488.83 578.04
 12 Karnataka 0.00 674.49
 13 Kerala 0.00 3.87
 14 Madhya Pradesh 0.00 717.14
 15 Maharashtra 303.43 3092.48
 16 Manipur 89.92 0.00
 17 Meghalaya 26.17 0.00
 18 Mizoram 0.00 0.00
 19 Nagaland 25.16 0.00
 20 Orissa NA NA

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
 21 Punjab 235.13 1.47
 22 Rajasthan 433.34 1049.70
 23 Sikkim 36.86 0.00
 24 Tamil Nadu 0.00 1372.79
 25 Tripura 0.00 235.10
 26 Uttar Pradesh 1102.56 3317.67
 27 Uttaranchal 0.00 466.22
 28 West Bengal 1.71 2090.67
 29 Chandigarh 0.00 59.40
 30 Delhi 0.00 128.32
 31 Pondicherry 0.00 0.00
 32 Daman & Diu 0.92 0.00
 33 Andaman & Nicobar 0.00 0.00
 34 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.00 0.00
 35 Lakshadweep 0.00 7.28
  Total 5758.54 16707.34
     
 * Literacy Campaigns are being implemented in 304 districts (109 under TLC and 174 under PLP)
 ** CE Programmes are being implemented in 314 districts.
                                                                                                                                                                               Annexure-VI
S.No. Name of State/UT OB as on       1-4-05
as per FMR # GOI releases State Releases Total funds
available
Expenditure   till 31st
March, 2006 Unspent Balance % w.r.t. total
funds available
1 Andaman & Nicobar 317.44 63.00 97.00 477.44 448.59 28.85 93.96%
2 Andhra Pradesh 12747.97 37999.00 12605.15 63352.12 55816.47 7535.65 88.11%
3 Arunachal Pradesh 633.52 4105.01 1115.00 5853.53 5227.41 626.12 89.30%
4 Assam 7747.28 17850.00 9300.00 34897.28 24803.64 10093.64 71.08%
5 Bihar 48244.05 31970.56 13261.17 93475.78 46104.76 47371.02 49.32%
6 Chandigarh 180.15 350.00 199.80 729.95 549.36                                           75.26%
7 Chattisgarh 25240.89 29184.36 10396.58 64821.83 42587.04 22234.79 65.70%
8 Dadar & Nagar 669.01 0.00 0.00 669.01 379.22 289.79 56.68%
9 Daman & Diu 3.69 223.82 34.00 261.51 57.63 203.88 22.04%
10 Delhi 1203.42 1100.00 653.91 2957.33 2557.13 400.20 86.47%
11 Goa 0.00 452.42 581.14 1033.56 477.88 555.68 46.24%
12 Gujarat 10345.46 15284.71 8510.00 34140.17 23983.15 10157.03 70.25%
13 Haryana 6977.03 10381.55 3398.85 20757.43 19858.60 898.83 95.67%
14 Himachal Pradesh 1619.49 7614.66 3380.88 12615.03 9929.73 2664.19 78.71%
15 J&K 5908.98 19429.55 5604.00 30942.53 21261.91 9680.62 68.71%
16 Jharkhand 24384.66 27997.50 10672.00 63054.16 37759.90 25294.26 59.88%
17 Karnataka 8369.29 28303.78 13926.35 50599.42 40437.44 10161.98 79.92%
18 Kerala 3437.52 5939.00 3662.44 13038.96 10432.12 2606.84 80.01%
19 Lakshadeep 38.41 0.00 20.00 58.41 16.01 42.40 27.41%
20 Madhya Pradesh 36698.37 77173.12 36468.79 150340.28 104047.48 46292.80 69.21%
21 Maharashtra 16934.23 50235.31 14519.70 81689.24 60458.50 21230.74 74.01%
22 Manipur 1937.17 1327.44 649.00 3913.61 2051.96 1861.65 52.43%
23 Meghalaya 3952.36 1925.81 813.26 6691.43 3533.16 3158.27 52.80%
24 Mizoram 2252.21 2559.15 988.08 5799.44 3599.34 2200.10 62.06%
25 Nagaland 262.53 2323.01 300.00 2885.54 2879.40 6.14 99.79%
26 Orissa 9917.03 32792.50 9197.51 51907.04 38438.92 13468.12 74.05%

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
27 Pondicherry 432.36 529.40 100.00 1061.76 568.79 492.97 53.57%
28 Punjab 7418.83 14683.89 4894.73 26997.45 21890.87 5106.58 81.08%
29 Rajasthan 3137.62 60362.00 17047.90 80547.52 75884.12 4663.40 94.21%
30 Sikkim 510.01 1000.25 100.00 1610.26 887.60 722.66 55.12%
31 Tamil Nadu 2075.66 35329.53 11776.51 49181.70 47961.24 1220.46 97.52%
32 Tripura 2373.45 7939.50 2191.97 12504.92 8163.00 4341.92 65.28%
33 Uttar Pradesh 4755.87 182799.00 60933.29 248488.16 223373.91 25114.25 89.89%
34 Uttaranchal 3446.59 10004.00 3334.33 16784.92 14687.32 2097.60 87.50%
35 West Bengal 15936.49 31024.00 11841.33 58801.82 48221.52 10580.30 82.01%
  270109.04 750256.83 272574.67 1292940.54 999335.12 293403.73 77.29%
 # Indicate as actually received by the State upto 31st March 2006
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                   
 Annexure-X
 
 State-wise Information about the number of Recognised Teacher training
institutions, approved courses  and their intake as on 31.3.2004
   AS ON 31ST MARCH 2004
S.NO. STATE NO. OF INSTITUTIONS NO. OF COURSES APPROVED INTAKE
1 A&N ISLANDS 2 3 140
2. ANDHRA PRADESH 393 426 43646
3. ARUNANCHAL PRADESH 2 2 105
4. ASSAM 28 29 1810
5. BIHAR 28 28 1990
6. CHANDIGARH 6 10 795
7. CHATTISGARH 41 41 2700
8. DAMAN & DIU 2 2 110
9. DELHI 53 74 8182
10. GOA 4 4 305
11. GUJARAT 338 338 20886
12. HARYANA 71 106 8765
13. HIMACHAL PRADESH 45 54 5097
14. JHARKHAND 20 20 1470
15. KARNATAKA 280 320 21325
16. KERALA 171 177 10309
17. MADHYA PRADESH 166 166 12460
18. MAHARASHTRA 592 592 38198
19. MANIPUR 6 6 740
20. MEGHALAYA 9 9 684
21. MIZORAM 4 4 400
22. NAGALAND 7 7 490
23. ORISSA 87 94 7104
24. PONDICHERRY 7 11 1125
25. PUNJAB 49 66 8205
26. RAJASTHAN 123 152 14585
27. SIKKIM 4 4 240
28. TAMIL NADU 156 136 10774
29. TRIPURA 5 6 754
30. UTTAR PRADESH (INCLUDING  UTTARANCHAL) 457 557 47211
31. WEST BENGAL 43 45 3467
 TOTAL 3199 3489 274072
                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Annexure-X A
  YEAR 2004-2005 YEAR 2005-2006
S.NO. STATE NO. OF INSTITUTIONS NO. OF COURSES APPROVED INTAKE NO. OF INSTITUTIONS NO. OF COURSES APPROVED INTAKE
1. A & N ISLANDS 0 0 0 0 0 40
2. ANDHRA PRADESH 21 22 2920 23 199 10855
3. ARUNANCHAL PRADESH 1 1 50 4 4 250
      

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
4. ASSAM 11 15 1125 29 29 2075
5. BIHAR 2 3 420 8 10 825
6. CHANDIGARH 1 2 725 0 1 420
7. CHATTISGARH 9 9 950 35 35 3300
8. DAMAN & DIU 0 0 0 0 0 0
9. DELHI 14 29 1883 9 14 710
10. GOA 3 3 200 0 0 90
11. GUJARAT 104 104 6700 219 219 15478
12. HARYANA 16 21 2640 5 10 762
13. HIMACHAL PRADESH 2 11 1686 3 4 410
14. JHARKHAND 7 7 740 30 30 2650
15. KARNATAKA 491 611 40780 331 331 22050
16. KERALA 148 203 17065 109 67 5967
17. MADHYA PRADESH 54 55 4450 221 221 21495
18. MAHARASHTRA 53 79 6100 342 342 24695
19. MANIPUR 0 1 25 8 9 465
20. MEGHALAYA 0 0 0 1 1 50
21. MIZORAM 0 1 30 0 0 0
22. NAGALAND 0 0 0 0 0 0
23. ORISSA 2 3 58 1 3 145
24. PONDICHERRY 6 6 660 59 55 4800
25. PUNJAB 19 34 2675 70 76 7195
26. RAJASTHAN 6 22 325 82 103 9925
27. SIKKIM 0 0 0 0 1 75
28. TAMIL NADU 169 193 9000 394 394 37593
29. TRIPURA 2 2 100 2 2 256
30. UTTAR PRADESH 205 339 26816 131 175 17185
31. UTTARANCHAL 3 4 400 35 35 3310
32. WEST BENGAL 4 4 275 9 10 940
 TOTAL 1353 1784 128798 2160 2380 194011
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Annexure-XI
Item
Cumulative target and achievement upto 2005-06  
UP UTTARANCHAL* JHARKHAND BIHAR West Bengal RAJASTHAN
(DPEP I & II)
ORISSA Total  ORISSA
Target Achieve-
ment
Target Achieve-
ment
Target Achieve-
ment
Target Achieve-
ment
Target Achieve-
ment
Target Achievement Target Achiev-
emen nt
Target Achiev-
ment
 Target Achievement
School
opened 2502 2502 463 463   1783 1783     1710 1710 6458 6458  1710 1710
Total
number of
teachers
appointed
2736 2736 463 463   3566 3536     6324 6034 13089 12769  6324 6034
13316 12975 1314 1314           14630 14289    
Total
number of
children to
whom free
text books
distributed
19137856 19346752 1194577 1194577   14018076 12451738     3463403 3463403 37813912 36456470  3463403 3463403
In-service
training of
teachers
(no. of
trainee days
)teacher
trainee.
125000 207100 453980 453980   3897520 3430205 403060 282082   134251 92189 5013811 4465556  134251 92189
Number of
toilet
constructed
12366 12346 2328 2327 2973 2207 3547 3246
1100 531 12422 11867 503 177 35239 32701  503 177
Number of
dinking
water
facilities
provided
255 255 1245 1245 2218 1872 3439 2277 1100 531 5661 5115 1773 1480 15691 12775  1773 1480
Number of
additional
classrooms 10040 10040 944 943 5924 3406 2060 1954 6539 2411 6687 5817 1318 790 33512 25361  1318 790

187th report of human resource development
file:///D/Committee%20on%20HRD/187threport.htm[01-07-2016 15:30:43]
constructed
Number of
school
building
constructed
5479 5414 381 372 1113 965 1505 1252 520 369 1671 1405 1125 558 11794 10335  1125 558
No. of
children
admitted in
AIE centers
(EGS+AIE)
901970 664848 112 172   367670 347882 54496 6615 186923 186923 20764 20764 1531935 1227204  20764 20764
Total 20211520 20264968 1655807 1655856 12228 8450 18299166 16243873 466815 292539 213364 211127 3631171 3587105 44490071 42263918  3631171 3587105
* Upto September 2005
 
 