15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
FIFTEENTH  REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2005-2006
 (DEMANDS NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  -21st DECEMBER, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON-21st DECEMBER, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
     December, 2005/ Agrahayana, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                           
2.        PREFACE                                                                                            
3.                REPORT                                                                                                                                                         
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government     
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
                      Government’s replies
 CHAPTER IIIRecommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted
                      by the Committee                     
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies of the Government are still
awaited
4.        Observations/Recommendations at a glance
5.        MINUTES                                                
6.        Annexure                                            
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                    ¾       Chairman
 MEMBERS
             RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur        
3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Prof. P.J. Kurian
5. Dr. A.K. Patel
6. Shrimati Maya Singh
      7.  Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
   8.  Shri R. Sarath Kumar

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
9. Shri Lalhming Liana
   *10.  Shri Digvijay Singh
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri M. Ambareesh
12.  Shri D.K. Audikesavulu
13.  Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
14.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi
15.  Smt. Bhavana P. Gawali
16.  Shri Rajendra Kumar
17.  Smt. Sushila Bangaru Laxman
18.  Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
19.  Shri Rasheed Masood
20.  Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam
21.  Dr. Chinta Mohan
Nominated w.e.f. 13th December, 2005
22.  Ms. Archana Nayak
23.  Shri D.B. Patil
24.  Shri Nakul Das Rai
25.  Smt. K. Rani
26.  Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
28.  Shri Uday Singh
29.  Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
30.  Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav
31.  Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
           
           Shri N.C. Joshi,         Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg,  Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guharoy ,   Director
Shri  Momraj Singh,   Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,          Committee Officer
PREFACE
 
           I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare,
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifteenth Report of
the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report onDemands
for Grants (Demand No.47) of the Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2005-2006.
2.        The Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
was presented to Rajya Sabha on 28
th April, 2005 and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th April, 2005.  Replies of the
Government on the recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Health were considered
by the Committee at its meeting held on the 15th December, 2005.   

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
3.        The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 15 th December,
2005. 
NEW DELHI;
15th December 15, 2005
24 Agrahayana  24, 1927 (Saka)
AMAR SINGH
Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
 
REPORT
           The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in its Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health for the year 2005-06.
 
2.
                Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the recommendation contained in the
Report.  They have been categorized as follows:
 
(i)        Recommendations/ Observations which have been accepted by the Government      Total -(Chapter I) 2.3, 10.3,
10.6, 10.7, 11.3, 11.5, 12.2, 12.6, 13.3, 13.5, 13.7, 13.8, 13.10, 15.3, 20.2, 21.1, 24.1 Total- 17
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Total - (Chapter II) 3.3, 3.5, 3.11, 4.2, 4.3, 4.5, 5.2, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 7.1, 7.2, 8.2, 8.3, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5, 11.4,
12.3, 12.4, 13.1, 13.4, 13.11, 13.12, 13.13, 14.2 & 14.3, 14.5, 15.1, 15.2, 17.1, 17.2, 20.1, 22.1, 22.3, 23.1, 23.2 & 23.3
Total-39
                                                                                  
(iii)
             Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:  Total – (Chapter III) 2.4, 2.6, 3.2, 3.4, 3.6, 3.9, 3.10, 4.4, 6.5, 8.4, 8.5 & 8.6, 9.5, 12.5, 12.7, 13.2, 13.6,
13.9, 13.14, 14.4, 15.4, 16.1, 18.1, 19.1 Total-23
 
(iv) Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:   -(Chapter-IV)   “Nil”
 
           CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
Recommendations/Observations
2.3
             The Committee observes that in accordance with the goals as contained in the NHP-2002, allocation for central
health sector should imply a manifold increase in the budget requirement. The Committee is in agreement with the
contention of the Department that past trends of allocation of budgetary outlays and the overall resources constraint do
not indicate a very encouraging scenario. Two suggestions were put forth before the committee in this regards by the
Department. First was that the external assistance for different schemes being obtained from various agencies as grants
be taken as an additionally over and above the budget. Committee was given to understand that a major constraint of
National AIDS Control Programme has been that of external assistance which comes from through Gross Budgetary
Support as a result of which all external assistance has to be accommodated within the Annual Plan/Five Year Plan
outlay ceiling. The Committee is in agreement with the viewpoint of the Department that external assistance coming in
the shape of grant-in-aid (distinct from loan) should flow over and above the Gross Budgetary Support, The Committee,
accordingly recommends that the Department should take up this issue with the Planning Commission.
 
Action Taken
We agree with the recommendation of the committee that external assistance for different schemes being
obtained from various agencies as grant or coming in the shape of grant-in-aid (distinct from loan) should flow over and
above the Gross Budgetary Support. This issue will be discussed further with the Planning Commission.
 
X NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
10.3 Recommendations/Observations
The State-wise reported number of cases and deaths during the last five years indicates that malaria control
measures in some states are not proving effective as the number of Malaria deaths instead of showing any downward
trend seem to be increasing. The committee is of the view that Department should take the initiative in coordination with
the concerned state Govts, who are implementing agencies for monitoring Malaria Control Programme in those States
showing increasing number of cases and deaths during the recent years.
 
State                                     1999     2000     2001   2002    2003 (Pro)
 
Karnataka                                11         14         21        33        22
Maharashtra                             46         40        50         43        85
Manipur                                     8           0          5           9        17
Meghalaya                                 5         11        17         41        38
Orissa                                    399        467      305       465      333
Rajasthan                                  0         10        36         11         66
W.Bengal                               144     103        191      152       214
 
The Committee is of the view that Department should take the initiative in coordination with the concerned state
Govt/implementing agencies for monitoring the Malaria Control Programme in those States showing increasing number
of cases and deaths during the recent years.
 
Action Taken
           Maximum no. of deaths are reported from the states of Assam, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Orissa, Rajasthan and West Bengal which contribute about 90% of the total deaths in the country.  The no. of deaths
have decreased in almost all the states since 2001 except marginal increase in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Mizoram and Punjab. Major increase has been reported from Gujarat, Maharashtra, Manipur, Rajasthan, Tripura and
West Bengal where substantial no. of deaths have been reported.Overall, no. of malaria cases in the country has
decreased by about 10.36% in 2003 as compared to 2001. However cases have shown slight increasing trend in the states
of Gujarat, Haryana, Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Daman
& Diu and Lakshadweep in 2003 as compared to 2001.
The state authorities have been advised to strengthen the surveillance activities to control the morbidity and
mortality due to malaria. Besides, Govt. of India is sending teams to the states from this organization and other
institutions like ICMR to provide the technical assistance to the states to plan and implement the programme effectively.
 
10.6 Recommendations/Observations
The committee finds that the situation in Bihar is more alarming. Most of the Districts in the state had ABER of
less than 1% in the Year 2003, due to which actual magnitude of Malaria situation in the State could not be assessed.
There are some districts like Aurangabad, Bhagalpur, Gaya, Patna, Nawada etc, where even with low level of ABER,
high Plasmodium Falciparum (Pf) proportion are being reported. The Committee would like to point out that the
Department should make all possible efforts for activating the existing/required machinery for the proper implementation
of the programme. The Committee strongly feels that the Department will have to continue monitoring by sending
inspection teams to the affected districts of the state.
 
Action Taken
Regular and frequent visit by Officers of Directorate of National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme
(NVBDCP) as well as 17 Regional Health &Family Welfare Offices of the Govt. of India and by other institutions like
Malaria Research Centre, Delhi, Regional Medical Research Centre (RMRC), Dibrugarh (Assam) and Regional Medical
Research Centre (RMRC),  Bhubaneshwar (Orissa) etc., for an on the spot assessment and guidance for timely corrective
measures for the effective control of malaria. Special attention would be given to the districts of Aurangabad, Bhagalpur,
Gaya, Patna, Nawada in monitoring the surveillance & other programme   activities.
 
10.7 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes that eleven malaria hardcore tribal districts in Gujarat have been covered under Enhanced

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
malaria Control Project with World Bank assistance w.e.f. 30th September 1997. The Committee is surprised to note that
18 districts out of total 25 districts of the State have reported increase in Malaria cases in 2004. Besides heavy rainfall
and disasters like earthquake, vacancy of 50% posts of MPWS and 40% of Lab technicians and inadequate supply of
insecticides can be considered mainly responsible for such a situation. Not only this 50% DDCs and FTDs were not
functioning in Patan and Kutch districts of the State. The Committee is of the view that like the other states not
performing well, in Gujarat also, only intensive monitoring can result in controlling the out-break of malaria cases. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should continue the initiative taken by it.
 
Action Taken
The Department has intensified monitoring of the progamme   Through Malaria Research Centre unit at Kheda,
Gujarat and Regional Office of Health & Family Welfare, Ahmedabad, besides officers are also making visits from the
Directorate of NVBDCP. Government of Gujarat has also taken some initiative to improve the situation by engaging
health workers & Lab Technicians on contractual basis against the vacant posts.
 
XI   NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME
11.3 Recommendations/Observations
While appreciating the work being done under RNTCP, Committee expresses serious concern on another assessment
of the field study.  Outstripping of management and financial capacity at Central and State levels by the extra ordinary
rapid expansion of the disease nullifies all the achievements made under the programme.
 
Action Taken
As a follow up action on the findings/recommendations of the above review, the following measures have been
taken at the Central and State level to augment the management in financial capacity.
 
Central level
a) To increase the manpower at the Central level, two more Chief Medical Officers, two financial consultants and two
WHO Consultants have been provided in the Central TB Division.
b) All the Chief Medical Officers and Consultants have been provided with Laptops to increase their efficiency.
c) Additional office space has been provided to Central TB Division.
 
State-level
a)
                The State authorities have been repeatedly requested to strengthen the State TB Cell (STC) as per the State TB
Society guidelines and consequently presently in most of the STC, the required staff such as Medical Officer,
Accountant, IEC Officer, Data Entry Operator, Driver, Pharmacist and Secretarial Assistant are in position.
b)
                More WHO Consultants have been provided to the States.
c)                12 Public Private Mix (PPM) Consultants have been appointed to coordinate TB Control activities in urban areas.
d)                The norm for providing contractual TB Health Visitor has been revised from 1 per 1.5 lakh urban populations to
1 per lakh population.
e)                1 Urban TB Coordinator on contractual basis has been sanctioned on contractual basis for 17 identified urban
agglomerates of more than 1 million population.
f)                 Provision has been made for appointment of TB-HIV Coordinators on contractual basis.
g)                State TB Societies have been empowered to reallocate the amount upto 100% of the requirement under specific
heads as against earlier provision of reallocation upto 15%.
h)                To increase the mobility of Medical Officers TB Control (MOTC-TU) at sub-district level, vehicle hiring charges
have been increased from Rs. 500/- to Rs. 700/- and Rs. 850/- per day in tribal & hilly areas.
i)                  To strengthen the training and management capability at the State level, LCD Projectors are being provided to
the States.
 
From the above, it is clear that from time to time the necessary measures have been taken for ensuring the high
quality of service and there has been no compromise in this regard as is evident from the high success achieved. 
Presently, more than one billion population has been covered under the revised strategy and the average national cure
rate is above 85% which is the global target. New sputum positive case detection rate for 2004 in the areas where
RNTCP is implemented has been achieved 72% which is above the global target of 70%.
 

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
11.5 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes with serious concern the WHO estimates of approximately 18 lakh new cases reported in
the country every year, out of which 8 lakh are new smear positive highly infectious cases. The Committee notes that
massive funding andtrained manpower along with a very large number of NGOs and private practitioners failed to keep
pace with the reported expansions of disease. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that there seems to be a need for
refocussing on vulnerable areas. It seems that the ground realities do not seem to be very conducive in all the states.
Therefore, district specific implementation of the programme is the need of the hour. For example, one practical problem
being observed is that drugs are being prescribed for very short period and for that too patients have to cover a very long
distance from their home to the clinic. Not only this, there are areas where hospitals are not ideally located. The
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that some element of flexibility should be permissible in the implementation of the
Programme. The Committee also feels that it should be ensured that there is more active participation both from
NGOs/Private practitioners on vulnerable areas, even if they are not conveniently located.
 
Action Taken
The RNTCP is an application of WHO recommended strategy of Directly Observed Treatment Short Course
(DOTS). Under this strategy to ensure compliance to treatment, the intensive phase of treatment, drugs are administered
thrice a week to the TB patient under the direct observation. This is only for first 2-3 months of the treatment. In the
continuation phase of treatment out of three doses in  week, first dose is given under observation and the remaining two
doses are self administered by the patient. The period of continuation phase is 4-5 months.For the convenience of the TB
patients, DOTS centres are established near to their residences. Any person such as voluntary health worker, anganwadi
worker, panchayat raj functionary, women self help group, who is accountable to health system and acceptable to the TB
patient can function as a DOT provider. The premises of the DOT providers are designated as DOT centres. Thus the
programme is providing necessary flexibilities to the districts as  DOT Centres can be established at convenient distance.
Anti TB drugs are provided in patient-wise boxes to ensure that all drugs required for full course of treatment are
earmarked the day one a TB patient is registered for treatment. The program is implemented by the District TB Societies
and they have flexibility in establishing the microscopy centres to be area specific. To increase the accessibility of the
masses to the TB care facilities, special emphasis is laid on involvement of NGOs and Private Practitioners which has
been decentralized to the district level. Presently, more than 1000 NGOs and more than 5000 Private Practitioners are
working for the TB Programme.
XII   NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
12.2
      Recommendations/Observations
Ninth Plan allocation for the Programme was Rs.480 crores and expenditure figures are Rs.450 crores. Marginally
less allocation of Rs. 445 crores has been made for Tenth Plan and utilization thereof during the first three years has been
optimum.  Tenth Plan Targets are to consolidate gains in controlling cataract blindness and also initiate activities to
prevent and control blindness due to other causes, particularly in children and the aged.
 
Action Taken
Allocation of Rs. 445 crores for the Tenth Plan  is based on the revised pattern of assistance under NPCB duly
approved by the CCEA.  Status of allocation and utilization of funds during the first three years of Tenth Plan is as
under:-
 
(Amount in Crores)
Year                              Allocation                       Utilization
2002-03                            85.00                              84.62
2003-04                            86.00                               85.62
2004-05                             88.00                              87.20
 
One of the main objectives of the Programme during Tenth Plan is to provide high quality  eye care to the affected
population including children and the aged in controlling  blindness due to cataract and other causes.
 
12.6  Recommendations/Observations
The Committee observes that a number of steps have been taken by the Department of improving the
implementation of the programme in North East states,  The Committee hopes that with the enhanced management
support, involvement of Mahila-Mandals, and Gram Panchayats etc. and close monitoring, a positive impact on the

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
implementation level will be noticed.
 
Action Taken
One of the main features of revised pattern of assistance is to enhance utilization of eye care facilities available in
the Government Sector, for which a scheme would be evolved where Panchayats would be involved in the programme. 
They would organize identification, motivation and transport of persons requiring eye care services including cataract
surgery to government fixed facilities.  Panchayats can use services of PHCs/sub center staff, ICDS functionaries
(Anganwadi workers) and voluntary groups like Mahila Mandals etc.  This scheme would aim at utilizing existing
facilities and reduction in backlog particularly in underserved areas.  District Blindness Control Societies would pay a
sum not exceeding Rs.175/- per operated case to Panchayats for meeting expenditure on this activity.
 
XIII.   NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
13.3
         Recommendations/Observations
The committee has been given to understand that NGOs play a very critical role in identifying target populations
among high risk groups, providing peer counseling, condom promotion, treatment of sexually transmitted infections.
NGOs are selected at state level through Technical Advisory Committee set up by the state AIDS control societies.
There is an in-built monitoring and evaluation system. Besides that, regular visits are made by the officers of state AIDS
control societies. The committee has been given to understand that SACS have been able to check malpractices b y
NGOs and remedial action is taken wherever necessary.
 
Action Taken
Detailed monitoring and evaluation system has been built into the programme. A Computerized Management
Information System and a Programme Finance Management System have been developed by the NACO. These system
and procedures ensure regular feedback from the NGOs through their respective State AIDS Control Societies in respect
of diverse parameters for evaluation.
           With the intensive monitoring and evaluation systems, the SACS are able to check poor performance, improper
use of funds and under achievement of targets etc. And on finding shortfalls on the above reasons SACS withdraws the
project and stops funding. 
To increase capacity of SACS, workshop have been held for paper of officers of SACS who deals with the matter
related to NGOs.
 
 13.5    Recommendations/Observations
IEC activities and awareness campaigns which are a major component of the programme are operationalised at
NACO and though the  SACS.  A wide variety of activities are undertaken, ranging from use of television and radio to
fold drama, exhibition, fairs etc. to reach the targeted population, specially in the rural areas. Each state develops its
annual plan of action and conducts activities accordingly. An IEC committee at the state level, which has members from
the various media units in the state, visualizes the plans which are approved by NACO after in depth discussions.
 
Action Taken
IEC activities have been further intensified. During the year 2004-05, SACS were asked to submit activities with
focus on total awareness building of the population above 15 years of age. The plans of activities were submitted by 33
states and 8 states have completed the report. Other states have been requested to submit the report.
 
13.7 Recommendations/Observations
The estimated number of HIV infections was 3.5 million in 1998, 3.71 million in 1999, 3.86 million in 2000, 3.97
million in 2001, 4.58 million in 2002 and 5.1 million in 2003. The Committee views with serious concern the steady
increase in the number of HIV patients. Not only this, people infected with HIV during 1980s and 1990s will be
progressing to AIDS, resulting thus in a steep increase in the number of AIDS patients.
 
Action Taken
As compared to 5.106 million infections estimated in 2003, during 2004, the HIV estimates were 5.134 million
infections. This indicates that there are 28,000 added infections during 2004. In Tamil Nadu early signs of sero-
stabilisation has been observed. It is true that with such progression of HIV epidemic in the country, it is assumed that
the number of AIDS cases in the country will be on rise in coming years.

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
13.8     Recommendations/Observations
As per the figures made available to the Committee, total number of AIDS cases as reported to NACO as on 28th
February is 1,02,733 with maximum number of AIDS patients in the high/moderate prevalence states:-
 
Andhra Pradesh:   10,819
Karnataka:              2,126
Maharashtra:         19,968
Nagaland:                   718
Manipur:                 2,866
Tamil Nadu:          48,180         
Gujarat:                   5,618
 
Action Taken
The number of AIDS cases as reported to NACO as on 31
st March, 2005 is 1,03,857. The states of Tamil Nadu,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur, and Nagaland remain high prevalence states. 
Number of cases in these high prevalence states by March 2005 is as under:
 
Andhra Pradesh:                  11,280
Karnataka:                              2,343
Maharashtra:                        12,963
Nagaland:                                  736
Manipur:                                 2,866
Tamil Nadu:                         48,180
Guajrat:                                  5,406
 
13.10 Recommendations/Observations
The committee notes that a working group was set up under the chairmanship of Secretary (Health) with
representatives from pharmaceutical companies, FICCI and CII in November 2003 to work out the details of the anti-
retroviral drug prices, subsidies, the logistics and diagnostic requirements of the programme. Although the working
group had given its report in 2003 itself, nothing is known about the status of implementation of the recommendations
made by it. Only a small beginning of providing free treatment of anti retroviral drugs at selected Government hospitals
in high prevalence states has been made.
 
Action Taken
Actions taken on the   recommendations of the working group are as follows :
i)                             NACO has formulated the National Guidelines standardizing treatment  with ARV drugs. List  of  first line
and second line drug combinations, their dosage schedule for adults and children and criteria for selecting the patients to
be placed  on ART has been clearly defined in these guidelines. Doctors in public and private sector are being trained
based on the National Guidelines.
 
ii)        Bulk order of ARV drugs has been placed centrally which ensures bulk purchase through competitive bidding by
national pharmaceutical companies.
 
XV. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME
 
15.3 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes that an evaluation of the National Cancer Control Programme was undertaken by the National
Institute of Health and Family Welfare, New Delhi in December, 2002. The Committee observes that the following
recommendations were made for strengthening the programme:-
 
·
        Financial assistance to RCCs needs to be enhanced from the prevailing rate of Rs. 75 lakhs per annum.
 
        One time Capital grant may be sanctioned for the newly established RCCs for setting up basic infrastructure.

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
·
 
·        Funds under Oncology Wing scheme need to be enhanced. All medical college hospitals to be provided at least
one Cobalt Machine to treat cancer patients.
 
 The Committee hopes that as recommended by the evaluation study, the Programme would have been revised. The
study had also emphasized that more RCCs need to be recognized in uncovered areas and additional RCCs in populous
States. The Committee feels that in view of increasing incidence of Cancer cases in the country, this recommendation
should be given top priority and implemented at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
           These recommendations were kept in mind while framing the revised guidelines.
As per the revised EFC, financial assistance to RCC have increased from Rs. 75.00 Lakhs per annum to Rs. 3.00
crore as one time assistance.  For new RCCs this assistance is Rs. 5.00 Crores for setting up of basic infrastructure
including purchase of equipment.  In addition to above, under the oncology wing scheme grant-in-aid has been enhanced
from Rs. 2.00 Crores to Rs. 3.00 Crores.  Grant-in-aid as per the revised scheme  has already been released during the
year 2004-05 to State Governments / RCCs. 
Regarding the selection of equipment, the choice has been left to the user institution out of the list provided under
the Oncology Wing Scheme which includes Cobalt Machine as well.
All the Government Medical Colleges and Government Hospitals are eligible for the financial assistance under
this scheme.
 
XX. RABBIES CONTROL
 
20.2
         Recommendations/Observations
The Committee has observed that India is the only country in the world using Nerve Tissue Rabies Vaccine
(NTV), where under 14 ver painful injections are given in the abdomen of patients.   This vaccine is being manufacture
and used in our counrty til date whereas other countries including Pakistan and Bangladesh have abandoned the same ten
years ago.  The World Health Organisation (WHO) three decades ago recommended a worldwide ban on the use of NTV
and switch over to the tissues culture anti rabies vaccine (TCVs).  The Committee notes that the Health Planning
Committee has also recommended the switching over to Tissue Culture Vaccine (TCVs).  Under TCV six injections are
given in the arm which are not only safe and painless but cost effective also.  The Committee understands that these
vaccines are being manufactured by several private and public sector institutes like Indian Immunologicals Ltd. (owned
by the National Dairy Development Board) and Human Biologicals Institute are producing the Tissue Culture Vaccines
(TCVs) – which is not made from live cells but from dead cells which are cloned in test tubes in a healthy and efficient
manner.  Aventis Pharma Ltd. produces the excellent Rabipur.  All of them are available for approximately the same cost
as the NTV.  The committee also finds that whereas NTV has shelf life of 6 months, the TCV has a shelf life of 24
months.  The Committee recommends that the Department should initiate action for introduction of TCVs for use all
over the country. 
 
Action Taken
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has already decided to phase out the production of NTV and switch over to
the use of Tissue Culture Anti Rabies Vaccine (TCARV) with effect from 01
st January 2005.  The production of NTV in
the country has been completely stopped and the manufacturing units have been allowed to sell NTV beyond 1 st January
2005 only till the stock is completely exhausted.  All the State Governments have been requested to switch over to the
use of TCARV for post exposure treatment of animal bites cases.
 
XXI. MONITORING:
 
21.1  Recommendations/Observations
           A number of National Health Programmes are being implemented across the country.  Besides that, Central
assistance is also provided for strengthening the health infrastructure in the States.  Implementing agencies are State
Govts/District Administration/NGOs.  The Committee however, has been observing that inspite of availability of funds,

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
both domestic and foreign, required impact of various health interventions at the ground level is simply not there.  The
Committee has been given to understand that every Health Programme has an in build effective monitoring mechanism
whereunder District/State level reports reach the Centre and are duly analyzed.  The Committee, however, is of the
opinion that in addition to state generated data, public representatives and Panchayati Raj Institutions can be involved in
monitoring. The committee understands that states like MP, Rajsthan have already undertaken the initiative in involving
PRIs in the health sector. The Committee strongly feels that the Department can make a further addition by keeping the
members informed about the status of various health programmes/interventions in their constituency. The committee is
of the view that with the involvement of members of Parliament, there would be better implementation with the removal
of all the constraints. The Committee would also like to point out that in the case of states not performing well for
continuous three years, funds should not continue to be released in the routine manner. Matter of non-performance by
States should be brought to the  notice of authorities at the highest level.
 
Action Taken
Under the Programme, diagnostic and treatment facilities including supply of anti-TB drugs for full course of
treatment are provided free of cost to TB patients.  For quality diagnosis, more than  10,000 microscopy centres have
been established  in the  country.  To create awareness among the masses about TB and increase their accessibility to the
TB care facilities, IEC activities are being taken through electronic & print media and NGOs & Private Practitioners are
being involved in the Programme. Presently, more than 1000 NGOs and 5000 Private Practitioners are working for the
programme. Since the inception of RNTCP more than 48 lacs patients have been put on DOTS, more than 7.0 lacs
deaths have been averted.   Treatment success rate of around 86% has been achieved in areas covered under RNTCP,
which is more than double the success rate of earlier Programme.  Under Revised National TB Control Programme
(RNTCP), Panchayat Raj Institutions are being involved for percolating the benefits of the Programme to the masses. In
the guidelines for District TB Control Societies (DTCS) which plan and implement RNTCP in the district, there is
provision for  representatives from the district Panchayat. To keep the MP’s informed about the schemes that are
undertaken in their constituencies, the District TB Societies have been asked to inform the concerned MP about the
schemes that are undertaken by the NGOs in the Districts for which grants is being given by the Society.
The performance of the States is monitored on continuous basis through analysis of quarterly reports and visit of
the field units by the officers from the Centre and States and necessary feedback is given for remedial action wherever
necessary. Funds are released based on the performance and wherever required, the matters are taken at the appropriate
level in the State Government
 
XXIV. ALTERNATIVE CENTRES
 
24.1 Recommendations/Observations
It has been reported to the Committee that experiments are being conducted on animals without using anesthesia
whereas all over the world there is a movement towards alternative testing modules for veterinary colleges, medical
colleges and pharmacy colleges.  The expertise is available in the country and people have also been trained abroad.  The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should put up a centre for creation and propagation of the alternative to animal
testing and provide sufficient financial assistance therefor.  The centre will take available knowledge, conduct
workshops and change syllabi whenever necessary.
 
Action Taken
A detailed proposal is being developed to establish a centre for alternatives to animal experimentation, which will
concentrate on research on alternatives to animal testing as well as training to all categories of personnel involved in
animal welfare. A building has already been constructed by CPSCEA in 7 acres of land at Faridabad. It would reach out
to the nation at a macro level through its publication, interactive website and would work on sensitization courses in
laboratory animals care and alternatives for the three categories of animal experimentation viz. regulatory research, basic
biomedical research and education. The centre will collaborate with international agencies/organizations and special
interest groups who also seek to promote the concept of alternatives in research and education.
CHAPTER- II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
 
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
3.3 Recommendations/Observations
              The Committee notes that allocation of Rs.40 crores for CGHS during the Ninth Plan was subsequently
enhanced to Rs.62 crores. However, allocated funds remained under-utilized (utilization figures being only Rs.42.19
crores). There has not been optimum utilization of Tenth Plan allocation of Rs.80 crores for CGHS so far. During 2004-
05 against an allocation of Rs.16.50 crores, expenditure incurred up to 9 th March, 2005 is only Rs.13.95 crores. The
Committee hopes that enhanced funds amounting to Rs.26 crores for 2005-06 will be fully utilized for the proposed
expansion plan for the CGHS.
 
Action Taken
              During the 10
th Five Year Plan, the Planning Commission allocated to the CGHS an amount of Rs.80.00 crore
out of which Rs.10.00 crore has been earmarked for the North-eastern Region including Sikkim.  Out of Rs.80.00 crore,
an amount of Rs.68.61 crore has already been spent up to 31.7.2005. A sum of Rs.31.00 has been provided to the CGHS
during 2005-2006 under Plan that includes Rs.5.00 crore for NER. Out of the said Rs.31.00 crore, an amount of Rs.5.28
crore has been spent up to 31.7.2005. The balance amount would be fully utilised by the end of the financial year.
 
3.5      Recommendations/Observations
Under the existing system, CGHS beneficiaries can obtain the medicines prescribed by the specialists from the
authorized local chemist. In the absence of authorized local chemist, beneficiaries are permitted to purchase the
medicines from the open market, reimbursable afterwards. The Committee has been observing that the authorized
chemists go on strike for long periods at regular intervals, thereby putting the beneficiaries to great inconvenience. On a
specific query about the factors responsible for such developments, paucity of funds has been citied as the main reason
by the Department. The Committee notes that during the last three years, there has been increase in the budget allocation
for supply of local purchase indent medicines through
 the authorized local chemists. While appreciating the release of additional funds for the purpose, the Committee is of the
view that there is a need for streamlining the system so that required funds are available in time for clearing the
anticipated bills of authorized local chemists. The Committee would also like to mention that a review of the existing
system of procuring of specialist prescribed medicines should be made so as to remove the bottlenecks/constraints, if
any.
 
Action Taken
The combined drugs formulary for the MSO/CGHS was last notified in March 1996 that had 317 drugs/items and
was valid for two years i.e. up to 31.3.98. This formulary had been extended from time to time with the approval of the
Competent Authority.  Since the formulary was an old one, it resulted in increasing the dependency of CGHS on the
authorized Local Chemists which caused inconvenience to the beneficiaries who got deferred supply of indented
medicines through the local chemist. 
 
              The Govt. has recently approved an ad-hoc drug formulary of 504 Proprietary drugs based on which the CGHS
has placed indents with the Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (HSCC) for CGHS Delhi and with the Medical
Stores Organisation, Dte.GHS, for CGHS outside Delhi for procurement of bulk medicines.  The CGHS has also adopted
the Generic drugs formulary of the Govt. of NCT of Delhi that contains 454 drug items that are being procured for the
last three years. As a result of these steps, the availability of drugs in the CGHS dispensaries would improve
substantially which to a large extent would reduce the dependence of CGHS on the Authorized Local Chemists.
 
3.11     Recommendations/Observations
 
          For years now, a large number of CGHS dispensaries are operating from rented accommodations, which are not at
all suited for either  the doctors/staff or the patients. The Committee is aware that Government is working to house such
dispensaries in either their own building or in some better accommodation. But the progress has been slow and it seems
to have made no tangible difference during the past several years. The Committee strongly recommends that the
Government should take stock of the dispensaries which have not been housed properly so that they move into
preferably their own building or at least in some bigger accommodation for the time being in the interest of the
doctors/staff and the patients. To start with at least those buildings for which land has been acquired/allotted can be
constructed on priority basis.
 

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
Action Taken
              The process of hiring better accommodation for the CGHS dispensaries in Delhi has been initiated. The CGHS
has already identified alternative private accommodation to be taken on rent so as to shift out of the existing premises
from where the CGHS dispensaries at Gurgaon, Shakurbasti and Yamuna Vihar are functioning. As hiring of private
buildings to house CGHS dispensaries is a time consuming process, shifting of dispensaries to alternative premises is
gradually being done. As already stated in para 3.2 above, construction/renovation of 12 buildings for housing CGHS
dispensaries is on hand. All this is being done keeping in view the limited resources available with the CGHS.
 
IV.      SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL,
4.2 Recommendations/Observations
              The Committee fails to understand the constraints being faced in procuring these equipment for which contracts
have been signed and funds are also available. The Committee strongly feels that there is urgent need for review of entire
procurement process so as to eliminate the bottlenecks being faced.
 
Action Taken
              The purchase procedure for the equipments has been adopted as per procurement guidelines of the Government.
Since the procurement of the equipments is a continuous process, so proposals remain at different stages of purchase.
Most of the equipments where the contracts are signed are imported and procured against Letter of Credit (LC) in which
the minimum delivery period of three months is required after finalization of the LC formalities. To further facilitate the
procurement the proposals are monitored at the highest level. A time-schedule has been prepared and monthly reviewed
by a committee/Medical Superintendent for all proposals and to see that bottlenecks, if any, be resolved expeditiously.
 
4.3      Recommendations/Observations 
 The Committee, however, is not happy with the existing system of getting NOC from the Fire Department.
Although more than six months have lapsed after completion of the OPD building, it remains inoperational for want of
requisite clearance from the Fire Department. The Committee strongly feels that the present guidelines/norms of Fire
Department need to be reassessed in the present scenario.
 
Action Taken
The existing system of obtaining NOC from Fire Department is a statutory requirement and is meant to ensure
the buildings constructed have the necessary fire safety system in place. However, NOC from the Fire Department has
since been obtained in respect of Left and Right Wings of the New OPD Complex. 
 
4.5 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee recommends that the Department should make serious efforts to get the vacant posts filled up at
the earliest. The Committee emphasizes that the Department should get the construction of VMMC expedited and fulfill
the prescribed norms for teaching and non-teaching faculty and the required infrastructure before the inspection by MCI
in March 2006.
 
Action Taken
Consequent upon exemption of technical posts under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare from the
instructions on optimization of direct recruitment in civilian posts on 17.3.2005, all the vacant CHS posts of VMMC has
been reported to UPSC for filling up.  As regards the construction of VMMC expeditiously, the Action Taken Report
against para 4.4 may be referred to. Further, consequent upon recognition of teaching experience of non-teaching
specialist doctors at PG level by Medical Council of India, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University has granted
teaching designations to 167 non-teaching Specialists of Safdarjung Hospital.
 
V. Dr. R.M.L. HOSPITAL
5.2 Recommendations/Observations
              The Committee is happy to note that the hospital possesses the basic infrastructure, faculty, clinical materials
and the environment required for setting up of the Institute. The Committee would, however, like to emphasis that
Department should monitor the construction of the Institute Building in co-ordination with the hospital authorities and
the construction agency, to ensure the completion of this project within the prescribed time-limit.
 

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
Action Taken
              The work of construction of the said Institute has been entrusted to Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
(India) Limited who have already taken action for obtaining the necessary approvals for the proposed Institute’s
building. As per the tentative time schedule, the building is to be completed by eighteen months after completion of
codal formalities like clearance of design etc The project is being monitored by a Project Monitoring Committee headed
by Secretary (H&FW) with  DGHS, Medical Superintendent, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital and other officers as its
members.
 
5.3
             Recommendations/Observations
              The Committee is of the view that efforts should be made to expedite the completion of all the sanctioned
projects within the prescribed time frame. The Committee hopes that project appraisals and approval exercise for the
remaining planned projects for the Tenth Plan must have started, if not, action should be initiated at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
All the sanctioned Plan Projects are being monitored by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and are
expected to be completed within the prescribed time frame. Besides, the following Projects are also being taken up
during the Tenth Plan:-
1. Construction of additional three floors in New OT Block to house eight new OTs.
2. Setting up of Nuclear Medicine Center
3. Setting up of Thoracic Science Department
      4.   Setting up of Neuro Science Department.
 
Department of Personnel & Training (DOPT) vide its O.M. No.2/8/2001-PIC dated 16.5.2001 had restricted
direct recruitment in all civilian posts to 1/3
rd of vacancies occurring in a year and that too subject to 1% of the total staff
strength. Now, the technical posts under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have been exempted from the purview
of the DOPT’s aforesaid instructions vide Ministry of Health & Family Welfare O.M. No.  Z.17025/29/2001-H dated
17.3.2005. All the vacant posts of doctors in Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. RML Hospital have been reported to UPSC for
filling up. The hospital administration has also advertised the other technical direct recruitment posts (which inter-alia
include Nursing and Paramedics) for filling up by direct recruitment. DGHS has streamlined the general administration
in Safdarjung Hospital and officers of the Dte.GHS are co-coordinating with the hospital authorities for better
management of various services. Posts, which have been deemed as abolished due to having remained vacant for long,
are considered for revival on merits, as per the requirement of the hospitals.
 
VI.         ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES
6.1      Recommendations/Observations
  A sum of Rs. 119.00 crores for BE 2004-2005 was allocated for AIIMS which was substantially increased to
Rs. 170 crores at the RE stage. The plan allocation of 2005-2006 stands at Rs. 201.26 crores. The Department has
informed that expenditure has been restricted to Rs. 151.00 crores in 2004-2005 to facilitate re-appropriation of Rs. 19
crores to non-plan. The Committee expresses it serious concern over diversion of funds from plan to non-plan side. In
order to avoid such a situation, the Committee feels that the non-plan allocation for the Institute should be sufficiently
increased to meet its non-plan requirements
 
Action Taken
              The enhancement of Non-Plan allocation from the existing level of Rs. 170 crores would be considered at the
RE stage.
 
6.2  Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes that actual expenditure during 2004-2005 is only Rs.86 crores, with allocated amounting to
Rs. 65 crores remaining unutilized. The reason cited for these savings is that revised proposals for Trauma Center and
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Institute of Rotary Cancer Hospital are yet to be approved by the competent authority. The
Committee finds that not much progress seems to have been made in the Trauma Center project. The project was initially
approved for Rs. 54.14 crores. However, due to change in the scope of work and additional statutory requirements,
revised EFC for Rs. 177.82 crores was submitted on 11
th December 2003. Since then the revised proposal is under the
process of being placed before the CCEA. The Committee has been given to understand that comments of all appraisal

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
agencies Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission etc. have been obtained on the draft Cabinet Note and are in the
process of finalization. The Committee notes that the date of completion of the Trauma Center will be six months from
the date of approval of CCEA. The Committee apprehends that there would be further cost escalation if the project fails
to get the final
 clearance without any further delay.
 
Action Taken
              The CCEA has already approved the proposal for setting up of Trauma Centre. The Centre would be
commissioned within this financial year.
 
6.3 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee has also been monitoring the progress made in the completion of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Institute of
Rotary Cancer Hospital with an initial cost of Rs. 19.50 crores. The project was to be completed by September 1996.
However, since then project cost has escalated to Rs. 136.25 crores which may increase further. A Committee
constituted for fixation of responsibility of time and cost over the project has duly submitted its Report. However, the
revised EFC is still awaiting the comments of the Planning Commission.
 
Action Taken
The EFC meeting was held on 26.5.2005 and recommended the proposal for Revised Cost Estimates.
 
6.4  Recommendations/Observations
               The Commission expresses its serious concern over the very tardy progress made in the completion of two very
important projects meant for saving precious human lives in the premier institute of the country. The Committee strongly
feels that there is an urgent need for streamlining the procedure for grant of formal approval to the proposed projects.
Project proposals keep on moving from one stage to another from one authority to another with the initial estimated cost
increasing manifold. What is more disturbing is that procedural formalities do not end with the project getting final
approval from the competent authority. Once the construction starts, another set of concerned agencies take over. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should review the present system and take steps for
removal of all unnecessary/repetitive/formalities arising in the operationalisation of a proposed project.
 
Action Taken
           The approval of the projects are governed by the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time.
The Ministry of Health & F.W. has advised the Director AIIMS to undertake the following measures to avoid delays in
execution of the projects:         
 
(i)        Before any project is started, there should be a detailed Project Report, duly analysed, so that assessment and
projection of requirements are realistic vis-à-vis costing, time schedule, etc.
 
(ii)       The Project Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Director AIIMS which has been recently
constituted, should meet at least once in two months to assess the physical and financial progress of each project.
 
(iii)      The progress of each project may be ensured that it is in strict compliance with the Time Schedule, so that there
is no delay leading to cost and time over run.
 
(iv)      While reviewing the progress, the Committee may also ensure that execution of the project is within the approved
scope, and that there is no change in nature and scope is involved.
 
(v)          Since the funding is through Government Exchequer, all the relevant instructions issued from time to time by
Government of India must be strictly adhered to. Any deviation may be viewed as a lapse meriting departmental action.
 
 
VII. POST-GRADUATE INSTT. OF MEDICAL & EDUCTIONAL RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH:
 
7.1      Recommendations/Observations

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
           The Committee notes that Plan allocation for a number of Medical Institutes / Hospitals has been considerably
enhanced in the Tenth Plan However, Ninth Plan allocation for these Institutes/Hospitals, though considerably less
remained under-utilised as indicated below:
(Rs. in crores)
Name Ninth Plan Tenth Plan
Allocation
Allocation
available last
two yearsBE RE Exp.
Central Institute of Psychiatry,
Ranchi
16.00 24.00 14.19 50.00 36.77
 
All India Institute of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation,
Mumbai.
15.00 12.51 6.49 20.00 12.74
PGIMER, Chandigarh 175.00 206.00 146.00 200.00 107.00
JIPMER, Pondicherry 70.00 77.76 48.36 150.00 105.15
Lady Hardinge Medical College
and Smt. S.K. Hospital, N.Delhi
65.00 49.70 30.05 200.00 162.20
Kalawati Saran Children Hospital,
New Delhi
56.00 69.82 49.45 140.00 120.33
Indira Gandhi Institute of Health
and Medical Sciences for North-
East Region, Shillong
85.00 69.00 59.50 380.00 197.90
 
Action Taken
              During the 9
th Five Year Plan (1997-2002) a provision of Rs.175.00 crores was approved for PGIMER,
Chandigarh. Out of this, an amount of Rs.146.00 crores was released to PGI during the period 1997-98 to 2001-02. The
entire amount of Rs. 146.00 crores was utilized by the PGIMER, Chandigarh. During the 9
th Plan period the continuing
schemes of 8 th Plan, namely, New Emergency Block and New OPD Block were completed and they are functioning
normally. The National Institute of Nursing Education was also completed and it is functioning normally. During the 9th
Plan all the ongoing of 8 th Plan were completed at the Institute. During the 9 th Plan with a view to boost medical
education and research activities at PGIMER, Chandigarh measures were taken to develop new centres at the Institute.
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) at its meeting held on 11
th July 2002 had approved five projects,
namely, Advanced Pediatric Centre Phase-II, Advanced Cardiac Centre, Advanced Eye Centre, Advanced Trauma
Centre and Bone Marrow Transp[ant Centre at an estimated cost of Rs.12196.45 lakhs (say Rs.122.00 crores). Since the
PGI could not incur Plan expenditure on new schemes till the approval of Government is received by them, the grant-in-
aid under Plan could not be utilized till CCEA’s approval was obtained. Against the work for the fresh projects, Rs.55.00
crores had been allocated and only Rs.26.00 crores was utilized by the Institute because the work for the new projects
had been started after 21.7.2000 and at that time less than two years were left of the 9
th Plan. Hence there was under
utilization of Plan funds for these projects.
 
7.2 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee observes that availability of funds in the last two years of the Tenth Plan for all the above-
mentioned institutes/ hospitals clearly indicate that enhanced allocation of funds has failed to achieve the desired
purpose.  Trend of under utilization of funds continues to be there .  This leads to only one conclusion that due to lack of
planning and constraints the institutes/hospitals have failed to take benefit from the enhanced funds.  It also indicates
absence of any dialogue/ interaction and co-ordination mechanism for utilization of allocated funds between the
Department and the individual institutes.
 
Action Taken
ME-II:
For the 10 th Five Year Plan, PGIMER, Chandigarh has been allocated Rs.200.00 crores. Out of this amount,
Rs.114.84 crores was for spillover liability of the Ninth Five Year Plan and Rs.85.16 crores was allocated for new
projects.   The spill over liability included Rs.20.00 crores for purchase of machinery and equipment already in process
th

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
and Rs.94.84 crores for completion of 9  Plan approved projects.  The new schemes which have been approved by EFC
and by the Ministry of Finance are Computerization of PGI, upgradation of Urology Department to Advanced Urology
Centre, upgradation of Community Medicine to School of Public Health, modernization of Animal House,
augmentation/upgradation of various Department of PGI including replacement of outdated technology/condemned
equipment and miscellaneous Engineering capital works.  Out of all these projects, the Bone Marrow Transplant Centre
has started functioning in May 2005 and Advanced Urology Centre in September 2004.  The Advanced Eye Centre is
functioning and would be shifted to the new building in November 2005.  The Advanced Cardiac Centre unit work will
be completed by March 2006.  Some equipment have already been procured and made operational.  Up-to the year 2004-
05, Rs.93 crores were released to PGI.  The PGI has utilized the entire amount of Rs.93 crores for Plan activities upto
March 2005. Utilization of allocated fund is effected through review of the progress of utilization f funds and of the
respective on-going projects, from time to time, at appropriate levels including in the Project Monitoring Committee
(PMC).
ME-IV:
              Major portion of the Plan allocation in 10 th Plan for Lady Hardinge Medical College and Smt. Sucheta Kriplani
Hospital, New Delhi and their associated Hospitals i.e. Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital, New Delhi is meant for their
combined Comprehensive Re-development Plan. An EFC Memo. For this purpose was circulated for the comments of
appraising agencies. Though the Planning Commission have given their in-Principle approval for the utilization of this
Plan allocation, they have not given their Appraisal Note on the EFC Memo. and have asked for the Detailed Project
Report for the Plan. Since it is proposed to develop the Plan through an agency to be selected through competitive
bidding, the Planning Commission have again been requested to give their appraisal note on EFC Memo. Without
insisting on the Detailed Project Report. Besides, action is also being taken to prepare a revised EFC Memo. As observed
by Planning Commission.
 
VIII       INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH, NEW DELHI
8.2
             Recommendations/Observations
              Against a Ninth Plan allocation of Rs.338.12 crores, Rs. 870.00 crores have been provided for ICMR in the
Tenth Plan. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that at the end of first three years of the Tenth Plan,
Rs.520.00 crores remain to be spent. The Committee feels that this is not a healthy trend. In view of the mandate given to
this apex body, there should be optimum and judicious utilisation of allocated funds within the prescribed time-frame.
The Committee, therefore, enjoins upon the Department to take remedial steps including completion of procedural
formalities at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
In fact the Ministry has sanctioned a total outlay of Rs.870.00 crores during the Xth Five Year Plan as against the
IXth Plan allocation (expenditure) of Rs.338.12 crores. In this context, it may be stated that the Ministry has sanctioned
an allocation of Rs.400.00 crores during the last three years and as such the balance left for the remaining two years of
the Xth Plan comes to Rs.470.00 crores and not Rs.520 crores. However, the Ministry has sanctioned an allocation of
Rs.202 crores under Plan Health (i.e. during the four years of the Xth Five Year Plan) thereby leaving a balance of
Rs.268 crores. The allocation of Rs.202 crores is being proposed to be enhanced to Rs.242 crores at RE Stage, which
means a balance of Rs.228 crores will be left for next two years. The Council has got 100% achievement out of the
Budget released and the expenditure comes to more than 70% of the total allocation of Xth Five Year Plan.
 
The details are given as under:
1. Actual RE sanctioned by the Ministry Rs.116 crores during
    2002-03.
2. Actual RE sanctioned by the Ministry Rs.110 crores during 2003-04.
3, Actual RE sanctioned by the Ministry Rs. 174 crores during 2004-05.
                          Total : Rs.400 crores
4. Approved BE sanctioned by the Ministry Rs.202 crores.
    Grand Total  :         Rs.642 crores.
     Balance out of Xth Plan allocation
     (Rs.870-602)                 Rs.268 crores
(Percentage of allocation w.r.t. Plan allocation = 73.79%
 

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
8.3   Recommendations/Observations
              Committee’s attention has been drawn by the media report about the ongoing research by the ICMR for
treatment of diabetes. On a specific query, Director General of ICMR informed the Committee tht ‘Vijaysar’ has been
scientifically evaluated by the Council for validating the anti-diabetic activity as described in the ancient texts and
traditional practice. The activity of its crude extract was studied against crude extracts of other medicinal plants with
similar activities, namely Jamun, Nishamalaki, Haridara and Amla in a multi-centric trial. The Committee was informed
that in the study done on newly diagnosed diabetics, encouraging results were obtained by ICMR. The Committee is
happy to note that some companies like Lupin, Dabur and Indigin have shown interest in the Vijaysar product. A
committee of these three companies has been formed which is at present analysing the data on mild and chronic diabetes.
As soon as this committee arrives at a conclusion, technology will be transferred to ICMR
 
Action Taken
The positive effect of the herbal product from ‘Vijaysar’ for treating newly diagnosed cases of Diabetes mellitus was
evaluated by the Council through Clinical Trials and a drug dossier was prepared. Number of pharmaceutical companies
as indicated in the report examined the dossier. However, this has still not been taken up by any company for Transfer of
Technology due to the problems envisaged in the long term availability of the source material – the heartwood of the tree
of Pterocarpus marsupium. Few more companies have shown interest and are examining the document.
 
X NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME
 
10.2 Recommendations/Observations
Against an allocation of Rs. 1227.00 crores in Ninth Paln, Funds amounting to only Rs.890.77 crores could not be
utilized. The Committee has been given to understand that a positive impact of generic approach/ action for effective
control of Vector Borne Diseases is being noticed on Health care workers. A   number of steps have been initiated to
operationalise the integration process which include-
(i)
               State and District Vector Borne Disease Control Societies have been formed to expedite flow of funds for
programme implementation.
(ii)              The Directorate of NVBDCP is under the process of developing an integrated training curriculum covering
the different vector borne diseases.
(iii)            The Directorate is under the process of integrating Management Information’s System for the monitoring and
evaluation of constituent diseases under the programme.
 
Action Taken
The Total expenditure up to 2004-05 is Rs. 624.48 crores against an allocation of Rs. 1349 cores leaving a
balance of Rs. 724.52 crores for the remaining period of 10
th plan. The approved budget estimate for 2005-06 is Rs.
348.45 crores.
 
10.3 Recommendations/Observations
While appreciating the initiatives being taken by the Department, the Committee would like to be apprised about
their status, particularly in those states where the diseases under the programme are more prevalent. The Committee
would also like to point out that in spite of higher allocation of Rs.1349 crores in Tenth Plan and implementation in
convergence mode, ground realities continue to be the same. During the first two years of Tenth Plan, funds remained
underutilized due to lengthy process of procurement and non-filling of vacant posts. As per the information made
available to the Committee, out of Rs. 1349 crore allocated for the Tenth Plan, at the end of three years, funds amounting
to Rs.633.33 crore are still available with the Department. This amount is likely to increase, as the actual figures of
expenditure for 2004-05 are not available.
 
Action Taken
The Total expenditure up to 2004-05 is Rs. 624.48 crores against an allocation of Rs. 1349 cores, leaving a
balance of Rs. 724.52 crores for the remaining period of 10
th plan. The approved budget estimate for 2005-06 is Rs.
348.45 crores
 
10.4 Recommendations/Observations

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
      The operational performance indicator for Malaria is screening of minimum 10% of the population living in Malaria
prone areas. The indicator parameter is Annual Blood Examination Rate (ABER). The impact indicator is Annual
Parasite Incidence viz., the number of Malaria cases per year per 1000 population. Position of the following three states
is very alarming under the aforesaid parameters:
                      State                               2002                                             2003
                                              Achie-       Achie-               Achie-            Achie-
                                           ved           ved                   ved               ved
                                      ABER     API             ABER           API
   Bihar                             0.49      0.04                0 .43             0.03
    UP                                 2.92       0.59               3.24             0.67
                        Uttaranchal                  3.43      0.20                 4.02             0.28
           All India                      8.91       1.79                 9.65              1.87
 
Action Taken
The states of Bihar, U.P. and Uttaranchal are persistently reporting low Annual Blood Examination Rate(ABER).
The most important reason is the shortages of male   Health workers who are supposed to carry out fortnightly house to
house visit to  screen the fever cases and make their blood slides. Regular monitoring of these  states is being carried out
by deputing officers from the Directorate of National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP) as well as
other partner Institutions and feedback is being provided to the states for improving the situation.
 
10.5
   Recommendations/Observations
      The Committee observes that poor surveillance in these states is due to  vacancies in the post of Lab Technicians and
Multi-purpose workers, adversely affecting the surveillance activities. The Committee finds that in a meeting held in
Lucknow on 29
th November, 2004 with the State Govt. officials, it was emphasized that the states should gear up the
epidemiological and entomological surveillance mechanism in order to establish advance warning system in respect of
vector Borne diseases. The Committee is surprised to note  that Drug distribution Centres and Fever Treatment Depots
either do not exit or are practically non- functional in many high- risk areas in the states. While appreciating the initiative
taken by the Department, the Committee would like to emphasize that mere holdings of meetings or issuing instructions
would not achieve any noticeable result. The Department has to sustain this initiative by regularly monitoring the
activating/establishing of DDCs/FTDs and expanding their involvement in activities like IEC, social mobilization etc.
Action Taken
The Directorate of NVBDCP is regularly monitoring the performance of low performing states by involving its
network of Regional Offices of Health & Family Welfare, Malaria Research Centre etc. Officers from Directorate of
NVBDCP & partner Institutions are making regular field visits in the states and feedback is being provided.
 
XI NATIONAL T.B CONTROL PROGRAMME
11.4
    Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes that there is no respite in the number of TB cases detected during 2001-02, 2002-03 and
2003-04.  Status of TB cases in some of the States is a matter of serious concern for the Committee-
State                           2001-02             2002-03             2003-04
Chattisgarh                      9744                 14295                15724
Delhi                              26389                32604                 38847
Mizoram                          1263                  1456                   1631
Nagaland                          1035                   933                   1763
Orissa                             19474               27152                 27080
Rajasthan                        84655                93462                98144
T.N.                                77574               80895                 89616
West Bengal                   73275               81485                 89836
Total                          1118664           1129076             1147223

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
XII   NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
 
12.3    Recommendations/Observations
The Committee observes that national figures about performance rate of Cataract surgery with IOL have been
steadily increasing from 20% in 1997-98 to 90% in 2004-05.  Majority of States have also achieved the minimum target
in cataract surgery rate per lakh population of 400 per year.  The Committee is, however perturbed to note that cataract
surgery rate in NE States is below except in Tripura.  Assam is one of the lowest performing states in the country with
cataract surgery rate of 77.  In its earlier Report also, the committee had expressed its serious concern about the dismal
status of the National Programme for Control of Blindness in NE Region.  The Committee reiterates that there is a need
for special focus on NE States with regular monitoring of the programme by the Department.
 
Action Taken
The performance in the NE States is being closely monitored.  In order to enhance the eye care delivery services
following steps have been taken: -
i)
                  teams of Ophthalmic Surgeons have been sent to these States for eye care delivery services and surgery of
cataract patients as and when required
ii)                Regional Institute of Ophthalmology was developed at Guwahati to cater the eye care needs of the local
population. 
iii)                grant-in-aid has been sanctioned to NGOs for up-gradation/ expansion of eye care delivery services 
iv)              Ophthalmic Surgeons are being trained in the modern surgery
v)                ophthalmic equipments have been supplied for surgery
vi)              funds were released for construction of eye wards and OTs. 
rates for spectacles were enhanced so that the poor may get the high quality glasses.
 
12.4
           Recommendations/Observations
The Committee has been given to understand that Central funds are released to State Blindness control societies,
which release grant in aid to District Blindness Control Societies as per requirement, provided unspent balance of the
Societies is less than Rs.3 lakh.  The Committee is of the view that unspent balance available with the implementing
agencies clearly indicates that benefits of scheme are not reaching the targeted beneficiaries.  The Committee would like
to point out that during the Ninth Plan, against release of Rs.587.73 lakhs as Grant-in-aid to North East States;
expenditure incurred was Rs.695.55 lakhs, thus indicating Rs.107.82 lakhs as unspent balance of previous Plan Period
being used by the District Blindness Control Societies.  The Committee observes that with the beginning of Tenth Plan,
unspent balance has again started to accrue as indicated below:                                                                    
                                                                                                 (Rs. In lakhs)
                            2002-2003                                                      2003-2004
                 Allo.     Exp.       Unspent Bal.                             Allo.   Exp.  Unspent Bal.
                                                                                                        
               136.27     76.78         59.49                                    90.56   39.56    51.00
 
Position is not different with regard to cash grants/ released to North East States.  Against a Ninth Plan allocation of
Rs.1212.13 lakhs, expenditure was only Rs.526.64 lakhs with an unspent balance of Rs.685.49 lakhs.  Trend of
allocation and expenditure doing the first two years of Tenth Plan indicate that this unspent balance is also being
utilized.   
                                                                
                                                                                           (Rs. In lakhs)
                      2002-2003                                                       2003-2004
                 Allo.     Exp.   Unspent Bal.                          Allo.     Exp.   Unspent Bal.
 
                         41.20   70.48       29.28                               39.00    89.87      50.87
 
The Committee apprehends that expenditure figures of 2004-05 will also reveal the same trend.  The Committee
would like to be apprised about the fund allocation and unspent balance available with District Blindness Control
Societies (State wise) during the first three years of the Tenth Plan.

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
Action Taken
           As desired by the Committee, a statement showing funds allocation and unspent balance available with district
Blindness Control Societies (State wise) during the first three years (2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05) of the Tenth Plan
may be seen at ANNEXURE –A
           As may be seen the overall status of utilization of funds released to NE States under National Programme for
Control of Blindness during the first three years of the Tenth Plan has improved.  In addition to measures indicated under
Para 12.3, review meeting at central level and regional levels are organized by the programme officers regularly.
           Further, for strengthening eye care infrastructure and enhancing the delivery of eye care services in NE State, a
meeting of selected eye care institutions was held on 11.7.2005 in New Delhi to discuss formulation of scheme for
development  of Centres of Excellence of Eye Care Services in India including NE Region.
 
XIII. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
13.1         Recommendations/Observations
India has an estimated number of 5.1 million HIV infected persons by 2003. The spread of HIV infection is not
uniform across the states in the country.  Six states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Nagaland, Manipur, Maharashtra and
Tamil Nadu are categorised as high prevalence states. Gujarat, Pondicherry and Goa are categorised as states with
moderate prevalence of HIV. All the remaining States/U.Ts are categorised as low prevalence States.
A comprehensive National AIDS control Programme Phase II is currently under implementation throughout the
country as a centrally sponsored scheme. The programme has five components as indicated below:
 
*         Priority targeted interventions for population at high risk.
*         Preventive interventions for the general population.
*         Low cost care for people living with HIV/AIDS.
*         Institutional strengthening.
*         Inter-Sectoral Collaboration.
 
Action Taken
National AIDS Control Organisation conducts annual round of HIV Sentinel Surveillance to monitor HIV trends
in various risk groups of population. This data is also used to estimate number of HIV infection in the country. Based on
2004 round of HIV Sentinel Surveillance conducted in 659 Sentinel Sites in the country, it is estimated that there are
5.134 million infections in the country. It is also observed that the spread of HIV infection is not uniform across the
states in the country. However, the stage of the epidemic in a particular state remains unchanged as compared to
previous years.
It is true that a comprehensive National AIDS Control Programme Phase II is currently under implementation
throughout the country as a centrally sponsored scheme. This phase will be under implementation till March 2006.
Preparation for phase III of the programme has also been started.
 
13.4
         Recommendations/Observations
While appreciating the inbuilt monitoring mechanism under the programme, the committee would like to have
the details of financial assistance released to NGOs during 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05. The committee would also
like to have the details of NGOs found to be indulging in malpractices during this period, state wise and action taken
against them. The committee observes that the level of involvement of NGOs in the programme seems to depend upon
the number of active NGOs coming forward in a particular area. The committee feels that if this is the position, then
there is a need for reviewing the criteria for selection of NGOs. Number of NGOs should be regulated by the existing
HIV risk population. There should be a specific norm for restricting the number of NGOs in a particular area.
 
Action Taken
           As on date 955 Targeted Interventions are being implemented through 909 and 60 Community Care Centres are
being implemented by 58 NGOs across the country. It is ensured that NGO located at one project area   does not get
more than one TI in the same location.   Enough opportunity is given to the NGOs having good experience and credible
links with the community.  In order to ensure that these interventions are cost effective and comprehensive, NACO has
provided guidelines for assessing the costs of proposed interventions for specific groups. The guidelines assist SACS to
sanction projects whose budgetary and programmatic scope is authentic and appropriate. The administrative approval for

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
taking up intervention by NGOs is given by SACS for three years. NGOs are required to submit a Bond to SACS before
the grant is released annually. The intervention is planned based on the Needs Assessment / Participatory Sites
Assessment etc.
           The Funding for Targeted Interventions projects has been decentralized since 1999 to the respective State AIDS
Control Societies (SACS). NACO does not fund any NGO directly but provides detailed Operational and Costing
Guidelines to SACS. As per procedure followed, the SACS used to submit their detailed Annual Action Plan to NACO,
containing demands for allocation of funds for various components including TIs. These demands are essentially made
on the basis of evidence based data and state strategy to reach high-risk groups.
Subsequently these Annual Plans are examined by NACO with reference to the past performance of the SACS in
relation to various components and finalized in consultation with the official of SACS.
The Funds are then released to State AIDS Control Society (SACS) by NACO as per approved Annual Action
plans. The statement showing financial allocations in the Approved Action Plan of SACS for Targeted Interventions and
Community Care Centres implemented by NGOs for year 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 is Annexed (Annexure-I).
           Information have been colleted from SACS which indicates that due to reasons like poor performance, funds
mishandling and change of management committees etc. SACS have withdrawn support from about 38 NGOs
implementing various projects since year 2000.
Following SACS have withdrawn support from NGOs:
 
Name of SACS                              NGOs
Tamil Nadu                                          5
West Bengal                                          1
Chandigarh                                            2
Andhra Pradesh                                     9
Ahmedabad                                           2
Orissa                                                    2
Gujarat                                                  6
Kerala                                                   5
Himachal Pradesh                                1
Haryana                                                3
Punjab                                                2
Total                                              38
 
13.11    Recommendations/Observations
The most important recommendation of the Working Group was agreement reached with pharmaceutical
companies on the prices of fixed dose combinations of ART drugs.  These prices were to be applicable only to the
quantity procured by Govt.  In the open market, the market forces were to determine the prices of the anti-retroviral
drugs.  The rates offered by the pharmaceutical companies to Govt. were subject to 100% waiver on excise duty, Central
Sales tax on major ingredients of raw materials and 100% custom duty waiver on imported material.
 
Action Taken
NACO is perusing with the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers for the  exemption/reduction of custom duty on
raw material and intermediates which are imported and  used for manufacturing ARV drugs by indigenous
pharmaceutical companies. However, as most of these raw material/intermediates are used for purposes other than
manufacturing ARV drugs, it has to be ensured that such exemptions are not misused. Therefore, pharmaceutical
companies are required to submit the precise proportion ingredient raw material/intermediate used for manufacturing
ARV drugs. However, NACO has already been able to purchase the ARV drugs in the year 2004-05 at rates much lower
than the rates indicated by the pharmaceutical companies at the time of above-mentioned Working Group meeting.
To sum up following measures have brought about the reduction in the cost of ARV drugs used in Govt
Hospitals:
i)                             Exemption from payment of central excise duty on the generic ARV drugs and their formulations used for
treatment of AIDS cases. Currently, the ARV drugs exempted from the payment of central excise duty include
Stavudine, Zidovudine, Didanosine, Nevirapine, Efavirenz, Nelfinavir, Indinavir, Ritonavir, Saquinavir and Lamivudine.
ii) Exemption from the payment of custom duty and counterveiling duty on import of bulk generic ARV drugs, such as,
Ritonavir and Saquinavir and their formulations.

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
13.12 Recommendations/Observations
The Report of the Working Group indicates that approximately 100,000 AIDS cases were sought to be covered
during the first year of the treatment and thereafter a 10-15% increase in the number of AIDS cases was anticipated.  The
Committee would like to be apprised about the strategy adopted for procurement of anti-retroviral drugs provided free of
cost on a pilot project basis in 2004 to a selected small number of patients.  The Committee would also like to know
about the fate of the report of the Working Group given in 2003.
 
Action Taken
Free Anti Retroviral Therapy (ART) was initially started in eight ART Centres, established in tertiary level
medical institutions/hospitals in six High Prevalence States and NCT Delhi. This was scaled up to 25 ART Centres in 13
States / UTs by 31st March 2005. It has been planned that by end current Financial Year, free ART will be provided from
a total of 100 hospitals
A total of 9168 patients are reported to be receiving ART from 25 ART Centres till 31st   May 2005.
For procurement of ARV drugs provided free of cost, NACO has adopted the strategy of using only the generic
ARV drugs manufactured by indigenous pharmaceuticals using ARV drugs approved by Drug Controller General of
India (DCGI) and not restricting to the list of WHO pre qualified ARV drugs.   Quality assurance for DCGI approved
ARV drugs is by conducting tests in high quality laboratories in India.
For this, open competitive tender process inviting tenders from all eligible suppliers through wide publicity is
followed.
This has reduced the average prices to as low as Rs 5500 per person per year compared to the average cost of Rs
16,000 per person per year one year ago. At present the low end ARV combination drugs are available at Rs 3,500 per
person per year and high end drugs used for certain categories, such as HIV with TB patients, at Rs 6,500 per person per
year as against the costs of Rs 14,400 and Rs 18,000 per person per year respectively one year ago. 
 
13.13.  Recommendations/Observations
Committees attention has been drawn by the Audit Observations included in the CAGs report no.3 of 2004 about the
performance appraisal of NACO. Some of the audit observations as indicated below clearly indicate that assessment on
paper and ground realities in the implementation of AIDS control programme are apparently very different:-
 
a)     Targeted groups in many states remained unidentified due to non completion of mapping exercises
b)     The target of providing STD clinics, modernized blood bank and voluntary counselling and testing centre and
every district could not be achieved
c)     In spite of excess STD clinics being set up, a large number of them not functioning optimally due to lack of
equipment, non-availability staff etc.
d)     Coverage of schools under the programme in state except AP (100%), Kerala(84%) & Nagaland(85%) ranged
between only one percent and 59 percent.
e)     Family health awareness campaigns organised in each state failed to attract even 20 percent of the targeted
population. Short notice and wrong selection of places are mainly responsible.
f)      Grants_in_aid released without proper assessment, resulting in only 23% grant by them. Large amount of
advances lying unadjusted with the procurement agent of NACO.
 
Action Taken
States were asked to complete mapping of high risk group and funds was provided.  As a result of which all the
states have now completed mapping exercises. Reports of 34 (out of total 38) AIDS Control Societies have been
received, while remaining 4 SACS are in process of finalization of report. These 4 SACS are Lakshadweep, Chattisgarh,
Dadra Nagar & Haveli and Rajasthan. The result of mapping of high risk group is given as per Annexure-IV
STD Clinics: STD Clinics have been strengthened from 504 STD Clinics in the year 2000-01 to 775  by 31
st
March 2005, that is year 2004-05. The list of state wise distribution is attached at Annexure-V  attached. Presently
NACO has established one STD Clinic in each District Hospital and Government Medical College in each state.
However, in some states, new districts have been formed from time to time where even the district hospitals have also
not been established. State AIDS Control Societies will establish the STD Clinic in newly formed districts as and when
the district hospital  becomes functional.

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
Blood Banks:
At present 552 district blood banks are functioning with support of NACO. 50 districts most of which are newly
formed districts do not have blood banks. National AIDS Control Board approval has been obtained for establishing
blood banks in June 2005 in every district of the country. All the concerning states are being issued sanctions for
establishing district blood banks in remaining districts
VCTC: By march 2005 a total of 804 VCTCs are functioning.  State wise list of the same in enclosed at
Annexure-VI. During the year 2005-06 a total of 197 VCTCs are proposed to be set up under NACP at district and sub
district level. In addition 157 VCTCs are proposed to be set up at sub district level in 6 high prevalence states under
GFATM round III project.
At the time of launching of the National AIDS Control Programme, the assumption was that for establishment of
STD Clinics, the basic infrastructure, such as space and staff will be provided by the concerned state health directorate
and NACO will provide support for organizing the in-service training of staff and funds for equipment, STD drugs,
laboratory reagents and other consumables used in the clinic. To meet this expenditure, NACO is providing a recurring
annual grant of Rs 1 lakh per STD Clinic to each State AIDS Control Society. Condoms are provided in adequate
quantity free of cost by NACO through SACS.
              Shortcomings in the functioning of the STD Clinics were communicated to the State AIDS control Societies
who have confirmed rectification of the shortcomings. NACO officers during their field visit to states, provide
supportive supervision to ensure optimum functioning of the STD clinics.
 
The states were asked to increase coverage of schools. A total of 60,000 schools were covered during the year
2004-05. State wise list of schools covered is given at Annexure-VII. During the year 2005-06 education department of
all the states and central government along with state aids control societies have taken responsibilities and had planned to
cover all the secondary and higher secondary level schools under school AIDS Education Programme.
FHAC guidelines have been revised. States have been given detailed revised guidelines for implementation of
FHAC in 2005. States have been asked that beside interpersonal communication, community mobilization should be
done by mass media campaign on the local channels of Doordarshan, All India Radio & Cable Network television and
local press. Provision of posters, pamphlets etc have also been made for increasing dissemination of relevant information
about the FHAC dates and venue in the area.
During NACP II reconciliation of expenditure for 1999 to march 2004 has been accomplished and utilization
certificates for the grants released to SACS have been issued.
Matter was taken up with procurement agent (NTPC) who have submitted the bills against advances for
adjustment which are being examined for adjustment at NACO & by P & AO, Ministry of Health.
 
XIV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
14.2& 14.3 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes that during the Ninth Plan, there was an allocation of Rs.28 crores under this Programme. 
However, utilization figures are only Rs.18.19 crores.  The Committee is constrained to observe that a massive
enhancement of Plan allocation for this Programme during the Tenth Plan, i.e. Rs.139 crores has failed to make any
noticeable impact for the simple reason that allocated funds have remained underutilized so far.  Against an allocation of
Rs.30.00 crore in 2002-03, the first year of Tenth Plan, utilization figures are only Rs.9 lakhs.  Actual expenditure
figures for 2003-04 are not available.  However, reduction of BE allocation of Rs.30.00 to Rs.5.00 crore at the RE stage
clearly indicates the dismal achievement level.  Full estimated expenditure of allocated funds of Rs.33 crores in 2004-05
has been projected.  In the event of success in achievement level in 2004-05, the fact remains that in the last year of the
Tenth Plan, Rs.100.91 crore out of total allocation of Rs.139 crore are available under this programme.
The Committee finds that due to approval of the Scheme in December, 2002, no activity was there during the
first year of Tenth Plan.  Situation does not seem to have improved much as out of 48 districts envisaged to be covered
during 2003-04, only 17 could be covered.  With regard to target of modernization of 37 mental hospitals and
upgradation of 75 medical colleges, progress charts shows nil progress.  Performance rate of similar targets in 2004-05 is
not yet known.
 
Action Taken
During the 9
th Plan, the National Mental Health Programme had only the component of District Mental Health
Programme.  Funds could not be released for the programme for want of Utilisation Certificates from the implementing
agencies.  However, during the 10 th Plan, NMHP has apart from DMHP, other components like upgradation OF 37

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
Government mental hospitals, psychiatric wards of medical colleges/district hospitals, IEC, Research, etc.  Accordingly
increased outlay was provided. In the first two years of 10 th Plan the funds could be released only to the districts under
the on-going pilot project, as the revised National Mental Health Programme was launched only in October, 2003. Since,
utilization certificates were not forthcoming from the old districts, the allocated funds could not be utilized during the
first two years.  The new NMHP has several other components along with the district component of earlier pilot project
viz. upgradation of Mental Health Institutes, strengthening of psychiatric wings of medical colleges and general
hospitals, research and IEC activities.  The proposals from the State Governments, which had been called for in October,
2003, had to be appraised before funding for the effective implementation.  However, 17 new districts were sanctioned
under the District Mental Health Programme and an amount of Rs.4.92 crores was utilized as against Rs.5.00 crore in the
RE 2003-04.  During 2004-05, 50 more new districts have been funded apart from 9 medical colleges and one mental
health institute.  Proposals for upgradation of other institutions are also being evaluated and funds would be released
during the current year.  Funds were also released for I.E.C. and Research activities.  The total expenditure during 2004-
05 was Rs.19.39 crore against BE of Rs.33 crore, as the allocation was reduced to Rs.21 crore in the RE.
 
14.5 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes that the Central Mental Health Authority is supposed to oversee the implementation of the
Mental Health Act, 1987.  The Act also provides for creation of State mental Health Authority.  The Committee would
like to be appraised about the number of States where such Authorities have been created.
 
Action Taken
The State Mental Health Authority had been constituted in 25 States and Union Territories.
 
XV. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME
 
15.1
         Recommendations/Observations
Cancer is a major public health problem in the country. There are about 20-25 lakh cases of cancer in the country
at any given point of time and approximately 7-9 lakh cases come up every year.
 
Action Taken
The statistics regarding cancer is based on the ICMR National Cancer Registry Programme.
 
15.2
         Recommendations/Observations
Against a plan allocation of Rs. 195 crores for this programme during the Ninth Plan, Rs. 266 crore has been
provided for the Tenth Plan. The Committee observes that during the first two years of Tenth Plan, allocated funds
remained under-utilized due to delay in approval of the revision in scheme. The Committee has been given to understand
that once the revised scheme is approved by the CCEA, the State Govts. and Regional Cancer Centres would be
requested to send formal proposals.
 
Action Taken
The revised NCCP came into existence from January, 2005, after the approval of CCEA in December, 2004.
Subsequent to the approval, the guidelines for the revised NCCP have been firmed up and widely circulated.
During the year 2004-05 against the allocated allocation of Rs. 53.00 Crore an amount of Rs. 63.00 Crore
(approx) has been incurred, making total expenditure during the first three years of the 10
th plan to Rs. 134.00 crore,
leaving a balance of Rs. 132.00 crore to be spent during the last two years of the plan. All out efforts will be made by
Programme Division to utilize the entire amount of Rs. 266 Crores provided for the 10 th Plan. In this connection Health
Secretaries of all  State Governments/ UTs and Directors of all Regional Cancer Centres have already been requested to
submit the proposal under various schemes of the National Cancer Control Programme.
 
XVII. DISASTER MANAGEMENT
 
17.1 Recommendations/Observations
India with a wide range of topographic and climatic conditions is a major disaster prone country in the Asia-
Pacific region.  A sum of Rs. 3 crores was provided in the Ninth Plan for the Health Sector disaster preparedness and

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
management.  However, the funds remained unutilized for want of a duly approved programme. A sum of Rs. 30 crores
have been provided for this area in the Tenth Plan. The Committee notes that proposals received from States for
strengthening and operationalisation of the Control Room and networking of National and State Control Rooms and also
strengthening of Disaster Wards in Govt. institutions are under consideration.   The Committee feels that Approval
process of these proposals needs to be expedited.
 
Action Taken
Components of the scheme has been circulated to all North eastern states (including Sikkim) inviting proposals
for assistance under the scheme. Proposals have been received from the states of Tripura, Nagaland and Manipur for
strengthening of control room which are under consideration. Other states have been reminded to send the proposal. As
major provision of the annual allocation had to be earmarked for mobile hospital project, this component could not be
acted upon earlier. This is being put up for Standing Finance Committee approval for implementation.
 
17.2
         Recommendations/Observations
The Committee observes that a major impediment for quick response mechanism in major disasters witnessed in
the recent years was non-availability of dedicated second tertiary level medical facilities near the disaster side.  The
Committee strongly feels that the havoc caused by the recent Tsunami outbreak in Southern region and Andaman and
Nicobar Islands in the country has established the urgent requirement of such facilities. The Committee is, however,
perturbed to note that the project on self-contained Container based Mobile Hospital was approved in April 2003.
However the revised cost estimates of the project could be finally approved by SFC only in February, 2004. Another
year has passed and the only progress made is the engagement of M/s Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation as the
Procurement Consultant for the project. The Committee notes that 5 to 6 mobile units are proposed to be set up all over
the country and one such unit would be procured during the Tenth Plan itself. The Committee would impress upon the
Department not to further delay the procurement of the proposed Mobile Unit, specially in view of disaster prone
geographical position of the country. 
 
Action Taken
A pre-fabricated, self contained, container based mobile hospital is being procured for which M/s Hospital
Services Consultancy Corporation, a Govt. of India Enterprise has been engaged as the procurement consultant. This
project being first of its kind in the country, it took time to finalise the technical specifications. Hospital Services
Consultancy Corporation invited bids in 2002, but the biddings were not found suitable. The Standing Finance
Committee considered the project on 10
th April, 2003 and decided that the technical specification committee should
examine the ICB from technical angle and submit its report at the earliest to initiate process of procurement by HSCC.
Accordingly the technical specification were examined and further enriched. The Standing Finance Committee approved
the revised cost estimates on 6.2.2004. As the technical specifications underwent revision it was considered to freeze
specifications and the process of an international competitive bidding be gone through afresh. The procurement
consultant was advised accordingly in August, 2004.
Fresh international competitive bidding was invited. The technical bids have been opened on 21.12.2004 and the
technical evaluation is nearing completion. Accordingly, procurement procedures would be initiated by HSCC(I) and
commissioning is likely to be completed by the end of 2005.
 
XX. RABBIES CONTROL
20.1 Recommendations/Observations
Committee’s attention has been drawn by the non-availability of anti – rabies vaccine in rural areas.  The
committee finds that whereas anti-rabies vaccine is easily available in big cities the position is entirely different in rural
areas.  As a result affected persons in such areas have to suffer a lot.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the
Department should take the initiative by launching a Pilot Project on this preventive measure in selected districts which
can later on cover all the districts in the country.  Strategy used in Polio Eradication Programme can be made use of for
rabies control. 
 
Action Taken
Health being a State subject, it is the responsibility of the State/UT Government to make the required quantity of
Anti Rabies Vaccine available in all health institutions of the State including the rural areas.  In case of any shortage of
the vaccine reported to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, all out efforts are made to make the vaccine available

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
from the manufacturer to the concerned State Government on payment basis. 
Regarding launch of Pilot project on control of Rabies, it is stated that Department of Animal Husbandry and
Dairying, Ministry of Agriculture is the nodal agency to implement such project.
 
XXII. MEDICAL EDUCATION
 
22.1&22.2 Recommendations/Observations
The committee is of the view that the Department/MCI should take the initiative in opening of more Medical
Colleges but only in such area not having such facilities.
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that an assessment of existing medical colleges in the country may be
made and wherever feasible, post graduate seats may be increased or under graduate colleges may be upgraded as posts
graduate colleges. Feasibility of having one post graduate seats against and MBBS seats may be explored by the
Department.
 
Action Taken
Establishment of Medical Colleges in a State is mainly the issue to be addressed by the State
Governments/Institution. Central Government only gives permission for establishment of new medical colleges provided
they: fulfill the requirement of Medical Council of India norms. Similarly, providing required atmosphere for Private
Institutions to set up Medical Colleges in respective State is also to address by the State Government. Considering socio-
economic factors and need for having an Institutions providing comprehensive speciality treatment. Govt. of India under
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojna (PMSSY) has decided to set up six AIIMS like institutions at Bhopal,
Bhubaneshwar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh and also upgrade following medical colleges/insitutes:-
(i)
               Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Insitute, Lucknow
(ii)              Rjendra Medical College & Hospital, Ranchi
(iii)            Government Medical College, Jammu
(iv)            Kolkata Medical College, Kolkata
(v)             Government Medical College, Salem
(vi)            Nizam Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad
(vii)          Sri Venkateshwara Institute of Medical Sciences, Tirupati.
 
XXIII. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL
SCIENCES, SHILLONG
 
23.1,23.2&23.3  Recommendations/Observations
NEIGRIHMS is being set up at Shillong at a cost of Rs. 422.60 crores as a super speciality hospital on the pattern
of AIIMS.  This institute shall have a 500 bedded referral hospital with 35 teaching departments at post-graduate level,
with a nursing college having an intake of 50 students per year.
 
The Committee notes that work on this project was started from 1997-1998 i.e. first year of Ninth Plan and upto
December, 2004, an expenditure of Rs. 163.15 crores has been incurred.  The Committee observes that the construction
work is being undertaken through four packages.  Under the package-I, 254 dwelling unit, guest house, roads etc. were to
be built.  Contract was allotted to M/S Ansal Building  Ltd., on 19.04.2000 for a total cost of Rs. 30.34 cores. 
Percentage value of work completed upto December, 2004 is only 27.13%.  Due to poor performance, part work has
been surrendered to another firm.  Under package-II, construction of 300 bedded hospital was undertaken, which was to
be completed by 16.07.2004.  Satisfactory progress has been there, however, this phase is also running behind schedule. 
Package-III comprises construction of additional 200 bedded hospital and other related services.  Scheduled completion
date is 30.09.2003 and 31.10.2004   Only 50.71% work completed by December, 2004.  Anticipated completion dates
are March and May, 2005.  Under phase-III & IV, completion rate is 99.55% .  Process of recruitment of manpower for
the Institute has been initiated.  Seventy six faculty posts in respect of 20 Departments were advertised and interviews
held in different phases, 24 candidates have been selected.
 
           The Committee notes that the 300 bedded institute is to be commissioned by December 2005.  As per the
information made available to the Committee, upto December, 2004, an expenditure of Rs. 163.15 core has been

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
incurred.   The Committee expresses its serious concern over the slow progress in the construction of Indira Gandhi
Medical Institution at Shillong.  Work started in the beginning of Ninth Plan still remains to be completed although
Tenth Plan has already crossed mid-term of plan period.  The Committee finds that it has taken more than four years
since the laying of foundation stone in August, 2000, with the buildings still not fully constructed.  The Committee
apprehends that provision of required faculty and other allied manpower and infrastructure will perhaps take another
plan period.  The Committee fails to understand the reasons for failure in adherence to time schedule, in spite of required
funds being available.  The Committee therefore emphasizes that the Department should constantly monitor the
completion all assigned projects to make the institute fully operational.
 
Action Taken
It is submitted that the Expenditure Finance Committee had accorded approval for establishment of North East
Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences (NEIGRIHMS) at Shillong  at a cost of Rs. 422.60
cores on 13.10.2000.  The project was cleared by the Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs on 7.2.2001.  The project
provided for a 500 bedded referral hospital with teaching at PG level in 35 specialities and super specialities  with a
Nursing College having annual intake of 50 students.  The revised project actually come into operation from 2000 with
the award of work relating to construction activities under Package I in April, 2000.  An Action Plan was prepared and
forwarded to the Prime Minister’s Office as the project has been included in the Prime Minister’s Agenda for the Socio-
economic development of North East Region.  As per this action plan, the entire project was to be commissioned by
May, 2005. 
 
           The construction activities were divided into packages.  The work under first package was awarded in April,
2000.  However, the work actually could start in November, 2000 due to  clearance from the State Forest Department for
cutting of trees.  Thereafter, the project has suffered delay on account of other factors, namely;
 
i)
                  issue of labour license by Labour Department;
ii)                interference by local NGOs regarding use of a particular local brand of cement instead of approved brand of 
cement;
iii)               frequent bandhs , office picketing and road
            blockages;
iv)
              scarcity of approved brand of cement and reinforcement  steel;
v)          scarcity of stone aggregates;
vi)         killing of sub-contractor;
vii)        poor infrastructure;
      viii)       non-availability of skilled  labour;
ix)          heavy rains and difficult terrain etc.     
 
           All these problems have cumulatively added to the initial delay in the start of construction activity.
 
           However, the project is being constantly monitored by various agencies including the Prime Minister’s Office and
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.  A meeting of the Committee of Secretaries under the
Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary was held on 29.4.2005.  Subsequent to that, the Hon’ble Minister of State in the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation had also reviewed the project on 6.6.2005. It was assured that the
entire project would be commissioned by July, 2006.  The action is under process for recruitment of faculty and other
staffs as well as for procurement of required equipment etc. 
 
Concerted efforts which include increased monitoring and weekly reviews at the Ministry level are being made to
see that the project is commissioned even before the target date of July, 2006.  The following works have already been
completed:
 
1.   31 Type A and B units have been handed over by
      NEIGRIHMS.
2.
      78 Type C and D units completed ( excluding external electrical works.
3.      Balance 78 Type C and D units in advance stage of finishing.
4.      66 Type A and B units and other works being re-tendered.

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
5.      Buildings for OPD, General Ward & Service Block, Director’s Administrative Block, Faculty Block, Director’s
Residence, Police Station, Police Housing, Police Beat Box completed and taken over by NEIGRIHMS.
6.      Casualty & Diagnostic Block nearing completion
7.      Roads & External Services, Substation Building, AC Plant Room Water Tanks, Water Supply lines, Drainage,
Sewerage Treatment Plant, Pump House etc. completed. Trial run & commissioning in progress.
8.      Nursing College & Hostel, Public Utility Block completed and taken over by NEIGRIHMS.
 
The Government would continue to monitor the project on regular basis so that the balance works and other activities
viz. recruitment of staff and procurement of equipment are also completed in time to make the project operational.
CHAPTER – III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
II.        BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2.4   Recommendations/Observations
The Department has also advocated that on the analogy of 2% Education Cess, a similar cess may also be
introduced in the health sector to enable realization of the goal of raising public spending on health to at least 2% of
GDP over the next five years. The Committee, however, has serious reservations on this proposal, not only due to such a
cess involving taxpayer’s money but also due to the past record of utilization of funds by the department. While not
denying that approved outlay for 2005-06 will adversely affect a number of schemes, the most affected being the
ambitious ‘Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Srakshana Yojana’ the Committee is more perturbed by the trend of allocation on
non-plan funds. Non-provision of required non-plan funds for the premier hospitals like AIIMS, PGIMER Chandigarh,
NIMHANS, Bangalore, even affecting the salary component of the staff is a matter of serious concern.
 
Action Taken
Under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana(PMSSY), Rs. 250 crores has been approved in the Annual
Plan 2005-06.  This lower order of funding against the proposed outlay was agreed to as the scheme was still under
formulation and the necessary approvals awaited.
 The Ministry has been approaching the Ministry of Finance to provide non-plan funds for premier hospitals like
AIIMS, PGIMER Chandigarh, NIMHANS Bangalore and similarly placed many other prestigious institutes. But from
past few years the Ministry of Finance has not been able to meet the requisite Non-Plan allocation to the Health Sector.
 
2.6 Recommendations/Observations
              The Committee is dismayed to note that as a result of declining trend of allocation of non-plan funds,
department is compelled to divert plan funds to non-plan to meet the obligations of some major health institutions. The
Committee feels that this can not be considered a healthy development, being against the prescribed norms. Diversion of
Plan funds to non-plan side very well indicated the poor status of schemes of the department, very vital for the
development of the country as a whole. While on one side, Department is advocating impositions of 2% cess for
generation of additional funds, it is not in a position to utilize the allocated plan funds due to poor management and
incapacity of implementing agencies. The Committee would like to emphasize that the Department should take remedial
measure in the light of finding of mid-term appraisal of various schemes.
 
Action Taken
We agree with recommendation of the committee that diversion of funds from plan to non-plan is not a healthy
trend. However, this apparently had been resorted to by the Ministry on account of shortage of funds under the non-plan
in respect of certain major health institutions like AIIMS, NIMHANS, VPCI etc.  The Ministry of Finance has been
approached even at the level of the Minister of Health to provide adequate Non-Plan budget to avoid diversion from Plan
to Non-Plan.
 
Comments of the Committee
Committee’s attention had been drawn by a disturbing trend of allocation of funds for some premier institutions  
under the Ministry.   The Committee views with serious concern the non-provision of required non-Plan funds essential
for the smooth functioning of prestigious institutions like AIIMS, PGIMER, Chandigarh, NIMHANS, and Bangalore and

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
similarly placed many other institutions.   The Committee had been given to understand that Ministry’s efforts to
convince the Ministry of Finance in this regard for the past few years have proved futile.   This is indeed a sorry state of
affairs.  Diversion of funds from Plan to non-Plan on a regular basis should not be allowed to continue, simply because it
has an adverse fall out on the Plan Schemes.   The Committee accordingly reiterates that the department should take it up
once again with the Ministry of Finance and prevail upon them for getting the required non-Plan funds from 2005-06
itself.  
 
III.     CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME:
3.2   Recommendations/Observations
The plan allocation of Rs. 16.50 Crores for CGHS in BE 2004-05 has been substantially increased to Rs. 26.00
crores in B.E. 2005-06. The additional money, as informed by the Department, is meant for expansion activities for
CGHS under which the newly sanctioned dispensaries for Dehradun, Bhubaneswar and Ranchi would be made
operational. The Committee also notes that during 2004-05 and 2005-06, 10 new Allopathic, two Ayurvedic, one Unani,
and three Homoeopathy dispensaries in different parts of the country are proposed to be opened. Besides that, buildings
of 14 dispensaries in Delhi are at present under construction. The Committee would like to have the details about the
progress made in this regard.
 
Action Taken
During the 10
th Five Year Plan, three new CGHS Allopathic Dispensaries (one each at Bhubaneswar, Ranchi and
Dehradun) have been opened. The CGHS facilities existing prior to the opening of the said new dispensaries were
available only to the employees of Accountant General’s office in Bhubaneshwar and Ranchi.  In addition to the above,
one Ayurvedic dispensary and one Homoeopathic Unit under CGHS Trivandrum and one Ayurvedic dispensary under
CGHS Guwahati have been newly established.
     Due to non-implementation of the SIU Report on the Norms Study of CGHS(Allopathic) dispensaries, the Ministry of
Finance is not agreeing to the creation of new posts that are needed for opening of additional/new dispensaries.
Therefore, the new CGHS dispensaries have been opened by redeployment of CGHS doctors and outsourcing the
support services of paramedical and other staff through the Hindustan Latex Limited (HLL).
The CGHS has taken possession of the following newly constructed buildings from the CPWD in various cities
to run its dispensaries:-
1. Chitra Gupta Road, New Delhi.
2. R.K.Puram Sector-12, New Delhi.
3. Shradhapuri Dispensary Building, Meerut
4. Rattan Lal Nagar Dispensary Building, Kanpur.
 
Administrative approval and Expenditure sanction has been conveyed to the CPWD for construction of CGHS
dispensary buildings at Ashok Vihar, Dilshad Garden, Pitampura, Shakur Basti, Shalimar Bagh and Tagore Garden in
Delhi, as also for Noida and Kamla Nehru Nagar, Ghaziabad.  The dispensary building at NOIDA is nearing completion.
The CGHS dispensary building at Tagore Garden, Delhi is due to be completed by the year-end.
            In the case of remaining buildings for which Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction has been issued,
the CPWD has to obtain approvals from various civic agencies where after construction work could commence.
 
Comments of the Committee
           The Committee notes that although three new CGHS allopathic dispensaries one each at Bhubaneswar, Ranchi
and Dehradun           have been opened during the 10
th Plan but they are yet to be made operational.   The Committee has
been informed that  due to non-implementation of  the SIU report  on the Norms Study  of CGHS allopathic dispensaries,
creation of new posts is not being agreed to by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee would like to point out that in
the absence of required manpower, purpose of opening new dispensaries gets defeated.   Temporary arrangements being
made by the Ministry by redeployment of doctors and outsourcing the support services of paramedical and other staff
cannot be considered an ideal situation.  The Committee, therefore, would appreciate if the Department pursues the issue
of creation of posts with the Ministry of Finance vigorously.   The Committee finds from the details furnished by the
Department that   a number of dispensary buildings are at present under construction and in the case of some buildings,
approval is yet to be  obtained from various civic agencies  for commencement of construction work.   The Committee
would like to emphasise that the Department should make concerted efforts to fulfill the target of  opening of
dispensaries and also making them operational during the Tenth Plan. 

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
3.4      Recommendations/Observations
The committee has been monitoring for the last two-three the progress made in the notification for combined
formulary of CGHS/MSO in respect of proprietary medicines based on recommendation of the Report of the
Shrivastava Committee.
The committee finds that not much progress seems to here been made as the process of fixation of rates of drugs
formulary is still not over. The Committee reiterates that the Department should expedite the notification of over-delayed
drugs formulary without any further delay.
 
Action Taken
The department of Health has been following the GNCT of Delhi generic drug formulary and the rate contract.
As regards rates of combined drugs formulary for proprietary medicines, the report of the rate Committee has since
been received and approved.
A Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of Smt. S.Jalaja, Additional Secretary of this Ministry
to review the Generic Drugs formulary /  National Essential  Drugs List (NEDL) from the prospective of requirement of
CGHS system and other indenters annually.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is constrained to observe that  the combined formulary of  CGHS/MSO in respect of proprietary
medicines based on the recommendations of Shrivastava Committee report remains to be  notified.   The Committee
finds that  yet another Committee has been constituted by the Ministry to review the Generic Drugs formulary/National
Essential Drugs List from the prospective of requirement of CGHS system and other indenters annually.   It is not known
whether this newly setup Committee has been given any time limit for giving its report.  The Committee observes  that
already  the notification of the drugs formulary has been over delayed considerably.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that  the report  of the latest Committee should be expedited and follow-up action taken thereon without
delay.  
 
3.6 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee has been emphasizing for the lasts few years for the need to revert to the earlier two-shift system
of CGHS dispensaries. The Committee has been informed that as recommended by the SIU Report on the Norms study
of CGHS (allopathic) dispensaries, 466 additional posts of medical officers and other required para-medical and group
‘D’ staff are required to be created for the purpose. The Department has expressed its inability to do so due to financial
constraints. The Committee is not fully convinced by the Department’s projection of need for such a large number of
posts. The Committee would like to point out that there has been gradual increase in the number of allopathic
dispensaries. Earlier also CGHS dispensaries were working in double shift. The Committee would like to have the
details about the number of dispensaries working in double shift and the staff in position in such dispensaries and the
present sanctioned strength and in position. The Committee feels that the present working hours can be easily divided
into two shifts as per the earlier practice. The Committee fails to understand the rationale for projection of the
requirement at such a high scale. The Committee would, therefore, emphasize  that the Department should get a review
done based on the practical requirement on the analogy of earlier double shift system.
 
Action Taken
There are only eleven(11) Double shift dispensaries functioning under CGHS Delhi. The Double shift
dispensaries are running in two regular shifts i.e. from 7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. with a regular complement of staff. The 2
nd
regular shift functions from 1.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m. which provides all the OPD facilities to the beneficiaries. The
sanctioned strength of staff for the afternoon/2nd shift in CGHS dispensaries is as under:-
S.No.         Name of Post                          Sanctioned Strength
1                  Medical Officers                               Two
2                  Pharmacist                                         One
3                  Clerk                                                  One
4                  Staff Nurse                                         One
5
                            Group ‘D’ (other than
                   Safai Karamchari)                            Three
6                  Safai Karamchari                              One

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
                  Total                                      Nine
 
The above sanctioned strength is in position in all the 2nd Shift CGHS dispensaries.
At present ten(10) double shift dispensaries are functioning under CGHS Delhi, one of which has been
temporarily closed due to the bad condition of the building.
Keeping in view the above figures, a projection of 466 Doctors and requisite staff had earlier been made by the
CGHS for making all the 244 CGHS Allopathic Dispensaries in the country (minus the existing eleven double shift
dispensaries) to work in double shift.
The CGHS regrets the communication gap as the CGHS had understood double shift as explained in the
preceding paras whereas the Committee had desired that the CGHS should revert back to the earlier broken shift system
wherein the doctors/staff used to work in the dispensary from 7.30 a.m. to 11.00 a.m. and then come back again in the
evening to attend the dispensary from 5.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m.
Reverting back to the earlier system of broken shift in the CGHS dispensaries is likely to raise protests from
various CGHS employees Associations as also from the Doctors Forum.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that at present ten double shift dispensaries are functioning under CGHS, Delhi.   These
dispensaries run in two regular shifts i.e. from  7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m.  and the second shift from 1.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m.   
The Committee has been emphasizing for the last few years for the need  of earlier two shifts system of CGHS
dispensaries.    The Committee has now been informed that  projection of 466 doctors and requisite staff was made by
CGHS for making all the 244 allopathic dispensaries in the country to work in double shift.  The Committee is surprised
by the Department’s clarification  about the    interpretation of double shift system.   Committee’s intention right from
the beginning was for reverting to  double shift (from 7.30 a.m. to 11.00 a.m. and from 5.30  p.m. to 7.30 p.m.).  The
Committee takes serious objection  to the contention  of the department that reverting back to the earlier system of
broken shift in the CGHS dispensaries is likely to   raise protest from various CGHS employees associations as also from
the doctors’ forum.    The committee strongly feels that it is the responsibility of the department to convince  the staff
attached with CGHS dispensaries for reversion to  double shift system.  One should not forget  that the CGHS
dispensaries are meant to serve the beneficiaries.  Accordingly all efforts need to be made to provide them the maximum
services.   
 
3.9      Recommendations/Observations
The Committee understands that at present, a CBI inquiry is going on a complaint received with regard to
recognition/reimbursement of hospitals bills. The Committee is of the view that review of the existing system of this
specific facility available to the CGHS beneficiaries should be carried out in the light of the findings of ongoing CBI
inquiry. The Committee further recommends that the existing package rates for various procedures/treatments may be
revised keeping in view the present market scenario. The Committee understands that at present only allopathic hospitals
are in the list of private recognized hospitals of CGHS. The Committee is of the view that the existing facility for taking
treatment in CGHS recognized private Hospitals/Diagnostic centers may be also be extended to AYUSH system of
treatment. The Committee therefore recommends that a panel of CGHS recognized private AYUSH Hospitals/clinics
may be drawn at the earliest.
 
Action Taken
The Ministry of HFW has written a letter to the Central Bureau of Investigation(CBI) on 20.7.2005 followed by
reminders on 3.8.2005 and 16.8.2005 for ascertaining the factual position of the case. As of 22.8.2005, no reply has been
received from the CBI in response to the said letters.
 
CGHS has already invited tenders for fresh recognition of private hospitals/diagnostic centres under CGHS along
with revised ceiling/package deal rates for various medical procedures/tests/investigations. Recognition of private
hospitals/diagnostic centres under CGHS is a detailed process that includes calling of tenders, scrutiny of tenders,
inspection of the hospitals, etc.  The fresh list of CGHS recognised private hospitals/diagnostic centres along with
revised ceiling rates is released only after completion of all technical and administrative formalities.
 
The finalisation of tenders for the recognition of private Ayush Hospitals under CGHS is under process.

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
Comments of the Committee
           Reply of the Ministry indicates that CBI inquiry on a complaint received with regard to
recognition/reimbursement of Hospital Bills will take some time to be completed.  In the process the review of the
existing package rates for various procedures/treatment which is already overdue will be further delayed.  Besides that,
the Committee finds that there are a number of procedural formalities to be completed before final recognition for both
medical procedures / investigation as well as of private Hospitals / Diagnostic Centres.  The Committee would like to
emphasize that   this entire process should be completed in a time bound manner so that CGHS beneficiaries are not put
to any inconvenience.
 
3.10 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee is unhappy to note that the CGHS network has not been able to achieve its desired objective of
providing efficient medical service to its beneficiaries. The network of CGHS dispensaries has degenerated to a stage
where patients receive neither treatment nor consultation. In fact, beneficiaries with very basis ailments only such as cold
and cough are attended to in these dispensaries. In Committee’s view, the position today is that treatment of the
beneficiaries is practically taking place at the specialist level only in a few hospitals and in designated dispensaries in
Delhi, and the number of specialists available in Delhi vis-à-vis CGHS beneficiaries is very low. Position of CGHS
beneficiaries residing in NCR such as Noida, Gurgaon is more worse as they are given dates of visit by specialists,
sometimes ranging from 45 days to 60 days and the beneficiaries have to wait for the arrival of specialists for long
periods. Therefore, the idea of providing a convenient health care to the Central Government employees has remained a
dream. The Committee strongly recommends that Government should take immediate steps to ensure that CGHS
dispensaries function in such a manner that the dispensaries, instead of being a place for referring patients to specialists
and disbursement of medicines recommended by them, should become health centers where its beneficiaries actually
receive proper treatment. It is high time that the role and functions of CGHS dispensaries
 is re-determined.
 
Action Taken
           CGHS is exploring the possibility of creating Specialists’ posts for being deployed at the CGHS polyclinics and
CGHS dispensaries to augment specialists’ consultation for the beneficiaries at the dispensary level which at present are
largely being obtained by the beneficiaries from the Govt. hospitals like Safdarjung and RML hospitals, etc.
           The Govt. has also constituted a high-powered Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri P.K. Kaul, former
Cabinet Secretary to review the functioning of CGHS and make it more users friendly.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes that a high powered Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri P.K. Kaul, former Cabinet
Secretary has been set up to review the functioning of CGHS and make it more user friendly. The Committee also takes
note of the fact that CGHS proposes to create specialist posts for augmenting the existing services.  The Committee,
however, would like to emphasize that the department should make all efforts to get the recommendations of the Kaul
Committee at the earliest.
 
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
4.4Recommendations/Observations
            The Committee hopes that construction of the VMMC building will be completed within the time-schedule,
thereby eliminating any increase in the original estimate of expenditure.
 
Action Taken
VMMC Construction Project has been entrusted to the Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation Ltd. who are
in the process of obtaining necessary statutory approvals. The contracting firm has also been selected after following the
laid down procedure. The construction is likely to commence shortly. The college building is scheduled to be completed
within eleven months after start of construction. A project Monitoring Committee under Secretary (H&FW) and
comprising of DGHS; CMD, HSCC; Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
and Medical Superintendent, Safdarjung Hospital as members has been constituted for regular monitoring of the project.
VMMC Construction Project has been entrusted to the Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation Ltd. who are in the

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
process of obtaining necessary statutory approvals. The contracting firm has also been selected after following the laid
down procedure. The construction is likely to commence shortly. The college building is scheduled to be completed
within eleven months after start of construction. A project Monitoring Committee under Secretary (H&FW) and
comprising of DGHS; CMD, HSCC; Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
and Medical Superintendent, Safdarjung Hospital as members has been constituted for regular monitoring of the project.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes serious note of the unreasonable delay in the completion of the construction of the building
of Vardhman Mahavir Medical College.  Last year, the Committee was given to understand that the construction work
would be complete by March 2006.  The Committee is however, constrained to observe that till now the construction
work is yet to commence.  The Committee is not convinced by the assurance given by the Ministry that the college
building is scheduled to be completed within eleven months after the start of the construction    The Committee is of the
view that procedural formalities should be completed at the earliest.
 
VI. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES
6.5Recommendations/Observations
              An outlay of Rs. 999 Crores has been transferred from the Department of Family Welfare for the Tenth Plan for
a new Scheme, i.e. “Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana”. Under this scheme, setting up of six AIIMS like
institutions one each in Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Uttaranchal and upgradation of six
medical colleges one each in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh
and West Bengal is envisaged. The Committee is , however, constrained to note that by the third year of the Tenth Plan,
the project has only been cleared by EFC and is now to be placed before the competent authority for approval.
Comments of Department of Expenditure have been received and are under examination in the Ministry. Comments of
the Planning Commission are still awaited. For want of formal approval from CCEA, no major activity could be initiated
during 2004-05. As a result, allocation of Rs. 60 lakhs for the purpose had to be reduced to Rs. 10 lakhs at the RE Stage.
Pending these clearances, start up activities like construction of boundary wall, process of selection of project Consultant
and selection of architectural concepts/designs have been taken up. The Committee does not visualize any major
progress in this ambitious project in 2005-06, keeping in view the past track record in such proposals. The year 2005-06
may perhaps be utilized only for getting formal approval of CCEA. By then, only one year of the Tenth Plan would be
left and Rs. 999 crores earmarked for the project would thus remain unspent.The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should initiate all required steps to get expedited the clearance of the Project “Pradhan Mantri Swasthya
Suraksha Yojana”. The Committee is also of the view that funds earmarked for the Scheme should be utilized within the
prescribed time frame and if need be, additional funds may also be provided therefor.
 
Action Taken
Under   PMSSY, it is proposed to set up one  AIIMS-like institution each in the states of Bihar (Patna),
Chhattisgarh(Raipur), Madhya Pradesh(Bhopal), Orissa (Bhubaneshwar) Rajasthan(Jodhpur) and Uttaranchal
(Rishikesh) . In addition, under the Scheme, there is a proposal to upgrade one existing medical institutes in the State of
Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and two existing institutes in Andhra Pradesh
to the level of AIIMS like Institution.Out of total outlay of  Rs. 999 crores transferred from erstwhile Department of
Family Welfare to Department of Health, Rs. 500 crores has been diverted to National Rural Health Mission.
There have been some delays in obtaining the CCEA approval and as such, the expenditure during 2004-05 were
very low and as a result, allocation of Rs. 60 crores for 2004-05 was revised to Rs. 10 crores at RE stage in view of
absorptive  capacity of  the Project.
              After the approval  of EFC,  a draft  CCEA note was prepared and comments of Department of Expenditure and
Planning Commission were obtained on CCEA Note. After incorporating the views/suggestion of Department of
Expenditure & Planning Commission, CCEA Note was sent to Cabinet Secretariat in May,  2005 for obtaining the
approval of CCEA.  Cabinet Secretariat has requested that the proposal in the first instance, may be considered in the
Committee of Secretaries  (COS) and a revised CCEA Note may thereafter be prepared after incorporating the
recommendations of the COS. Necessary action is being taken in this respect. The Ministry is committed to go ahead
with the project and spend the funds allocated for the Project, once the approval of CCEA is obtained.
 
Comments of the Committee
              The Committee has been observing the progress made in the implementation of “Pradhan Mantri Swasthya

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
Suraksha Yojana” under which six AIIMS like institutions are to be set up in Bihar, Chattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh,
Orissa, Rajashthan and Uttaranchal along with upgradation of six medical colleges in other states.  The Committee finds
that this prestigious scheme still remains to be at the planning stage due to a number of procedural formalities yet to be
completed.   Meanwhile, the Committee is surprised to note that out of an outlay of Rs. 999 crore earmarked for the
scheme, an amount of the Rs. 500 crore has been diverted to National Rural Health Mission.  In such a situation the
commitment given by the Ministry for spending the funds allocated for the project, once the approval of CCEA is
obtained, does not have any meaning.  The Committee has little hope about the “Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Surksha
Yojna” taking off by the end of 10
th Plan. 
 
VII.  MISCELLANEOUS
 
7.3 Recommendations/Observations
              Only two examples would be enough.  The Committee has been given to understand that the Standing Finance
Committee had approved purchase of Spiral CT Scan, Color Doppler and Campus Server for the Central Institute of
Psychiatry, Ranchi in February, 2002.  The Committee has been given to understand that they could not be purchased
due to non-availability of funds since then.  The Committee is not convinced by these arguments as there was no
shortage of funds during the Ninth Plan.  Real reason must be delay in the finalization of technical specifications by the
Technical Committee, as indicated by the Department itself.  Similarly, for JIPMER, Pondicherry, a premier Institute in
the country, two projects of Super Speciality Block and Trauma Care Centre and also considerable increase in the faculty
strength are proposed.  The Committee takes a serious view of this and would like to be apprised about the factors
responsible therefor.  The Committee would also like to emphasize that the Department should initiate corrective
measures in order to prevent such situations in future.
 
Action Taken
PH:
 Though SFC had approved purchase of the equipment in the last year of the Ninth Plan, i.e. 2001-02 the purchase
could not be effected as the approval was conveyed only in February, 2002. Although funds were provided during all the
years (2001-02,02-03,03-04) except during 2004-05, the equipment could not be purchased, due to various reasons. The
delay took place  mainly in the appointment of the Technical Specification Committee and finalization of the technical
specification of the equipment.
However, during the current financial year, necessary provision of Rs.5.80 crore have been made under the sub-head
Machinery & Equipment during 2005-06 (Plan) for the purpose.  All the procedures for procurement including
finalization of technical specifications and revalidation of administrative and financial sanction have been completed.
ME-IV:
              As regards the projects of JIPMER, Pondicherry, it is stated that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA) has only recently cleared the proposal for construction of Super Speciality Block and Trauma Care Center at
JIPMER, Pondicherry and the time frame for execution of works is 24 months.  This will lead to the augmentation of the
facilities at JIPMER, Pondicherry both in terms of patient care, medical education and Research in super-speciality
streams.
 
Comments of the Committee
           The Committee views with serious concern the unjustified delay in the procurement  of required equipment for
the Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi.  Approval for purchase of these equipments was given in February, 2002, i.e.
last year of Ninth Plan.  However, it has taken four years for completion of procedure for procurement and necessary
provision of   RS. 5.80 crores could be made in 2005-06.   The Committee hopes that these equipments will be finally
provided to the Institute  by the end of Tenth Plan.
 
VIII.  INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH NEW DELHI
8.4
  Recommendations/Observations
Committee’s attention has also been drawn by media reports about several clinics promising Stem cell cure for
diseases from Muscular Dystrophy, Neuromucsular disorder, Stroke, Liver Cirrhosis, Diabetes etc. in Delhi and other
cities in the country. When asked about the authenticity of such claims, the Director General, ICMR informed the
Committee that very few Centres have approached the Council for approval. NuTech Mediworld, New Delhi, which had
submitted incomplete papers, have been asked by the Council to submit the detailed procedure and protocol including

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
the source of stem cell used for therapy. The applicant, however, failed to provide the same even after several reminders.
 
Action Taken
The beneficial effects of Stem Cell research as therapy have been acknowledged by all the scientific departments
in the country who have announced that this should be promoted and supported in the country with adequate
regulatory/monitoring mechanism in view of the ethical, legal and social issues involved. The draft guidelines in this
regard were prepared earlier. A brainstorming session is being planned by the ICMR  to come out with a National Policy
and appropriate guidelines for Stem Cell research and clinical application in the country.
 
8.5  Recommendations/Observations
As informed by ICMR, in view of the potential of this new technology in modern therapeutics and biomedical
research, a brain storming session was organised at the Institute of Pathology, New Delhi on 14 th September, 2001.  It
was decided that Stem Cell research and its clinical applications should be promoted in the country.  However, need for
thorough examination of this new technology before approving any research was also emphasised.  Accordingly, DCGI
requested ICMR to prepare appropriate guidelines to help in regulation of Stem Cell research and its research and its
application.  A drafting Committee was constituted for this purpose which drafted  brief guidelines on the subject in
2002.  These draft guidelines were put on ICMR Website for public consultation and also sent to DCGI for approval. 
The Committee has been given to understand that comments and suggestions have been received and the document is
being finalised.
 
8.6. Recommendations/Observations
The Committee notes that the guidelines suggest that a multi-disciplinary National Apex Committee  should be
constituted to monitor Stem Cell research activities in the country.  All proposals involving stem cells of an source will
be examined by this Committee.   Centres involved in Stem Cell research will have to be registered with the Committee. 
While appreciating the initiative taken by the Council for regulation of Stem Cell research and its application, the
Committee would like to emphasise that the approval process of draft guidelines on the subject pending before DCGI
should be expedited.  This is very necessary in view of a number of clinics claiming successful results in the treatment of
hitherto incurable diseases have started operation in recent years.  The Committee would also appreciate if an initiative is
taken by the ICMR/Department/concerned authorities in taking preventive steps so that such clinics do not continue to
attract patients.
 
Comments of the Committee
           Media report continue to come about significant achievements being made in Stem Cell Therapy.  The Committee
has commented extensively in this regard in its Seventh Report presented to Parliament in April, 2005. The Committee
was given to understand that draft guidelines for helping in regulation of Stem Cell research had been put on the ICMR
Website.  These guidelines suggested constitution of a multi-disciplinary National Apex Committee. The Committee had
suggested that the approval process of draft guidelines pending before DCGI should be expedited.  Latest Report
furnished by the Department however, indicates that the draft guidelines for which a drafting Committee was set up in
2002 continue to remain at the draft stage even after a gap of three years.  What is even more surprising is that a
brainstorming Session is now being planned by ICMR to come out with a National Policy and appropriate guidelines for
Stem Cell research.  The Committee is not happy with this kind of approach.  More than three years have passed since
the constitution of Drafting Committee in November, 2002.   The Committee strongly feels that there is a need both for
extensive research in Stem Cell therapy promising cure of chronic health problems and also regulating false claims in
this area.
 
IX. VACANCY POSITION IN CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL /INSTITUTIONS ETC.
 
9.5
   Recommendations/Observations
Para 9.5 (relating to Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. RML Hospital)
The Committee expresses its serious concern about the status of medical/para-medical /technical/general staff in
Safdarjung, Dr. RML Hospital in Delhi. All these hospitals provide medical services, both routine and emergency to
ever-increasing number of patients not only from Delhi and NCR but also from adjoining states. The Committee feels
that with such a large number of vacancies, specially of medical posts, nursing posts and technical posts, these hospitals
can never be in a position to provide the required services. The Committee is more worried about the situation in

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
Safdarjung Hospital where some posts have simply lapsed. In some cases, status of the posts is not even confirmed, they
seem to have lapsed. With a large number of vacancies of para-medical, technical and those related to general
administration, there cannot be proper working conditions for the doctors working specially in Safdarjung Hospital.
There seems to be total lack of co-ordination between the Hospital Administration and DGHS. The Committee is of the
view that the Department will have to take the initiative in revamping and streamlining the administration of these
hospitals. First step should be immediate review of all vacant/lapsed posts of all categories. Thereafter, the Department
should initiate the process of filling up the vacant posts at the earliest. The Committee is also of the view that a
monitoring/co-ordination mechansism needs to be evolved which can serve as a link between DGHS and hospital
administration.
 
Action Taken
Hospital:
Department of Personnel & Training (DOPT) vide its O.M. No.2/8/2001-PIC dated 16.5.2001 had restricted
direct recruitment in all civilian posts to 1/3rd of vacancies occurring in a year and that too subject to 1% of the total staff
strength. Now, the technical posts under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have been exempted from the purview
of the DOPT’s aforesaid instructions vide Ministry of Health & Family Welfare O.M. No.  Z.17025/29/2001-H dated
17.3.2005. All the vacant posts of doctors in Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. RML Hospital have been reported to UPSC for
filling up. The hospital administration has also advertised the other technical direct recruitment posts (which inter-alia
include Nursing and Paramedics) for filling up by direct recruitment.  DGHS has streamlined the general administration
in Safdarjung Hospital and officers of the Dte.GHS are co-coordinating with the hospital authorities for better
management of various services. Posts, which have been deemed as abolished due to having remained vacant for long,
are considered for revival on merits, as per the requirement of the hospitals.
 
ME-IV:
The posts in different Hospitals including Lady Hardinge Medical College and Associated Hospitals etc. could
not be filled up due to applicability of Govt. orders under which only 1/3 rd of Direct recruitment posts subject to 1% of
total sanctioned strength in the Ministry could be filled up. The Govt. has recently exempted the Technical posts under
this Ministry from the applicability of this order. Besides, action has also been taken to obtain the approval of the
Cabinet that the vacant posts are not treated as lapsed if the same remain vacant for these years or so. With the above
steps taken, it will be felt that the position about filling up the posts in these institutions including the Lady Hardinge
Medical College and Associated Hospitals will further improve in future.
 
Notwithstanding the position given above, it is also stated that the process of selection of specialists, through UPSC has
already been initiated and regular CHS officers will be in place soon. Moreover, the Govt. has also allowed ad hoc
contractual appointment of faculty for Lady Hardinge (LHMC) and Associated Hospitals, till the same are filled by
UPSC by regular incumbents. LHMC & Smt. S.K. Hospital have also invited applications for filling up of Staff Nurses
posts by making advertisements in various newspapers and matter is under process. The Kalawati Saran Children’s
Hospital (KSCH) have informed that since 2004 they have filled around 55 posts including 34 posts of Staff Nurses and
process is already underway to till up 58 posts of Staff Nurses.
 
Comments of the Committee
           Committee’s attention has been constantly drawn by the existence of a large number of vacancies of both medical
and para-medical posts in the premier hospitals like Dr. R.M. L. Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital and Lady Hardinge
Medical Collage and Hospital in Delhi.  The Committee has been emphasizing the need for exemption of technical posts
in these hospitals from the purview of DOPT’s guidelines issued on 16.5. 2001.  The Committee is happy to note that all
technical posts under the Ministry have now been exempted w.e.f. 17.3.05.  The Committee has been informed that all
the vacant posts of doctors in Dr. R.M.L and Safdarjung Hospital have been reported to UPSC for filling up.   Similarly,
other technical posts including Nursing and paramedics have been advertised by the hospital administration.  While
appreciating this encouraging development, the Committee would like to emphasize that recruitment process needs to be
expedited. More than nine months have lapsed since the notification issued on 17. 3. 05, vacant posts still remain to be
filled up.  The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for evolving a regulatar mechanism for pursuing this
issue. 
 
XII   NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
 
12.5    Recommendations/Observations
The Committee finds that besides NE States, Bihar also is reported to be not performing well in the context of
implementation of National Programme for Control of Blindness.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the
status of funds allocation and utilization  thereof during the first three years of Tenth Plan in Bihar (District wise) 
 
Action Taken
Status of allocation and utilization of Grant-in-aid and Cash Grant to State/District Blindness Control Societies in
Bihar (Dist. Wise)  under NPCB during the first three years of Tenth Plan is placed at ANNEXURE-B.
 
Comments of the Committee
           The Committee observes that during the first three years of the Tenth Plan, inspite of funds being provided to
Bihar under the National Programme for control of blindness, the state failed to take benefit from the same.  Situation 
was very discouraging in 2003-04, when out of Rs. 220 lakhs, only Rs. 14.75 lakhs could be utilized. The Committee
reiterates its stand for judicious and timely utilization of funds.
 
12.7 Recommendations/Observations
The committee observes that 575 DBCSs under the Chairmanship of District Collector/Deputy Commissioner
have been established in the country.  The Committee finds that District Collector/Deputy Commissioner besides their
routine duties are also entrusted with the implementation of a number of Central sponsored programmes pertaining to a
large number of Departments.  The Committee feels that there is a need for reassessing the role of District Collector and
if possible, involvement of some other Government representative who can be assisted in his monitoring/supervision by
public representatives from village level Panchayats to local MPs.  The Committee would also like to point out that in
view of inadequate eye care facilities in rural areas and difficult terrains, involvement of NGOs should be increased.
 
Action Taken
State Blindness Control Societies have been formed in States/UTs for supervision and close monitoring of the
implementation of the Programme through District Blindness Control Societies.
Panchayats would also be involved in the programme. They would organize identification, motivation and transport of
persons requiring eye care services including cataract surgery to government fixed facilities.  Panchayats can use
services of PHCs/sub center staff, ICDS functionaries (Anganwadi workers) and voluntary groups like Mahila Mandals
etc.  This scheme would aim at utilizing existing facilities and reduction in backlog particularly in underserved areas.
Further, in view of inadequate eye care facilities in rural areas and difficult terrains, the scheme for grant to NGOs has
been decentralized from the current financial year.
 
Comments of the Committee 
           The Committee observes that the Department has chosen to overlook its recommendation suggesting a
reassessment of the role of the District Collector/Deputy Commissioner.  The Committee believes that the District
Collector/ Deputy Commissioner is overloaded with work pertaining to a large number of departments.  The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendation about involvement of some other Government representative who can be assisted in
his monitoring/supervision by public representatives from village level Panchayats to local MPs. 
 
XIII. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
13.2 Recommendations/Observations
The Committee is of the view that external assistance which comes in the shape of Grant-in-aid and distinct from
loan, should flow over and above the Gross Budgetary support.  The Committee therefore recommends that the
Department should actively pursue this matter with the Planning Commission.  The Committee would also like to point
out that this funding process should be made applicable in respect of foreign funds flowing for other disease control
Programmes also. The Committee would, however, like to point out that massive foreign funding should also have an
effective monitoring mechanism to ensure its optimum and judicious utilization.
 
Action Taken
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) awarded a grant of US$ 122.67 million 
(Rs.564.275 crores) during their Round IV funding for implementation of project entitled “Accessing the Antiretroviral

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
treatment to HIV/AIDS infected persons in six high prevalence states and NCT”.   The matter was actively pursued with
the Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission vide their letter No. N14042/17/2003-PAMD dated 10 th June
2005 approved treating grant money received from the GFATM as additionality over and above X Plan outlay and XI
Plan outlay of the National AIDS Control Programme.
 
Comments of the Committee
           The Committee is happy to note that its recommendation for treating foreign fund over and above the Gross
Budgetary Support under the National AIDS Control Programme has been agreed to by the Planning Commission vide
their communication dt. 10
th June, 2005.   The Committee would like to point out that availability of additional funds
would mean greater responsibility for judicious utilisation of funds.  
 
13.6     Recommendations/Observations
The committee observes that an allocation of Rs. 225 crores and Rs.259 crores for the entire programme has been
made during 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively. The committee is, however, surprised to note that funds amounting to
Rs.77 crore and Rs.85 crores have been spent on publicity/advertisements alone during 2003-04 and 2004-05
respectively. The Committee feels that level of expenditure on publicity/advertisement in view of total allocation, meant
for different equally and even more vital components, seems to be on the high side.  The Committee would like to be
apprised about the IEC activities undertaken in high prevalence states and expenditure incurred thereon during 2003-04
and 2004-05.
 
Action Taken
The funds amounting to Rs.77 crores and Rs.85 crores spent on publicity and advertisement during the year
2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively cover all IEC expenditure including advertisement and publicity made by all the 38
SACS and at national level which include inter sectoral collaboration agencies, defence, railways, SAIL, ESIC, Youth
Affairs, Ministry of I & B as well as school AIDS education programme besides various other activities.   In the absence
of any vaccine for cure of HIV/AIDS, awareness is the only vaccine against HIV/AIDS in the country. NACO’s
Information, Education & Communication (IEC) strategy is operationalised at two levels: national and state level. 
NACO undertakes various IEC activities at National level and allocates funds to State AIDS Control Societies to carry
out IEC activities as per their local needs.  Then the State AIDS Control Societies evolve IEC strategy on the basis of
their Communication Needs Assessment undertaken by their respective states.
The details of expenditure incurred by the Four States Tamil Nadu, Manipur, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh during the
year 2003-04 & 2004-05 is given at Annexure-II
 
Comments of the Committee
Committee’s attention has been drawn by utilisation of large funds under the National AIDS Control Programme
for IEC activities in high prevalence States.  Details furnished by the Department in respect of States like T.N,
Karnataka, A.P and Manipur reveal that funds ranging from Rs. 1.22 crore to 1.95 crore had been allocated during 2003-
04 and 2004-05 for this purpose to these states.  Allocation for Maharashtra during 2003-04 and 2004-05 was Rs. 2.50
crore and Rs. 3 crore respectively.  Similarly Nagaland, although smaller state, was released 1.80 crore and Rs. 1.50
crore during these two years.  However, the Committee is surprised to note that details of expenditure and IEC activities
are yet to be received from these two states. The Committee apprehends that this position might be in respect of some
other states also. The Committee would  like to point out that expenditure of Rs. 77 crore and Rs. 85 crore for IEC
activities out of total allocation of Rs. 225crore and Rs. 259 crore during 2003-04 and 2004-05 cannot be considered a
small amount.  The Committee is in agreement with the contention of the Department that in the absence of any vaccine,
awareness is the only vaccine against HIV/AIDS at present.  However, the Committee strongly feels that Govt. funds
need to be accounted for in every respect.  The Committee therefore is of the views that there is a need for assessment of
the impact made by IEC activities undertaken under the suspension of NACO, specially the role of NGOs and criteria for
their deployment in districts.13.9 Recommendations/Observations
The committee also observes that  1099 AIDS patients in Chandigarh, 2397 in W.Bengal and 1153 in Rajasthan
indicates an alarming situation . the committee feels that proper treatment of the increasing number of AIDS patients is
the emerging area which needs maximum attention. The committee is happy to note that an-principle decision has been
taken by the Govt. to provide anti-retroviral drugs to children and women affected with full blown AIDS. Eight  govt.
hospitals in six high prevalence states and NCT of Delhi have started giving free ART from 1
st April, 2004. additional
eight hospitals have been identified for starting ART from August 2004. The committee feels that this  initiative needs to

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
be implemented effectively as number of AIDS patients i.e. 1213 treated in the first phase seems to be negligible in the
light of such patients reported in high prevalence states. The committee feels that for achieving the target of free ART to
100,000 AIDS cases by 2007 and to 180,000 cases till 2009, vigorous efforts will have to be made by the department as
well as the implementing agencies.
 
Action Taken
A total of 25 ART centres are functional in 13 states of the country. A total of 9168 patients have been started on
free ART at these centres as on 31
st May 2005.
Another 14 centres have been sanctioned to be functional by July 2005. With this 18 states/UTs of the country
will be covered
It is planned to start 61 new centres by December 2005 taking total to 100 ART centres. Detailed list of the
centres identified for ART is placed at Annexure-III.
Implementation of GFATM round 4 project will start from 1 st august 2005 under which a total of 180,000 AIDS
cases are planned to be covered on ART by July 2010.
 
Comments of the Committee
           The Committee notes that against the target of free ART to 100,000 AIDS cases by 2007, only 9168 patients have
been started on free ART at 25 ART centres functional in 13 States in the country as on 31.3.2005.  Another 14 Centres
have been sanctioned to be functional by July, 2005.  The Committee is not aware of the present status of these 14
Centres.  Committee notes that 61 new Centres are planned to start by December-2005.  Target of free ART treatment
for 100,000 patients till 2007 continues to be there.  The Committee is of the view that from only 9168 patients receiving
free treatment by 31.3.2005 to reach the level of 100,000 patients by 2007, concerted efforts are required to be made. 
Taking note of the Action Plan and broad guidelines drawn by the Department in this regard, the Committee impresses
upon the Department to adhere to the same strictly.   
 
13.14 Recommendations/Observations
“The Committee also notes a very disturbing observation made in the Audit Report. It has been pointed out that
although the Ministry had announced in December 2002 that blood donors found to be HIV positive would be told of
their infection and asked to seek confirmatory tests and counseling, NACO continues to follow the existing policy of
giving the results only to those persons who ask for these. The Committee agrees with the audit observation that non-
disclosure of HIV status; mandatory to all HIV infected reasons could lead to such persons unknowingly spreading the
disease among the uninfected persons. The Committee is not inclined to accept the argument of the Department that HIV
status is revealed only to those donors who would want their status known, as any other approach will adversely affect
voluntary blood donation movement. The Committee would like to emphasize that a rethinking is required on this
sensitive issue in view of the dangerous implications of this policy.”
 
Action Taken
Presently the policy envisages the reveal of HIV status only to result seeking donors.  This can be debated by a
group of experts, to build up consensus to include all donors instead of restricting only to result seeking donors. 
Subsequently, National AIDS Control Board (NACB) approval will be required.
 
Comments of the Committee
In its earlier report, the Committee had drawn the attention of the Department to an observation made in the CAG
Report of 2004 about the fall-out of non-implementation of a decision made by the Department in December, 2002 of
informing HIV positive blood donors about their status.   The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for
having a re-thinking in this regard and not to restrict the revelation  of HIV status to only result seeking donors.   The
Committee emphasizes a dialogue may be initiated   between all stake-holders so as to build up a consensus to include
all donors.  The Department should take action in this regard without any further delay.
 
XIV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
14.4
       Recommendations/Observations
The Committee has been informed that on the direction of Supreme Court in the Erwadi case, Chief Secretaries
of all the States have got conducted a need-based survey about the mentally ill patients and the facilities available in the
states.  Subsequently, in a launch workshop held in October, 2003, all Health Secretaries were requested to identify

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
specific districts, psychiatric units and mental hospitals which required to be funded under the programme.  The
Committee is constrained to note that the appraisal exercise of proposals submitted by State Governments is still going
on.  The Committee would like to emphasize that the Deptt. should make concerted efforts to expedite the process of
approval so that implementation could be started.  The Committee would also like to point out that the eleven
States/UTs which have failed to forward their proposals should be actively pursued for doing the same.
 
Action Taken
The reports of the Appraisal Teams received are being processed and it is expected to utilize the allocated funds
in full during 2005-06.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is constrained to observe that the reports of the State Appraisal Teams regarding identification of
specific districts, psychiatric units and mental hospitals to be funded under the Mental Health Programme are still being
processed.   The Department has also failed to specify whether reports have been received from all the States.  The
Committee urges upon the Department to expedite the process so that there is optimum and judicious utilisation of the
allocated funds. 
 
XV. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME
15.4 Recommendations/Observations
Under the District Cancer Control Programme, started in 1990-91, financial assistance of Rs. 22 lakhs per district
in the first year and Rs. 17 lakh each for the remaining four years of the project period are released. Thereafter, the State
Govt. is required to take over the scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised about the number of districts
covered under the programme (Statewise). The Committee would also like to have an idea about the status of this
Programme after the completion of five-year project period/Statewise. The Committee would like to emphasize that in
view of enhancement of financial assistance under this Programme, effective monitoring mechanism should be evolved
so that allocated funds reach the identified district.
 
Action Taken
DCCP was launched in 1990-91 with the provision of Rs. 15 lakhs in the first year and Rs. 10.00 lakhs each in
the subsequent 4 years. Till date 62 districts have availed the funding. However, the scheme did not take off due to
operational problems.
 
           Under the revised NCCP, the provision has been increased to Rs. 22.00 lakhs in the first year and Rs. 17.00 lakhs
each over the next 4 years.    
 
State Governments have been requested to submit the proposals for taking up the District Cancer Control
Programme scheme as per the revised guidelines of the NCCP.  A target of 25 districts has been kept under DCCP for
2005-06.
 
For effective monitoring mechanism, the State Government has to identify the nodal agency for implementation
of the scheme i.e. either the Medical College / Government Hospital / RCC who in turn will monitor all the DCCP
activities and submit the utilization certificate to this Ministry.
 
Comment of the Committee
The Committee has been given to understand that 62 districts have availed the funding under DCCP which was
started in 1990-91  but the scheme did not take off  due to operational problems. The Committee would like to know in
detail about the operational problems faced by the districts in implementing these schemes. The Committee hopes that
the constraints faced by States must have been taken care of under the revised NCCP.   The Committee would also like
to be apprised about the acceptance status with regard to 25 districts targetted to be covered under DCCP during 2005-
06.   The Department should also take up with the State Govts. the matter of identification of the nodal agency for
effective implementation of the scheme as soon as possible.
 
XVI. SETTING UP OF MEDICAL GRANTS COMMISSION
16.1 Recommendations/Observations

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
The Committee notes that the details are in the process of being worked out. The Committee is of the view that
decision on this vital aspect of health care and management has been over-delayed.  The Committee would therefore like
to emphasize that all required steps for the setting up of Medical Grants Commission need to be expedited.
 
Action Taken
Medical Grants Commission has been conceived as funding agency for providing financial assistance for
upgrading the facilities in various government medical colleges and hospitals which are otherwise starved for resources.
The scheme for providing assistance for diagnostic facilities in government medical colleges and hospital could not be
taken up for want of Plan allocation under the Department of Health.
Under the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) the role of Government Medical College and Hospital is envisaged
for providing comprehensive tertiary care medical services. The funds under the NRHM are proposed to be canalized
through the Medical Grants Commission for providing necessary financial assistance for upgrading the facilities in the
Government Medical College and Hospital. The modalities and functioning of the Commission are in the process of
conceptualization.
 
Comments of the Committee
Setting up of Medical Grants Commission was envisaged in the National Health Policy 2002 and Rs. 5 crore was
allocated for it in the Tenth Plan. The Committee however observes that the modalities and functioning of the Medical
Grants Commission are still being conceptualized and already fourth year of the Tenth Plan period is nearing its end. 
The Committee reiterates that all required steps need to be taken up for setting up the Medical Grants Commission
should be expedited. 
 
XVIII. INITIATIVES TO BE UNDERTAKEN
18.1 Recommendations/Observations
Due to increase in life expectancy and changing life style, new non-communicable diseases like neurological
disorders, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases are assuming increasing importance. The Committee notes that during the
Ninth Plan, following Pilot Projects were proposed to be launched and some token provision there for was also made.
 
    a.     Diabetes Control programme
    b.    Prevention of Deafness and Hearing impairment
    c.    Oral health Programme
    d.    Programme against Micronutrient Malnutrition
    e.     Medical Rehabilitation
    f.     Cardiovascular Disease Control Programme
 
The Committee notes that these pilot projects have not taken off and no provision is envisaged during Tenth Plan.
The Committee is of the view that instead of having above mentioned six projects focus should be concentrated on only
two programmes namely the Diabetes Control programme Cardiovascular Disease Control Programme including control
of Rheumatic Fever.
 
Action Taken
The Pilot Programme to Control Micro-nutrient Deficiencies was launched in the year     1995, with an aim to
combat the problem of micro-nutrient Malnutrition in a holistic way. The Programme is being implemented by
AIIH&PH, Kolkata in one district each of five states namely Assam (Kamrup), Jharkhand (Gumla), Gujarat
(Sabarkantha), Orissa (Jajpur), and West Bengal (Bunkura) .The population covered under the programme is school
children, adolescent girls and boys, non-pregnant women, adult males and elderly population. The important micro-
nutrients covered under the programme are iron, folic acid, vitamin A, fluorine and zinc. Fund provisions were made
annually under the programme and a total of Rs. 260-00 lakhs was released during the Ninth Five Year Plan period.
The programme was clubbed with National Iodine Deficiency Disorders Control Programme in the year 2000-01.
Since then fund provision had been made under NIDDCP (sub-head Monitoring) 
In the Tenth Five Year Plan, Rs. 300.00 lakhs provision was proposed for Pilot Programme to Control Micro-nutrient
Deficiencies under NIDDCP. So far, Rs. 127.50 lakhs (including current financial year release Rs. 17.50 lakhs)  has been
released.
           Under the Pilot Programme baseline survey data on nutritional & Socio-economic status, nutrient intake, housing,

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
water sanitation, study of knowledge, attitude and practice regarding Iodine Deficiency Disorders, Vitamin A
Deficiency, Iron Deficiency  Anemia was collected and laboratory analysis was done for haemoglobin, fluorine, zinc etc.
Training, advocacy sensitization/motivation, awareness generation meetings were organized for health functionaries,
policy & decision makers, elected  local leaders, teachers etc. at various levels with a view to strengthen their knowledge
on the important micronutrients deficiency i.e. Iodine  Deficiency Disorders , Vitamin  A Deficiency , Iron Deficiency
Anemia and strategies for prevention and control in context of local situation.
The Intervention Strategies under the Programme presently focus on IEC activities to     improve the awareness
amongst the people. Considerable IEC material in the form of posters, pamphlets, booklets, audio cassettes and video
cassettes for Planners, Panchayat members and community have been developed which were subsequently translated
into Hindi and Bengali. Translation of IEC material into other regional language is under process. Continuation of the
pilot programme is indispensable, as the basic focus of the programme is to prevent and control important micronutrient
deficiencies together in the targeted population who have not been covered in the Vitamin A Programme & Anemia
Control Programme.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee in its earlier report had commented upon the status of six pilot projects proposed to be launched
during the Tenth Plan.   Finding that these projects had not taken off, the Committee had observed that it would be
feasible and appropriate if focus is there only on two projects instead of six and accordingly suggested Diabetes Control
Programme and Cardiovascular Disease Control Programme can be taken up first.   The Committee finds that the
Department, instead of giving a specific response to its suggestion, has only given details about the implementation of
programme against Micronutrient Programme.   While appreciating the work done under this programme, the Committee
would reiterate its suggestion for giving priority to Diabetes Control Programme and Cardiovascular Disease Control
Programme.
 
XIX. UTILISATION OF MPLADS SCHEME FUNDS:
 
Recommendations/Observations
19.1     The Committee understands that at present under the MPLADs Scheme members of Parliament don’t have the
option provide financial assistance to the needy persons for treatment of major and life threatening diseases. The
Committee therefore recommends that the Department should take up this matter with the Ministry of Statistics &
Programme Implementation.
 
Action Taken
Addl. Economic Adviser, Bureau of Planning, DGHS has written vide their letter No.Z.15011/32004-BP dated
9
th September, 2005 to Director (Administration & HOD, ICT), Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation.
Reply is still awaited.
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee observes that although the Seventh Report of the Committee was presented in April, 2005, its
suggestion about utilisation of MPLAD Scheme Funds for providing financial assistance to needy persons for treatment
of major and life-threatening diseases could be taken by the Ministry in September, 2005 to which the reply is awaited  
The Committee recommends to that the Ministry should vigorously pursue this matter with the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation.
CHAPTER – IV
OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL
AWAITED
-Nil-
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
II.        BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
Committee’s attention had been drawn by a disturbing trend of allocation of funds for some premier institutions  

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
under the Ministry.   The Committee views with serious concern the non-provision of required non-Plan funds essential
for the smooth functioning of prestigious institutions like AIIMS, PGIMER, Chandigarh, NIMHANS, and Bangalore and
similarly placed many other institutions.   The Committee had been given to understand that Ministry’s efforts to
convince the Ministry of Finance in this regard for the past few years have proved futile.   This is indeed a sorry state of
affairs.  Diversion of funds from Plan to non-Plan on a regular basis should not be allowed to continue, simply because it
has an adverse fall out on the Plan Schemes.   The Committee accordingly reiterates that the department should take it up
once again with the Ministry of Finance and prevail upon them for getting the required non-Plan funds from 2005-06
itself.      (para 2.4)
 
III.      CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME:
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           The Committee notes that although three new CGHS allopathic dispensaries one each at Bhubaneswar, Ranchi
and Dehradun           have been opened during the 10
th Plan but they are yet to be made operational.   The Committee has
been informed that  due to non-implementation of  the SIU report  on the Norms Study  of CGHS allopathic dispensaries,
creation of new posts is not being agreed to by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee would like to point out that in
the absence of required manpower, purpose of opening new dispensaries gets defeated.   Temporary arrangements being
made by the Ministry by redeployment of doctors and outsourcing the support services of paramedical and other staff
cannot be considered an ideal situation.  The Committee, therefore, would appreciate if the Department pursues the issue
of creation of posts with the Ministry of Finance vigorously.   The Committee finds from the details furnished by the
Department that   a number of dispensary buildings are at present under construction and in the case of some buildings,
approval is yet to be obtained from various civic agencies for commencement of construction work.   The Committee
would like to emphasise that the Department should make concerted efforts to fulfill the target of opening of dispensaries
and also making them operational during the Tenth Plan.       (para 3.2)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to observe that  the combined formulary of  CGHS/MSO in respect of proprietary
medicines based on the recommendations of Shrivastava Committee report remains to be  notified.   The Committee
finds that  yet another Committee has been constituted by the Ministry to review the Generic Drugs formulary/National
Essential Drugs List from the prospective of requirement of CGHS system and other indenters annually.   It is not known
whether this newly setup Committee has been given any time limit for giving its report.  The Committee observes  that
already  the notification of the drugs formulary has been over delayed considerably.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that  the report  of the latest Committee should be expedited and follow-up action taken thereon without
delay.  
                                                                                                                               (para 3.4)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that at present ten double shift dispensaries are functioning under CGHS, Delhi.   These
dispensaries run in two regular shifts i.e. from  7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m.  and the second shift from 1.30 p.m. to 7.30 p.m.   
The Committee has been emphasizing for the last few years for the need  of earlier two shifts system of CGHS
dispensaries.    The Committee has now been informed that  projection of 466 doctors and requisite staff was made by
CGHS for making all the 244 allopathic dispensaries in the country to work in double shift.  The Committee is surprised
by the Department’s clarification  about the    interpretation of double shift system.   Committee’s intention right from
the beginning was for reverting to  double shift (from 7.30 a.m. to 11.00 a.m. and from 5.30  p.m. to 7.30 p.m.).  The
Committee takes serious objection  to the contention  of the department that reverting back to the earlier system of
broken shift in the CGHS dispensaries is likely to   raise protest from various CGHS employees associations as also from
the doctors’ forum.    The committee strongly feels that it is the responsibility of the department to convince  the staff
attached with CGHS dispensaries for reversion to  double shift system.  One should not forget  that the CGHS
dispensaries are meant to serve the beneficiaries.  Accordingly all efforts need to be made to provide them the maximum
services. 
                                                                                                                 (para 3.6)   
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           Reply of the Ministry indicates that CBI inquiry on a complaint received with regard to
recognition/reimbursement of Hospital Bills will take some time to be completed.  In the process the review of the
existing package rates for various procedures/treatment which is already overdue will be further delayed.  Besides that,
the Committee finds that there are a number of procedural formalities to be completed before final recognition for both

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
medical procedures / investigation as well as of private Hospitals / Diagnostic Centres.  The Committee would like to
emphasize that   this entire process should be completed in a time bound manner so that CGHS beneficiaries are not put
to any inconvenience.                            (para 3.9)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee notes that a high powered Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri P.K. Kaul, former Cabinet
Secretary has been set up to review the functioning of CGHS and make it more user friendly. The Committee also takes
note of the fact that CGHS proposes to create specialist posts for augmenting the existing services.  The Committee,
however, would like to emphasize that the department should make all efforts to get the recommendations of the Kaul
Committee at the earliest.                                                                           (para 3.10)
 
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee takes serious note of the unreasonable delay in the completion of the construction of the building
of Vardhman Mahavir Medical College.  Last year, the Committee was given to understand that the construction work
would be complete by March 2006.  The Committee is however, constrained to observe that till now the construction
work is yet to commence.  The Committee is not convinced by the assurance given by the Ministry that the college
building is scheduled to be completed within eleven months after the start of the construction    The Committee is of the
view that procedural formalities should be completed at the earliest.                                                                                   
                  (para 4.4)
VI. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
              The Committee has been observing the progress made in the implementation of “Pradhan Mantri Swasthya
Suraksha Yojana” under which six AIIMS like institutions are to be set up in Bihar, Chattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh,
Orissa, Rajashthan and Uttaranchal along with upgradation of six medical colleges in other states.  The Committee finds
that this prestigious scheme still remains to be at the planning stage due to a number of procedural formalities yet to be
completed.   Meanwhile, the Committee is surprised to note that out of an outlay of Rs. 999 crore earmarked for the
scheme, an amount of the Rs. 500 crore has been diverted to National Rural Health Mission.  In such a situation the
commitment given by the Ministry for spending the funds allocated for the project, once the approval of CCEA is
obtained, does not have any meaning.  The Committee has little hope about the “Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Surksha
Yojna” taking off by the end of 10
th Plan.                                                                                                                (para
6.5)
 
VII.  MISCELLANEOUS
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           The Committee views with serious concern the unjustified delay in the procurement  of required equipment for
the Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi.  Approval for purchase of these equipments was given in February, 2002, i.e.
last year of Ninth Plan.  However, it has taken four years for completion of procedure for procurement and necessary
provision of   RS. 5.80 crores could be made in 2005-06.   The Committee hopes that these equipments will be finally
provided to the Institute  by the end of Tenth Plan.                                                              (para 7.3)
 
VIII.  INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH NEW DELHI
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           Media report continue to come about significant achievements being made in Stem Cell Therapy.  The Committee
has commented extensively in this regard in its Seventh Report presented to Parliament in April, 2005. The Committee
was given to understand that draft guidelines for helping in regulation of Stem Cell research had been put on the ICMR
Website.  These guidelines suggested constitution of a multi-disciplinary National Apex Committee. The Committee had
suggested that the approval process of draft guidelines pending before DCGI should be expedited.  Latest Report
furnished by the Department however, indicates that the draft guidelines for which a drafting Committee was set up in
2002 continue to remain at the draft stage even after a gap of three years.  What is even more surprising is that a
brainstorming Session is now being planned by ICMR to come out with a National Policy and appropriate guidelines for
Stem Cell research.  The Committee is not happy with this kind of approach.  More than three years have passed since
the constitution of Drafting Committee in November, 2002.   The Committee strongly feels that there is a need both for

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
extensive research in Stem Cell therapy promising cure of chronic health problems and also regulating false claims in
this area.
                                                                                                           (para 8.4 to 8.6)
IX. VACANCY POSITION IN CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HOSPITAL /INSTITUTIONS ETC.
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           Committee’s attention has been constantly drawn by the existence of a large number of vacancies of both medical
and para-medical posts in the premier hospitals like Dr. R.M. L. Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital and Lady Hardinge
Medical Collage and Hospital in Delhi.  The Committee has been emphasizing the need for exemption of technical posts
in these hospitals from the purview of DOPT’s guidelines issued on 16.5. 2001.  The Committee is happy to note that all
technical posts under the Ministry have now been exempted w.e.f. 17.3.05.  The Committee has been informed that all
the vacant posts of doctors in Dr. R.M.L and Safdarjung Hospital have been reported to UPSC for filling up.   Similarly,
other technical posts including Nursing and paramedics have been advertised by the hospital administration.  While
appreciating this encouraging development, the Committee would like to emphasize that recruitment process needs to be
expedited. More than nine months have lapsed since the notification issued on 17. 3. 05, vacant posts still remain to be
filled up.  The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for evolving a regulatar mechanism for pursuing this
issue.                                (para 9.6) 
 
XII   NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           The Committee observes that during the first three years of the Tenth Plan, inspite of funds being provided to
Bihar under the National Programme for control of blindness, the state failed to take benefit from the same.  Situation 
was very discouraging in 2003-04, when out of Rs. 220 lakhs, only Rs. 14.75 lakhs could be utilized. The Committee
reiterates its stand for judicious and timely utilization of funds.
                                                                                                          (para 12.5)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
           The Committee observes that the Department has chosen to overlook its recommendation suggesting a
reassessment of the role of the District Collector/Deputy Commissioner.  The Committee believes that the District
Collector/ Deputy Commissioner is overloaded with work pertaining to a large number of departments.  The Committee
reiterates its earlier recommendation about involvement of some other Government representative who can be assisted in
his monitoring/supervision by public representatives from village level Panchayats to local MPs. 
                                                                                  (para 12.7)
 
XIII. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           The Committee is happy to note that its recommendation for treating foreign fund over and above the Gross
Budgetary Support under the National AIDS Control Programme has been agreed to by the Planning Commission vide
their communication dt. 10
th June, 2005.   The Committee would like to point out that availability of additional funds
would mean greater responsibility for judicious utilisation of funds.                                                                             
     (para 13.2)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Committee’s attention has been drawn by utilisation of large funds under the National AIDS Control Programme
for IEC activities in high prevalence States.  Details furnished by the Department in respect of States like T.N,
Karnataka, A.P and Manipur reveal that funds ranging from Rs. 1.22 crore to 1.95 crore had been allocated during 2003-
04 and 2004-05 for this purpose to these states.  Allocation for Maharashtra during 2003-04 and 2004-05 was Rs. 2.50
crore and Rs. 3 crore respectively.  Similarly Nagaland, although smaller state, was released 1.80 crore and Rs. 1.50
crore during these two years.  However, the Committee is surprised to note that details of expenditure and IEC activities
are yet to be received from these two states. The Committee apprehends that this position might be in respect of some
other states also. The Committee would  like to point out that expenditure of Rs. 77 crore and Rs. 85 crore for IEC
activities out of total allocation of Rs. 225crore and Rs. 259 crore during 2003-04 and 2004-05 cannot be considered a
small amount.  The Committee is in agreement with the contention of the Department that in the absence of any vaccine,

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
awareness is the only vaccine against HIV/AIDS at present.  However, the Committee strongly feels that Govt. funds
need to be accounted for in every respect.  The Committee therefore is of the views that there is a need for assessment of
the impact made by IEC activities undertaken under the suspension of NACO, specially the role of NGOs and criteria for
their deployment in districts.
                                                                                                                  (para 13.6)
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
           The Committee notes that against the target of free ART to 100,000 AIDS cases by 2007, only 9168 patients have
been started on free ART at 25 ART centres functional in 13 States in the country as on 31.3.2005.  Another 14 Centres
have been sanctioned to be functional by July, 2005.  The Committee is not aware of the present status of these 14
Centres.  Committee notes that 61 new Centres are planned to start by December-2005.  Target of free ART treatment
for 100,000 patients till 2007 continues to be there.  The Committee is of the view that from only 9168 patients receiving
free treatment by 31.3.2005 to reach the level of 100,000 patients by 2007, concerted efforts are required to be made. 
Taking note of the Action Plan and broad guidelines drawn by the Department in this regard, the Committee impresses
upon the Department to adhere to the same strictly.
                                                                                                                           (para 13.9) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
In its earlier report, the Committee had drawn the attention of the Department to an observation made in the CAG
Report of 2004 about the fall-out of non-implementation of a decision made by the Department in December, 2002 of
informing HIV positive blood donors about their status.   The Committee strongly feels that there is an urgent need for
having a re-thinking in this regard and not to restrict the revelation of HIV status to only result seeking donors.   The
Committee emphasizes a dialogue may be initiated   between all stake-holders so as to build up a consensus to include
all donors.  The Department should take action in this regard without any further delay.
                                                                                                                                (para 13.14)
 
XIV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee is constrained to observe that the reports of the State Appraisal Teams regarding identification of
specific districts, psychiatric units and mental hospitals to be funded under the Mental Health Programme are still being
processed.   The Department has also failed to specify whether reports have been received from all the States.  The
Committee urges upon the Department to expedite the process so that there is optimum and judicious utilisation of the
allocated funds. 
                                                                                                                 (para 14.5)
XV. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME
COMMENT OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee has been given to understand that 62 districts have availed the funding under DCCP which was
started in 1990-91  but the scheme did not take off  due to operational problems. The Committee would like to know in
detail about the operational problems faced by the districts in implementing these schemes. The Committee hopes that
the constraints faced by States must have been taken care of under the revised NCCP.   The Committee would also like
to be apprised about the acceptance status with regard to 25 districts targetted to be covered under DCCP during 2005-
06.   The Department should also take up with the State Govts. the matter of identification of the nodal agency for
effective implementation of the scheme as soon as possible.                                                                           (para 15.4)
 
XVI. SETTING UP OF MEDICAL GRANTS COMMISSION
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
Setting up of Medical Grants Commission was envisaged in the National Health Policy 2002 and Rs. 5 crore was
allocated for it in the Tenth Plan. The Committee however observes that the modalities and functioning of the Medical
Grants Commission are still being conceptualized and already fourth year of the Tenth Plan period is nearing its end. 
The Committee reiterates that all required steps need to be taken up for setting up the Medical Grants Commission
should be expedited.                                                                                             
                                                                                                                     (para 16.1)
XVIII. INITIATIVES TO BE UNDERTAKEN
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee in its earlier report had commented upon the status of six pilot projects proposed to be launched
during the Tenth Plan.   Finding that these projects had not taken off, the Committee had observed that it would be

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
feasible and appropriate if focus is there only on two projects instead of six and accordingly suggested Diabetes Control
Programme and Cardiovascular Disease Control Programme can be taken up first.   The Committee finds that the
Department, instead of giving a specific response to its suggestion, has only given details about the implementation of
programme against Micronutrient Programme.   While appreciating the work done under this programme, the Committee
would reiterate its suggestion for giving priority to Diabetes Control Programme and Cardiovascular Disease Control
Programme.                                                                                  (para 18.1)
 
XIX. UTILISATION OF MPLADS SCHEME FUNDS:
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee observes that although the Seventh Report of the Committee was presented in April, 2005, its
suggestion about utilisation of MPLAD Scheme Funds for providing financial assistance to needy persons for treatment
of major and life-threatening diseases could be taken by the Ministry in September, 2005 to which the reply is awaited  
The Committee recommends to that the Ministry should vigorously pursue this matter with the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation.                                                                                       (para 19.1)
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
V
FIFTH MEETING
 
           The Committee met at 2.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 15 th December, 2005 in Committee Room 63, Parliament
House, New Delhi.
           MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                    ¾       Chairman
2. Prof. P.J. Kurian
           LOK SABHA
 
3. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
5. Smt. Maneka Gandhi
6. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
7. Dr. Baburao Mediyam
8. Shri Nakul Das Rai
9. Shri Uday Singh
10. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
11. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav
12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
   SECRETARIAT
                Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
              Shri P.R.Guha Roy, Director
              Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
              Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer
 
1.
                    At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. The Committee then considered and
adopted the following Reports: -
          
th

15th Report of Committee on Health and Family welfare
file:///D/health_family/15threport.htm[29-06-2016 14:46:03]
    (i)     12  Report of the Committee on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendments)       Bill-2005.
   
(ii)  13th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations   contained in the 8 th
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) relating to the Department of Family Welfare.
   
(iii)  14th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations    contained in the 9
th
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) relating to the Department of AYUSH.
 
(iv)  15th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations    contained in the 7
th
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-06) relating to the Department of Health.
 
2A.      The Committee also decided that the 12 th,13th , 14th and 15th Reports may be presented in Rajya Sabha by the
Chairman and in his absence, by Prof. P.J. Kurian and in his absence Smt. Maya Singh laid on the Table of Lok Sabha
by Dr. Karan Singh Yadav and in his absence by Shri Uday Singh on the 21st  December, 2005.
 
3.        The Committee adjourned at 3.00 p.m.
NEW DELHI
15th  December, 2005
MOMRAJ SINGH
UNDER SECRETARY
 
 