 1
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PRLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ISSUES RELATING TO  AVAILABILITY OF GENERIC, 
GENERIC-BRANDED AND BRANDED MEDICINES, 
THEIR FORMULATION AND THERAPEUTIC EFFICACY 
AND EFFECTIVENESS 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2010/ SRAVANA , 1932 (SAKA) 
 
45 


 2
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ISSUES RELATING TO AVAILABILITY OF GENERIC, 
GENERIC-BRANDED AND BRANDED MEDICINES, 
THEIR FORMULATION AND THERAPEUTIC EFFICACY 
AND EFFECTIVENESS 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 4TH AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2010/ SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 


 3
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
   PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE--------------------------------      (i)           
2. PREFACE---------------------------------------------------------------------      (ii)         
3. REPORT-----------------------------------------------------------------------    1-12 
*4 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE--------    
*5. MINUTES---------------------------------------------------------------------        
            
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*To be appended at printing stage 
 
 
 
 

 4
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) 
        
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Amar Singh    -    Chairman 
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
       *3.       Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
4.       Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
5.       Shri Balbir Punj 
6.       Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7.       Shrimati Brinda Karat 
8.       Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
    @9.          Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
    #10         Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
12. Shri Ashok Argal 
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
18. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
19. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
20. Shri N. Kristappa 
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
22. Shri Datta Meghe 
23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
26. Shri M. K Raghavan 
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
28. Shrimati Meena Singh 
29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
31. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
              
 Shrimati Vandana Garg,            Additional Secretary 
Shri R.B.Gupta,                         Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta,     Joint Director 
                  Shri Dinesh Singh,                    Assistant Director 
 Shri Satis Mesra               Committee Officer 
______________________________________________________ 
 
* ceased to be a member w.e.f  01/7/2010 
@ ceased to be a member w.e.f  30/6/2010 
# ceased to be member w.e.f  29/6/2010 
 
(i) 

 5
PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee hereby present this 
Forty-fifth Report of the Committee on the issues relating to the availability of generic, 
generic-branded and branded medicines, their formulation and therapeutic efficacy and 
effectiveness. 
2. The Committee deliberated on the issue in hand in its meetings held on the        26
th 
April, 20th May and 10th June, 2010. 
3. During the course of examination of the subject mentioned above, the Committee 
was benefited by the Status Note furnished by the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare on various issues concerning generic, generic branded and branded medicines, the 
presentation made by Dr. Samit Sharma (IAS), District Magistrate, Nagaur, Rajasthan before 
it on the 20
th May 2010 and the oral evidence tendered by the Secretary, Department of 
Health and Family Welfare on the 10 th June, 2010. Dr. Samit Sharma highlighted a host of 
issues concerning generic and branded drugs and also acquainted the Committee with the 
salient features of the Generic Drugs Initiative started by him in the Districts of Chittorgarh 
and Nagaur, Rajasthan. 
4. The Committee acknowledges with thanks the assistance rendered by Dr. Samit 
Sharma in enlightening the Committee about various facets of the issue under reference. 
5. The Committee at its meeting held on the 21 st July, 2010 considered and adopted the 
Draft Report. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                             Amar 
Singh   
         
           AMAR SINGH 
21
st July, 2010                                                                                                     Chairman, 
Asadha 30, 1932 (saka)                                               Department-related Parliamentary                                  
                                                              Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
(ii)  

 6
REPORT  
1. Since independence, a number of policy interventions-both at the Central and 
State levels have been made to provide be st possible healthcare to the people with 
special focus on the vulnerable sections of  the society - the very poor.   However, 
with the ever-increasing population, insu fficient funding and emergence of newer 
diseases (such as AIDS), the impact of St ate-sponsored  programmes have not been 
very effective. 
 
2.     Drugs form a substantial portion of the out-of-the pocket spending on health by 
households in India. The poor are the wors t sufferers of the high cost of medicines 
due to their vulnerability to diseases. Studie s have shown that the poor in both rural 
and urban areas spend a higher proportion of their income on medical treatment 
than those who are better-off.  
 
3. The Committee has been informed that expenditure on drugs constitutes 
anywhere from 40 to 80 per cent of the total cost of treatment. Regrettably, 
expenditure on healthcare is the second most common cause for rural indebtedness.   
 
4. Undeniably, universal access to quality medicines at affordable prices is of 
critical importance. Through its Reports on Demands for Grants and also while 
examining drug-related legislations, the Committee has been constantly drawing the 
attention of the Government towards the urgent need for creating a mechanism 
whereby quality medicines at affordable pric es are made available to all sections of 
our society.   
 
5. Recognizing the immense importance of medicines in healthcare, the 
Committee decided to examine the issues pe rtaining to availability and pricing of 
medicines, the prescribing patterns by  Government and private doctors and 
procurement by state-run heal th services.   Accordingly, the Committee called for a 
Status Note from the Department of Health and Family Welfare. 
 
6.  The Committee was informed that quality of the drugs imported, 
manufactured and sold in the country is regulated under the provisions of the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules made hereunder. While the regulatory control 

 7
over the approval of drugs is under the Central Government, the manufacture, sale 
and distribution thereof is primarily regulated by the State Drug Control Authorities 
appointed by the State Governments.   
 
7. The Status Note received from the Department made the Committee 
understand the entire gamut of branded medicines, the so-called “branded generics” 
and generic medicines - their comparative pricing, role of pharma manufacturers 
and trade and Government procurement procedures  
 
8. It was clarified that the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules do not identify the 
distinction between generic, branded generi cs and branded medicines.  The basis of 
categorization is as follows: 
a) Branded medicines:  contain one or more ingredients marketed under 
brand names given to them by their manufacturers in India. These are 
normally promoted to doctors. [In western countr ies brand-name 
medicines are defined differently: the term refers to new drugs 
developed by the innovator patent holding companies].   
b) Generic medicines:  are those which are marketed under their 
chemical/salt names. [In western countries “generic” medicines are 
defined differently i.e. products that  contain the same ingredient(s) as 
brand-name medicines but are manu factured after the expiry of 
patents by companies other than innovators. These are marketed under 
new brand names]   
c )       B r a n d e d - g e n e r i c s :  i s  a n  e x c l u sively Indian terminology and refers to 
branded products [same as category (a) above] but not promoted to the 
medical profession but marketed thro ugh heavy incentives to retail 
chemists. Obviously such products are unethically and illegally sold 
either without prescriptions or by substituting prescribed brands. 
 
9. It was pointed out by the Department that all categories of medicines, 
whether imported or manufactured, are required to comply with the standards 
specified in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules.  The quality is monitored by the central 
and state Licensing Authorities through a system of collection of random samples 
and testing.  Therefore a generic medicine (s old under its salt name) is equivalent to 
the branded product  meeting the same standards of quality. 
 
10. The Committee was apprised that pricing of drugs was the responsibility of 
the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Auth ority (NPPA), under the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in the Minist ry of Chemicals & Fertilizers.  Prices of scheduled 

 8
drugs/formulations are fixed/revised by th e Authority, as per the provisions of the 
Drug Price Control Order (DPCO), 1995. Unde r the DPCO, prices of 74 bulk drugs 
and the formulations containing any of these scheduled drugs are controlled.  In 
respect of drugs not covered under th e DPCO i.e. non-scheduled drugs, 
manufacturers have the freedom to fix the prices.   
 
11. Generic drugs are substantially cheaper than branded products.  It was 
admitted by the Department that the use of generics, if promoted both in the public 
and private sectors, would substantially reduce drug costs and increase drug 
availability.  Bulk procurement of gene rics would help in procuring drugs at 
competitive prices by the public sector health care services.  
 
12. Currently there is no provision to ma ke it mandatory to market medicines 
under generic names only, without any brand name.  
 
13. On a specific query about the procur ement process of medicines by Central 
Government, the Committee was informed as follows:  
 “The Medical Stores Organization (MSO) under the Directorate General of 
Health Services procures medicines as per the confirmed indents by its 
indenters and supplies to them in a comp etitive price after due quality tests.  
The MSO has got two formularies:-  on e for Generic drugs and another for 
Proprietary or Branded drugs.  The generic formulary consists of 818 drugs 
including fixed dose combinations. Th e formulary for proprietary/branded 
drugs contains 504 drugs. On the basis of  the formularies, the Rate contract is 
undertaken with the manufacturers/suppliers from time to time.  Once the 
rate contract is made, it is valid for th ree years in the case of Generic drugs, 
whereas for proprietary/branded drugs, the validity of rate contract is for one 
year.  It is a fact that the Generic drugs are comparatively cheaper than the 
branded drugs, even branded generic drugs.  However, prescription of 
medicines by doctors of the Hospitals is in the form of branded drugs only.  
Sometimes, the doctors do prescribe the branded generic drugs. If the indent 
to MSO shall be for Generic drugs only, the procurement will be done only for 
generic drugs.  Since the procurement by  MSO is directly linked with indent 
received from its indenters, it has no choice left than to procure the indents 
placed by indenters, whether it is generic or proprietary.” 
 
14. In its meeting held on the 20
th May, 2010, the Committee had the opportunity 
to view a presentation given by Dr. Samit Sharma (IAS), District Magistrate, Nagaur, 
Rajasthan on the initiative taken by him with regard to availability of generic 

 9
medicines, prescription of such medici nes by doctors and procurement mechanism 
thereof. The Committee was informed that  Dr. Sharma was conf erred a prestigious 
award for spearheading a campaign to prov ide cost-effective generic equivalents of 
prescribed branded medicines and building awareness among the people during his 
stints at Chittorgarh and presently as Dist rict Magistrate, Nagaur, Rajasthan.  The 
following points were highlighted in the presentation: 
 
- Currently there are over 1,00,000 brands of medicines sold in India by just 
over 8,500 drug companies. The Nati onal List of Essential Medicines 
(NLEM) contains 354 molecules. 
 
- In 1979, the prices of 347 medicines we re controlled by NPPA which was 
reduced to 142 medicines in 1987. In 1995, the number of medicines under 
price control was further reduced to 74.  However controlled prices of only 
63 scheduled medicines have been notified as of date. 
 
- Some of these 74 medicines are now outdated and repl aced by newer 
drugs which are all outside the pric e control mechanism. Hence in real 
terms less than 50 common drugs are today under the price control. 
 
- An initiative was taken in the Chittorgarh district for making affordable 
medicines available to patients through Low Cost Drug Shops selling 
generic medicines. 
 
- The first steps taken were in convincing doctors to prescribe medicines by 
generic/salt name as per the direction given by the State Government and 
removing the false notions about inferior quality of generic medicines. 
 
- The next action was involvement of Government Co-operative Medical 
Stores in procurement of generic me dicines through open tender.  Drugs 
of reputed companies only were recommended by the Approval 
Committee.  Against an initial a pproval of 22 drug companies, 57 
companies stand approved at present.  About 800 medicines and 200 
surgical items were procured which were  sold at 20% profit margin to the 
patients. 
 
- Large gap in the procurement rate and the MRP of medicines  was noticed 
as indicated below: 
 
Generic Drug
  Chittorgarh Tender Rate MRP (Rs.)  
Amlodipine (5 mg)          Rs. 2.50 (10 Tablets)  22.00 
Cetirizine (10mg)   Rs. 1.20 (10 Tablets)  35.00 
Ceftazidime (1000mg)     Rs. 52.00 (1 Injection)                    370.00 
  

 10
- Awareness about huge difference in prices was created among all stake 
holders, more particularly am ong pharmacists and patients. 
Advertisements to this effect were  issued by the District Health 
Committee (Nagaur and Chittorgarh) under the National Rural Health 
Mission. 
 
- As a result there was sharp fall in the treatment costs.  For example, for the 
treatment of Pneumonia involving 7 days therapy, the cost was Rs. 1136 
when branded medicines were used compared to just Rs. 139.51 when 
generic medicines were purchased from Co-operative store. 
 
- A saving of Rs. 6.05 crore in the treatment of 4.03 lakh patients in 6 months 
was estimated. 
 
- Private Chemist Associations agreed to sell generic medicines at  50 per 
cent discount on MRP. 
 
15. The Committee noted that the Biha r Government has also taken a similar 
initiative.  Every medical college, district hospital, PHC in the state has a shop where 
generic medicines at less than 50 per ce nt of the MRP are sold and yet Bihar 
Government is earning 45 per cent revenue on the project.  
 
16.      The Committee also studied the Ta mil Nadu model of Essential Drug Supply, 
with the following components:- 
i. Finalizing list of Essential Drugs based on National List of Essential 
Medicines (NLEM). 
ii. Purchasing only generics. 
iii. Ensuring adequate funds and human resources for supply of drugs from its 
warehouses to various points of health care delivery. 
iv. Testing drugs for quality 
v. Supplying drugs only in strips and blister packing 
vi. Making proper arrangements for storage of drugs in modern warehouses 
vii. Training of pharmacists in storage and distribution of drugs 
viii. Revising store keeping procedures and storing drugs according to the 
principle of “First come - First out basis” to avoid expiries.  
 
17. The Committee took note of the fact that by adopting the above model of 
Essential Drug Supply, Tamil Nadu has been able to achieve the following: 
i. Huge savings on drug expenditure. 
ii. Rational use of drugs 
iii. Accurate up to date stock information on the computer 
vi. Linkage of all warehouses telephonic ally with the TNMSC headquarters in 
Chennai. 
 

 11
18. The Committee is of the opinion that Chittorgarh, Tamilnadu and Bihar 
models are worth emulating across the country as they have the potential to make 
drug-access easier on the pocket of the people and thus save precious human lives. 
 
19. The Committee recommends that the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, in coordination with the Department of Pharmaceuticals, should  
convene a meeting of Chief Secretaries of State Governments for the purpose of 
formulating an effective ‘essential drug s upply’ policy, having the components of 
(a) generic prescribing, (b) adoption of es sential drugs list, (c) standard treatment 
guidelines, (d) drug procurement by open  tender system, (e) distribution of low 
cost drugs through Government drugs stores and (f) demand generation of 
generics through public awareness.  The Committee desires to be kept apprised of 
the action taken in this regard.   
   
20. The Committee also took note of the fact that the Department of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers has introduced a new scheme  where under, a one-time grant of Rs. 
50,000 is made to an NGO for setting up  a shop selling exclusively generic 
medicines. 
 
21.     The Committee was also informed that for making available medicines at 
affordable prices, a campaign, ‘Jan Aushadhi’ had been launched by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, to sell quality generic medicines. As of now, 46 
Jan Aushadhi Stores have been opened across the country.  The Committee, 
however, feels that in a country of 110 crores plus people, even hundreds of Jan 
Aushadhi stores are unlikely to make a significant dent. Therefore proactive 
intervention by State Governments down to District levels is required to help the 
people to procure life saving medicines at affordable prices.  
 
22. The Committee noted that apart from  NPPA and DCGI, import and export 
policies of drugs are looked after by the Ministry of Commerce, fiscal matters by 
the Ministry of Finance and the policy effects on small scale pharma units is dealt 
with by the Ministry of Small and Me dium Enterprises (MSME). At present, 
NPPA has no jurisdiction over the pricing of new patented medicines with the 
result that they are being sold at exorbitant prices, many of them by importers. 

 12
The Committee urges the Government to address this issue without any further 
delay. 
 
23. The Committee noted that many unethical and corrupt practices had crept 
into the pharma business.  For example many companies while retaining the popular 
brand names of their price controlled products were changing the ingredients to 
evade ceiling prices. Example cited included  Aciloc-RD of J. B. Chemicals (price 
controlled ranitidine replaced with omeprazole), Cetrizet-D of Sun Pharmaceuticals 
(price controlled pseudoephedrine replac ed with phenylepherine), Normet of 
Emcure (price controlled norfloxacin replaced with  ofloxacin) and Brakke 
suspension of Franco-Indian (price controlled ciprofloxacin replaced with ofloxacin). 
In other cases manufacturers just added another agent of hardly any clinical 
rationale to exorbitantly hike the pric es. Examples included Norflox of Cipla 
(lactobacillus added to price controlled norf loxacin) and Doxy-1 of USV (lactic acid 
bacillus added to price controlled doxycycline). 
 
24. The Committee, taking note of the lack of any inter-Ministerial mechanism 
for checking such corrupt practices, took up the matter with the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare and Department of Pharmaceuticals in February, 2010. 
The Committee is happy to note that subsequently a High Powered Inter- 
Ministerial Coordination Committee with the following composition has been 
constituted: 
1. Secretary (Pharma)     Chairman 
2. Chairman, NPPA    Member 
3. Drug Controller General, India  Member 
4. Secretary (Health & Family Welfare)  Member 
or Joint Secretary level representative 
5. Secretary (MSME) or Joint Secretary  Member 
 Level representative 
6. Joint Secretary (Pharma) in charge  Member 
of NPPA   
 
25. The Department of Pharmaceutic als vide its Memorandum dated 8
th April, 
2010 have, inter alia,  informed that after deliberation on the matter the Inter-
Ministerial Coordination Committee may recommend a framework for ensuring 

 13
availability of quality medicines at afford able prices to the Government within a 
period of one year. 
 
26. The Committee welcomes the initiative in this regard and sincerely hopes 
that the constitution of the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee would not 
only ensure availability of drugs at fair prices but also result in better 
coordination between the office of DCGI and the NPPA. The Committee desires 
to be kept apprised of the findings of the Inter-Ministerial Coordination 
Committee and the action taken thereon afte r conclusion of the consultation in 
this regard.  
 
27. Since all drugs whether branded, generic or branded generic, manufactured 
and/or imported for sale and distribution in the country, are required to conform 
to the same quality parameters listed in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, the 
Committee would like the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee (IMCC) to 
give wide publicity to this fact, so that the apprehensions of general public fueled 
and fanned by interested quarters about generic drugs not being of good quality 
could be dispelled.  
 
 
28. The Committee is shocked to note that despite there being irrefutable 
evidence of a strong link between high prices of medicines and poverty as also 
despite the fact that the Eleventh Five Year  Plan’s one of the avowed objectives is 
to include all essential drugs under a system of price regulation, the number of 
drugs under price control still remains at a pathetic 74. The Committee is not 
aware of the reasons behind reducing th e number of drugs under price control 
and, therefore, would like to be enlightened about the reasons behind restricting 
the controlled drugs to a mere 74.  Prescr iption of irrational and useless drugs by 
many of the doctors with ulterior motives is rampant.  The Committee is, 
therefore, convinced that there is no other alternative but to include more 
essential and life saving drugs under price regulation.  
 
29. The Committee simultaneously recomme nds that the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare take up the matter with the Department of Pharmaceuticals at 

 14
the highest level with a view to revisiting the issue of inclusion of drugs in the 
DPCO and making it more rational and patient-friendly. The Committee would 
like to be kept informed of the action taken in this regard. 
 
30. Another related issue which drew the attention of the Committee was that   
c u r r e n t  p r i c e s  o f  m a n y  d r u g s  a r e  h i g h l y  i n f l a t e d  w i t h  n o  r e l a t i o n  t o  t h e i r  c o s t s  a s  
illustrated by the following table:- 
Name given 
by drug 
company 
(Brand Name) 
Salt name of 
medicine 
(Generic 
Name) 
Potency 
 
No. of Tablets Printed Max. 
Retail 
ORTHOBID 
 
NIMESULIDE 100 mg 10 29.19 
NIMULID 
 
NIMESULIDE 100 mg 10 38.72 
NICIP NIMESULIDE 100 mg 10 21 
NISE NIMESULIDE 100 mg 15 48 
 
However, the retailer’s purchasing price of NICIP manufactured by Cipla  is only Rs. 
1.88.  Obviously on this price, Cipla is ma king some profit. The Committee is aware 
that the cost of producing a strip of 10 tablets of Nimesulide is no more than Rs. 1.40. 
It is evident that  huge margins are being pocketed by both the drug companies and 
traders. Similarly the cost of producing a st rip of 10 tablets of Progesterone is Rs. 18 
but it sells for Rs. 180; there are many more examples of this nature. 
 
31. The Committee also notes that despite there being a code of ethics in the 
Indian Medical Council Rules introduced in December 2009 forbidding doctors 
from accepting any gift, hospitality, trips to foreign and domestic destinations etc 
from healthcare industry, there is no let-up in this evil practice and the pharma 
companies continue to sponsor foreign trips of many doctors and shower with 
high value gifts like air conditioners, cars , music systems, gold chains etc. to 
obliging prescribers who then prescribe costlier drugs as quid pro quo. Ultimately 
all these expenses get added up to the cost of drugs. The Committee’s attention 

 15
was drawn to a news item in Times of India dated July 1, 2010 by Reema 
Nagarajan giving specific instances of  violations of MCI code. The Committee 
calls upon the Government to take strict and speedy action on such violations. 
Since MCI has no jurisdiction over drug companies, the Government should take 
parallel action through DCGI and the Income Tax Department to penalize those 
companies that violate MCI rules by cancelling drug manufacturing licences 
and/or disallowing expenses on unethical activities.   
 
32. One of the suggestions put forth before the Committee was to make it 
mandatory for all doctors to write all prescriptions in generic names only. 
However, the Committee feels that going for a “generic only” prescription policy 
has its flip side. Even if the doctor pre scribes a drug by generic name, the chemist 
will be free to dispense any equivalent. Thus the power will shift from doctors to 
the chemists. The pharma companies would unethically start wooing the chemists 
instead of doctors. This will be worse than current situation. If the patient does 
not get any relief, doctor will blame the chemist. Moreover while the doctor has 
some interest in the continued patronag e from the patients, chemists could not 
care less. For them profits will be the only criteria of selling medicines. 
 
33. The Committee is aware that in its bid to help bring down healthcare costs 
the Union Health Ministry had recently issued directions to doctors in the Central 
Government-run hospitals to prescribe only generic drugs as far as possible and 
not branded drugs. In order to eliminat e middlemen (C&F agents, distributors, 
wholesalers, retailers) the Committee recommends that the Governments, both at 
the Centre and the States procure generic drugs in bulk from manufacturers and 
dispenses them directly to patients, through its health centres.  
 
34. One option for making available affo rdable medicines put forth before the 
Committee was to cap the profit margin of  all medicines irrespective of whether 
they are under DPCO or not.  This step would do away with the need of 
monitoring prescriptions, identifying the manufacturers supplying low-priced 
medicines and without any need to prefer  generic over branded products.  If 
fixation of MRP is done by NPPA based on a fair, transparent system keeping 
interests of all stake holders in mind n early all issues on pricing would get 

 16
resolved.  This system is already in vogue in many other fields such as electricity 
rates, bus and taxi fares, interest rates, insurance premium  just to mention a few. 
Lastly, with the floating of an open tender in the market, all drug 
manufacturers/stockiest would come forwar d with the offer of lowest possible 
rates.  
 
35. The Committee is aware that a lega l framework is available by way of 
Essential Commodities Act 1956 under which the Government can put a cap on 
profitability. The Committee has also been informed that in the original Drug 
Price Control Order, there was a proposal that in addition to price control on 
individual drugs, there should be a cap on the overall profitability of the drug 
manufacturers. The objective was to disco urage manufacturers to shift from Price-
Controlled (less profitable) to uncontrolle d (hugely profitable) medicines. The 
proposal was, however, never implemented.  Taking into account all the above 
facts, the Committee, recommends that the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in coordination with the Depa rtment of Pharmaceuticals immediately 
move the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee and initiate a process of 
examining the issue of putting a blanket cap on profit margins of all medicines 
across board. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. 
 
36.     The Committee is, however, of the considered view that given the current 
ground realities in the country where more than 80 per cent population is 
dependent on private medical care and nearly 45 crore people live below the 
poverty line, the most effective and direct approach would be to put a blanket cap 
on profit margins of all medicines across the board. Medicines are the only item 
where the decision to buy is not taken by the purchaser but by a third party i.e., 
doctor. Therefore, if prescribers and producers join hands and take advantage of a 
patients’ helplessness, only state can stop them. 
 
37. Another pertinent issue that attracted the attention of the Committee was a 
news-item dated 31
st May, 2010 published in the Hindustan Times which 
highlights the following issues: 

 17
- 61 drugs worth over $ 80 billion are going off patent of the US Patent 
and Trademark Office between 2011  and 2013 making it possible for 
domestic pharma companies in India to produce cheaper versions of off-
patent drugs. 
 
However, promoters of some of the Indian pharma companies like Piramal 
Healthcare, Ranbaxy, Shanta Biotech and Dabur Pharma have already sold their 
controlling shares to US, Japanese and German MNCs. Many other drug 
manufacturers are reportedly interested in similar disinvestment. These 
developments would result in MNCs ga ining market supremacy and essential 
medicines are bound to become costlier.  The Committee would appreciate if the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare ta kes up this issue with the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers without any delay to come up with policy options to 
ensure that major Indian pharma companies remain in Indian hands.   
 
 