Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
 
REPORT NO. 
71
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
August, 2013/Sravana, 1935 (Saka)
 
SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
The Functioning of Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS)
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 6th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 6th August, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SEVENTY FIRST REPORT
The Functioning of Central Government
Health Scheme (CGHS)
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  6 th August, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  6 th August, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2013/Sravana, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(viii)
Composition of the Committee on Health and Family W elfare (2010-11) ............. (i)-(ii)
Composition of the Committee on Health and Family Welfare (201 1-12) ............. (iii)-(iv)
Composition of the Committee on Health and Family W elfare (2012-13) ............. (v)-(vi)
Composition of the Sub-Committee II on CGHS (2010-11) ................................... (vii)
Composition of the Sub-Committee II on CGHS (201 1-12) ................................... (viii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (ix)-(x)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( xi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—23
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 24—34
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 35—51
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 53 —63

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(2010-11)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
@7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Rasheed Masood
*10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
15. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
16. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi
18. Shri Nimmala Kristappa
19. Dr. Tarun Mandal
20. Shri Datta Meghe
21. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
22. Dr. Chinta Mohan
23. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
24. Shri R. K. Singh Patel
25. Shri M. K. Raghavan
26. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shrimati Meena Singh
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh
31. Shri Ratan Singh
@ Ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 18 th August, 2011.
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  21.9.2010.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Satis Mesra, Committee Officer

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(2011-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
*2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
%3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
^8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Shrimati B. Jayashree
10. Shri Derek O’Brien
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
&&12. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
@13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Raj Kumari Chauhan
15. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Dr. Monazir Hassan
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
20. Shri P. Lingam
21. Shri Datta Meghe
22. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
23. Dr. Chinta Mohan
24. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
25. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
26. Shri M. K. Raghavan
27. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
30. Shri Ratan Singh
31. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
* Ceased to be a Member w.e.f.  27 th January, 2012 and re-nominated to the Committee on 2 nd February, 2012.
% V acant vide resignation w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012.
^ Vacant vide  resignation w.e.f.  9 th March, 2012 and renominated as Member w.e.f.  4 th May, 2012  and Member of Sub-
Committee II on CGHS w.e.f. 1 st June, 2012.
&& Ceased to be a member w.e.f. 29 th June, 2012.
@ V acant vide resignation w.e.f.  30 th April, 2012.

(iv)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
&8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
& Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 24 th July, 2013.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(vi)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(vii)
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE–II (CGHS) OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(2010-11)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Rasheed Masood — Convenor
2. Shri Balbir Punj
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
6. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
7. Shri M. K Raghavan
8. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
9. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
10. Shri Ratan Singh
11. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh
12. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
13. Shrimati Meena Singh
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
15. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

(viii)
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE–II (CGHS) OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(2011-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Balbir Punj — Convenor
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Raj Kumari Chauhan
6. Shri M. K Raghavan
7. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma
9. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
10. Shri P. Lingam
11. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
12. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(ix)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Seventy-first Report of the Committee on the Functioning of Central
Government Health Scheme (CGHS) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
2. The Committee (2010-11) in its meeting held on 6
th May, 2011 decided to constitute a
Sub-Committee to examine the Functioning of Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS).
Subsequently since the deliberation on the subject remained inconclusive, the Committee
(2011-12) in its meeting held on 21 st September, 2011 again constituted a Sub-Committee on the
subject.
3. The Sub-Committees (2010-11 and 2011-12) constituted to examine the Functioning of
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) deliberated on the subject in its meetings held on
15
th June, 27 th June, 26 th July, 11 th October, 2011 and 6 th June, 2012. The main Committee (2012-13)
also deliberated on the subject on 9 th January, 2013.
4. During the course of examination of the subject, the Sub-Committee heard the views of
the Additional Secretary and Director General (CGHS), Department of Health and Family Welfare
on 27 th June, 2011. The Sub-Committee also had the benefit of the views of certain stakeholders
during its meetings held on 26 th July, 2011 and 11 th October, 2011 (List of stakeholders /experts
at Annexure-I). Thereafter, the main Committee also heard the views of Additional Secretary and
Director General (CGHS), Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare on 9
th January, 2013 along with Director Generals of Armed Forces Medical
Services (AFMS), Ministry of Defence; Railway Health Services (RHS), Ministry of Railways and
Employees State Insurance(ESIC), respectively on the subject.
5. During the finalization of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following documents/
papers:–
(i) Status Note on CGHS received from Department of Health and Family Welfare;
(ii) Oral Evidence tendered by Additional Secretary and DG (CGHS), Department of Health
and Family Welfare;
(iii) Oral Evidence tendered by Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services
(AFMS), Ministry of Defence; Director General of Railway Health Services (RHS),
Ministry of Railways and Director General of Employees State Insurance (ESIC);
(iv) Written submissions submitted by stakeholders; and
(v) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of Health and Family
Welfare.
6. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
26
th July, 2013.

(x)
7. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 BRAJESH PATHAK,
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
July 26, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Sravana 4, 1935 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

(xi)
ACRONYMS
1. AAP – Annual Acquisition Plan
2. AFMS – Armed Forces Medical Service
3. AMA – Authorized Medical Attendant
4. AYUSH – A yurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy
5. CGHS – Central Government Health Scheme
6. CMO – Chief Medical Officer
7. CSMA – Central Services Medical Attendance
8. DNB – Diplomate of the National Board
9. DLC – Differential leukocyte count
10. ECG – Electrocardiogram
11. ESIC – Employees State Insurance Scheme
12. GDMOs – General Duty Medical Officers
13. IRMS – Indian Railway Medical Service
14. IVF – In-Vitro Fertilization
15. MSDs – Medical Store Depots
16. MSO – Medical Stores Organisation
17. ME – Medical Equipment
18. NABL – National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories
1 9 . NABH – National Accreditation Board for Hospitals
20. NCR – National Capital Region
21. NFSG – Non Functional Selection Grade
22. OPD – Out Patient Department
23. PRO – Public Relations Officer
24. PVMS – Priced V ocabulary of Medical Stores
25. PPP – Public Private Partnership
26. PIB – Press Information Bureau
27. TLC – Total Leucocyte Count
28. UTI-TSL – Unit Trust of India-Technology Services Limited

1
REPORT
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
The “Central Government Health Scheme” (CGHS) provides comprehensive health care
facilities to the Central Government employees and pensioners their dependents residing in CGHS
covered cities, sitting and retired Members of Parliament, freedom fighters etc.
2. Central Government Health Scheme started in New Delhi in 1954 is now in operation in
25 cities viz. Allahabad, Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Bhopal, Chandigarh, Chennai, Delhi,
Dehradun, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Jabalpur, Kanpur, Kolkata, Lucknow, Meerut, Mumbai,
Nagpur, Patna, Pune, Ranchi, Shillong, Trivandrum and Jammu. Medical facilities are provided
through Wellness Centres/polyclinics under Allopathic, Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Sidha and
Homoeopathic systems of medicines. As per information furnished by the Department of Health and
Family Welfare, 248 allopathic Wellness Centres, 19 polyclinics, 78 Ayush dispensaries/units; 3 Yoga
Centres; 65 Laboratories; 17 Dental Units along with dialysis and maternity units  are working under
CGHS.
3. Besides, CGHS beneficiaries enjoy medical facilities in around 400 private empanelled
hospitals and around 170 diagnostic Centres in 25 cities in the country. The city-wise distribution
of Wellness Centres/beneficiaries/card holders is at Annexure-II.
MEMBERSHIP OF CGHS
4. As informed by the Department as on 31 st March, 2008, CGHS had 8,49,816 card holders
with a beneficiary base of 32,08,655. The CGHS is applicable to the following:
· All Central Government employees and their dependant family members residing in
CGHS covered areas.
· Central Government Pensioners and their eligible family members getting pension from
Central Civil Estimates
· Sitting and Ex-Members of Parliament.
· Ex-Governors and Lt. Governors
· Freedom Fighters
· Ex-Vice-Presidents
· Former Prime Ministers
· Sitting and Ex-Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts
· Employees and pensioners of certain autonomous organizations in Delhi.
· Journalists (in Delhi) accredited with PIB (for OPD and at RML Hospital)
· Delhi Police Personnel in Delhi only
· Railway Board employees
5. The Committee was also apprised that the expenditure incurred on CGHS during Eleventh
Five year Plan was Rs 276.87 crore and Rs 2790.38 crore under Plan and Non-Plan heads

2
respectively. For the year 2012-13, the expenditure incurred was 66.16 crores under the plan head.
A table showing details of expenditure incurred during 2007-12 is at Annexure-III .
FACILITIES AND SERVICES UNDER CGHS
6. CGHS provides comprehensive health care services to its diverse group of beneficiaries.
The basic medical facilities like Out Patient Care are provided at the wellness centre level and In-
Patient care through the Government hospitals in 25 locations where CGHS is in operation across
the country. The specialized services made available to beneficiaries at CGHS Wellness Centres are
as under:–
· Emergency service at 6 earmarked Wellness Centres Domiciliary/Home visits when
required to attend patients who are unable to visit the Wellness Centre.
· Specialist Consultation and other special treatment on scheduled date.
· Laboratory, Radiological investigation facilities.
· Special care for senior citizens by means of separate queues/counters at every level of
transaction.
· Geriatric Units/facilities having various specialties treatment running for old age
ailments at 2 Wellness Centres in Delhi namely Janakpuri and Timarpur,
· Preventive Health Check-up at earmarked CGHS Wellness Centres in order to diagnose
hitherto undetected illness and also for Health Education.
· AYUSH dispensary/Units are running with Yoga Centres at different Wellness Centres.
7. The other components of the Scheme include purchase, storage, distribution and supply of
medicines; health education; empanelment of private hospitals and diagnostic centres for providing
best quality health care. OPD services in private recognized hospitals is not permitted except in
case of Satellite cities of Delhi, viz., Noida, Gurgaon, Faridabad and Ghaziabad, wherein the CMO
in-charge can directly refer the beneficiaries to recognized hospitals.
Dialysis Facility
8. A Standalone Haemodialysis Centre at Sadiq Nagar CGHS wellness centre was started as a
pilot project under Public Private Partnership with Apollo group of hospitals exclusively for CGHS
beneficiaries (both pensioners and serving) and has been functional since 1
st September 2010.
9. It has the capacity to dialyze up to 21 cases of chronic renal failure per day with
7 functional dialysis machines and is operational from 7 A.M. to 8 P.M. for 310 days in a year. This
endeavor is a pioneering initiative and first of its kind in CGHS.
Preventive Health Check-up Scheme
10. The Committee was apprised that keeping in mind the preventive aspect of chronic
illnesses/health issues and on the basis of feedback received from the pilot project on Preventive
health check up scheme being run at R.K Puram-V wellness centre, Delhi, these services have now
been expanded to 8 other CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi-NCR which are functional from
1
st January 2012. The beneficiaries above the age of 40 years are covered under this project.
11. During the course of presentation in the meeting held on 9 th April, 2012 pertaining to
Demands for Grants 2012-13, the Director, CGHS highlighted the major initiatives taken by the
Department under CGHS. He informed that allopathic Wellness Centres in all cities have been

3
computerized due to which there is easy availability of medicines at the Wellness Centres and an
option to take treatment/medicines from any the Wellness Centres in any CGHS city without any
special permission. In addition, IVF facility for the childless CGHS beneficiaries; inclusion of minor
children of dependent widowed/separated daughter as dependant family member for CGHS; revision
of rates for coronary stents and hearing aids and expansion of preventive Health Check Up scheme
to 8 Wellness Centres (two in each zone) in Delhi/NCR have also been started. Further, he also
discussed the future plans which included setting up of Delhi type Hind-Lab facilities in Mumbai
and Bengaluru; review of empanelment process and package rates in 2012; preparation of CGHS
manual; introduction of Health Insurance Scheme for Central Government employees and
pensioners.
12. The Committee has also been informed that CGHS has the provision for reimbursement of
expenditure incurred on Ambulance facilities on the basis of recommendation of the treating doctor
that conveyance of the patient by any other mode would endanger the patient’s life or would
grossly aggravate his/her condition and all journey is undertaken within the same city. Further, it
was also stated that CGHS is in process of procuring two new ambulances equipped with
Advanced Life Support system for the VIPs in Delhi.
13. As regards cashless scheme, the Committee has been informed that the CGHS pensioner
beneficiaries as well as MPs, ex-MPs etc. are provided  cashless medical facilities in all CGHS
empanelled private hospitals/diagnostic Centres. Serving beneficiaries are also entitled for cashless
benefits from the empanelled private hospital when admitted under emergency situations.
SCOPE AND PURPOSE OF THE SCHEME
14. The Committee took note of growing resentment among the beneficiaries about the
prevailing inadequacies and red-tapism in delivery of the services under the Central Government
Health Scheme and decided to make a detailed study of the scheme threadbare and to suggest
measures to plug the existing loopholes and steps to strengthen the scheme. The Committee is
of the firm view that health is not just the absence of disease but it is determined by social and
mental well-being and is the mark of the functional efficiency of the individual. If the
Government will shy away from their responsibility of providing good health to its employees,
the foundation of the whole system will get crippled. To begin with, the Committee in order to
have wider perception of the shortcomings in the functioning of Central Government Health
Scheme, decided to call for comments from various stakeholders and accordingly released a
press release seeking public opinion on the subject. The Committee received a large number of
representations in response to its press release and suggestions made in the representations from
stakeholders have been duly included in the succeeding paras of the Report. Besides, the
Committee heard witnesses from various Associations, other stake holders, held meetings with
the officers of Department of Health and Family Welfare to get an insight into general and
specific grievances. The Committee also visited various CGHS Wellness Centres as well as
Wellness Centres at Guwahati, Imphal, Chennai, Bangalore, Shimla and Chandigarh and held
discussions with Doctors/beneficiaries at each centre to observe the functioning of the health
scheme as per the vision and mission of CGHS.
15. Although CGHS has shown improvement since last 10 years, still many inadequacies exist
in providing the desired facilities to the beneficiaries and laxity at various levels. In this backdrop,
the Committee has focused on the key problem areas which are hampering the smooth functioning
of CGHS and has made its observations and recommendations on various aspects of drug
procurement, grievance redressal mechanism, reimbursement procedure, emergency care, specialist
consultations, etc. Necessary suggestions have also been made on various issues to improve the
functioning of CGHS, which are discussed in succeeding paras.

4
GENERAL PROBLEMS
16. The Committee, during the course of consideration of the subject, has received several
representations from beneficiaries across the country voicing their dissatisfaction over the general
functioning of Central Government Health Scheme including inadequacy of infrastructure and
administrative issues at the Wellness Centres.
17. In view of a large number of complaints received, the Committee undertook visits to some
of the Wellness Centres in Delhi/NCR, Chennai, Bangalore, Guwahati and Shillong to make on the
spot study of their functioning and to have first hand information and to have interaction with
various stakeholders to know the ground realities. The issues which came to the notice of the
Committee have been discussed in the succeeding paras.
SHORTAGE OF DOCTORS AND STAFF
18. One of the major complaints received as regards the CGHS was shortage of doctors,
paramedical and other assisting staff in most of the CGHS Wellness Centres. From a perusal of
the vacancy position in many CGHS Wellness Centres, the Committee noted that many posts are
lying vacant since long. What adds further to the woes of the beneficiaries is the fact that doctors
and other staff frequently come late to the Wellness Centres. All this results in over-crowding of
the centres. Many beneficiaries also complained that often they have to return unattended which
besides causing physical and mental agony also results in extra burden monetarily on the patient
owing to transportation charges on account of multiple visits. Many beneficiaries also complained
about non availability of specialist doctors in these centres.
19. During the course of the meeting held on 27
th June 2011, the representative of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare had stated that in Delhi out of 670 sanctioned posts of
GDMOs 56 posts are vacant and out of 614 filled positions 63 are contractual appointees. The
scheme of appointing doctors on contract basis has been extended to other cities too. During its
deliberation with stakeholders on the subject, at its meeting held on 26
th July, 2011, it was
highlighted that the provision of doctors should commensurate with the number of beneficiaries at
the Wellness Centres. Further, to ensure availability of doctors at Wellness Centres at all the times
there should be replacement or leave reserves for them.
20. The Committee was also informed that there is acute shortage of clerical staff in CGHS
Wellness Centres in Delhi and efforts have been made to get the sanctioned posts filled up through
SSC and the Ministry has already taken action to deploy data entry operators in those Wellness
Centres where regular clerical staff are not posted. However, the Committee found a different
picture during its visit to some of the Wellness Centres. The Committee noted that at Dwarka
Wellness Centre, Delhi, the staff strength was less than the sanctioned strength. The contracts of
the contractual doctors and other clerical staff were not revoked after the expiry. A similar situation
was at Ghaziabad Wellness Centre too. The Committee was apprised that the Centre caters to
around 41,000 beneficiaries. However, the doctors and staff strength are not in commensurate with
the beneficiaries attending the dispensary. The beneficiaries present in the wellness centre
complained about heavy rush in the Centre at all the times and delay in other services too. At Noida
Sector 11 Wellness Centre also Committee witnessed the same status pertaining to staff strength,
lack of infrastructure and basic amenities, heavy rush etc.
21. To have first hand information as regards the working of CGHS Wellness Centres located
in other cities the Committee undertook study visits to Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh
and Chandigarh and visited CGHS Centres there. The Additional Director, CGHS, Chennai apprised
the Committee about the facilities provided by 14 CGHS Wellness Centres located in the State and
also focused on the need for appointment of more doctors, data entry operators and operation

5
manager for Wellness Centres to cater to the needs of 14,834 serving employees and 13,340
pensioners besides MPs, ex-MPs, freedom fighters and retired judges. The Committee also heard
views of Chairman, Coordination Committee of the Central Government Pensioners Associations,
Karnataka, on the functioning of CGHS. He submitted that shortage of doctors was leading to long
waiting time which could be reduced by laying down a time frame of 15 minutes per patient and
5 minutes for follow up cases on average till the revised Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) formula is
prescribed to augment the staff strength.
22. The Department, in reply to a query regarding steps being taken to fill up the vacancies,
has informed that for filling up of the vacancies of GDMOs and Specialists, requisitions have been
sent to UPSC and as a short term measure, appointment of retired GDMOs is being made from
time to time on contract basis. For filling up of the vacancies of pharmacists, applications were
called and further action to select the candidates is under process. For other vacancies in Group
’C’, action has been initiated as required in accordance with the Recruitment Rules. Further, it has
also been informed that as per the SIU norms, one doctor is posted for beneficiaries attendance
of 75 per day and incremental increase of doctors is provided as attendance increases and these
are being broadly followed in Delhi/NCR.
23. The Committee fails to understand as to why there still exists a huge gap between
in-position strength and sanctioned posts of doctors and supporting staff despite the
Departments’ claim that the contractual appointments of retired doctors is being made to
fill up the vacancies. The fact about this mismatch was brought to the notice of the
Committee by the beneficiaries while deposing before it as also during the study visit to
some of the Wellness Centres. The same holds true for vacancies in paramedical and other
staff also. If all the vacancies had been filled up by contractual appointments as claimed by
the Department, the vacancies would have ceased to exist. The Committee is of the opinion
that vacancies, irrespective of any category cause overstressing of the existing manpower
and directly or indirectly are bound to affect the quality of services rendered to the
beneficiaries by the Wellness Centres. CGHS has been established with the vision to cater
to health needs of the beneficiaries and shortage of manpower will handicap the successful
running of CGHS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
reassess the strategies adopted to fill up the vacancies and come up with realistic measures
so that the shortage of doctors and paramedical staff in CGHS Wellness Centres can be
overcome. Efforts should also be made to increase the availability of specialist doctors or
consultants in various fields at these Wellness Centres keeping in mind the alarming
increase in the number of patients suffering from high blood pressure, diabetes, and other
critical illnesses. Adequate provision for leave reserve vacancies for all posts should be
made so that substitutes could be provided in case of any one proceeding on leave.
24. The Committee recommends that vigorous efforts should be made by the Department
for filling up of all the existing vacancies of GDMOs and specialists and other paramedical
staff. The Committee also recommends that adequate provision of leave reserve should be
made for doctors and other assisting staff so that the beneficiaries do not have to suffer
due to absence of doctors and other assisting staff.
PUNCTUALITY
25. Another issue which needs urgent attention of the Department is lack of punctuality among
doctors and other allied staff members. In the meeting of the Committee held on 26
th July, 2011,
witnesses informed the Committee that most of the doctors never come in time to the Wellness
Centres. The Committee has also received numerous complaints regarding the non-availability of
doctors at CGHS Wellness Centres. Few beneficiaries also complained that doctors often leave their

6
rooms for long durations resulting in further increase in rush and suggested that lunch break time
for doctors and staff should be fixed and clearly indicated on the notice board for the information
of the patients.
26. The Committee conveys its anguish at the absence of work discipline in the discharge
of duties by the doctors and other supporting staff in the Wellness Centres. The complaints
from various stakeholders imply that due to lack of punctuality on the part of doctors and
paramedical staff, the beneficiaries have to wait for hours for getting registered and
examined. Through written as well as the oral representations, suggestions of undertaking
surprise visit to check the punctuality of the staff members by the concerned authorities
and introduction of biometric system of attendance have been given by various experts and
stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, emphasizes that the above mentioned measures
must be introduced to abate this problem of late comers. Besides, period of tea/lunch breaks
should be restricted and notified on the Notice Board in the Wellness Centres so that the
beneficiaries do not have to wait for longer period.
BEHAVIOURAL ISSUES
27. Another aspect which was brought to the attention of the Committee was the unsympathetic
attitude and indifferent approach of doctors and other staff towards patients’ problems. The
beneficiaries informed that patients are not examined properly and medicines are prescribed without
any explanation which leaves them with little faith in the diagnosis by doctors, thus eroding the
credibility of CGHS. The Committee believes that health care service provider should be tender-
hearted towards the ailing patients. He is meant to do away with patients’ pain and not for causing
further agony to them. They are dealing with people who are sick, old and helpless. During oral
presentations, the Committee noted that one of the reasons behind these behavioral problems may
be acute shortage of staff and doctors with no provision of leave reserves. Besides, voluntary
Retirement Scheme availed by doctors due to lack of good service conditions in CGHS further add
to the existing shortage of staff.
28. In the meeting held on 27
th June, 2011, the Department informed about the steps taken
to improve the attitude of doctors and staff towards the patients. In order to address this issue
the Department informed that it has put in place a mechanism to have surprise inspections in
CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi and outside Delhi by its officers and submissions of reports
thereon. The Committee was further apprised that quarterly meetings of these officers are also
being held to look into the complaints of the beneficiaries. It was informed that strict instructions
have been issued to the in charges of Wellness Centres to pay full attention to the patients’ well
being.
29. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to address the issues
relating to punctuality and behavioral aspects but feels that still much more need to be
done in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the frequency of surprise
inspections should be increased and feedback of the beneficiaries gathered regularly. The
Committee also recommends that immediate necessary remedial measures should also be
taken on the shortcomings pointed out in the Inspection reports and feedback.
INFRASTRUCTURE
30. The Committee’s attention was also drawn towards the poor infrastructure of the most of
the Wellness Centres. The Committee noted that many of the Wellness Centres are functioning in
make-shift DDA flats and other such buildings which are not really suited for running such
Wellness Centres. Various stakeholders in their written submissions have complained about the
crowded Wellness Centres with unsatisfactory sanitary and hygienic conditions.

7
31. With regard to maintenance of sanitary and hygienic conditions of the Wellness Centres, the
Department has informed that according to the SIU norms of Department of Expenditure, sanitation
and security services are to be outsourced. The concerned zones have already taken steps to
outsource the same as per vacancy positions. The Committee, on local study tour to various
Centres, was dismayed to note the poor maintenance of buildings and premises by CPWD staff at
Noida and Dwarka Wellness Centres. Further, the Sub-Committee noticed that no outsourcing of
Grade IV staff has been done at Dwarka wellness centre. The area welfare officer from Ghaziabad
Wellness Centre informed the Committee that the wellness centre is located in 3 storey building
without a passenger lift and no funds have been earmarked to CPWD for carrying out maintenance
work of these Wellness Centres. The Committee was also apprised of the need for providing air-
conditioning facility in the stores and pathological laboratories to protect medicines/medical samples
taken.
32. The Committee expresses its anguish over the sorry state of the many of the
buildings housing the Wellness Centres which are in dilapidated condition. The Committee
also notes that in many centres there is inadequate space, seating arrangement and facility
of drinking water. One of the parameters judging the success of any health care delivery
system is the hygiene it maintains and availability of basic amenities like water, electricity
to support proper infrastructure. The Committee feels that the unhygienic environment,
improper sanitation in Wellness Centres would erode the credibility of the healthcare
services. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should understand the
exigency of proper infrastructure and cleaning staff in CGHS Wellness Centres all over the
country as a pre-requisite to provide the health facilities for the beneficiaries. The
Committee has also noted that the Ministry has outsourced the cleaning work to a private
agency which is handling the mechanized cleaning for the last one year. The Committee
desires that the work of private agencies handling cleaning work under CGHS should be
frequently monitored.
33. The Committee observes with concern that basic infrastructure like ECG machine,
Glucometre etc. are not available in the Wellness Centres. The Committee recommends
that such basic medical instruments should be made available in all Wellness Centres.
PROBLEMS FACED BY SENIOR CITIZENS
34. The Committee was apprised of the sorry state of treatment being meted out to elderly
beneficiaries who virtually have to struggle to see the doctors and get medicines at the CGHS
Wellness Centres. Some of the elderly beneficiaries informed the Committee that in the absence of
proper mechanism and shortage of staff and doctors they often have to wait for long hours to see
the doctors. To further add to their woes is the long wait at the pharmacy counters. The situation
gets worse if the prescribed medicines are not in stock and are indented and they have to again
come to the Wellness Centres for collecting the medicines. In case they purchase their medicines
from authorized chemist outside the Wellness Centres, getting bills reimbursed is another ordeal for
them.
35. The Department has accepted the fact that despite repeated instructions regarding giving out
of turn treatment to senior citizen/pensioners and service at each activity level, this system is
generally not being enforced at the wellness centre level. The Department has informed that the
CMOs in- charge of the Wellness Centres have been instructed to personally make rounds of the
wellness centre particularly during peak hours to ensure that senior citizens are being treated
promptly in compliance with the instructions given by the Department.
36. It was brought to the notice of the Committee by several beneficiaries that at geriatric
Wellness Centres, doctors are not punctual resulting in lots of hardship for the senior citizens. The

8
Committee has also found that specialty services are deficient at most of the Centres. In addition,
Committee was surprised to find the absence of vital services like cardiology & neurology in these
Centres which are sine-qua-non  for senior citizens.
37. During the study visit by Sub-Committee at Noida CGHS Wellness centre, the CMO in-
charge informed that the centre has started a special scheme for senior citizens where patients
above 85 years are visited by doctors once in 3 months to enquire about their well being. The
Committee has received suggestions for providing similar services in other Wellness Centres across
the country. The Committee suggests that the Department should consider the matter and
take necessary measures to provide domiciliary services for the senior citizens in all
Wellness Centres. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to ensure that the
instructions issued by it for paying special attention to senior citizens/pensioners are
implemented in letter and spirit and strict compliance of the instructions along with
devising a system for fixing responsibility for noncompliance thereof must be ensured
without further delay. If need be, a ‘Committee for Senior Citizens’ can be constituted at
every Wellness centre which would ensure compliance of the relevant instructions. In
addition to this, the Committee suggests that geriatric sensitization should be ingrained in
the minds of doctors and staff in Wellness Centres. It also recommends for appointing
Geriatric specialist doctors for the elderly CGHS beneficiaries who may visit various CGHS
wellness Centres on designated dates. The Committee also impresses upon the Department
to further strengthen the CGHS facilities available in Government Hospitals/Private
Hospitals empanelled under CGHS to ensure hasslefree treatment for beneficiaries.
SHIFT SYSTEM AT CGHS WELLNESS CENTRES
38. The Committee in its 39
th Report on Demands for Grants 2010-11, had emphasized on the
need for introduction of shift system in CGHS Wellness Centres. According to the feedback given
to the Committee, the Ministry has stated that two shift system at CGHS Wellness Centres has
been introduced in Noida, Gurgaon and Faridabad from August, 2011. However, response to this
new initiative is not encouraging.
39. During the Committee’s visit to Noida wellness centre, the CMO informed that their centre
had started afternoon shift w.e.f. 15
th June, 2011 and an average of 50 patients daily utilize the
evening services.
40. The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts in starting double shift system in
some of the Wellness Centres and proposes that feasibility of introducing double shift
system in other Wellness Centres in Delhi be explored so that beneficiaries need not have
to take leave from their offices to consult the doctors in morning hours. Further, patients’
load in morning hours at Wellness Centres would also get evenly distributed. As regards the
tepid response to the second shift, the Committee recommends that to increase the patient
inflow in evening shift in the Wellness Centres, wide publicity may be given through local
newspapers and official website of CGHS and other print and electronic media channels. To
address the issues relating to availability of staff and doctors for evening shift, the
Committee proposes that their services can be utilized on rotation basis. The Committee is
of the firm view that these efforts would certainly strengthen the scheme.
EMERGENCY SERVICES
41. The Committee has received numerous requests from experts and stakeholders to restart the
emergency services at Wellness Centres as was available earlier in many dispensaries. It has also
been requested that one doctor should be on duty at night at the CGHS Wellness Centres for
dealing with the emergency cases.

9
42. The Committee was apprised that the reason behind the gradual closing of emergency shifts
was low patients’ attendance resulting in underutilization of the manpower and resources. Also, in
case of medical emergencies, the beneficiaries may go to any hospital for treatment and claim the
reimbursement as per the package rates. At present, there are only 6 Wellness Centres where
emergency services are in operation.
43. The Ministry has also submitted that all CGHS Wellness Centres provide emergency medical
facilities to its beneficiaries during working hours from 8.00 
A.M. to 3.00 P.M. In addition,
emergency medical facilities are also provided between 3.00 P.M. to 8.00 A.M. at six CGHS Wellness
Centres/hospitals namely – North Avenue, South Avenue, Telegraph Lane, Pandara Road, Kingsway
Camp and Timarpur. CGHS beneficiaries may go to any hospital whether empanelled or not in case
of medical emergencies.
44. The Committee is of the view that Emergency services are meant to stabilize a
suffering patient by providing initial treatment so that he gets time to reach the hospital
for further management. If a patient gets emergency first aid at the wellness centre only,
then he can be shifted to hospital in a given time. The Committee impresses upon the
Ministry to explore the possibility of starting evening and the emergency services at all
these Wellness Centres depending upon the number of the beneficiaries catered by the
Centres. The Committee suggests that the services of the CGHS Wellness Centres should
be made available round the clock on 24 hour basis on the lines of hospitals. There should
be at least one doctor available at the wellness centre at all times. The staff can be
appointed to work in shifts on rotation basis. Initially the scheme to introduce emergency
services in CGHS Wellness Centres on round the clock basis can be started as pilot project
in a few Wellness Centres and based on the feedback received from them, the scheme can
be extended throughout the country.
45. The Committee was of the opinion that all the emergency units of CGHS should have
ambulance service to attend to. The Committee, accordingly, recommends each emergency
unit of CGHS should be equipped with ambulance service.
46. Further, the Committee also feels that the suggestion of opening mini-casualty
centre for every 6-8 Wellness Centres to offload the hospital casuality wards as submitted
by some of the witnesses may also be considered by the Department.
47. The Committee is also of the opinion that a Control Room/ Call Centre should be
set up to provide important information to the beneficiaries in dire need of emergency
treatment.
AYURVEDA, YOGA CENTRES
48. The Committee was informed that at present, there are 86 AYUSH Wellness Centres/units
and 4 Yoga Centres rendering their services under CGHS. During the local study visit, the
Committee was informed that Ayurveda centres and yoga clinics have also been opened at Noida
and Ghaziabad Wellness Centres. The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts in co-
locating Ayurvedic and Yoga therapies with the allopathic system of medicine at CGHS
Wellness Centres. The Committee, however, observes that a lot more is still required to
be done for giving due thrust and place to these alternative therapies. The Committee
also takes note of the shortage of Ayurvedic doctors and yoga trainers in many of the
CGHS Wellness Centres and exhorts the Ministry to take required action to fill up the
existing vacancies in a time bound manner. The Committee also suggests that steps may
be initiated to extend yoga and Ayurvedic systems of therapies to other CGHS Wellness
Centres as well.

10
HOMOEOPATHY AND UNANI CENTRES
49. In the meeting held on 11 th October, 2011, the Committee heard views of Dr. Prakashan,
Vice-president-All India Homoeopathic Doctors Association on the current status of availability of
Homoeopathic system of treatment in CGHS Wellness Centres. He informed that in Delhi there are
13 Homoeopathic Centres out of which 3 are Homoeopathic Wellness Centres and 10 are
homoeopathic units. The homoeopathic units were started with a view to convert them into full
fledged Wellness Centres. The States like MP, Orissa, Uttarakhand, etc., are exempted from setting
up of Homoeopathic Wellness Centres. He also informed that the administrative control of the
homoeopathic units remains with the in-charge of allopathic dispensary who is not suitably qualified
to judge the performance of homoeopathy doctors. He also highlighted that there is only one post
for the pharmacist from Homoeopathic system and when he is on leave it leads to difficulties in
dispensation of medicines. He, further, highlighted the issues of giving Non Functional Selection
Grade (NFSG) to Homoeopathic doctors; training of Medical Officers from Wellness Centres who
are posted as in-charge of a medical store depots and urgent requirement of establishment of
Homoeopathy Wellness Centres in the areas like Paschim Vihar, Dwarka, Rohini, Gurgaon and
Faridabad. Many beneficiaries have also requested to start homoeopathic services at their respective
Wellness Centres.
50. The Committee is of the view that homoeopathy is widely popular because of no or
minimal side effects. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the Ministry should
strive towards providing regular homoeopathy services at all the Wellness Centres. The
Committee also suggests that the Ministry should take necessary steps to address the above
problems as highlighted by then Vice-President, All India Homoeopathic Doctors Association.
51. The Committee also heard views of Dr. Talat Usmani, CMO in- charge, Unani dispensary,
Sarojini Nagar who informed it that in Delhi, there is only one Unani dispensary, four units and
one special unit that is opened for only one day i.e., ‘Tuesday’ in the Medical Centre Parliament
House Annexe. As regard the problems currently being faced in running the Unani System of
medicine in CGHS Wellness Centres, he apprised that the foremost issue was the delay in purchase
of the Unani medicines even after clearance by the higher authorities. According to him, the other
aspect which was hampering the progress of Unani system was shortage of staff. He drew
attention towards the number of posts for medical officers, pharmacists and grade IV staff that
are lying vacant at Delhi and outside Delhi in Unani Wellness Centres.
52. The Committee is of view that the Ministry should look into the matter and take
necessary remedial measures to fill up the vacant posts of doctors and other allied staff in
Unani Wellness Centres to ensure smooth functioning of the Unani Wellness Centres. The
delays reported in procurement of Unani medicines should also be looked into and necessary
action be taken.
LOCATIONS OF WELLNESS CENTRES
53. Another aspect which was brought to the notice of the Committee was about the
unapproachable location of some of the Wellness Centres/Beneficiaries of the Wellness Centres at
Ghaziabad, Dwarka, Noida, Shillong etc. have submitted before the Committee that the existing
centres are not centrally located. They are located at remote places and outskirts of the cities. The
Wellness centre at Ghaziabad is located at a far away place and not well connected. Public mode
of transport was not available for most of these Wellness Centres. Similarly in Shillong the Wellness
Centre is located at the outskirts of the city and the beneficiaries are hesitant to visit the centre.
54. The Committee, strongly recommends that all Wellness Centres located at remote or
on the outskirts of the city should be shifted to convenient centrally located places at the

11
earliest. State Government/other concerned authorities may be approached to allot/provide
plot/premises at convenient and central locations for housing these centres.
PREVENTIVE HEALTH CHECK-UP SCHEME
55. Numerous requests for introducing annual health check-up plans for the beneficiaries above
the age group of 40 years have been received by the Committee. The Committee was informed that
the Department has already expanded the Preventive Health check up scheme at 8 CGHS Wellness
Centres in addition to one already existing at R.K Puram-V (South Zone) from the year 2012
keeping in view the importance of diagnosis of Chronic Noncommunicable health problems at the
preventive level.
56. The Committee appreciates the Department’s efforts for starting Preventive Health
Check-up Scheme and feels that such schemes would benefit the CGHS in the long run as
preventive measures are more economical as compared to the curative measures. Further,
the Committee is of the opinion that such services should be made available to all the
CGHS beneficiaries and not limited to specified Centres.
57. The Committee also recommends that medical details of patients should also be kept
online and made available if required.
DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES
58. The Committee expresses its displeasure with the present condition of the diagnostic
services under CGHS. Despite Departments’ claim that only NABL accreditated laboratories are
under CGHS empanelment, the Committee has received complaints of substandard and poor quality
equipments, lack of basic tests facility, malfunctioning of existing equipments, lack of air-
conditioned labs.
59. In the meeting held on 26
th July, 2012, the witnesses who appeared before the Committee
informed that the lab facilities provided under CGHS are only for blood sugar, TLC & DLC and
even these services are not up to the mark. The patients are referred to private pathology labs for
rest of the investigations.
60. During the local study visit to some Wellness Centres, the Committee noted that there were
no testing facilities at Mayur Vihar Wellness Centre and there were no pathologist & microbiologist
at Noida Wellness Centre. The Committee noticed that the instruments for checking Blood pressure,
temperature were not even calibrated at Ghaziabad Wellness Centre.
61. The Committee feels that the Department needs to address all the shortcomings
existing in the facilities provided at the diagnostic Centres under CGHS. The Committee
understands that correct diagnosis is imperative for getting the right treatment. Unless
adequate diagnostic and laboratory benchmarks are not only set but also complied with at
CGHS Wellness Centres, there will be serious implications for the patients. The Committee,
accordingly, suggests that in order to ensure the efficiency of labs and diagnostic Centres,
it is imperative that diagnostic Centres and labs are well equipped with state-of-the art
technology equipments so as to facilitate quality medical care at CGHS Wellness Centres.
The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to initiate action in this regard.
Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the process of
NABL accreditation of labs and diagnostic centres under CGHS.
SEPARATE WING FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES
62. Many of the beneficiaries through their oral evidences and also through written

12
representations informed the Committee that CGHS beneficiaries had to face hardships in
Government hospitals where no separate facilities have been earmarked for CGHS beneficiaries. It
was also mentioned that Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital has got Orthopaedics and Medicine units
in CGHS wing and for rest of the specialties like cardiology, neurology etc. the beneficiaries have
to see doctor along with general public which is tiresome especially for senior citizens.
63. The Committee has also been informed that both the Defence and Railways have got
exclusive and full fledged hospital facilities for their serving and retired employees. While it may
not be possible to have separate hospitals for Central Government employees, provision of separate
wing for CGHS employees in Central Government, State Government and District Hospitals may
be considered to ensure parity with the facilities being provided to the Defence & Railways
employees.
64. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should explore the
possibility of opening a separate CGHS wing in all the Government hospitals covering all
disciplines of medical facilities to make it more convenient for the CGHS beneficiaries to
consult the specialist doctors.
PLASTIC IDENTITY CARDS
65. The Committee has been informed that plastic identity cards are being issued as part of
computerization process to all the CGHS beneficiaries so that they can avail the medical facilities
in any city should they happen to be in that city either on official work or on leave. With the
introduction of plastic cards, beneficiaries can get medicines from any wellness Centre across the
country without the need of carrying temporary attachment from their respective offices. The
Department has also submitted that for issue of plastic cards, provision of online application has
been made. As per the new procedure, applications for CGHS cards for serving employees are
received through their administrative offices/departments. CGHS plastic cards are collected from
the office of CGHS by a designated officer from the departments/offices. Retiring employees/
beneficiaries have an option to apply for issue of pensioner CGHS cards in advance, 6 weeks
before superannuation, so that they get pensioner cards ready at the time of their retirement.
66. During the course of the meeting held on 27
th June, 2011, the Committee was apprised that
the plastic cards are being issued to the beneficiaries through an outsourcing agency. Further, the
Department had informed that out of 10 lakh beneficiaries in Delhi, 8.7 lakh cards have already
been prepared and 75% of these cards have been collected. The Department also informed that
there have been cases of delay in issuing of plastic cards and the same will be reviewed with the
outsourcing agency. However, the inspection report of wellness centre at Dwarka furnished by the
Department has highlighted the need to address the issue of distribution system of plastic cards.
(Annexure-IV)
67. The Committee has been given to understand that though the plastic card entitles a
beneficiary to avail treatment at any CGHS Wellness Centre, this rule is not being
implemented on the ground. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should make efforts to ensure that the instructions issued by it regarding plastic cards are
followed at all the Wellness Centres across the country. The Department should also look into
the reasons for delay in issuing the plastic cards and address the same on priority basis.
68. It has also been brought to the notice of the Committee that unclaimed CGHS plastic cards
are being misused in the CGHS Wellness Centres, and medicines procured against these cards are
being sold in the open markets.
69. The Committee takes a serious view of such malpractices and impresses upon the
Department to take necessary action in this regard. The Department may fix a timeline for

13
collection of the plastic cards by the beneficiary so that the unclaimed cards are
surrendered to the issuing authority, if they remain uncollected beyond a specified period
of time.
COMPUTERIZATION
70. The Committee is happy to note that computerization has been completed in all CGHS
Wellness Centres and is in progress in Ayush Wellness Centres/Units/Medical Store in Delhi and
NCR.
71. The Committee however, received numerous oral and written complaints from beneficiaries
regarding the inordinate delays they have to face in getting treatment despite computerization in
Wellness Centres. The Committee was informed that in case of poor network connectivity, systems
don’t work and all the work comes to a halt. The Committee recommends to the Department
to look into the causes of this delay and draw concrete action plan to ensure smooth
functioning of software and to put in place an efficient mechanism to promptly handle
network issues so that the benefits of computerization, can be reaped.
72. The Committee also took note of a few suggestions given by the beneficiaries such
as making available health education articles on home page of the CGHS website for
educating people about prevention of commonly prevalent diseases and illnesses. Some
health related dos and don’ts may be put on the CGHS website and publicity may be given
on this at the Wellness Centres. Further, making available the facility of booking prior
appointment online for the specialists on the lines of private hospitals was also mooted for
the benefit of beneficiaries especially for senior citizens. The Committee recommends that
the Department may explore the possibility of utilizing such inputs for making CGHS more
people friendly.
73. The Committee also took note of the fact that presently there is no computerized system
wherein any empanelled hospital can give the data of all referred cases by the CGHS Wellness
centre. Though presently computerized referral letters are being generated for retired employees,
computers of CGHS Wellness Centre are not linked to the empanelled Hospitals. The Committee
observes that the integration of panel hospitals and Wellness Centres for online
transmission of data is yet to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
immediate steps be taken to formulate policy in this regard and develop and operationalize
appropriate software for the purpose.
74. The Committee is also of the opinion that the Department should take measures for
on-line empanelment with tariffs to maximise the utility of computerization of the system
and make it more transparent and accessible.
POLYCLINICS
75. The Department has informed that specialized consultation is being provided at the
polyclinics and at present four CGHS polyclinics are in operation at Kasturba Nagar I, Pusa Road,
Timarpur and Laxmi Nagar; 16 polyclinics are running at other locations outside Delhi. The
Committee has received numerous requests from various stakeholders regarding opening of more
polyclinics and connecting them to the Wellness Centres so that diagnostic tests reports of the
patients can be made available online.
76. Keeping in view the numerous requests received from various stakeholders, the
Committee would appreciate if the Department undertakes an urgent review of the
polyclinics presently functioning especially with regard to provision of speciality services in

14
these polyclinics and at the same time explore the possibility of opening more polyclinics
at other places also so as to ensure good health care to greater number of CGHS
beneficiaries.
AUTHORISED MEDICAL ATTENDENT FOR BENEFICIARIES
77. The Committee has been given to understand that the CGHS cardholders are entitled
to cashless treatment and diagnostic facilities at CGHS empanelled hospitals/diagnostic
centres. However, these facilities are not extended to those who are not covered under a
CGHS Dispensary and avail the services of the Authorised Medical Attendent under Central
Services (Medical Attendance) Rules. The Committee is of the view that such an
arrangement is patently unfair and recommends that cashless benefits both for consultation
and diagnostic services be extended to the AMA beneficiaries.
EFFICACY OF EMPANELMENT PROCEDURE
Empanelment of Hospitals
78. As CGHS is spread over 25 cities only, the remote areas are lacking these facilities due to
lack of hospitals under empanelment and nonavailability of any CGHS wellness Centre in their area.
This leaves the beneficiaries with no choice except going to the State Government hospitals where
they have to undergo numerous hardships like long waiting hours to see the doctor and get treated.
79. The Committee heard the views of certain witnesses in order to understand the functional
status of the empanelment scheme. In this regard, the Committee in its meeting held on
11
th October 2011, was informed that empanelment procedure is complex and the rates offered by
CGHS are far lower than the actual rates in private hospital due to which private hospitals are
reluctant to get empanelled. The Committee also noted that the reputed multispecialty hospitals like,
Apollo, Batra, Rockland, Escorts have withdrawn their empanelment due to delayed bill settlement
processes and also that some private empanelled hospitals try to avoid admitting CGHS beneficiaries
on the pretext of non-availability of beds.
80. As regards the empanelment procedure and rates the Committee was informed in the
meeting held on 27
th June 2011, that empanelling process is reviewed every two to three years. The
Committee was apprised that in total, there are 246 hospitals under empanelment out of which
Delhi has about 100 hospitals, but in NCR like Gurgaon, Faridabad, Noida, Ghaziabad and other
cities where very few hospitals and diagnostic Centres have been empanelled, a concept of a
continuous empanelling scheme on the same terms and conditions was introduced to get more and
more hospitals and diagnostic Centres on CGHS panel in such cities.
81. The Committee was also informed that for empanelment of hospitals, laboratories and
imaging Centres under CGHS, they have to be accreditated by NABH, NABL, and AERB
respectively to ensure good quality health care services including medical and diagnostics services
to CGHS beneficiaries. Keeping in view the continued lack of sufficient hospitals/diagnostic Centres
under CGHS panel in Mumbai, Shillong, Trivendrum, Dehradoon, and Guwahati the applications
have again been invited from private hospitals and diagnostic laboratories under extended continuous
empanelment scheme with some relaxation in respect of NABH accreditation. Hospitals so
empanelled under relaxed conditions are provided to give an undertaking to apply for NABH
accreditation within six months of empanelment as decided by the Committee of Secretaries.
82. The Committee takes note of the fact that flexibility of allowing empanelment
without prior accreditation has been given in view of the lack of sufficient empanelled
hospitals in certain cities and strongly recommends that the Department should ensure

15
NABH/NABL accreditation of such hospitals/diagnostic Centres within six months of their
empanelment and no further relaxation on this account should be given.
83. As far as rates are concerned, the Committee was informed that only L1 rates are notified
& all those hospitals who agree for the notified rates get CGHS approval for empanelment. The
Committee would like the Department to do a comparative analysis of the CGHS rates
vis-à-vis the rates fixed and paid by the health insurance companies to private hospitals/
diagnostic centres so that a reasoned decision regarding the rates could be arrived at. The
Committee is aware that the private hospitals are driven by profit motives and charge
exhorbitant rates for treatment and diagnostic procedures and therefore, they should not be
allowed to dictate terms in this regard.
84. The Committee, accordingly, recommends framing of a more rational policy for
revision of rates. The Committee would also like the Department to ensure that the bills
preferred by the private hospitals/diagnostic centres are processed promptly and genuine
claims are settled without hassles within a specified time-frame and the empanelled
hospitals/diagnostic Centres are not subjected to unnecessary delays in reimbursement of
their claims of expenditure.
85. The Committee has been given to understand that some of the CGHS empanelled
Hospitals have been refusing admission to the CGHS beneficiaries on the ground that CGHS
beds were not available to accommodate them. The Committee takes a serious note of this.
The Committee is unable to understand as to how a CGHS empanelled hospital can refuse
admission to the CGHS beneficiary merely on the ground that CGHS bed was not available.
Any refusal of admission by an empanelled hospital amounts to discrimination towards the
CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry
should look into the matter to find out the reasons for which empanelled hospitals are
avoiding treatment of CGHS beneficiaries and take remedial measures so that the CGHS
beneficiaries are not put to any such discrimination in the CGHS empanelled hospitals.
There should be a mechanism in place to look into such instances. Further, measures
should be taken to increase the number of empanelled hospitals.
86. The Committee observes that the beneficiaries in the districts where there is no CGHS
dispensary or empanelled Hospitals, face lots of difficulties. The Committee, therefore
recommends that there should be atleast one empanelled hospital under CGHS in every district
of the country for the service of the beneficiaries and thus save them from unnecessary hassle.
Empanelment of Cancer Hospitals
87. The Committee, in its meeting held on 27
th Junes 2011, expressed its concern about
shortage of hospitals empanelled for cancer treatment and was apprised that there are ten well
known cancer hospitals in Delhi and one in Hyderabad empanelled under CGHS for cancer
treatment. Besides,the CGHS beneficiaries can avail treatment from any hospital offering treatment
for cancer, even if it is not recognized, subject to the rates prescribed for Delhi. As far as rates
are concerned, rates of Tata Memorial hospital for surgical procedures and for radiotherapy and
chemotherapy rates prevailing in super specialty hospitals have been finalized.
88. Keeping in mind the number of treatment options available for cancer afflicted
patients in private hospitals and the associated treatment cost, the Committee would like
to suggest that more hospital with such facilities should be considered for empanelment.
The Committee would like to emphasize that the kind of specialized services being offered
by a hospital, especially for terminal diseases like cancer, should be the basic criteria for
selection of a hospital for empanelment.

16
Insurance scheme for cancer and other terminal diseases
89. The Committee takes note of the fact that prevalence of terminal diseases such as
cancer is increasing in the country and their treatment involves huge cost. Though the
Central Government employees are covered under CGHS and have the coverage of
treatment of cancer and other terminal diseases, but they have to meet huge amount of
expenditure out of their pocket. CGHS/Department concerned also incur heavy financial
burden on account of these diseases. For ensuring better and timely treatment and for
avoiding heavy financial burden on the beneficiaries as well as the Department concerned,
the Committee is of the view that there should be a separate insurance policy to cover the
entire expenditure involved in the treatment of cancer and other terminal diseases for
CGHS beneficiaries. The premium can be shared by the CGHS and the beneficiaries in a
ratio that can be decided by the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry may examine this suggestion seriously and come out with a concrete proposal.
BILL SETTLEMENT
90. For the settlement of medical reimbursement claims of the beneficiaries it was informed that
the Department has laid new comprehensive procedure to ensure timely and hassle free disposal of
medical reimbursement claims in order to facilitate prompt reimbursement of medical expenses to
the pensioner beneficiaries. These initiatives include doing away with the requirement of verification
of bills by the treating doctor and essentiality certificate, and issuance of specific guidelines for
examination of requests for full reimbursement of claims. Also, the beneficiaries now have the
option of submitting the original bills under any health insurance scheme that they may be
subscribing and claim the balance amount from CGHS/Department that shall be as per CGHS rates
and regulations. CGHS has also laid down guidelines to reimburse the expenses incurred on IVF
treatment to CGHS beneficiaries.
91. The Committee takes note of the fact that the CGHS beneficiaries are no longer required
to get their medical bills verified by the treating doctor and furnishing of essentiality certificate has
also been done away with. However, the Committee has been given to understand that this facility
is not available to those Central Government Employees who avail medical facilities under Medical
Attendance Rules, 1954. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to
immediately address this issue and extend the same facilities to those covered under M.A.
Rules. The Committee also calls upon the Department to issue a fresh circular clarifying
the procedures in this regard and dispelling misgivings, if any.
92. The Committee has been informed that in order to expedite the process of bill clearance,
the Department has engaged UTI-TSL as Bill Clearing Agency under which the empanelled hospitals
and diagnostic Centres are required to submit their bills after discharge of the patient which will
pay them the applicable amount as per the package rates for the treatment within 10 days. Further,
Committee was given to understand that this scheme is expected to help the pensioners in availing
healthcare facilities. The Committee would like the Department to examine the performance of this
Scheme and take corrective measures if found short on any account.
93. The Committee’s attention was also drawn towards the hardships the beneficiaries have to
face in getting their bills reimbursed which reflect that the Departments initiative to streamline
reimbursement of claims have not yet yielded the desired results.
94. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that the Department should once again review
the online bill submission and approval process so that the online bills submitted by the
hospitals can be approved by the bill clearing agency and then the hospitals should submit
the bills as this will minimize the reconciliation/ disputes and reduce bill payment cycle. The

17
Committee also suggests that the department should once again review the reimbursement
process and make it simpler and transparent in view of the concerns put forth by the
beneficiaries. Besides, the department should ensure that the claim adalats meant for
settling pending claims are held regularly.
95. The Committee further recommends that since, one Bill Clearing Agency is not able
to clear all the bills in time, the Department should appoint more agencies and specify the
time period within which the bills have to be cleared.
EXPANSION OF CGHS
96. During the course of meeting held on 26
th July 2011, the Committee was informed that there
is shortage of Wellness Centres in various areas. People have to travel long distances to reach the
nearest CGHS centre to avail medical facilities. In case of emergencies, due to traffic jams on
roads, these situations may prove fatal.
97. In the meeting held on 27
th June 2011,  the Committee was apprised of the fact that the
criteria of opening CGHS dispensary is dependent on the number of beneficiaries i.e. 2000
beneficiaries in existing city and 6000 beneficiaries in new city. The Director (CGHS) further
apprised that CGHS is available in 25 cities and there was no proposal to extend it to other cities,
as CGHS right now is overstressed. It was also informed that Ministry of Finance has declined
the proposal of covering pensioners under CSMA rules and instead proposed the existing Health
Insurance Scheme for them which is covering non-CGHS areas with strong network of private
hospitals for them.
98. The Committee feels that by merely accepting that there is no room for further
expansion does not relieve the Department of its commitment to provide required health
care to the existing government employees and former employees. At a time when the
avowed objective of the Government is to bridge the gaps in health infrastructure and
human resources for health, the Committee is at a loss to understand as to why such a
retrograde step has been taken, especially in view of the dismal health infrastructure in the
country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may
take up the matter with Ministry of Finance again for expansion of CGHS.
99. The Committee understands that the Government has its own limitations and CGHS
Wellness Centres cannot be opened in every corner of the country. In areas where there
is no CGHS Wellness Centre, the nearest hospital/diagnostic centre may be empanelled as
per the defined empanelment procedure.
100. The Committee is also of the opinion that the number of CGHS Wellness Centres
needs to be commensurate with the number of beneficiaries and geographical spread of the
cities. It should reach out to the beneficiaries/cardholders rather than making them to
travel long distances.
101. The Committee observes that some Hospitals have set up a plant to manufacture
stents, which are very economical. The Committee, suggests that CGHS should tie up with
such manufacturers and procure stents at wholesale rates for the use of beneficiaries.
DENTAL SERVICES UNDER EMPANELMENT
102. The Committee takes note of the Department’s effort to outsource the dental services
through Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode in 13 selected Wellness Centres in Division A
(central and south zone) apart from CGHS empanelled dental Centres/government hospitals and
polyclinics where dental treatment services can be availed. The Committee is given to understand

18
that about 93 dental procedures can be availed by the CGHS beneficiaries at designated Wellness
Centres on the credit basis for both serving and pensioner CGHS beneficiaries.
103. The Committee would like to suggest that the dental services should be made
available in all the Wellness Centres and not just in a few selected Centres in Delhi. The
same procedure of outsourcing could be utilized in other Centres so that all the
beneficiaries across the country can avail dental facilities. The quality, efficacy and adequacy
of dental services should be closely monitored. The Department should ensure that the
outsourced dentists are not engaged in commercial exploitation of the facilities being
provided by the Government. The Committee impresses upon the Department to have a
stringent monitoring mechanism in this regard.
NABH/NABL ACCREDITATION
104. The Committee takes note of the Department’s initiative for ensuring quality service to
CGHS beneficiaries by making NABH/NABL accreditation of hospitals and laboratories respectively,
as compulsory pre-requisite for CGHS empanelment. The NABL/NABH lay down certain norms and
standards to be observed and after inspection they provide accreditation to those who fulfill the said
standards. There is no guarantee that once accreditated, the Hospital/diagnostic centre will maintain
those standards till the next inspection by NABL/NABH.
105. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to be cautious on this
move and take necessary steps to ensure that the quality as per accreditation status of
empanelled hospitals and diagnostic labs is maintained.
DRUG PROCUREMENT SYSTEM
106. As regards the system of procurement of drugs in CGHS, the Committee was informed that
bulk procurement of generic/proprietary/branded drugs for CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi-NCR
is done through Hospital Service Consultancy Corporation at the rates notified by the Medical
Stores Organization (MSO). The drugs are stored in Medical Store Depots (MSDs) which supply
these drugs to Wellness Centres in a staggered manner. Outside Delhi, it is done by MSO at the
rates notified by it and are distributed by its subordinate offices i.e. General Medical Stores Depots
for the cities within their respective areas of operation. Life-saving drugs like anti-cancer drugs,
drugs in the case of renal failure/transplantation are procured by MSD directly from the
manufacturer at the request of CGHS beneficiary on case to case basis.
107. Besides, to further facilitate availability of drugs to the beneficiaries, CMO in-charge of
the Wellness Centres are procuring drugs which are not available in the Wellness Centres/MSD
from authorized local chemists. It was further apprised that CGHS Wellness Centres in Delhi
have been authorized to place indents for commonly prescribed 272 proprietary/branded
medicines as per requirement directly on the manufacturers/distributors on rate contract basis
fixed by Medical Stores Depot (on a discount of 25% on MRP). This has resulted in higher
beneficiary satisfaction, as more than 90% get the medicines on the same day. This has also
resulted in reduced inventories at the level of Medical Stores Depot of CGHS. This schemes has
now been extended to CGHS in Mumbai, Kolkata, Nagpur and Chennai. Instructions have also
been issued by the CGHS to introduce the same to Patna, Bhubaneshwar, Bengaluru, Pune,
Ranchi and Guwahati.
108. The Department has also informed that after computerization of CGHS Wellness Centres,
the indented medicines are being made available the next day. The Committee also takes note of
the procedures laid down for timely availability of medicines to the beneficiaries but fails to
understand as to how the desired benefits are yet not reaching the beneficiaries. The dismal state

19
of availability of medicines was brought to the notice of the Committee by the beneficiaries
through written submissions as well as through oral submissions. The Committee was apprised
that indenting procedure generally takes longer and very rarely medicines are given on the next
day.
109. The Committee feels that the key gap lies in the absence of close and sustained
supervision of day to day arrangement for indenting, procurement, storage, and distribution
of drugs in Medical Store Depots and within CGHS. For this purpose, the Committee would
emphasize that the Department should review the system to streamline and revamp it so
as to remove the delay in supply of medicines.
110. The Department also informed that they are planning to make certain identified lifesaving
drugs part of the formulary so that they can have rate contract and the stocks will be adequate
to be supplied to the beneficiaries on case to case basis.
111. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in achieving the
smooth operation of drug procurement system. The Committee is of the view that CMOs
of the all the Wellness Centres should ensure that all the medicines listed in the formulary
are always available in the dispensary.
112. The Committee noted from the submissions from various stakeholders that beneficiaries are
often given a substitute of the prescribed medicine without any explanation and therefore they are
forced to purchase their medicines from private shops. The Members raised this issue in the
meeting of the Sub-Committee on CGHS held on 27
th June, 2012. The Members questioned the
efficacy of substitute drugs and enquired about the measures being adopted to warrant safety and
efficacy of the substitute drugs. In response thereto, the Sub-Committee was apprised that in case
a specialist prescribe a drug to a patient and the same is unavailable in the wellness centre, then
another drug with similar salt, if available, in the centre is provided to the patient. It was further
added that there is no compromise on the quality of drugs procured under CGHS because
whenever drugs are brought, some randomly picked samples thereof are sent for testing to
laboratories and only when they are passed by the laboratories, they are procured by CGHS.
113. The Committee however, impresses upon the Department to regularly monitor the
quality and efficacy of the drugs supplied to the beneficiaries.
114. The Committee observes with concern that the whole process of buying medicines
from empanelled chemists is time consuming and difficult as the number of chemists in
panel within the specified radius is very less. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
at least three chemists should be included within the specified radius of concerned CGHS
Dispensary to make it convenient for the beneficiaries.
115. The Committee has received a number of complaints from the beneficiaries regarding the
poor quality of medicines and near expiry date drugs being supplied in the Wellness Centres, the
possibility of counterfeit and spurious drugs finding their way to the distribution system of
medicines through CGHS, and other Government agencies and also certain unscrupulous elements
in the CGHS system siphoning off CGHS supplies for sale through chemists.
116. In view of a large number of complaints regarding the quality aspect of the drugs
supplied to the beneficiaries the Committee observes that there is an imperative need for
an efficient mechanism of quality assurance of the drugs supplied through CGHS. The
quality of the medicines is the bedrock for health care services and if it gets compromised,
it will erode the credibility of the whole health care delivery system. The Committee
accordingly directs that suitable measures be taken to ensure that only good quality lab
tested drugs are supplied to CGHS beneficiaries.

20
MALPRACTICES
117. The Committee’s attention was drawn towards the malpractices in CGHS Wellness Centres
wherein unclaimed pensioners’ plastic cards that remain uncollected are being used for procuring
medicines to be sold in private markets. Moreover, instances of pilferage and bad prescribing habits
of doctors leading to high volume of local purchases have also been reported in the submissions
of the beneficiaries.
118. As regards checking the incidents of fraud and corruption in procurement of drugs and
pilferage of drugs, the Department has informed that with the computerization of CGHS, details of
issue of drugs on previous visits are available and further drugs are prescribed and issued to
beneficiaries after verifying such details. It is now possible to monitor the demand, supply and
consumption pattern of drugs in CGHS Wellness Centres. Indents are placed online. Any unusual
change in such patterns is closely monitored and scrutinized at the level of CMOs in-charge and
also at Medical Store Depot. Computerization has brought about transparency and accountability in
administration of CGHS. Inventory Management of drugs has also improved with computerization.
119. The Department has also informed that to curb malpractices in supply and pilferage of
drugs, a copy of the prescription is kept with the bill where the cost of drugs exceeds Rs.1,000/-
and the issue of costly drugs is done from MSD, after the CMO in charge of the Wellness Centre
verifies the prescription of the Specialist and utilization certificate of drugs issued earlier. A copy
each of the prescription and utilization certificate along with a photocopy of CGHS Token Card is
kept in record each time drugs are issued.
120. The Committee takes note of the various steps being taken by the Ministry to curb the
pilferage of medicines. However, it feels that there is room for further improvement. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should seriously consider the option
of setting up the strong surveillance system with emphasis on surprise inspections.
121. The Committee is also of the opinion that the specialists should be made aware of
all the medicines listed in the Formulary, so that the specialist could prescribe medicines
listed in the Formulary which would ensure cutting down of the quantity of local purchase
resulting in cost control. In addition to this, orientation in material management should be
provided to the in-charge of the Medical store depots from National Institute of Health and
Family Welfare, run by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare who could supervise &
guide the lower staff in store activities. Maintaining proper inventory would help in
controlling the length of indent list in the CGHS Wellness Centres.
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM
122. The Committee has been informed that Local Advisory Committees, consisting of
representatives of resident welfare associations; pensioners’ associations; and Area Welfare Officers
appointed by the Department of Personnel and Training have been constituted at each dispensary
level, which meet at least once in a month, preferably on the second Saturday of the month to
attend to grievances of the beneficiaries. A complaint/grievance box and complaint/grievance
register are also required to be kept at every dispensary. CGHS has also set up help line wherein
any beneficiary can lodge his/her complaint, which is attended to by the concerned authorities and
a reply sent in a time-bound manner. Claims adalats are being held annually in Delhi in each zone
to settle any pending/outstanding bills of pensioner beneficiaries. All Additional Directors/Joint
Directors in CGHS cities outside Delhi have also been directed to hold Claims Adalats.
123. However, the Committee has been informed that the ground realities are not much
encouraging and the decisions taken by the dispensary advisory committee aren’t honoured by the
administration. Various complaints were brought to the notice of the Committee viz. no replies to

21
written complaints/e-mails were received; the phone lines are disconnected without giving
satisfactory answers etc., no complaint boxes available; no encouragement for filing complaints;
local authorities refuse to tackle the problems related to policy matters due to lack of authority and
funds.
124. The Committee observes that merely taking initiatives for effective functioning of
CGHS without making them efficacious will not serve the intended purpose. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that wide publicity through local and print media needs
to be given in this regard and priority should also be given to making the Grievance
Redressal Mechanism efficient and effective. In addition to this, every letter/request should
be acknowledged; status of complaints should be posted on CGHS website and also data
from DGHS should be reviewed yearly to know the real picture and enable the CGHS to
deliver quality healthcare services to the beneficiaries.
125. The Committee would also like the Department to identify the problem areas on the
basis of the grievances/complaints received and take appropriate remedial measures
accordingly.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS Of FACILITIES PROVIDED BY EMPLOYEES STATE
INSURANCE CORPORATION, INDIAN RAILWAYS AND ARMED FORCES MEDICAL
SERVICES
126. In order to improve and further strengthen the services provided under CGHS, Committee
felt it appropriate to have a comparative analysis of facility provided under Employees State
Insurance Scheme (ESIC), Indian Railways and Armed Forces Medical Service (AFMS) and
accordingly at its meeting held on 9
th January, 2013 heard DG , ESIC, Ministry of Labour and
Employment, DG, Railway Health Services, Ministry of Railways and DGAFMS, Ministry of
Defence.
127. The Committee has been informed that under the Employees State Insurance Scheme,
medical care services are also provided through Mobile Dispensaries and Employers Utilization
Dispensaries. Under indirect provision, a total of 1380 panel doctors are engaged in providing
primary medical services through the indirect system. Under the panel system, the clinics of
Registered Medical Practitioners are approved for providing outpatient care. “SUVIDHA
SAMAGAM” is also organized in all the offices for redressal of public grievances. Separate service
window is provided to all the senior citizens for availing medical facilities viz. registration/
consultation/medicine distribution etc. in hospitals/dispensaries wherever feasible.
128. In case of health services provided by Indian Railways, the Committee has observed that
in view of the special operational needs of the organization, Indian Railway Medical Service (IRMS)
functions as a single unified cadre delivering all kinds of services including Specialist & Super
Specialist care as well. The doctors at zonal hospitals are also engaged in teaching and training of
PG students (DNB) trainees for specialist and super specialist courses.
129. The Committee has further observed that the Armed Forces Medical Service (AFMS)
provides comprehensive and total primary, secondary and tertiary (super speciality) medical care to
the dependent clientele. Over 130 AFMS hospitals, equipped with modern equipment as well as
expertise of specialist/super-specialists, based on organisational as well as perceived requirement are
spread across the country. Presently the AFMS is providing contemporary, state of art super-
speciality care, through designated centres/hospitals, in fields like joint replacement, advanced
cardiac care, nephrology, organ transplant, vascular surgery, infertility etc. The Armed Forces
Hospitals work on authorized scale of equipments called Medical Equipment (ME) Scale. In addition
there is a modernization programme which is planned on annual basis and is called Annual

22
Acquisition Plan (AAP). The Office of DGAFMS maintains a vocabulary of drugs and equipments
called PVMS (Priced V ocabulary of Medical Stores) which is periodically updated. In addition,
certain drugs which are not commonly used or are under the new introduction are called NIV (Not
In V ocabulary). Moreover, a Central Complaint Cell functions under the Addl DGAFMS (HR) at the
apex office of the AFMS at the O/o DGAFMS. All complaints/representations received at this office
are critically analysed, after obtaining necessary inputs from the three medical directorates and due
remedial action is taken in order to address the complaint.
130. In the light of the above, the Committee proposes the following for further
strengthening the services provided under CGHS:
(i) Mobile Dispensaries should be started at the earliest, for underserved areas.
(ii) Special sessions may be organized and special cells may be maintained in all the
offices for redressal of public grievances and prompt action should be taken, so
that the same is not repeated in future.
(iii) Separate service window may be provided to all the senior citizens for availing
medical facilities viz.  registration/consultation/medicine distribution etc. in
hospitals/dispensaries wherever feasible.
(iv) T o mo nitor the procurement of drugs, a periodically updated vocabulary of drugs
and equipments may be maintained.
(v) A framework may be designed to monitor timely modernisation of infrastructure
and facilities provided under CGHS.
131. The Committee observes that there are several other government players in the field
of providing health services e.g., ESI, AFMS, IRMS etc. The Committee would like the
Ministry to explore the possibility of covering all such players including CGHS under one
umbrella, as an apex organisation.
SEPARATE SUPER-SPECIALITY HOSPITALS EXCLUSIVELY FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES
132. V arious Union Ministries and Departments have separate set up for providing health care
facilities to their employees. Ministries of Railways and Defense have very wide and well-
established network of dispensaries, hospitals and super speciality hospitals for their employees all
over the country. Similarly, Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) has also very wide
network of dispensaries, hospitals and super speciality hospitals all over the country. A considerable
number of Central Government employees are residing in metro cities particularly in Delhi, Mumbai
and Kolkata. All Central Government employees can avail health care facilities from the Government
hospitals and some of those hospitals like Dr. Ram Manohar Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital have a
separate wing for CGHS beneficiaries in some disciplines. But these hospitals are already
overcrowded. It is very difficult and time consuming to avail treatment from these hospitals.
Besides, almost all medicines, kits and accessories for surgery etc. are to be purchased by the
beneficiaries from the open market for which they can claim reimbursement from their respective
departments.
133. Keeping in view the above facts, the Committee strongly recommends that separate
super speciality hospitals exclusively for CGHS beneficiaries, on the lines of Ministry of
Railways, Defence and ESIC, one each in each metro city, where a considerable number of
CGHS beneficiaries are residing along with their families, should be established so that the
CGHS beneficiaries can avail super speciality treatment in these hospitals as per their
convenience.

23
MEDICAL CENTRE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE
134. The Medical Centre, Parliament House Annexe, was set up to cater up healthcare
requirements of the sitting Members and retired Members of Parliament. The above Medical Centre
has been providing quality and basic health care facilities including pathological test, x-ray,
ultrasound facilities etc. to Members of Parliament, former MPs, Sr. Bureaucrats and Journalists.
The Medical Centre has full-fledged physiotherapy unit with all modern gadgets and equipments,
pathological lab, x-ray and ultrasound facilities. In addition to services of regular physicians,
services of specialist doctors in various disciplines have also been made available at the centre.
Most of the sitting Members including Ministers, retired Members are regularly availing health care
facilities at the centre and as a result thereof they are not required to go to AIIMS and other
Government hospitals, which are already overcrowded, for their day-to-day health care
requirements. The Committee has been given to understand that the doctors/staff strength of
Medical Centre, PHA has been depleted due to transfer/superannuation of the incumbents to the
posts and for which no replacement could be provided so far leading to difficulty in maintaining
services to the Hon’ble Members. Most of the equipments are very old and outdated with expired
life. Computerization of medical centre is pending for a considerable time whereas all the CGHS
Wellness Centres have been computerized. The Medical Centre is also facing shortage of space for
accommodating stores, pharmacy etc. There is no provision of leave reserve vacancies for the
Medical Centre and in case anyone proceeds on leave, no substitute is made available.
135. The Committee is unable to understand the reasons for which the Medical Centre,
PHA has not been computerized so far whereas all the CGHS Wellness Centres have been
computerized and are connected with network. The Committee, therefore, feels that the
Medical Centre is required to be computerized immediately for keeping check and control
on availability/dispensing of medicines and other activities. The Committee strongly
recommends that all vacant posts at the Medical Centre, Parliament House Annexe should
be filled up immediately. There is need to strengthen the mechanism for provision of
replacement of specialists in case of leave. A panel of specialists for replacement duties at
the Medical Centre, PHA may be drawn up for this purpose. Old and outdated equipments
should be replaced by the latest equipments and gadgets. Keeping in view the utility of
physiotherapy unit and the increasing number of patients visiting there, the Physiotherapy
Unit of the Centre is required to be expanded further by providing adequate manpower and
the latest gadgets and equipments. In order to fill-up vacancies of the supporting staff
temporarily till a permanent replacement thereof is provided in different categories, a panel
of retired and experienced staff members may be prepared for the purpose.
136. The Committee received a suggestion that a post of PRO should be created for the Medical
Centre, PHA. The PRO will provide link between Members of Parliament and various government
hospitals including AIIMS, private medical institutions and the specialists and super specialists
working there. In case of any specialty and super specialty treatment required by the Members,
the PRO will enable them to get appointment with the appropriate specialist/super specialist in the
desired medical institutions, both Government and private sector. The Committee recommends
the Department to explore the feasibility of appointing a PRO for the convenience of
Members of Parliament.

24
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
SHORTAGE OF DOCTORS AND STAFF
1. The Committee fails to understand as to why there still exists a huge gap between
in-position strength and sanctioned posts of doctors and supporting staff despite the
Departments’ claim that the contractual appointments of retired doctors is being made to
fill up the vacancies. The fact about this mismatch was brought to the notice of the
Committee by the beneficiaries while deposing before it as also during the study visit to
some of the Wellness Centres. The same holds true for vacancies in paramedical and
other staff also. If all the vacancies had been filled up by contractual appointments as
claimed by the Department, the vacancies would have ceased to exist. The Committee is
of the opinion that vacancies, irrespective of any category cause overstressing of the
existing manpower and directly or indirectly are bound to affect the quality of services
rendered to the beneficiaries by the Wellness Centres. CGHS has been established with
the vision to cater to health needs of the beneficiaries and shortage of manpower will
handicap the successful running of CGHS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should reassess the strategies adopted to fill up the vacancies and come
up with realistic measures so that the shortage of doctors and paramedical staff in CGHS
Wellness Centres can be overcome. Efforts should also be made to increase the
availability of specialist doctors or consultants in various fields at these Wellness Centres
keeping a mind the alarming increase in the number of patients suffering from high blood
pressure, diabetes, and other critical illnesses. Adequate provision for leave reserve
vacancies for all posts should be made so that substitutes could be provided in case of any
one proceeding on leave. (Para 23)
2. The Committee recommends that vigorous efforts should be made by the Department
for filling up of all the existing vacancies of GDMOs and specialists and other paramedical
staff. The Committee also recommends that adequate provision of leave reserve should be
made for doctors and other assisting staff so that the beneficiaries do not have to suffer
due to absence of doctors and other assisting staff. (Para 24)
PUNCTUALITY
3. The Committee conveys its anguish at the absence of work discipline in the discharge
of duties by the doctors and other supporting staff in the Wellness Centres. The complaints
from various stakeholders imply that due to lack of punctuality on the part of doctors and
paramedical staff, the beneficiaries have to wait for hours for getting registered and
examined. Through written as well as the oral representations, suggestions of undertaking
surprise visit to check the punctuality of the staff members by the concerned authorities
and introduction of biometric system of attendance have been given by various experts and
stakeholders . The Committee, therefore, emphasizes that the above mentioned measures
must be introduced to abate this problem of late comers. Besides, period of tea/lunch breaks
should be restricted and notified on the Notice Board in the Wellness Centres so that the
beneficiaries do not have to wait for longer period. (Para 26)
24

25
BEHAVIOURAL ISSUES
4. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to address the issues
relating to punctuality and behavioral aspects but feels that still much more need to be
done in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the frequency of surprise
inspections should be increased and feedback of the beneficiaries gathered regularly. The
Committee also recommends that immediate necessary remedial measures should also be
taken on the shortcomings pointed out in the Inspection reports and feedback. (Para 29)
INFRASTRUCTURE
5. The Committee expresses its anguish over the sorry state of the many of the
buildings housing the Wellness Centres which are in dilapidated condition. The Committee
also notes that in many centres there is inadequate space, seating arrangement and facility
of drinking water. One of the parameters judging the success of any health care delivery
system is the hygiene it maintains and availability of basic amenities like water, electricity
to support proper infrastructure. The Committee feels that the unhygienic environment,
improper sanitation in Wellness Centres would erode the credibility of the healthcare
services. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should understand the
exigency of proper infrastructure and cleaning staff in CGHS Wellness Centres all over the
country as a pre-requisite to provide the health facilities for the beneficiaries. The
Committee has also noted that the Ministry has outsourced the cleaning work to a private
agency which is handling the mechanized cleaning for the last one year. The Committee
desires that the work of private agencies handling cleaning work under CGHS should be
frequently monitored. (Para 32)
6. The Committee observes with concern that basic infrastructure like ECG machine,
Glucometre etc. are not available in the Wellness Centres. The Committee recommends
that such basic medical instruments should be made available in all Wellness Centres.
(Para 33)
PROBLEMS FACED BY SENIOR CITIZENS
7. The Committee suggests that the Department should consider the matter and take
necessary measures to provide domiciliary services for the senior citizens in all Wellness
Centres. The Committee also impresses upon the Department to ensure that the
instructions issued by it for paying special attention to senior citizens / pensioners are
implemented in letter and spirit and strict compliance of the instructions along with
devising a system for fixing responsibility for non-compliance thereof must be ensured
without further delay. If need be, a ‘Committee for Senior Citizens’ can be constituted at
every Wellness Centre which would ensure compliance of the relevant instructions. In
addition to this, the Committee suggests that geriatric sensitization should be ingrained in
the minds of doctors and staff in Wellness Centres. It also recommends for appointing
Geriatric specialist doctors for the elderly CGHS beneficiaries who may visit various CGHS
wellness Centres on designated dates. The Committee also impresses upon the Department
to further strengthen the CGHS facilities available in Government Hospitals/Private
Hospitals empanelled under CGHS to ensure hasslefree treatment for beneficiaries.
(Para 37)
SHIFT SYSTEM AT CGHS WELLNESS CENTRES
8. The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts in starting double shift system in

26
some of the Wellness Centres and proposes that feasibility of introducing double shift
system in other Wellness Centres in Delhi be explored so that beneficiaries need not have
to take leave from their offices to consult the doctors in morning hours. Further, patients’
load in morning hours at Wellness Centres would also get evenly distributed.  As regards the
tepid response to the second shift, the Committee recommends that to increase the patient
inflow in evening shift in the Wellness Centres, wide publicity may be given through local
newspapers and official website of CGHS and other print and electronic media channels. To
address the issues relating to availability of staff and doctors for evening shift, the
Committee proposes that their services can be utilized on rotation basis. The Committee is
of the firm view that these efforts would certainly strengthen the scheme. (Para 40)
EMERGENCY SERVICES
9. The Committee is of the view that Emergency services are meant to stabilize a
suffering patient by providing initial treatment so that he gets time to reach the hospital
for further management. If a patient gets emergency first aid at the wellness centre only,
then he can be shifted to hospital in a given time. The Committee impresses upon the
Ministry to explore the possibility of starting evening and the emergency services at all
these Wellness Centres depending upon the number of the beneficiaries  catered by the
Centres. The Committee suggests that the services of the CGHS Wellness Centres should
be made available round the clock on 24 hour basis on the lines of hospitals. There should
be at least one doctor available at the wellness centre at all times. The staff can be
appointed to work in shifts on rotation basis. Initially the scheme to introduce emergency
services in CGHS Wellness Centres on round the clock basis can be started as pilot project
in a few Wellness Centres and based on the feedback received from them, the scheme can
be extended throughout the country. (Para 44)
10. The Committee was of the opinion that all the emergency units of CGHS should have
ambulance service to attend to. The Committee, accordingly, recommends each emergency
unit of CGHS should be equipped with ambulance service. (Para 45 )
11. Further, the Committee also feels that the suggestion of opening mini-casualty
centre for every 6-8 Wellness Centres to offload the hospital casuality wards as submitted
by some of the witnesses may also be considered by the Department. (Para 46)
12. The Committee is also of the opinion that a Control Room/Call Centre should be set
up to provide important information to the beneficiaries in dire need of emergency
treatment . (Para 47)
AYURVEDA, YOGA CENTRES
13. The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts in co-locating Ayurvedic and Yoga
therapies with the allopathic system of medicine at CGHS Wellness Centres. The
Committee, however, observes that a lot more is still required to be done for giving due
thrust and place to these alternative therapies. The Committee also takes note of the
shortage of Ayurvedic doctors and yoga trainers in many of the CGHS Wellness Centres and
exhorts the Ministry to take required action to fill up the existing vacancies in a time
bound manner. The Committee also suggests that steps may be initiated to extend yoga and
Ayurvedic systems of therapies to other CGHS Wellness Centres as well. (Para 48)
HOMEOPATHY AND UNANI CENTRES
14. The Committee is of the view that homoeopathy is widely popular because of no or

27
minimal side effects. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the Ministry should
strive towards providing regular homoeopathy services at all the Wellness Centres. The
Committee also suggests that the Ministry should take necessary steps to address the above
problems as highlighted by then Vice-President, All India Homoeopathic Doctors Association.
(Para 50)
15. The Committee is of view that the Ministry should look into the matter and take
necessary remedial measures to fill up the vacant posts of doctors and other allied staff in
Unani Wellness Centres to ensure smooth functioning of the Unani Wellness Centres. The
delays reported in procurement of Unani medicines should also be looked into and necessary
action be taken. (Para 52)
LOCATIONS OF WELLNESS CENTRES
16. The Committee, strongly recommends that all Wellness Centres located at remote or
on the outskirts of the city should be shifted to convenient centrally located places at the
earliest. State Government/other concerned authorities may be approached to allot/provide
plot/premises at convenient and central locations for housing these centres. (Para 54)
PREVENTIVE HEALTH CHECK-UP SCHEME
17. The Committee appreciates the Department’s efforts for starting Preventive Health
Check-up Scheme and feels that such schemes would benefit the CGHS in the long run as
preventive measures are more economical as compared to the curative measures. Further,
the Committee is of the opinion that such services should be made available to all the
CGHS beneficiaries and not limited to specified Centres. (Para 56)
18. The Committee also recommends that medical details of patients should also be kept
online and made available if required. (Para 57)
DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES
19. The Committee feels that the Department needs to address all the shortcomings
existing in the facilities provided at the diagnostic Centres under CGHS. The Committee
understands that correct diagnosis is imperative for getting the right treatment. Unless
adequate diagnostic and laboratory benchmarks are not only set but also complied with at
CGHS Wellness Centres, there will be serious implications for the patients. The Committee,
accordingly, suggests that in order to ensure the efficiency of labs and diagnostic Centres,
it is imperative that diagnostic Centres and labs are well equipped with state-of-the art
technology equipments so as to facilitate quality medical care at CGHS Wellness Centres.
The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to initiate action in this regard.
Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the process of
NABL accreditation of labs and diagnostic centres under CGHS. (Para 61)
SEPARATE WING FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES
20. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should explore the
possibility of opening a separate CGHS wing in all the Government hospitals covering all
disciplines of medical facilities to make it more convenient for the CGHS beneficiaries to
consult the specialist doctors. (Para 64)
PLASTIC IDENTITY CARDS
21. The Committee has been given to understand that though the plastic card entitles a

28
beneficiary to avail treatment at any CGHS Wellness Centre, this rule is not being
implemented on the ground.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should make efforts to ensure that the instructions issued by it regarding plastic cards are
followed at all the Wellness Centres across the country. The Department should also look
into the reasons for delay in issuing the plastic cards and address the same on priority
basis. (Para 67)
22. The Committee takes a serious view of such malpractices and impresses upon the
Department to take necessary action in this regard. The Department may fix a timeline for
collection of the plastic cards by the beneficiary so that the unclaimed cards are
surrendered to the issuing authority, if they remain uncollected beyond a specified period
of time. (Para 69)
COMPUTERIZATION
23. The Committee recommends to the Department to look into the causes of this delay
and draw concrete action plan to ensure smooth functioning of software and to put in place
an efficient mechanism to promptly handle network issues so that the benefits of
computerization, can be reaped . (Para 71)
24. The Committee also took note of a few suggestions given by the beneficiaries such
as making available health education articles on home page of the CGHS website for
educating people about prevention of commonly prevalent diseases and illnesses. Some
health related dos and don’ts may be put on the CGHS website and publicity may be given
on this at the Wellness Centres. Further, making available the facility of booking prior
appointment online for the specialists on the lines of private hospitals was also mooted for
the benefit of beneficiaries especially for senior citizens. The Committee recommends that
the Department may explore the possibility of utilizing such inputs for making CGHS more
people friendly. (Para 72)
25. The Committee observes that the integration of panel hospitals and Wellness Centres
for online transmission of data is yet to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that immediate steps be taken to formulate policy in this regard and develop and
operationalize appropriate software for the purpose. (Para 73)
26. The Committee is also of the opinion that the Department should take measures for
on-line empanelment with tariffs to maximise the utility of computerization of the system
and make it more transparent and accessible. (Para 74)
POLYCLINICS
27. Keeping in view the numerous requests received from various stakeholders, the
Committee would appreciate if the Department undertakes an urgent review of the
polyclinics presently functioning especially with regard to provision of speciality services in
these polyclinics and at the same time explore the possibility of opening more polyclinics
at other places also so as to ensure good health care to greater number of CGHS
beneficiaries. (Para 76)
AUTHORISED MEDICAL ATTENDENT FOR BENEFICIARIES
28. The Committee has been given to understand that the CGHS cardholders are entitled
to cashless treatment and diagnostic facilities at CGHS empanelled hospitals/ diagnostic
centres. However, these facilities are not extended to those who are not covered under a

29
CGHS Dispensary and avail the services of the Authorised Medical Attendent under Central
Services (Medical Attendance) Rules. The Committee is of the view that such an
arrangement is patently unfair and recommends that cashless benefits both for consultation
and diagnostic services be extended to the AMA beneficiaries. (Para 77)
EFFICACY OF EMPANELMENT PROCEDURE
Empanelment of Hospitals
29. The Committee takes note of the fact that flexibility of allowing empanelment
without prior accreditation has been given in view of the lack of sufficient empanelled
hospitals in certain cities and strongly recommends that the Department should ensure
NABH/NABL accreditation of such hospitals/diagnostic Centres within six months of their
empanelment and no further relaxation on this account should be given . (Para 82)
30. The Committee would like the Department to do a comparative analysis of the CGHS
rates vis-à-vis  the rates fixed and paid by the health insurance companies to private
hospitals/ diagnostic centres so that a reasoned decision regarding the rates could be arrived
at. The Committee is aware that the private hospitals are driven by profit motives and
charge exhorbitant rates for treatment and diagnostic procedures and therefore, they should
not be allowed to dictate terms in this regard. (Para 83 )
31. The Committee, accordingly, recommends framing of a more rational policy for
revision of rates. The Committee would also like the Department to ensure that the bills
preferred by the private hospitals/ diagnostic centres are processed promptly and genuine
claims are settled without hassles within a specified time-frame and the empanelled
hospitals/ diagnostic Centres are not subjected to unnecessary delays in reimbursement of
their claims of expenditure. (Para 84 )
32. The Committee has been given to understand that some of the CGHS empanelled
Hospitals have been refusing admission to the CGHS beneficiaries on the ground that CGHS
beds were not available to accommodate them. The Committee takes a serious note of this.
The Committee is unable to understand as to how a CGHS empanelled hospital can refuse
admission to the CGHS beneficiary merely on the ground that CGHS bed was not available.
Any refusal of admission by an empanelled hospital amounts to discrimination towards the
CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry
should look into the matter to find out the reasons for which empanelled hospitals are
avoiding treatment of CGHS beneficiaries and take remedial measures so that the CGHS
beneficiaries are not put to any such discrimination in the CGHS empanelled hospitals.
There should be a mechanism in place to look into such instances. Further, measures
should be taken to increase the number of empanelled hospitals. (Para 85)
33. The Committee observes that the beneficiaries in the districts where there is no
CGHS dispensary or empanelled Hospitals, face lots of difficulties. The Committee,
therefore recommends that there should be atleast one empanelled hospital under CGHS in
every district of the country for the service of the beneficiaries and thus save them from
unnecessary hassle. (Para 86)
Empanelment of Cancer Hospitals
34. Keeping in mind the number of treatment options available for cancer afflicted
patients in private hospitals and the associated treatment cost, the Committee would like
to suggest that more hospital with such facilities should be considered for empanelment.

30
The Committee would like to emphasize that the kind of specialized services being offered
by a hospital, especially for terminal diseases like cancer, should be the basic criteria for
selection of a hospital for empanelment. (Para 88)
Insurance scheme for cancer and other terminal diseases
35. The Committee takes note of the fact that prevalence of terminal diseases such as
cancer is increasing in the country and their treatment involves huge cost. Though the
Central Government employees are covered under CGHS and have the coverage of
treatment of cancer and other terminal diseases, but they have to meet huge amount of
expenditure out of their pocket. CGHS/Department concerned also incur heavy financial
burden on account of these diseases. For ensuring better and timely treatment and for
avoiding heavy financial burden on the beneficiaries as well as the Department concerned,
the Committee is of the view that there should be a separate insurance policy to cover the
entire expenditure involved in the treatment of cancer and other terminal diseases for
CGHS beneficiaries. The premium can be shared by the CGHS and the beneficiaries in a
ratio that can be decided by the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry may examine this suggestion seriously and come out with a concrete proposal .
(Para 89)
BILL SETTLEMENT
36. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to immediately address
this issue and extend the same facilities to those covered under M.A. Rules. The Committee
also calls upon the Department to issue a fresh circular clarifying the procedures in this
regard and dispelling misgivings, if any. ( Para 91)
37. The Committee, accordingly, suggests that the Department should once again review
the online bill submission and approval process so that the online bills submitted by the
hospitals can be approved by the bill clearing agency and then the hospitals should submit
the bills as this will minimize the reconciliation/disputes and reduce bill payment cycle. The
Committee also suggests that the department should once again review the reimbursement
process and make it simpler and transparent in view of the concerns put forth by the
beneficiaries. Besides, the department should ensure that the claim adalats meant for
settling pending claims are held regularly. (Para 94)
38. The Committee further recommends that since, one Bill Clearing Agency is not able
to clear all the bills in time, the Department should appoint more agencies and specify the
time period within which the bills have to be cleared. (Para 95)
EXPANSION OF CGHS
39. The Committee feels that by merely accepting that there is no room for further
expansion does not relieve the Department of its commitment to provide required health
care to the existing government employees and former employees. At a time when the
avowed objective of the Government is to bridge the gaps in health infrastructure and
human resources for health, the Committee is at a loss to understand as to why such a
retrograde step has been taken, especially in view of the dismal health infrastructure in the
country. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may
take up the matter with Ministry of Finance again for expansion of CGHS. (Para 98)
40. The Committee understands that the government has its own limitations and CGHS
Wellness Centres cannot be opened in every corner of the country. In areas where there

31
is no CGHS Wellness Centre, the nearest hospital/diagnostic centre may be empanelled as
per the defined empanelment procedure. (Para 99)
41. The Committee is also of the opinion that the number of CGHS Wellness Centres
needs to be commensurate with the number of beneficiaries and geographical spread of the
cities. It should reach out to the beneficiaries/cardholders rather than making them to
travel long distances. (Para 100)
42. The Committee observes that some Hospitals have set up a plant to manufacture
stents, which are very economical. The Committee, suggests that CGHS should tie up with
such manufacturers and procure stents at wholesale rates for the use of beneficiaries.
(Para 101)
DENTAL SERVICES UNDER EMPANELMENT
43. The Committee would like to suggest that the dental services should be made
available in all the Wellness Centres and not just in a few selected Centres in Delhi. The
same procedure of outsourcing could be utilized in other Centres so that all the
beneficiaries across the country can avail dental facilities. The quality, efficacy and adequacy
of dental services should be closely monitored. The Department should ensure that the
outsourced dentists are not engaged in commercial exploitation of the facilities being
provided by the Government. The Committee impresses upon the Department to have a
stringent monitoring mechanism in this regard. (Para 103)
NABH/NABL ACCREDITATION
44. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to be cautious on this
move and take necessary steps to ensure that the quality as per accreditation status of
empanelled hospitals and diagnostic labs is maintained. (Para 105)
DRUG PROCUREMENT SYSTEM
45. The Committee feels that the key gap lies in the absence of close and sustained
supervision of day to day arrangement for indenting, procurement, storage, and distribution
of drugs in Medical Store Depots and within CGHS. For this purpose, the Committee would
emphasize that the Department should review the system to streamline and revamp it so
as to remove the delay in supply of medicines. (Para 109)
46. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in achieving the
smooth operation of drug procurement system. The Committee is of the view that CMOs
of the all the Wellness Centres should ensure that all the medicines listed in the formulary
are always available in the dispensary . (Para 111)
47. The Committee however, impresses upon the Department to regularly monitor the
quality and efficacy of the drugs supplied to the beneficiaries. (Para 113)
48. The Committee observes with concern that the whole process of buying medicines
from empanelled chemists is time consuming and difficult as the number of chemists in
panel within the specified radius is very less. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
at least three chemists should be included within the specified radius of concerned CGHS
Dispensary to make it convenient for the beneficiaries. (Para 114)
49. In view of a large number of complaints regarding the quality aspect of the drugs
supplied to the beneficiaries the Committee observes that there is an imperative need for

32
an efficient mechanism of quality assurance of the drugs supplied through CGHS. The
quality of the medicines is the bedrock for health care services and if it gets compromised,
it will erode the credibility of the whole health care delivery system. The Committee
accordingly directs that suitable measures be taken to ensure that only good quality lab
tested drugs are supplied to CGHS beneficiaries. (Para 116)
MALPRACTICES
50. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should seriously consider
the option of setting up the strong surveillance system with emphasis on surprise
inspections. (Para 120)
51. The Committee is also of the opinion that the specialists should be made aware of
all the medicines listed in the Formulary, so that the specialist could prescribe medicines
listed in the Formulary which would ensure cutting down of the quantity of local purchase
resulting in cost control. In addition to this, orientation in material management should be
provided to the in-charge of the Medical store depots from National Institute of Health and
Family Welfare, run by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare who could supervise and
guide the lower staff in store activities. Maintaining proper inventory would help in
controlling the length of indent list in the CGHS Wellness Centres. (Para 121)
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL SYSTEM
52. The Committee observes that merely taking initiatives for effective functioning of
CGHS without making them efficacious will not serve the intended purpose. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that wide publicity through local and print media needs
to be given in this regard and priority should also be given to making the Grievance
Redressal Mechanism efficient and effective. In addition to this, every letter/request should
be acknowledged; status of complaints should be posted on CGHS website and also data
from CGHS should be reviewed yearly to know the real picture and enable the CGHS to
deliver quality healthcare services to the beneficiaries. (Para 124)
53. The Committee would also like the Department to identify the problem areas on the
basis of the grievances/complaints received and take appropriate remedial measures
accordingly. (Para 125)
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS Of FACILITIES PROVIDED BY EMPLOYEES STATE
INSURANCE CORPORATION, INDIAN RAILWAYS AND ARMED FORCES MEDICAL
SERVICES
54. In order to improve and further strengthen the services provided under CGHS, Committee
felt it appropriate to have a comparative analysis of facility provided under Employees State
Insurance Scheme (ESIC), Indian Railways and Armed Forces Medical Service (AFMS) and
accordingly at its meeting held on 9
th January, 2013 heard DG, ESIC, Ministry of Labour and
Employment, DG, Railway Health Services, Ministry of Railways and DGAFMS, Ministry of
Defence. (Para 126)
55. The Committee has been informed that under the Employees State Insurance Scheme,
medical care services are also provided through Mobile Dispensaries and Employers Utilization
Dispensaries. Under indirect provision, a total of 1380 panel doctors are engaged in providing
primary medical services through the indirect system. Under the panel system, the clinics of
Registered Medical Practitioners are approved for providing outpatient care. “SUVIDHA
SAMAGAM” is also organized in all the offices for redressal of public grievances. Separate service

33
window is provided to all the senior citizens for availing medical facilities viz. registration/
consultation/medicine distribution etc. in hospitals/dispensaries wherever feasible. (Para 127)
56. In case of health services provided by Indian Railways, the Committee has observed that
in view of the special operational needs of the organization, Indian Railway Medical Service (IRMS)
functions as a single unified cadre delivering all kinds of services including Specialist and Super
Specialist care as well. The doctors at zonal hospitals are also engaged in teaching and training of
PG students (DNB) trainees for specialist and super specialist courses. (Para 128)
57. The Committee has further observed that the Armed Forces Medical Service (AFMS)
provides comprehensive and total primary, secondary and tertiary (super speciality) medical care to
the dependent clientele. Over 130 AFMS hospitals, equipped with modern equipment as well as
expertise of specialist/super-specialists, based on organisational as well as perceived requirement are
spread across the country. Presently the AFMS is providing contemporary, state of art super-
speciality care, through designated centres/hospitals, in fields like joint replacement, advanced
cardiac care, nephrology, organ transplant, vascular surgery, infertility etc. The Armed Forces
Hospitals work on authorized scale of equipments called Medical Equipment (ME) Scale. In addition
there is a modernization programme which is planned on annual basis and is called Annual
Acquisition Plan (AAP). The Office of DGAFMS maintains a vocabulary of drugs and equipments
called PVMS (Priced V ocabulary of Medical Stores) which is periodically updated. In addition,
certain drugs which are not commonly used or are under the new introduction are called NIV (Not
In V ocabulary). Moreover, a Central Complaint Cell functions under the Addl DGAFMS (HR) at the
apex office of the AFMS at the O/o DGAFMS. All complaints/representations received at this office
are critically analysed, after obtaining necessary inputs from the three medical directorates and due
remedial action is taken in order to address the complaint. (Para 129)
58. In the light of the above, the Committee proposes the following for further
strengthening the services provided under CGHS:
(i) Mobile Dispensaries should be started at the earliest, for underserved areas.
(ii) Special sessions may be organized and special cells may be maintained in all the
offices for redressal of public grievances and prompt action should be taken, so
that the same is not repeated in future.
(iii) Separate service window may be provided to all the senior citizens for availing
medical facilities viz.  registration/consultation/medicine distribution etc. in
hospitals/dispensaries wherever feasible.
(iv) To monitor the procurement of drugs, a periodically updated vocabulary of drugs
and equipments may be maintained.
(v) A framework may be designed to monitor timely modernisation of
infrastructure and facilities provided under CGHS. (Para 130)
59. The Committee observes that there are several other government players in the field
of providing health services e.g, ESI, AFMS, IRMS etc. The Committee would like the
Ministry to explore the possibility of covering all such players including CGHS under one
umbrella, as an apex organisation. (Para 131)
SEPARATE SUPER-SPECIALITY HOSPITALS EXCLUSIVELY FOR CGHS BENEFICIARIES
60. Various Union Ministries and Departments have separate set up for providing health care
facilities to their employees. Ministries of Railways and Defense have very wide and well-
established network of dispensaries, hospitals and super speciality hospitals for their employees all

34
over the country. Similarly, Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) has also very wide
network of dispensaries, hospitals and super speciality hospitals all over the country. A considerable
number of Central Government employees are residing in metro cities particularly in Delhi, Mumbai
and Kolkata. All Central Government employees can avail health care facilities from the Government
hospitals and some of those hospitals like Dr. Ram Manohar Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital have a
separate wing for CGHS beneficiaries in some disciplines. But these hospitals are already
overcrowded. It is very difficult and time consuming to avail treatment from these hospitals.
Besides, almost all medicines, kits and accessories for surgery etc. are to be purchased by the
beneficiaries from the open market for which they can claim reimbursement from their respective
departments. (Para 132)
61. Keeping in view the above facts, the Committee strongly recommends that separate
super speciality hospitals exclusively for CGHS beneficiaries, on the lines of Ministry of
Railways, Defence and ESIC, one each in each metro city, where a considerable number of
CGHS beneficiaries are residing along with their families, should be established so that the
CGHS beneficiaries can avail super speciality treatment in these hospitals as per their
convenience. (Para 133)
MEDICAL CENTRE, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE
62. The Committee is unable to understand the reasons for which the Medical Centre,
PHA has not been computerized so far whereas all the CGHS Wellness Centres have been
computerized and are connected with network. The Committee, therefore, feels that the
Medical Centre is required to tbe computerized immediately for keeping check and control
on availability/ dispensing of medicines and other activities. The Committee strongly
recommends that all vacant posts at the Medical Centre, Parliament House Annexe should
be filled up immediately. There is need to strengthen the mechanism for provision of
replacement of specialists in case of leave. A panel of specialists for replacement duties at
the Medical Centre, PHA may be drawn up for this purpose. Old and outdated equipments
should be replaced by the latest equipments and gadgets. Keeping in view the utility of
physiotherapy unit and the increasing number of patients visiting there, the Physiotherapy
Unit of the Centre is required to be expanded further by providing adequate manpower and
the latest gadgets and equipments. In order to fill-up vacancies of the supporting staff
temporarily till a permanent replacement thereof is provided in different categories, a panel
of retired and experienced staff members may be prepared for the purpose. (Para 135)
63. The Committee recommends the Department to explore the feasibility of appointing
a PRO for the convenience of Members of Parliament. (Para 136)

35
MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
(2010-11)
The Sub-Committee met at 12.00 N OON. on Wednesday, the 15 th June, 2011 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Rasheed Masood — Convenor
2. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
3. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
4. Shri Ratan Singh
5. Shri M.K. Raghavan
6. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
7. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
8. Shrimati Meena Singh
9. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members and briefed them about the mandate
of the Sub-Committee. He informed them that the Main Committee had undertaken the subject of
functioning of Central Government Health Scheme for in-depth study last year. The Main
Committee had accordingly held initial interaction with the representatives of the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare. The Committee had also deliberated on the subject during its study visit to
Guwahati and Shillong from 22
nd to 27 th October, 2010. The Committee had also visited the CGHS
Wellness Centres at Pusa Road, Inderpuri and Dwarka in Delhi on 6 th April, 2011.
3. The Sub-Committee took note of a number of problem areas pertaining to the functioning
of CGHS Wellness Centres like lack of satisfactory services for the beneficiaries, drug procurement
system, empanelment of private hospitals/nursing homes/pathological testing centres, etc.
4. The Sub-Committee then discussed its further course of action. It decided to begin its study
by having a briefing meeting with the representatives of the Department of Health and Family
Welfare, followed by interaction with experts, stakeholders viz. Govt. Employees’ Resident Welfare
37

38
Associations, Pensioners’ Associations and Associations of CGHS Doctors, Para-medical staff and
employees. The Sub-Committee also decided to visit few CGHS dispensaries located in the National
Capital Region, Medical Store Depots of CGHS.
5. The Sub-Committee also decided to issue a Press Release inviting suggestions/views on the
functioning of CGHS from all stakeholders.
6. The Sub-Committee decided to hold its next meeting on the 27
th June, 2011.
7. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M.

39
II
SECOND MEETING
(2010-11)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 27 th June, 2011 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Rasheed Masood — Convenor
2. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri M.K. Raghavan
5. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
6. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
7. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
8. Shrimati Meena Singh
9. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Dr. R. K. Srivastava, Director General of Health Services (DGHS)
2. Shri L.C. Goyal, Addl. Secretary & DG (CGHS)
3. Shri R. Ravi, Director
4. Dr. (Shrimati) S. Brinda, Director (CGHS)
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members and apprised them of agenda of the
meeting. The Convenor also informed them that a Press Release has been issued by the Secretariat
to invite written memoranda containing suggestions/views/comments of stakeholders/organizations/
CGHS beneficiaries on various aspects pertaining to the functioning of CGHS.
3. Thereafter, the Additional Secretary and DG (CGHS) made a Power Point Presentation on
the functioning of CGHS, inter alia highlighting therein the recent initiatives taken by the
Department like computerization and networking of allopathic dispensaries in all cities including
39

40
CGHS wing in RML Hospital; inclusion of new treatment procedures and investigations in CGHS
Dispensaries, accredition of hospitals and labs; starting of two shifts in dispensaries in NOIDA,
Gurgaon and Faridabad; introduction and issue of plastic cards; appointment of UTI-TSL as bill
clearing agency for payment of hospitals bills; Grievance Redressal Mechanism etc. He also shed
light on the future plans of CGHS like streamlining and computerization of the process of scrutiny
of individual medical reimbursement claims, special CGHS Cells in Medical Colleges,
computerization of AYUSH dispensaries in Delhi, need for Health Insurance Scheme with focus on
beneficiaries of Non-CGHS areas etc.
4. During the course of the meeting, the Members raised a number of queries w.r.t. the
functioning of CGHS like supply of medicines other than prescribed by specialist with similar salts
and its quality and efficacy; empanelment of private hospitals particularly inclusion of more cancer
hospitals in its fold; filling up of the posts of Chief Medical Officer-incharge, physician and other
posts in the Medical Centre, Parliament House Annexe lying vacant for a considerable period;
lackadaisical attitude of some doctors in treatment of patients at CGHS dispensaries; expansion of
CGHS facility to other cities; delay in issuing plastic cards to the beneficiaries; information relating
to comprehensive health insurance scheme, etc., some of which were answered by the witness.
5.  The Convenor directed the Department to furnish a detailed note on the comprehensive
Health Insurance Scheme and the expansion of the CGHS Scheme to other cities particularly the
interaction of the Department of Health and Family Welfare with the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission in this regard. The Committee also decided to send a detailed questionnaire
on the subject to the Department.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.50 
P.M.

41
III
THIRD MEETING
(2010-11)
The Sub-Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 26 th July, 2011 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Vijay Bahuguna — In the Chair
2. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
3. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
4. Shrimati Meena Singh
5. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Shri R. P. Sharma, CGHS Beneficiaries Forum, Kalkaji Extention
2. Shri H. C. Shukla, CGHS Beneficiaries Forum, Kalkaji Extention
3. Shri K. S. Kohli, Area Welfare Officer, West Patel Nagar, New Delhi
4. Shri S. Krishnan, Indian Audit and Accounts Service (Rtd.)
5. Shri Parmeshmwar, Indian Audit and Accounts Service (Rtd.)
6. Shri Inder Singh Hora, General Secretary, Pensioners and Retired Persons Association
(Regd.), Janakpuri
7. Shri S.K. Chatterjee, Vice-President, Government Pensioners Association, Nagpur
8. Shri M. Jojaiah, Secretary, Government Pensioners Association Nagpur
2. At the outset,s in the absence of Convenor, the Sub-Committee voted Shri Vijay Bahuguna,
MP, Lok Sabha to preside over the meeting. The Members were then apprised of the agenda of
the meeting, i.e., hearing the views of some stakeholders on the functioning of Central Government
Health Scheme.
41

42
3. The Sub-Committee then first heard the views of Shri R. P. Sharma, CGHS Beneficiaries
Forum, Kalkaji Extension. Shri Sharma informed the Sub-Committee that the said area had two
dispensaries viz. Kalkaji I and II which had a combined population of 12,000 CGHS beneficiaries.
He highlighted the following problems ailing the dispensaries (i) shortage of doctors; (ii) lack of
basic facilities for senior citizens; (iii) dilapidated condition of dispensary building, (iv) majority of
medicines being indented causing inconvenience to the beneficiaries; (v)lack of punctuality by
Doctors; (vi) need for specialists in other disciplines like internal medicine, skin, eyes etc.;
(vii) need to introduce bio-metric system for the doctors and staff to ensure punctuality and
discipline as was done in some Ministries; (viii) delays in settlement of bills of empanelled hospitals
thus resulting in depriving the patients of smooth healthcare services. (ix) delay in settlement of
Bills of the pensioners by the Ministry was a major problem for the CGHS beneficiary.
4. Shri S. Krishnan & Shri Parmeshwar, both retired from Indian Accounts and Audit Service
presented their views on the subject. They highlighted the following issues: (i) lack of medical
records of patients in CGHS Dispensaries; (ii) need for the computerization of medical records of
patients; (iii) need to increase frequency of visits by specialists to dispensaries on the basis of the
number of beneficiaries it served; (iv) separate time for senior citizens to avoid inconvenience to
them from standing in long queues; (v) need to empower CMO of the dispensary to allow
diagnostic tests for patients in special cases, instead of the present system where the power is
vested with the concerned specialist; (vi) need for NABH – accredited hospitals being brought
under the empanelment of CGHS as they were set up on land acquired by them from Government
at throwaway prices; (vii) provision  of smart Cards for senior citizens to avail facility for
treatment in any hospital without prior permission in case of emergency; (viii) separate dedicated
wing in all government hospitals for all serving and retired Government servants; (ix) resuming
evening shift in CGHS dispensaries etc.
5. Shri K. S. Kohli, Area Welfare Officer, West Patel Nagar, highlighted the following issues:
(i) need to allow direct treatment in private hospital; (ii) appointment of the authorized chemist
within 5 kms of the CGHS wellness centres concerned;  (iii) need to subject such chemist to
constant checks; (iv) setting up of more cold chains; (v) discontinuing the practice of providing
substitute medicines at the stores of CGHS wellness centres; (vi) facility of yearly check up for
senior citizens; (vii) need to carry out regular surprise checks by the authorities; (viii) appointment
of staff on full-time basis etc.
6. Shri S. K. Chatterjee and Shri Jojaiah of the Government Pensioners Association, Nagpur
informed that the retired as well as serving Government servants are staying outside the municipal
area in Nagpur but were not able to avail CGHS facilities as all the CGHS wellness centres in
Nagpur were located in the heart of the city. They pleaded for establishing one or two CGHS
wellness centres in those areas where maximum number of Government servants were staying.
7. Shri I. S. Hora, General Secretary and Shri B. S. Rampala of Pensioners and Retired
pensioners Association submitted that a separate CGHS wing with all disciplines should be there is
all Government hospitals. They also felt that there was a need to make all disciplines of medicines
geriatric sensitive. He was of the view that there was a need to strengthen the Ayurvedic and Unani
systems of medicines at CGHS dispensaries as an alternative source of treatment and there was
also a need for empanelment of more cancer hospitals for CGHS beneficiaries and Senior citizens.
8. Members raised some queries which were answered by witnesses.
9. A Verbatim Record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.

43
I
FIRST MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 11 th October, 2011 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Rasheed Masood — Convenor
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri M. K. Raghavan
4. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
5. Dr. Monazir Hassan
6. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
1. Dr. Janki Ballabh Jha, Retd, CMO, New Delhi.
2. Dr. Basav Gupta, Joint Secretary, All India GDMO Association and Joint Director,
CGHS, Bikaner House.
3.   Dr. Prakashan, Vice-President, All India CGHS Homoeopathic Doctors’ Association.
4.   Dr.  Talat Usmani, CMO-Incharge, Unani Dispensary, Sarojini Nagar.
2. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Members of the Sub-Committee to the meeting.
The Convener then apprised the Members about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., hearing the views
of some stakeholders who had either worked or are working under the Central Government Health
Scheme.
3. The Sub-Committee then first heard the views of Dr. Janki Ballabh Jha, Retd. CMO, New
Delhi. Dr. Jha shared his experience as CMO in a CGHS dispensary with the sub-Committee and
highlighted the various problem areas affecting the working of CGHS dispensaries. The issues
raised by him included –  (i) Referral to specialist by the CMO should be only for consultation
and not for merely repeating prescriptions; (ii) lack of availability of specialists and polyclinic and
43

44
other services; (iii) computerization eating away the clinical examination time of the doctor as he
busy writing down the prescription on the computer in the  absence of an  operator; (iv) coverage
of CGHS beneficiaries on the lines of ECHS facility for Armed Forces personnel; (v) scarcity of
CGHS hospitals; (vi)  lack of facilities for senior citizens; and (vi) need for behavioral change in
dispensaries etc.
4.       Thereafter, Dr. Basav Gupta, Joint Secretary, All India GDMO Association and Joint
Director, CGHS, Bikaner House put forth the views of the Association before the Sub-Committee.
The issues raised by him on behalf of the Association included – (i) shortage of doctors,
pharmacists and the clerical and supporting staff; (ii) requirement of upgradation of infrastructure
as well as ambience in CGHS set-up; (iii) ill-effects of deputing the Medical Officers as OSDs to
dispose of administrative work; (iv) requirement of SIU study to make realistic assessment of
Doctors and staff; (v) issue of insurance coverage; (vi) need for strengthening CGHS set-up rather
than making it redundant; and (vii) expansion of services and need to relook at the norms fixed
for opening  CGHS  Centres etc.
5. Dr. Prakashan, Vice-President, All India CGHS Homoeopathic Doctors’ Association
presented his views on the subject. He highlighted the following issues: (i) shortage of
Homoeopathic Dispensaries and staff; (ii) requirement of two pharmacists in Homoeopathy
dispensaries; (iii) pending issue of giving  Non Functional Selection Grade(NFSG) to Homoeopathic
doctors; and (iv) issue arising out of posting an allopathic Medical Officer as incharge of a
dispensary having other systems of medicine also etc.
6. Lastly, Dr. Talat Usmani, CMO-Incharge, Unani Store, Sarojini Nagar gave a brief
presentation that was based on his experience in the Unani System of Medicine in the CGHS set-
up. Dr. Usmani during the course of his deposition stated that so far, during this financial year
there had been no purchase of the Unani medicines as the files that were being cleared at Director
(CGHS) level were now being sent to AS and DG. This had led to delay in procurement of these
medicines. Dr. Usmani also highlighted the need for imparting training before a posting the
pharmacists in the CGHS stores. Members raised some queries which were answered by witnesses.
7. A Verbatim Record of proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.

45
II
SECOND MEETING
(2011-12)
The Sub-Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 6 th June, 2012 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Balbir Punj — Convenor
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
2. At the outset, the Convenor was apprised about the agenda of the meeting, i.e., to discuss
the future course of action on the examination of functioning of Central Government Health
Scheme (CGHS).
3. The Sub-Committee was of the view that it already had a fruitful interaction with many
stakeholders on the subject and had already covered a large part of India except the western part
of India to study the functioning of C.G.H.S. The Sub-Committee was also of the view that there
is a need to undertake a local visit to some of the private hospitals empanelled under the CGHS
to have a proper perspective on the facilities being provided to CGHS beneficiaries. The Sub-
Committee was also of the view that the possibilities of linking all the CGHS facilities so as to
allow online sharing of medical details and diagnostics reports with the consulting and referral
doctors in order to obviate the need for the patient shuttling in person to do the same be explored
by the Department of Health and Family Welfare. It was of the opinion that pragmatic and feasible
approach be adopted for improving functioning of CGHS.
4. The Sub-Committee was of the view after undertaking the visits (local as well as
outstation), it may hear the concluding views of the Secretary, Department of Health and Family
Welfare alongwith the Director General, Central Government Health Services and thereafter prepare
a report on the subject.
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.
45

46
V
FIFTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9 th January, 2013 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri H.K. Dua
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Kirti Azad
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
9. Dr. Tarun Mandal
10. Shri Harin Pathak
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
13. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri R.K. Jain, Additional  Secretary and Director General, CGHS
2. Dr. B.C. Mahapatra, Addl. DG, CGHS
3. Dr. (Shrimati) S. Brinda, Director, CGHS
4. Shri V .P. Singh, Deputy Secretary
46

47
Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS), Ministry Of Defence
1. Air Marshal. D.P. Joshi, Director General, AFMS
2. Maj. Gen. Rajan Chaudhry, Addl. DG, AFMS (E&S)
3. Maj. Gen. Yash Pande, Addl. DG, AFMS (HR)
4. Col.Sharad Bajpai, Director, AFMS (Coordination)
Railway Health Services (RHS), Ministry of Railways
1. Shri V .K. Ramteke, Director General, RHS
2. Dr. D. P. Pande, Executive Director/Health (Planning)
Employees’ State Insurance Coporation (ESIC)
1. Shri Anil Kumar Aggarwal, Director General, ESIC
2. Dr. S.K. Jain, Dy. Medical Commissioner, ESIC
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them  of the agenda of the
meeting viz. to hear the  views of (i) Shri R.K. Jain, DG, CGHS, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, (ii) Air Marshal (Dr.) D.P. Joshi, DG, AFMS, (iii) Dr. V .K. Ramteke, DG, Railway Health
Services, and (iv) Dr.  Anil Kumar Agarwal, DG, Employees’ State Insurance Corporation on the
functioning of Central Government Health Scheme.
II. Oral evidence of DG, CGHS, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
3. The Committee first heard the views of Shri. R.K. Jain, Director-General , CGHS. He made
a power point presentation on CGHS  in which the following issues were highlighted: (i) overview
of CGHS; (ii) eligibility for CGHS; (iii) categories of beneficiaries; (iv) network of empanelled
hospitals and wellness centers along with the beneficiary pool under CGHS distributed city-wise
etc; (v) expenditure incurred on CGHS during the last three years; (vi) recent initiatives like
opening of new dispensaries in Delhi and NCR, opening of new CGHS Wellness Centres in Raipur
(Chhattisgarh), Shimla(Himachal Pradesh), Panaji (Goa), Gandhinagar (Gujarat), Pudduchery, and
Indore; (vii) changes in timings of CGHS Wellness centres from 7.30 a.m. to 1.30 p.m. to 9.00
a.m. to 4.00 p.m. from January, 2013; (viii) starting of cashless facility at selected private hospitals
in Delhi; (ix) introduction of SMS-Alert system to check  pilferage of medicines; (x) starting of
rotation policy for pharmacists and other staff; (xi) delegation of powers of Add. Directors  to
appoint contractual doctors against vacant posts; (xii) promoting use of generic medicines;
(xiii) expansion of preventive health check up facility to 8 dispensaries; (xiv) introduction of health
insurance scheme for central government employees and pensioners with special emphasis on non-
CGHS covered areas, etc.
4. During the course of the meeting, Members raised queries and gave their suggestions on
the following issues: viz. (i) disparity in opening up of wellness centers and empanelment of
hospitals among States, (ii) scanty number of CGHS Wellness Centres in North-eastern States and
other distant States; (iii) criteria for empanelment of hospitals in a particular area; (iv) consideration
of distance while selecting a location for construction of wellness centers; (v) reimbursement
policy especially for emergency procedures; (vi) rates variation among cities; (vii) quality of
doctors who cater to the CGHS beneficiaries; (viii) recruitment of nursing personnel in CGHS
wellness centers; (ix) SIU norms for recruitment; (x) transfer policy; (xi) irregularity in CGHS
services provided to freedom fighters; (xii) recent changes made in timings of CGHS wellness
centers; (xiii) blueprint of CGHS for coming years with agenda to reach to beneficiaries;

48
(xiv) patient satisfaction; (xv) complying to the norms of patient care and time bound dealing with
related issues; (xvi) reviving double shift in CGHS wellness centers; (xvii) opening up of more
emergency wellness centers and upgradation of existing ones with high quality equipments and
facilities along with ambulance services; (xviii) state-of-art diagnostic centers for government
employees; (xix) scope of collaboration with ESI and railway health services; (xx) punctuality and
availability of doctors at Parliament House Annexe wellness center; (xxi) current state of
equipments and machines; (xxii) centralized drug procurement system and record of database of
medicines procured and supplied to individual patients; (xxiii) increase in number of bill clearing
agencies; (xxiv) reasons of payment delays; (xxv) biometric cards; (xxvi) difference in tariff of the
hospitals for empanelment under CGHS; (xxvii) regular inspection of emergency (24x7) centres in
order to check their effectiveness; (xxviii) provision of on-line approval for treatment on the basis
of biometric card, etc.  Some of the queries  were answered by the witnesses. The Chairman
directed the witnesses to send written replies to queries which remained unanswered, within a
week’s time.
III. Oral evidence of DG , AFMS, Ministry of Defence
5. The Committee, thereafter, heard the Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services who
made a power point presentation inter alia  highlighting the overview of AFMS; organizational
structure; medicare in armed forces; modernization of AFMS; Hospitals and Centers, military
nursing centers, research activities in AFMS; medical Aid Mission; providing relief in disasters;
control of HIV/AIDS in the armed forces; DNA finger printing of all armed personnel, etc.
6. During the course of the meeting, Members sought clarifications on recruitment procedure
for medical professional in armed forces; facilities granted to medical  personnel in armed forces;
provision of more CT scan centres and increase in bed strength for South-eastern India, etc which
were answered by the witnesses.
IV. Oral evidence of DG, Railways Health Services
7. The Committee, thereafter, heard the DG, Railway Health Services on the functioning of
RHS. During his deposition, he inter alia  stated that Indian Railway Medical Services (IRMS) has
a network of 125 hospitals, 586 health units and approx. 14000 indoor hospitals with 2506 doctors
including dental surgeons, 57000 paramedics including nurses, pharmacists, etc. It catered to 65
lakh beneficiaries. On an average 2.6 crore out door patients and 4.84 lakh indoor patients are
attended to every year. Further around 1,30,000 surgeries are performed every year. He also
explained about the procurement of drugs, empanelment of hospitals and diagnostic centres, facility
for citizens, reimbursement of medical expenses and grievance redressal mechanism, etc.
8.   A query was raised regarding the average response time taken by the Railways Health
Services to respond to rail mishaps which was answered by the witness.
V Oral evidence of DG, ESIC
9. The Committee then heard the DG , ESI on the medical facilities provided under ESI. He
inter alia  highlighted that employers are required to pay contribution  at the rate of 4.75 per cent
of wages of the covered employees. The rate of contribution for the employees is 1.75 per cent
of their wages. Further, the Corporation gets no budgetary support and different activities of the
corporation are managed from the corpus of the funds generated by employer and employees. He
further highlighted the issues like the medical care set-up, medical benefits available, drug
procurement, empanelment of hospitals and diagnostic centres, reimbursement of medical expenses,
facilities of senior citizens, medical facilities of ESI staff and retired employees, etc.

49
10. The Committee directed the DG, CGHS, Ministry of health and Family Welfare to compare
the facilities available for beneficiaries in AFMS, RHS and ESIC vis-à-vis the facility available in
CGHS and furnish a report for the perusal of the Committee within fifteen days indicating as to
how CGHS can incorporate the better provisions of the three systems in CGHS so as to ensure
maximum benefit  to the CGHS beneficiaries.
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.

50
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 26 th July, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
7. Shri H.K. Dua
8. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
11. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
12. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
13. Dr. Monazir Hassan
14. Shri Mahabal Mishra
15. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
16. Shri Harin Pathak
17. Shri Ramkishun
18. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
19. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
50

51
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., consideration and adoption of draft 71st Report on the Functioning of
Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS).
II. Adoption of the Draft Report on Functioning of CGHS
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the draft Report on Functioning of CGHS.
The Chairman invited Members to share their specific suggestions for incorporation in the Draft
Report. After some discussion, some modifications such as reviewing the process of online
submission of bills and approval thereof; need for review of reimbursement process and make it
simpler and transparent in view of the concerns put forth by the beneficiaries; ensuring that claim
adalats meant for settling pending claims are held regularly; need for direct procurement of stents
from manufacturers of indigenous stents at wholesale rates rather than leaving beneficiaries at the
mercy of suppliers; need to adopt a system to integrate services provided under C.G.H.S, E.S.I,
defence hospitals, railway hospitals under one command; need for providing one ambulance for
each emergency dispensary; need for basic equipments like E.C.G machine, glucometre in all
dispensaries; need for attaching minimum of three medical stores with each dispensary within a
radius of 3-5 kms.; need for having C.G.H.S facility and empanelled hospital in each district;
extending cashless treatment facilities to A.M.A beneficiaries; setting up of super specialty hospitals
in each metro city; starting an insurance scheme for cancer and other terminal diseases for CGHS
beneficiaries, etc. were suggested by Members for incorporation in the Report. After some
discussion, the Committee adopted the Report with some modifications.
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Tuesday, the 6
th August, 2013. The Committee
authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri H.K. Dua and Shri Jagat Prasad Nadda to present
the Report in Rajya Sabha, and Shri Kirti Azad, and in his absence, Shri Harin Pathak to lay the
Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.

ANNEXURES

55
ANNEXURE-I
List of Stakeholders/experts
List of experts, stakeholders viz.  Government Employees’ Resident Welfare
Associations, Pensioners’ Associations and Associations of CGHS Doctors, Para-
medical staff and employees.
1. Shri R. P. Sharma, CGHS Beneficiaries Forum, Kalkaji Extention
2. Shri H. C. Shukla, CGHS Beneficiaries Forum, Kalkaji Extention
3. Shri K. S. Kohli, Area Welfare Officer, West Patel Nagar, New Delhi
4. Shri S. Krishnan, Indian Audit and Accounts Service (Rtd.)
5. Shri Parmeshmwar, Indian Audit and Accounts Service (Rtd.)
6. Shri Inder Singh Hora, General Secretary, Pensioners & Retired Persons Association (Regd.),
Janakpuri
7. Shri S.K. Chatterjee, Vice President, Government Pensioners Association, Nagpur
8. Shri M. Jojaiah, Secretary, Government Pensioners Association Nagpur
9. Dr. Janki Ballabh Jha, Retd, CMO, New Delhi.
10. Dr. Basav Gupta, Joint Secretary, All India GDMO Association and Joint Director, CGHS,
Bikaner House.
11. Dr. Prakashan, Vice President, All India CGHS Homeopathic Doctors’ Association.
12. Dr. Talat Usmani, CMO-Incharge, Unani Dispensary, Sarojini Nagar.
Representatives from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri R.K. Jain, Additional Secretary and Director General, CGHS
2. Dr. B.C. Mahapatra, Addl. DG, CGHS
3. Dr. (Shrimati) S. Brinda, Director, CGHS
4. Shri V .P. Singh, Deputy Secretary
Representatives from Armed Forces Medical Services (AFMS), Ministry Of Defence
1. Air Marshal. D.P. Joshi, Director General, AFMS
2. Maj. Gen. Rajan Chaudhry, Addl. DG, AFMS (E&S)
3. Maj. Gen. Yash Pande, Addl. DG, AFMS (HR)
4. Col. Sharad Bajpai, Director, AFMS (Coordination)

56
Representatives from Railway Health Services (RHS), Ministry of Railways
1. Shri V .K. Ramteke, Director General, RHS
2. Dr. D. P. Pande, Executive Director/Health (Planning)
Representatives from Employees’ State Insurance Coporation (ESIC)
1. Shri Anil Kumar Aggarwal, Director General, ESIC
2. Dr. S.K. Jain, Dy. Medical Commissioner, ESIC

57
ANNEXURE-II
STATEMENT SHOWING THE DETAILS OF CGHS HOSPITALS/WELLNESS
CENTRES ACCORDING TO DIFFERENT SYSTEMS OF MEDICINES
Sl. City State CGHS CGHS Wellness Centres
No. Hospitals
Allopathy A yurvedic Homoeopathy Unani Siddha Yoga Total
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
1 Ahmedabad Gujarat 5 1 1 0 0 0 7
2 Allahabad Uttar Pradesh 7 1 1 0 0 0 9
3 Bangalore Karnataka 10 2 1 1 0 0 14
4 Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 1 0 0 0 0 0 1
5 Bhubaneswar Odisha 2 1 0 0 0 0 3
6 Chandigarh 1 0 0 0 0 0 1
7 Chennai T amil Nadu 14 1 1 0 2 0 18
8 Dehradun Uttarakhand 1 0 0 0 0 0 1
9 Delhi 4 88 13 13 5 1 4 124
10 Guwahati Assam 3 0 1 0 0 0 4
11 Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh 13 2 2 2 0 0 19
12 Jabalpur Madhya Pradesh 3 0 0 0 0 0 3
13 Jaipur Rajasthan 5 1 1 0 0 0 7
14 Jammu Jammu and Kashmir 1 0 0 0 0 0 1
15 Kanpur Uttar Pradesh 9 1 2 0 0 0 12
16 Kolkata W est Bengal 18 1 2 1 0 0 22

58
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1
17 Lucknow
Uttar Pradesh
6 1 1 1 009
18 Meerut 6 1 1 0 0 0 8
19 Mumabi
Maharashtra
26 2 3 0 0 0 31
20 Nagpur 11 2 1 0 0 0 14
21 Patna Bihar 5 1 1 0 0 0 7
22 Pune Maharashtra 7 1 0 0 0 10
23 Ranchi Jharkhand 2 0 0 0 0 0 2
24 Shillong Meghalaya 1 0 0 0 0 0 1
25 Thiruvanthpuram Kerala 3 1 1 0 0 0 5
T
OTAL : 4 248 33 35 10 3 4 333

59
List of CGHS Cities and Beneficiaries State-wise
State City No. of Beneficiaries
Delhi Delhi and NCR 1396420
(NOIDA, Ghaziabad,
Gurgaon and Faridabad)
Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad 193684
Assam Guwahati 47543
Bihar Patna 60395
Gujarat Ahmedabad 24716
Karnataka Bengaluru 1 14315
Jharkhand Ranchi 9712
Kerala Trivandrum 30443
Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 131263
Jabalpur
Maharashtra Mumbai 414596
Nagpur
Pune
Meghalaya Shillong 6544
Odisha Bhubaneshwar 17355
Rajasthan Jaipur 19466
Tamil Nadu Chennai 87605
Uttarakhand Dehradun 1067
Uttar Pradesh All ahabad 424506
Kanpur
Lucknow
Meerut
West Bengal Kolkata 210354
Chandigarh (UT) Chandigarh 39318
Jammu and Kashmir Jammu 270
T
OTAL : 3209572

60
60
ANNEXURE-III
Statement showing details of Plan and Non-Plan Expenditure
on CGHS during Eleventh Five Year Plan
(Rs. in crore )
Year Plan Non-Plan Prob T otal
2007-08 37.98 432.71 438.45 909.14
2008-09 52.42 498.82 498.87 1050.11
2009-10 60.39 607.37 617.16 1284.92
2010-11 64.41 602.23 645.49 1312.13
2011-12 276.87 2790.38 837.93 6105.15
Status of allocation of Plan funds and Utilisation there of by CGHS during the Eleventh Plan
Year B.E. R.E. A.E
2007-08 40.00 40.00 35.20
2008-09 50.00 59.37 45.45
2009-10 51.00 66.44 58.02
2010-11 68.65 80.81 57.21
2011-12 78.00 78.00 61.67
NOTE: The Plan funds are utilised for meeting the expenditure on account of salary and wages,
purchase of medicines and all other administrative expenses incurred by some CGHS cities for
which budget is allocated under Plan head only. These cities are Chandigarh, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar,
Guwahati, Shillong, Dehradun, Jabalpur, Ranchi and Thiruvananthapuram. Further, the expenditure
on construction of new CGHS buildings and renovation and modernization of existing ones etc. are
also met form the capital works head under Plan head. CGHS has been making best efforts to
utilize the Plan funds allocated to it under this head. The main reason for underutilization of the
Plan funds in the long process of finalization of contracts and execution of work by the CPWD
which has to follow the laid down procedures for engaging contractors and execution of work.
Although CGHS releases almost entire funds timely but due to process delays, the contracts
awarded through CPWD could not be finalised timely leading to time over run in many cases.
CGHS has been holding regular meetings with CPWD officials and all other officers concerned to
expedite the projects in order to ensure maximum utilization of Plan funds. Some progress has been
noticed during the last few months in this regard.

61
61
ANNEXURE-IV
Inspection Report of Wellness Centre, Dwarka on 1.4.2011 at 8.00 A.M.
CGHS wellness centre Dwarka (No 36A) is situated in a Government accommodation near
Palam Flyover. This is covering the beneficiaries staying in Dwarka sub city and adjoining
earmarked areas. Earlier this area was covered by the CGHS wellness center situated at Palam.
This wellness center has come into existence in April 2009.
The areas are covered presently by the CGHS Wellness Centre — Dwarka Sectors 1 to 23,
Raja Puri, Binda Pur, Madhu Vihar, Pochan Pur, Ambh Rahi, Bamdoli, Bharth.
The name of the in-charge of the dispensary is Dr. B.C. Mahapatra who has been here
since a little more than a year. There are 4 more doctors posted here but today 1 doctor is on
leave and another is working part time on doctors’ advice. Out of 14 officials only 4 were present
till 8-15 
A.M. (including doctors). The in-charge has been there since 7-25 A.M. The Punctuality of
the staff in this center is below satisfaction.
Staff strength is on lower side- there is no Clerical staff; the Dresser is on the verge of
retirement. The contractual doctor has been revoked after the expiry of the contract. There is no
orderly or peon to do the errand. The security has been outsourced.
Cleanliness is not at all satisfactory. The premises as well as the building itself are poorly
maintained so far as regular cleaning is concerned. The cleaning work has however not been
outsourced here and the regular cleaning staffs are apathetic to the matter of up keep and tidiness
as much as possible.
The wellness center has got about 7600 cards and about 26000 beneficiaries attached to it.
The profile is mostly service holders with their family members – 5513 cards with 21376
beneficiaries. There are about 2056 pensioners having 4750 card holders.
The wellness center has come into existence after the computerization of the CGHS
services have been done in Delhi. The beneficiaries are well conversant to the On Line system of
services provided by the dispensary.
Issue of plastic cards has been a contentious problem in the dispensary. Many of the
beneficiaries had submitted their applications for conversion of their paper cards into plastic cards
in the previous center at Palam. These cards are to be obtained from that dispensary only even
though the beneficiaries have been transferred to Dwarka wellness center. Another group of
beneficiaries have applied in HQ at Bikaner House; the cards are being sent to the concerned
dispensary via the concerned zone. The rest of the beneficiaries have applied in this dispensary
whose cards are being distributed from this dispensary smoothly through a unique method
innovated by the in-charge of this center. This is as under-
1. The cards are kept in a specific lot as when received from the agency who are
entrusted to prepare the plastic cards. The cards are kept tidily as per Serial number
in ascending order in every lot. Lots are created as per the application date and supply
date. Beneficiaries can easily make out their lot number on the basis of date of
application with the help of the DEO. Once the lot number of the card is ascertained
the actual cards may be identified physically very easily.

62
2. In case the beneficiaries are not coming forward to collect the cards beyond
reasonable time, another unique method has been adopted by the in-charge to inform
them. The application forms are made mandatory to contain the mobile numbers of the
beneficiary (mobile numbers outnumber the land line connections these days). After a
specific lag period, one SMS is sent to the effect that cards have been received in this
wellness centre requiring to be collected by the beneficiaries through the free web
based SMS site. This method may be adopted by other wellness center to decongest
the card stock.
So far about 8500 cards have been received from the outsourced agency of which 1070
cards are lying undistributed (12.5%). Average daily attendance is little more than 200.
The Advisory Committee is meeting every month regularly and appears to be involved in the
welfare of the wellness centre. Lately the committee has been reconstituted due to inclusion of 2
new members in accordance to the laid down guidelines.
Monthly performance reports are being sent regularly on line along with the hard copies of
reports on family welfare and immunization.
One Medical Specialist is coming on a specific day of the week. Demand is there to
increase the number speciality in this respect.
Medicine stock seems to have improved following betterment in supply of medicines from
MSD. There is, as such no complaints about the supply and receipt of medicines. Rate contract
medicines are also in good supply. Indent quantum has also decreased lately. CMO I/C  is
controlling ably the movement of medicines through local purchase and other sources of supply
of medicines. The supplier of local Purchase is M/S  Prakash Medicos.
Total available number of medicines - 1 Store- 273 (RC -197, Prop-75, Gene-1), 2 Counter-
425 (RC 197, Prop- 217, Gen-11)
Random check of the three areas namely- the medicine sore, counter and the local purchase
did not show any gross discrepancy: The minor deficiencies have been notified to the in-charge
and the concerned official.
The family Welfare and the nursing activities are being done routinely. The registers require
more elucidation and upkeep. Cold chain appears to be fine although the regular record maintenance
is lacking. The dressing room is maintained in a small room where the part time clerk is also
sitting. The necessary equipments are kept available but the maintenance is unimpressive. The
Autoclave machine is in working condition.
Interaction with the cross section of the beneficiaries reveal that the space constraint is
there Demand for more specialist services is also there. However there are per se no gross
complaints against the staff and doctors of the dispensary. The general view is a favorable one.
Overall impression about the wellness centre is that the management requires to have more
vigil in the matter of cleanliness and punctuality.

63
Services are provided by the Centre from April, 2009 to March, 2011
Total No. Daily Permission Immunization Copper- Number
of Patients Average for tests/ of Children TS Sterilization
Treated patients procedure done Inserted cases
given referred
April 34842 159 1335 78 05 NSV-2
to December, Tubectomy –
2009 11
January to 58344 195 1303 210 15 NSV-3
December, Tubectomy –
2010 30
January to 14684 199 1221 75 01 NSV-0
March, Tubectomy –
2011 4
Total No. of Medicines Available in the MSD Supply Items: 11 (G) + 72 (P)
Wellness Centre as on Date: Rate Contract Medicines: 197
Total: 280
Expenditure of Medicines from April, 2009 to March, 2011 are us under:
2009 (April to December): Service – Rs. 5744834; Pensioner – Rs. 9492981
2010 (January to December): Service – Rs. 5154602; Pensioner – Rs. 7736354
2011 (January to March): Service – Rs. 1068194; Pensioner – Rs. 1728936

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.