 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
REPORT NO.  
153 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THERECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE145TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2023-2024 
(DEMAND NO. 4) OF THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail:  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEEON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2024/Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON 
THERECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE145TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2023-2024 
(DEMAND NO. 4) OF THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2024) 
 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2.  PREFACE ii 
3.  ACRONYMS iii-iv 
4.  REPORT v 
5.  Chapter-I       
Recommendations/observations which have 
been accepted by the Ministry. 
 
Chapter-II     
Recommendations/observations on which 
the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Ministry‘s replies. 
 
Chapter-III   
Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which replies of the ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee. 
 
Chapter - IV   
Recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final replies of the Ministry have not 
been received 
 
1-51 
 
 
 
52-76 
 
 
 
77-79 
 
 
 
 
80 
6.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A 
GLANCE 
81 
7.  Annexure, Tables, and List of Sources 82-98 
8. * MINUTES - 
*To be appended at the later stage. 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2023-24) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri MaddilaGurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr.Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen  
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Vijay Kumar   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on  its 
behalf, present this 153rd Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Governme nt on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 1 45th Report on ―Demands for Grants 2023 -
2024 (Demand No. 4) about Ministry of Ayush. 
 
2.  The 145th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha  on 15th March, 2023 and laid on the Table  of 
Lok Sabha on 20th March 2023. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the  
recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Ministry of Ayush in the month 
of June, 2023. 
 
3.  The Committee made a total of 69 recommendations in the 145th Report, out of which 42 
recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and has been categorized under Chapter -I. 
There are 22 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view  of the 
Ministry‘s replies that have been categorized under Chapter -II. There are 3 
recommendations/observations, in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and 
have been categorized under Chapter -III while 2 recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final replies of the Ministry have not been received have  been categorized under Chapter-
IV. 
 
4.  The Committee, in its meeting held on the 5th February, 2024 considered the Draft  
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
5th February, 2024 
Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and FamilyWelfare 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
ABC 
ACSIR 
Always Better Control 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research  
AEPC Ayush Export Promotion Council 
AIIA All India Institute of Ayurveda 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AOGUSY Ayurswasthaya Yojana  and Ayush Oushadhi  Gunvatta EvumUtpadan Samvardhan 
Yojana 
ASHA Accredited social health activist 
ASU Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani 
ASU&H Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy 
AUS&SR Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy 
BE Budget Estimates 
BCC Behaviour Change Communication 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
CBM Capacity Building Measures 
CCIM Central Council of Indian Medicine 
CCRAS Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
CCRH Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
CCRS Central Council for Research in Siddha 
CCRUM Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 
CCRYN Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy 
CHC Community Health Centres 
CII Confederation of Indian Industry 
CME Continuing Medical Education 
CoE Centre of Excellence 
CRIYN Central Research Institute of Yoga & Naturopathy 
CPMU Central Program Management Unit 
DHs District Hospitals 
FITM Forum on India Traditional Medicine 
FY Financial Year 
GCP-ASU Good Clinical Practice Guidelines for Clinical Trials in Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani 
Medicine 
GDP Gross Domestic Price 
GBS Gross Budgetary Support 
HMIS Hospital Management and Information System 
HWC Health and Wellness Centres 
HWC Health Care Workers 
HWCs Health Wellness Centres 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IEC's Information Education and Communication 
IMPCL Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Ltd 
IPD In-Patient Department 

iv 
 
IPVCS Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Centers 
ITRA Institute of Teaching & Research in Ayurveda 
JFMCs Joint Forest Management Committees 
MHRA Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency 
MoA Ministry of AYUSH 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MMDP Morbidity Management and Disability Prevention 
MSME Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises 
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals 
NAM National AYUSH MISSION 
NER North Eastern Region 
NCH National Commission for Homeopathy 
NCISM National Commission for Indian Systems of. Medicine 
NEIAFMR North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Folk Medicine Research 
NEIAH North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy 
NGOs Non-Governmental Organisation 
NHP National Health Policy 
NIA National Institute of Ayurveda 
NIH National Institute of Homoeopathy 
NIS National Institute of Siddha 
NISR National Institute of Sowa-Rigpa 
NIUM National Institute of Unani Medicine 
NMPB National Medicinal Plants Board 
NPCDCS National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular 
Diseases and Stroke  
NPvCC National Pharmacovigilance Centre 
OPD Outpatient Department 
PCIM&H Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Medicine and Homeopathy 
PCIMH Pharmacopoiea Commission of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy 
PFMS Public Financial Management System 
PHC Primary Health Centres 
PHI Public Health Initiatives (AYUSH and Public Health) 
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
PMU Project Monitoring Unit / Programme Management Unit 
PPvCs Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centers 
QCI Quality Council of India 
RCFCs Regional-cum-Facilitation Centres 
RE Revised Estimate 
RRIUM Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine 
SAAP State Annual Action Plan 
SCSP Scheduled Caste Sub Plan 
SWOT Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats 
TSP Tribal Sub Plan 
UC Utilization Certificates 
UTs Union Territories 
WHO World Health Organisation 
GCTM Global Center for Traditional Medicine 

v 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 After the presentation of Union Budget 2023 -24 by the Minister of Finance to the 
Parliament, the Committee took up consideration of Demands for Grants and examined officers 
of the Ministry of Ayush . The Committee held meetings on 21st February, 2023. The 1 45th 
Report on the subject was adopted on  13th March, 2023 and presented to Rajya Sabha on  15th 
March, 2023 and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 20 th March, 2023. The Notes on action taken 
on various recommendations and observations of the Committee by the Ministry were received 
in the month of  June, 2023. This Report of the Committee deals with an analysis of  the Action 
Taken by the Government on the  Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 1 45th Report 
on ―Demands for Grants 2023-2024 (Demand No. 4)‖ pertaining to the Ministry of Ayush. 
2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Ayush in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows: 
CHAPTER-I:Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Paragraph Nos:  1.5.2, 1.6.1, 1.7.1, 2.1.4, 2.2.2, 2.3.1, 3.2.4, 3.2.5, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.4.3, 
3.5.3, 3.5.4, 3.6.3, 3.6.4, 3.7.3, 3.8.2, 3.12.3, 3.13.3,  3.14.2, 3.16.3, 3.21.5, 3.21.6, 4.1.3, 
4.1.4, 4.2.1, 4.5.1, 4.6.1, 4.7.1, 4.8, 4.8.1, 5.1.1, 5.4.3, 5.4.4, 5.7.1, 5.8.3, 5.8.4, 5.8.5, 5.9, 
5.9.1, 5.9.2 and 5.9.3. 
TOTAL- 42 
CHAPTER-II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue  
in view of the Government's replies: 
Paragraph Nos:1.4, 2.4.1, 3.2.3, 3.3.4, 3.7.2, 3.9.4, 3.11.2, 3.15.3, 3.17.1, 3.17.3, 3.18.2, 
3.19.3, 3.20.5, 3.20.6, 3.21.7, 4.3.4, 4.4.1, 5.1.2, 5.1.3, 5.2.1, 5.3.1, 5.4.1, 5.6.2 
TOTAL- 22 
CHAPTER-III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos: 2.4.1, 3.10.3 and 3.12.4. 
TOTAL- 3 
CHAPTER-IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos: 3.20.7 and 5.5.1. 
TOTAL- 2 

vi 
 
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the  
Report.  

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
1.1 PROPOSED INITIATIVES TO BE TAKEN DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 
2023-24 
Recommendation: 
1.1.1 The Committee appreciates the new initiatives undertaken during 2021 -22 & 2022-23 and the 
proposed initiatives to be undertaken during 2023 -24 by the Ministry of Ayush. The continuation of 
National Ayush Mission, Champion Service sector Scheme; NABH accreditation and insurance coverage; 
International classification of diseases -II; Draft Food Safety and Standards (Ayurveda Aahar) 
Regulation, 2021; emphasis on scientific research; inclusion of Ayush practitioners in WHO Doctor -
population Ratio; Ayush Export Promotion Council (AEPC); WHO global Centre for Traditional 
Medicine; Ayush services at AIIMS; Developing standards for Ayush systems; yoga as competitive sport 
with formation of International Yogasana Sports Federation; Yogasana announced as sport; creation of a 
Strategic Policy and Facilitation Bureau; new schemes by merging e xisting schemes are a welcome step. 
The Committee strongly believes that the new initiatives would bring forth global recognition and 
acceptance of AYUSH systems in public healthcare system. Given the operational efficiency, professional 
pursuit and proper  & adequate institutional support for research councils, educational institutes, 
regulatory bodies, etc, is testimonial evidence that Ayush system is marching ahead towards establishing 
itself an alternative system of medicine. The Committee desires that the Ministry should make concerted 
efforts for optimal utilization of the potential of available AYUSH resources and establish the Ayush 
system within a pluralistic system of Integrative healthcare and re -emphasizing the need for integrating 
AYUSH in the Na tional Health Mission, research and education in convergence with the achievement of 
objectives of National Health Policy (NHP) 2017. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to lay 
focus on the implementation of its schemes, maintaining high standards of education and research and 
strengthen its monitoring mechanism vide its institutional statutory and regulatory bodies to have Always 
Better Control (ABC) over quality and safety of AYUSH drugs. 
(Para 1.5.2of 145th Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.1.2 The Institute receives funds under Champion Service Sector   Scheme for various 
activities.  The Institute had already obtained NABH accreditation for its 280-bed campus 
hospital.  The Institute is maintaining high standards of ayurvedic education and also undertakes 
research activities for which 29 MoUs have been signed and the research and other activities 
envisaged in these MoUs are in progress. 
 Step to integrate Ayush in National Health Mission. 
 Development of proper integrative research protocols in Ayush. 
 Incorporation of Ayush knowledge as an integral part of school and colleges education. 
 Development of research-oriented evidence-based Ayush education in Ayush Institute. 

2 
 
 Evidence base research to develop quality and safe Ayush drugs. 
1.1.3 Central Council for Research in Siddha is engaged in multifaceted research activities. In 
the area of clinical research, pre -clinical Pharmacological / Toxicologica l studies, Open label 
trials, multi -centric Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs) are being conducted for acute and 
chronic diseases. The main emphasis is on diseases of national health priority with a view to 
develop safe and effective Siddha treatments. Be sides, validation studies of Siddha 
Pharmacopoeial formulations, new formulations are also being tested for drug development and 
generation of IPR. Council is also engaged in National collaboration with reputed scientific 
organization and medical instituti ons / Universities on diseases of national priorities.   Central 
Council for Research in Siddha has granted 70 IMR projects and out of this 8 IMR projects have 
been completed and 17 projects which have been completed are awaiting PEMC clearance and 
45 IMR p rojects are ongoing. The National Health Policy, 2017 which aims to attain possible 
level of good health, wellbeing through preventive and promotive health care in AYUSH 
facilitates universal access through main streaming and integration.  During COVID-19, CCRS 
has carried out collaborative studies with Biomedical /Allopathy institutes / Colleges. 
1.1.4 NIUM accredited with NABH for three years i.e., up to 7th January 2024 and NABL 
accreditation for its laboratories is in process. 
1.1.5 National Institute of  Siddha is making optional utilization of the resources available for 
rendering treatment under the Siddha System of Medicine to the public. It will endeavour to 
integrate Siddha System in National Health Mission, research and education in consonance with 
the National Health Policy, 2017. 
1.1.6 The observations of the Committee to establish the Ayush system within a pluralistic 
system of Integrative healthcare and re -emphasizing the need for integrating AYUSH in the 
National Health Mission, research and edu cation in convergence with the achievement of 
objectives of National Health Policy (NHP) 2017 is focusing on integrated health and well-being 
could be achieved by undertaking interdisciplinary research to enrich the scientific base of 
Homoeopathy, considering this:  
 Studies are undertaken to enrich the scientific base of homoeopathy and improve its 
application in clinical practice, the development of new drugs for emerging health 
challenges. 
 Studies are aimed to understand the biological effect of homeopath ic medicines; animal 
experimentation to assess anti -viral properties; physiochemical studies; standardization 
and optimization of the process of drug manufacturing and knowing the presence of 
nanoparticles in these medicines. 
 The focus is to elucidate the nature of Homoeopathic medicines in physiochemical 
dimensions so that standardization can be done, and the theories/ concepts of homeopathy 
can remain intact while applying the modern approach to the studies. Till date Council 
has collaborated with various  reputed institutes like Bose Institute (Kolkata), Central 
Drug Research Institute (Lucknow), Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical 

3 
 
Education and Research (JIPMER, Pondicherry), All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
(New Delhi), University of Madras (Chennai), Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology 
(Hyderabad), Panjab University, Indian Institute of Technology (Delhi) etc. and had 53 
National and 03 International collaborations. 56 projects have been concluded in this 
field and 18 are ongoing.  
 Studies for development of medicines for prevention/ treatment of Covid 19, Dengue, 
Chikungunya, Rota virus, Acute encephalitis syndrome, Malaria, etc. have been 
undertaken. Studies to understand the immune modulation in human by the homoeopathic 
medicines is also in progress. More studies on other priority areas are under consideration 
beside this state of art of laboratories are being established at Kolkata, and Mumbai for 
nurturing scientists to undertake studies in this nascent field. 
 
1. NIH, Kolkata got NABH Accreditation on 24 thFebruary 2019 for 3 years. Again, it is 
reaccredited from 24.02.22 to 23.02.2025.This Institute has modern medicine experts in the 
field of ENT, Eye, Dental. Medicine, Dermatology for providing expertise and also to 
manage case in both OPD & IPD whenever required. 
2. The Ministry of Ayush has developed a Central Sector Scheme under Champion Services 
Sector Scheme (CSSS) –Medical Value Travel with components of Skill Development to 
fill the gap in the availability of skilled man power, capacity building of existing skilled 
human resources and to promote Export of Services. 
1.1.7 A non -recurring grant in -aid of Rs 39,95,000/ - (Rupees Thirty -Nine Lakh Ninety -Five 
Thousand only) has been sanctioned as financial assistance to National  Institute of 
Homoeopathy, Kolkata for Skill development component.  
1.1.8 NIH, Kolkata is a nodal Institute for the Organizations/Institutes situated in the states of 
West Bengal, Bihar and Jharkhand. The respective Organizations/Institutes may apply to g et 
financial assistance through project approval Committee of the Ministry of Ayush.   
1.1.9 Till date three Organizations had applied to Ministry to conduct training programmes but 
the eligibility criteria were not fulfilled as per the guidelines hence no  training program was 
approved. 
1.1.10 The proactive efforts made by India in positioning the Ayurveda, Yoga etc. as the soft 
power of India and at the same time generating evidence about the health benefits as well as 
safety of these systems & AYUSH drugs  has given a significant boost to the demand of 
Ayurveda, Yoga and other Indian traditional systems of medicine across the world. The Ministry 
of Ayush, to further this initiative, developed the central sector scheme for Promotion of 
International Cooperat ion for Ayush and a substantial increase has been seen in utilization of 
funds under the said scheme (i.e. from Rs.15.81 Cr in 2018-19 to Rs. 139.84 Cr in 2022-23. 
1.1.11 The Ministry of Ayush signed 24 Country -to-Country MoUs for Cooperation in the field 
of Traditional Medicine and Homoeopathy with foreign nations, signed 46 Institute level MoUs 

4 
 
with international institutes for undertaking Collaborative Research / Academic collaboration 
and signed 15 MoUs with international institutes for setting up of Ay ush Academic Chairs in 
foreign nations. 
1.1.12 Presently, Ayurveda is recognized and regulated in 23 Countries, other than India 
(Bahrain, Bangladesh, Cuba, Fiji, Hungary, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Malaysia, Mauritius, 
Myanmar, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Romania,  Serbia, South Africa, Sri Lanka , Switzerland, 
Slovenia, Tanzania, Trinidad &Tobago, and United Arab Emirates). 
1.1.13 The growth rate of export of Ayush and Herbal Products to various countries during the 
period FY 2017 -18 (i.e., USD 456.12 Million) To FY  2021-22 (i.e., USD 612.12 Million) has 
been 34.20 per cent. 
(Source: DGCIS) 
1.1.14 As prescribed in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 and Rules 1945 made thereunder, 
enforcement of the legal provisions pertaining to Quality Control and issuance of drug lic ense of 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic drugs, is vested with the State drug Controllers/ 
State Licensing Authorities appointed by the concerned State/ Union Territory Government. 
Rule 158-B in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 provides the regu latory guidelines for issue 
of license to manufacture Ayurvedic, Siddha, and Unani medicines and Rule 85 (A to I) in the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 provides the regulatory guidelines for issue of license to 
manufacture Homoeopathic medicines. It is ma ndatory for the manufacturers to adhere to the 
prescribed requirements for licensing of manufacturing units & medicines including proof of 
safety & effectiveness, compliance with the Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) as per 
Schedule T & Schedule M-I of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 and quality standards of drugs 
given in the respective pharmacopoeia.   
 
1.1.15 Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy (PCIM&H), a 
subordinate office under Ministry of Ayush lays down Pharmacopoeial Standards and Formulary 
specifications for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy (ASU&H) drugs within the ambit 
of  Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940, which serve as official compendia for ascertaining the quality 
of the drugs included therein.  Further, PCIM&H as an appellate drug testing laboratory receives 
the samples from Government agencies as per Drugs & Cosmetics Act & Rules there under for 
ascertaining their quality. 
1.1.16 During 2023 -24, Rs. 1200.00 Crore has been earmarked to National AYUSH Mission 
(NAM) for implementation of different activities of NAM. Accordingly, resource pool has been 
allocated to States/UTs for submitting proposals through State Annual Action Plan (SAAP). The 
increased budget allocation will enhance the impact of Ayush system in the society. 
1.1.17 Further, Government of India has adopted a strategy of Co -location of AYUSH facilities 
at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals 
(DHs), thus enabling choice to the patients for different sys tems of medicines under single 
window. The engagement of AYUSH Doctors/ paramedics and their training is supported by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare under National Health Mission (NHM), while the support 

5 
 
for AYUSH infrastructure, equipment/furnitu re and medicines are provided by Ministry of 
Ayush under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM).  Further, 
State/UT Governments have been suggested to submit the proposal for co -location of AYUSH 
facilities at PHC, CHCs & DHs in the SAAP as per the NAM guidelines. 
1.1.18 The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020 and the National 
Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020 has been notified in the Gazette of India on 
21.09.2020, accordingly, Central Government has constitut ed commissions namely the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) and the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy (NCH) to provide quality and affordable medical education, ensure availability of 
adequate and high quality medical professionals of Indian System of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy in all part of the country and encourages such medical professionals to adopt latest 
medical research in their work and to contribute to research. 
1.1.19 As per NCISM Act, 2020, separate autonomous  boards have been constituted under the 
Commission namely, Board of Ayurveda and Board of Unani , Siddha and Sowa Rigpa 
for education policy related matters; Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian 
System of Medicine for Assessment and Rating of Med ical Institutions of Indian System 
of Medicine;  Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine to address 
the issues related to Ethics and Registration of the Indian System of Medicine 
practitioners. Similarly, As per NCH Act, 2020, separa te autonomous boards have been 
constituted under the Commission namely, Homoeopathy Education Board for education 
policy related matters; Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy for 
Assessment and Rating of Medical Institutions of Homoeopathy; Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Homoeopathy to address the issues related to Ethics and Registration of 
the Homoeopathy practitioners. 
1.2 PROPOSED INITIATIVES TO BE TAKEN DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 
2023-24 
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 
Recommendation: 
1.2.1 The Committee believes that the mission objective of NCISM Act, 2020 and the NCH Act, 
2020 should be translated into action in all parts of the country including rural, urban, slum, 
hilly and tribal areas. Then and only then the impact assessment of both the legislations could be 
well understood by both the policy maker and targeted beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to chalk out strategic course of action to accomplish the cherished 
goals as enshrined in two legislations. 
(Para 1.6.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.2.2 NCISM and NCH Act, 2020 provide for a medical education system that improves access to 
quality and affordable medical education ensures availability of adequate and high -quality medical 

6 
 
professionals in all parts of country. For monitoring of quality of Education, through NCISM Act, 
2020 and NCH Act, 2020, there is a uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to 
the undergraduate courses & Post Graduate National Entrance Test for Post -graduation Cour se 
respectively in each of the disciplines of the Indian System of Medicine & Homoeopathy in all 
medical institutions governed under these Acts. The aforesaid Acts has also provisions for National 
Exit Test, a common final year undergraduate medical examin ation shall be held for granting license 
to practice as medical practitioners and National Teachers Eligibility Test shall be conducted 
separately for the post -graduates of ISM & Homoeopathy who desire to take up teaching profession 
in that discipline. 
1.2.3 To produce highly competent/proficient/meritorious ISM & Homoeopathy medical 
graduates:- 
(i) Minimum Standard in Medical Education (Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani Sowa -Rigpa and 
Homoeopathy undergraduate courses) have been notified for implementation with imme diate effect; 
Competency/Outcome Based Course Curriculum and Syllabus for first professional course in 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa (ASUS) and Homoeopathy have been implemented to 
ensure competency of the medical students; Early clinical exposure  to medical students implemented 
from first year of the course/ program. 
(ii) Methodology to supplement modern advances, scientific and technological developments in 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa (ASUS) and Homoeopathy curriculum has been included  
in the regulations. 
(iii) To promote multi -disciplinary attitude and approach, 28 online elective courses have also been 
started for first professional undergraduate medical students of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Sowa -
Rigpa (ASUS). 
(iv) Industry-Academia interface has been initiated to provide industry exposure to the postgraduate 
students of concerned specialty in Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani. 
(v) To improve the quality of teaching institutions in Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa 
(ASUS) medical syst ems Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has been developed for the online 
visitation and assessment of ASUS teaching colleges and attached hospitals. 
(vi) To promote quality in research and publications, NCISM has trained 60 master trainers well -
oriented in publication ethics, research integrity and scientific writing to train all PG guides of ASUS 
post graduate institutions across the country and made MOU with CCRAS to provide research grant 
for UG and PG students under SPARK scheme.  
(vii) To promote quality in teaching, NCISM has trained around 2000 teaching faculties of ASUS as 
educational technologists. 
However, recommendation of the Committee has been noted by the Ministry. 
1.3 PROPOSED LEGISLATION ON THE AYUSH PHARMACY AND ALLIED 
HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONS AND YOGA & NATUROPATHY 
Recommendation: 

7 
 
1.3.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the proposed legislations on Yoga &  
Naturopathy and Ayush Pharmacy, and Allied Healthcare Professions would play pivotal role in 
the regulation of Ayush Industry and Professions and Yoga & Naturopathy. Keeping in view the 
rising popularity of the Ayush systems the proposed legislations are need of the hour. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to expedite the process of introducing of 
proposed legislation in the Parliament. 
(Para 1.7.1 of 145th Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.3.2 Recommendation has been noted and, in this regard, two draft bills along with comparison 
with existing bills have shared with competent authority for consideration and advice. 
1.4 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION ANALYSIS 
Recommendation: 
1.4.1 The Committee observes that the projected demand of the Ministry for the year 2023 -24 
is Rs. 4092.33 crore against which an amount of Rs. 3647.05 crore has been allocated in BE 
2023-24 thus there is a shortfall of Rs. 444.83 crore in BE 2023-24.  The Committee expresses its 
concern that reduced budgetary allocation to the Ministry of Ayush in comparison to the 
projected demand would have an adverse impact on the implementation of originally conceived 
projects/schemes/programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of Ayush to 
approach the Ministry of Finance to seek higher budgetary allocation at the supplementary 
demand stage to ensure that no undertaken project/scheme gets suffered for want of requisite 
fund. 
(Para 2.1.4ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.4.2 An amount of Rs. 3647.50 crore has been allocated in BE 2023 -24 by Ministry of 
Finance against the projected demand of Rs. 4092.33 crore. The recommendation of the 
Committee is noted for compliance and the Ministry of Ayush will approach the Ministry of 
Finance to seek  higher budgetary allocation at the Supplementary/RE stage  to ensure that no 
undertaken project/scheme gets suffers for want of requisite funds. 
1.5 COMPARATIVE BUDGET ALLOCATION BETWEEN MINISTRY OF 
HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE AND MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
Recommendation: 
1.5.1 The Committee, while taking into account the budget utilization trend of the Ministry of 
Ayush, appreciates the absorption capacity of the project/scheme implementing agencies of the 
Ministry of Ayush as the same is 98.74%, 98.70%, 95.27% and 72.23% during 2019 -20, 2020-
21, 2021 -22 and 2022 -23 ( up to  10th February, 2023) respectively, which indicates the 

8 
 
reasonable justification for higher budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Ayu sh in the forth -
coming financial years. 
(Para 2.2.2 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.5.2 Ministry of Ayush is grateful that the Committee appreciates the absorption capacity of 
the project/scheme implementing agencies. The Ministry of Ayush will approach the Ministry of 
Finance for seeking higher budgetary allocation in the forthcoming financial years. 
1.6 OUTPUT-OUTCOME MONITORING FRAMEWORK (2023-24) 
Recommendation: 
1.6.1 The Committee takes notes of the various details of Output -Outcome Framework of the 
schemes of Ministry of Ayush to be executed during 2023 -24. The Committee hopes that the 
financial outlay earmarked for the various schemes would be sufficient for achieving the targets 
set in the Output -Outcome Framework, and in case of further requirement of fund in the mid of 
the implementation of the Scheme the Ministry may  put forward the demand for additional 
requirement of the fund at the supplementary stage. The Committee recommends the Ministry of 
Ayush to have resilient and alert mode of monitoring mechanism to oversee the execution of the 
Schemes/Projects to ensure that the physical targets as set in the Output -Outcome Framework is 
achieved without time and cost overruns. The Committee, in this regard, recommends the 
Ministry to undertake midterm performance evaluation of each scheme and projects through 
Cost Benefit A nalysis and SWOT Analysis. The Committee strongly believes that the Output -
Outcome Framework will enrich the enabling environment of the Ministry of Ayush and bring 
forth the catalytic changes in providing Ayurvedic and Homeopathic mode of treatment. 
(Para 2.3.1ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.6.2 The IC Scheme is being assessed on OOMF parameters as well as Mid -term evaluation 
was undertaken for the said scheme before its renewal in 2021 and as per which, it was 
recommended to continue to said scheme for further period of 5 years. 
Sr. 
No. 
Indicators 2022-23 
(Actual) 
OUTPUTS INDICATORS   
1.1 Number of experts to be deputed (Short -Term & Long -Term) at 
Foreign Countries as well as International Organizations e.g., 
WHO) 
25 
1.2 Number of Indian Ayush Experts to be supported for presenting 
Ayush related Papers at International conferences etc. 
4 

9 
 
1.3 Number of Indian Ayush Manufacturers/ Ayush Service providers 
to be supported for participating in International Trade Fair, 
Conferences, Expos etc. to display their Ayush related products and 
services.                           
7 
1.4 Number of National/ International organizations to be supported for 
holding International Conferences on Ayush. 
16 
1.5 Participation in International Conferences and International Forums 
like BRICS, SCO, IBSA, G20, BIMSTEC, ASEAN, CICA etc. 
21 
1.6 Number of Indian Ayush Manufacturers/ Ayush Exporters to be 
supported for Market Authorization/ registration of AYUSH 
products at abroad.                           
6 
1.7  Number of Information Cells to be formed in abroad 2 
1.8 Number of students to be allotted with international fellowships 50 
OUTCOMES  
1.1 Number of international bilateral/ multilateral agreements to be 
signed with foreign countries/ organizations. 
11 
1.2 Number of AYUSH Chairs to be deputed at foreign 
Universities/Colleges etc. 
0 
1.3 Number of Foreign Authorities to be sensitized about Ayush 
System 
1055 
1.4 Number of Academic programmes to be conducted 11 
1.5 Number of engagements with UN Agencies like WHO, UNESCO 15 
 
1.6.3 Standing Finance Committee meeting was conducted on 16.02.2023 to revise the 
Guidelines of Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) and 
thereunder, Output- Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) of the  AOGUSY also been 
revised. 
1.6.4 The Central Sector Scheme namely Ayush Oushadhi  Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan 
Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) has implemented from FY 2021 -22 and approved upto FY 
2025-26. Hence, P&E division may be requested to initiate the process for Mid-Term Evaluation, 
Cost Benefit Analysis and SWOT Analysis during FY 2024-25 (i.e., after completion of 03 years 
of 15th FC) for the above said scheme. 
1.6.5 As per NAM guidelines there is provision of midterm evaluation by 3 rd party at the mid 
of scheme continuation from 2021-22 to 2025-26 i.e., during financial year 2023-24. 
 
1.6.6 Further, Ministry has constituted Central level monitoring team for field Visit to 
State/UTs for assessing progress of different activities approved under NAM including AYUSH 
Health and Wellness Centers (HWCs), so that Output-Outcome of the scheme may be analysed. 
 

10 
 
1.7 PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF NMPB DURING 2021 -22 
AND 2022-23 
Recommendation: 
1.7.1 The Committee observes that NMPB has developed an online portal cum android-based 
application for trading of medicinal plants named 'e -CHARAK'. The Committee recommends 
that NMPB should chalk out a strategy to enable trading and information exchange amongst 
various stakeholders involved in the medicinal plants sector. The Committee further recommends 
NMPB to organize frequent „Buyer -Seller Meet among the Farmer Bodies, Industries and 
State/UT Government on challenges faced and way forward which may include discussion on 
Medicinal Plants Cultivation and Supply Chain Management‟. The Committee is of the 
considered view that Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav Campai gn by NMPB, to promote the medicinal 
plants sector in the Country, would give impetus to the campaign “Ayush Aapke  Dwaar” to 
create awareness on medicinal plants. 
(Para 3.2.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.7.2 As the nation celebrates the 75 th Anniversary of India‘s Independence (Azadi Ka Amrit 
Mahotsav) to commemorate this monumental occasion, all Departments and Ministries were 
directed to host a set of activities for a resurgent, Aatma Nirbhar Bharat throughout the year.  
1.7.3 Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav Campaign by NMPB, Ministry of Ayush: 
1.7.5 National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB), Ministry of Ayush has also organised Azadi 
Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) Campaign to promote the medicinal plant sector in country under 
the AKAM, NMPB, Ministry of Ayush supported two activities: (i) ―Ayush Aapke  Dwaar‖ to 
create awareness on medicinal plants , and (ii) Distribution of Medicinal plants saplings to 
farmers for promotion of Cultivation during the period of one year from 30 thAugust, 2021 
onwards. 
(i) Distribution of medicinal plants saplings (Ayush AapkeDwar) : Till date, under Ayush 
Aapke Dwarcampaign, 8345393 saplings of Ashwagandha, Bael, Kalmegh, Lemon grass, 
Shatavari, Amla, Tulsi, Giloe, Ghritkumari etc. have been distributed among farmers,  students, 
households, and general public in 30 states including UTs. Details are as under: - 
 
State/UTs wise distribution of medicinal plant saplings under Ayush AapkeDwar 
S.N State No. of Medicinal 
Plants saplings 
distributed 
Name of Medicinal Plants 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
65 Tulsi, Ajwain, Kalmegh, Lemon grass, Ghritkumari 
2 Assam 2850 Giloe, Arjuna, Baheda, Vach, Giloe etc. 
3 Arunanchal Pradesh 1141  Satavar, Adhatoda, Kari Patta, Tulsi, Amla, Giloe etc. 
4 Andhra Pradesh 1322884 Ashoka, Brahmi, Raktchandan, Madukparni, Henna, lemon 
grass etc. 

11 
 
5 Bihar 850 Giloe, Tulsi, BhuiAmla, Coleus, Neem, and Brahmi 
6 Chhattisgarh 2137045 Giloe, Stevia, Satavar, Kalmegh, Ashwagandha, 
Ghritkumari, Gudmar, Tulsi, Brahmi, Pipli, Bel, Amla 
7 Chandigarh 330 Lemon grass, Aloe, Giloe, Brahmi, Shatavari etc. 
8 New Delhi 3486720 Giloe, Ashwagandha and Tulsi. 
9 Goa 7570 Amla, Tejpatta, Stevia, Garcinia, Raktchandan, Moringa 
10 Gujarat 308302 Giloe, Tulsi, Ashwagandha,BhuiAmla, Ghritkumari, 
Guggulu etc. 
11 Himachal Pradesh 240360 Giloe, Ashwagandha, Jamun, Harsingar 
12 Haryana 800 Giloe, Tulsi, Ashwagandha ,BhuiAmla, Ghritkumari 
13 Jammu & Kashmir 725 Giloe, Ashwagandha 
14 Jharkhand 400 Tulsi, Cardamom, Pipali etc. 
15 Puducherry 2500 Pipali, Nergundi, Adarak, Vasak, Tulsi etc. 
16 Punjab 354247 Ashwagandha, Giloe, lemon grass, Ghritkumari, Nirgundi, 
Shatavari etc. 
17 Kerala 17964 Tulsi, Cardamom, Pipali, Brahmi, Ashoka, Curry Patta, 
Neem, Nirgundi, etc. 
18 Karnataka 8203 Neem, Bahunia, Ashoka, Gmelina etc. 
19 Madhya Pradesh 81631 Giloe, Guggulu, Satavar , Giloe, Ashwagandha etc. 
20 Maharashtra 66691 Giloe, Amla, Arjuna, Harad 
21 Meghalaya 3000 Madukparni, Zanthoxylum, Gaultheria, Lodhra etc. 
22 Manipur 50000 Giloe, Amla, Arjuna, Harad 
23 Mizoram 10120 Satavar, Amla, Herb Paris etc. 
24 Odisha 23700 Tulsi, Ashwagandha, Giloe 
25 Rajasthan 57772 Guggulu, Amla, Bael 
26 Sikkim 54000 Giloe, Amla, Ghritkumari, Harad, Baheda, Curry Patta, 
Reetha, Syonak etc. 
27 Tamil Nadu 40346 Ashoka, Nux vomica, Bael etc. 
28 West Bengal 7680 Tejpata,  Stevia, Ashoka, Giloe, Tulsi etc. 
29 Uttarakhand 47236 Kutki, BadhiElaichi, Lemon grass, Tejpatta etc. 
30 Uttar Pradesh 10261 Giloe, Ashwagandha, Jamun, Harsingar etc. 
Total saplings 
distributed 
              8345393 
 
1.7.6 Inaugural Programme: 
(ii) Cultivation of Medicinal Plants: The inaugural / launch programmes were organised on 3rd 
September 2021 in 17 States/ Union territories through Regional Cum Facilitation Centre 
(RCFCs), State Medicinal Plants Board (SMPBs) and other scheme implementing agencies to 
distribute medic inal plants saplings to cover maximum number of farmers in the 
District/State/Region.  
1.7.7 Yearlong distribution of Medicinal Plants: 

12 
 
During the AKAM Campaign, the NMPB, Ministry of Ayush through RCFCs/SMPBs and 
other Implementing Agencies distributed more than 91 Lakhs saplings of various medicinal 
plants to 14792 farmers across the country.  
The medicinal plants distributed during the campaign are Kutki, Kuth, Jatamansi, Giloy, 
Tulsi, Kalmegh, Ashwagandha, Aloe vera, Brahmi, Shatavari, Stevia, Tejpatta, Ashoka, 
Guggulu, Sarpagandha, Amla etc. Under this campaign species specific to State and 
Region were given priority for distribution among farmers to promote their cultivation. The 
details of RCFC-wise and SMPB-wise number of medicinal plants distributed and farmers 
supported are as under: - 
No. of Medicinal plants distributed to farmers for Cultivation under Azadi Ka Amrut 
Mahotsav (AKAM) 
 
Name of organization No. of Farmers No. of Saplings Distributed 
RCFC-NR - I 436 5,77,088 
RCFC-NR - II   484 1,45,804 
RCFC-ER 1471 3,35,870 
RCFC-CR 449 15,691 
RCFC-WR 4559 68,919 
RCFC-SR  109 28,982 
RCFC- NER 411 7,80,655 
SMPB, Andaman & Nicobar 8 63 
SMPB, Andhra Pradesh 9 12,028 
SMPB, Bihar  1,973 
SMPB, Chhattisgarh 365 42,77,500 
SMPB, Goa 10 70 
SMPB, Himachal Pradesh 344 2,750 
SMPB, J&K 105 900 
SMPB, Karnataka  121 3,000 
SMPB, Kerala 590 3,33,300 
SMPB, Lakshadweep 10 870 
SMPB, Manipur 100 15,000 
SMPB, Meghalaya 102 1,600 
SMPB, Mizoram 142 8,620 
SMPB, Odisha 712 10,050 
SMPB, UP 200 1,050 
SMPB, Uttarakhand 3675 24,84,418 
SMPB, West Bengal 380 5,935 
Total 14,792 91,12,136 
 
1.7.8 Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav 
 

13 
 
S.No. Activities Organization Status 
1 Distribution 
of medicinal 
plants 
saplings 
(Ayush 
AapkeDwar) 
NMPB Till date, under Ayush AapkeDwarcampaign , 
8345393 saplings of Ashwagandha, Bael, 
Kalmegh, Lemon grass, Shatavari, Amla, Tulsi, 
Giloe, Ghritkumari  etc. have been distributed 
among farmers, students, households, and general 
public in 30 states including UTs. 
(Details are placed at Point (i) of Para 3.2.4 reply 
mentioned above) 
2 Cultivation 
of Medicinal 
Plants 
NMPB Distribution of saplings to the farmers; 
Approximately, 9112136 medicinal plants 
saplings were distributed to the farmers 
throughout the country. 
 
1.7.9National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB), Ministry of Ayush has provided financial 
assistance in project mode to various institutes / org anizations to organize awareness, 
programme, exposure visits and capacity building programmes (semi9nars / conferences / 
workshops etc.) through Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities under 
Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Develop ment and Sustainable Management of 
Medicinal Plants. NMPB has supported 8 number of projects (two projects at Karnataka and two 
projects at West Bengal, one each at Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, and Maharashtra) for 
organizing Buyer-Seller Meets under IEC activities from the financial year 2016-17 to 2022-23. 
Recommendation: 
1.7.10 The Committee, taking a cue from the submission of the Secretary, Ministry of Ayush, 
during the course of consideration of Demand for Grants, about the launching of National 
campaign on Ashwagandha  on the occasion of 7 th Ayurveda Day Celebration on 23rd October, 
2022 by the National Medicinal Plants Board, recommends the Ministry to guide NMPB to 
undertake all out efforts to make the National Campaign on Ashwagandha “A Health Promoter” 
in order to achieve the objective of creating awareness about the Health Benefits of 
Ashwagandha among public & promote usage of this potential medicinal plant throughout the 
country. 
(Para 3.2.5 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.7.11 Details are at Annexure – ‗A‘. 
1.8 PHARMACOPOEIA COMMISSION FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND 
HOMOEOPATHY (PCIM&H) 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation: 
1.8.1 The Committee takes into account the challenges being faced by PCIM&H while 
implementing its mandate intending to achieve its mission objectives that inter-alia includes the 
reorganisation of staff structure pattern and framing of recruitment rules necessitated with re -
establishment of PCIM&H by merging the erstwhile institutions i.e. Pharmacopoeia Commission 
for Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy (Autonomou s), Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian 
Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacopoeia Laboratory (Subordinate Office). The Committee 
recommends that PCIM&H Management should immediately address manpower related issues 
of existing staff in the light of cabinet de cision regarding merger and re -establishment. The 
Committee further recommends that requisite HR management principles may be adhered to 
while reorganizing the staff structure pattern under specifically laid down rule so that PCIM&H 
can implement its mandate efficiently and effectively. 
(Para 3.3.2 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.8.2 Concerns of the Committee have been noted. PCIM&H is in active process of 
reorganization of its staff structure pattern &  framing the recruitment rules as per the frame 
foreseen. Stress will be given to adhere requisite HR principles, to address the manpower issues 
and expedite the recruitment process. A tentative proposal for reorganization of staff was 
submitted & the quer ies raised by DOPT/ Deptt. of Expenditure in this regard are being 
responded since last 2 years. In the light of latest queries from Deptt. of Expenditure , a 
committee is being constituted to give necessary recommendations in this regard. 
Recommendation: 
1.9.3 The Committee is of the view that there is urgent need for converging all the Ayush drug 
related standard setting exercises to a single authority in accordance with Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act, 1940 and Rules  made there under. Therefore, the Ministry should establish a simplified 
mechanism for involvement of stakeholders in development of pharmacopoeial standards. The 
Committee further recommends PCIM&H to test comprehensively and scientifically more 
number of drug s samples of ASU drugs and samples of Homoeopathic drugs. The Committee 
also desires that PCIM&H should conduct further surveys cum collection tours to collect the 
medicinal plants used in ASU&H System of Medicine. 
(Para 3.3.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.9.4 Cognizance of the issue has already been taken and Ministry of Ayush through PCIM&H 
has initiated an exercise for establishing Pharmacopoeial standards under one herb one standard 
policy. Further the draft under consideration regarding revision of Drug and  Cosmetics Act 1940 
and Rules thereunder has proposed provisions for accommodating such policy shift. The current 
process of development of Pharmacopoeial standards undergoes 3 -tier scrutiny viz. at level of 
ASU&H, Sub-Committees, Pharmacopoeia Committee and Scientific Advisory Board where 

15 
 
stakeholders representing R&D, Academia, Regulators, Industry etc. constituted to the 
scrutinizing Committee/board. 
1.9.5 PCIM&H in the capacity of Central Drug Testing Laboratory tests samples of ASU&H 
drugs comprehensiv ely & significantly in accordance with Drugs & Cosmetics Act and Rules 
thereunder and as per respective Pharmacopoeias/ testing protocol. However, the number of 
samples to be brought under this exercise only depends upon the referral of samples fro m the 
Hon‘ble Court and there is hardly any control on increasing or decreasing such instances.   
Already being implemented as a continuous process. 
1.10 CENTRE SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS  
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND COMMUNICATION (IEC) 
Recommendation: 
1.10.1 Keeping in view the worldwide resurgence of interest in traditional and holistic system of 
healthcare, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Ayush should propagate the 
potentiality of Ayush System in prevention and treatment of common ailments. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to leave no stone unturned in efficiently and effectively 
implementing IEC Scheme, thus generating awareness amongst the common masses especially in 
rural, urban slums, hilly & tribal area. Awareness about the Ay ush system of medicine can be 
created among the citizens by organizing the Arogya Fairs, and Ayurveda Parv in all the states 
of India in phased manner. Larger participation of the common man in events having significant 
footfall, celebration of Important d ays of the Ayush system and through digital means like social 
media handles, etc. can lead to propagation and proliferation of Ayush System in all corners of 
the Country. 
(Para 3.4.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.10.2 The recommendation of the Committee is noted by the division and will be complied 
with. 
1.11 PROMOTION OF INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
Recommendation: 
1.11.1 The Committee emphases that on approval of the following proposed new initiatives, the 
Ministry has to chalk out strategy to implement the same in order to disseminate the scientific 
knowledge of Ayush system of medicines: - 
i. Development of Global Ayush portal for extending the reach of Ayush knowledge. 
ii. Developing the special category of AYUSH visa for the foreigners seeking AYUSH 
Medical treatment in India. 
iii. Developing New Tariff Lines (HS lines/code) for ASU&H Products/ Herbal Products 
which will help to boost the export of Ayush products. 
iv. Collaborations with foreign countries under different International Forums like SCO, G -
20, ASEAN, BIMSTEC, BRICS, IBSA etc. 

16 
 
(Para 3.5.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.11.2 The Ministry of Ayush, towards achieving the global recognition and propagation of 
Ayush system, has taken the initiative of the development of the Global Ayush Portal for 
enabling the international audience to get authentic information about Ayush system of 
Medicine. The Global Ayush Portal  is being developed by DIC i.e. Digital India Corporation (a 
not-for-profit Company set up by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY), Govt. of India) and as informed by DIC, the portal is in the final stage of completion. 
1.11.3 During the inaugural ceremony of the ―Global Ayush Investment and Innovation 
Summit‖ held on 20.04.2022 at Gandhinagar, Gujarat, the Hon'ble Prime Minister made the 
announcement to launch a special category of Ayus h visa for foreign visitors for Ayush medical 
travel/education/treatment including Yoga. The same has been taken up with the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs. 
1.11.4 To clearly identify the export data for each system of Ayush,  a new line of HS Codes is 
under creation for which an Inter-ministerial working group has been formed.   
Collaboration with foreign countries under different international forums like SCO, G -20, 
ASEAN, BIMSTEC BRICS, IBSA etc. 
- Side event with MoHFW on the  topic ―Meeting of experts and practitioners of 
Traditional Medicine‖ with a Focal Theme: Developing SCO strategy on deepening 
cooperation in Traditional Medicine: 3rd February 2023 (Virtual)  
- First Expert Working Group on Traditional Medicine, under the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO): 9th, 10th& 22ndFebruary11th& 14th April 2023, in Delhi, India  
- B2B conference and Expo on Traditional Medicine under the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO): 2nd – 3rd March 2023, in Guwahati, India 
- The Ministry of Ayush has proposed to hold a c onference on Ayurveda and Traditional 
Medicine on theme ―Role of Traditional Medicine in India and ASEAN countries in 
mitigation of COVID-19 pandemic is scheduled to be held in the month of July 2023 in 
Delhi, India.  
- Ministry of Ayush and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), New Delhi, 
India organised Two -day training program for the BIMSTEC Member States on virtual 
mode on Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) and Biological Diversity Act 
(BDA) 2002 on 7 and 8 April 2022.  
- Ministry of Ayush nominated officers to conduct the systemic review of research on 
Traditional Medicine used in diabetes and Covid-19 from published information as a first 
step of Collaborative research as proposed agenda on 4 th meeting of BTFTM.  India and 
Shri Lanka are responsible lead countries for Collaborative research activity.  

17 
 
- Two-Member Delegation from the Ministry of Ayush will be participating in the 
upcoming 5th meeting of BTFTM in Thailand (26th-28thJune 2023). 
- As a part of India‘s Chairship of BRICS 2021, Ministry participated in ―First meeting 
of BRICS Sherpas‖ held on 24-26 February 2021. 
- Ministry of Ayush organized BRICS High -level Forum on Traditional Medicine online 
on May 11th, 2022. 
- In a follow-up to the BRICS Sherpas Meeting, Ministry of Ayush organized a virtual 
meeting of the ―BRICS Experts in Traditional Medicines‖ held on 25th March 2021. 
Further, a ―Webinar on Harmonization of Regulation of Standardization of 
Traditional Medicinal Products of BRICS Cou ntries‖ was organized by the Ministry 
of Ayush on 28th May 2021. 
- Ministry of Ayush provided interactionfor 2nd BRICS Sherpas' Meeting held from 12th to 
13th April 2022 virtually. 
- The Ministry of Ayush organized IBSA Senior Officials Meeting on Traditional 
Medicine held virtually on 17th September 2021. 
The Ministry's comments on the draft IBSA MoU on Trilateral Cooperation on Traditional 
Medicines have been shared with MEA after including comments of the Brazilian side on said 
MoU. 
1.12 PROMOTION OF INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
Recommendation: 
1.12.1 The Committee understands that G20 presidency provides a unique opportunity to India 
to strengthen India's role in the Global Health order through Ayush intervention. The concept of 
One World One Health resonates with the G20 theme of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam which implies 
The World Is One Family. For achieving the same, it is essential that healthcare is made 
accessible as well as affordable to all. The Committee believes that Ayush which largely focuses 
on holistic health and wellbeing can be utilized as an affordable means to tackle various 
diseases including the Non -Communicable Diseases. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that Ministry to imbibe the theme of "Vasudhaiva Ayush Nirog  Vardhanam" and addr ess the 
rising challenges in the health sector. Through its G20 presidency, India must showcase the true 
potential of Ayush system which is in integral part of Indian Culture. 
(Para 3.5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.12.2 First Health Working Group Meeting under India‘s G20 Presidency was held in 
Thiruvananthapuram from 18 th-19thJanuary 2023 along with Side Event on Medical Value 

18 
 
Travel from 19 th-20thJanuary, 2023, in which Ministry of Ayush has conducted Yoga Session, 
showcasing of Ayush System (Traditional Medicine) through stall and Media propagation. 
(i) 2nd G20 Health Working Group meeting was held from 17 -19th April 2023 in Goa on the 
theme (digital Health). Ministry of Ayush has conducted Yoga Session, showcasing of 
Digital Ayush System through stall and Media propagation. 
(ii) 3rd Health Working Group meeting is scheduled to be held on 4 th- 6thJune 2023 in which 
Ministry of Ayush is going to arrange meditation session and showcasing of Ayush System 
related research and development on drugs, diagnostics & vaccine s through stall and media 
propagation. 
4th Health Working Group Meeting and G20 Health Ministers Meeting is Meeting is scheduled 
to be held on 17 -19 August 2023 at Gandhinagar in which Ministry of Ayush along with WHO 
is planning to conduct global summit for traditional medicine as a co-branded event. 
1.13 CHAMPION SERVICES SECTOR SCHEME (CSSS) 
Recommendation: 
1.13.1 The Committee finds huge potential in Champion Services  Sector Scheme for creating 
more opportunities for capacity building and skill development in Ayush sector besides creating 
more job opportunities and also nationwide authentic data generation in Ayurveda, Yoga & 
other Traditional systems of medicine sector.  The Committee, however, feels that the 
implementation of scheme at the grass -root level has already suffered due to late confirmation 
of continuation of the scheme leading to lower budgetary allocation.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation at 
the supplementary demands stage, for its effective and efficient execution and in order to 
accomplish the cherished objectives of the scheme. 
(Para 3.6.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.13.2 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
Recommendation: 
 
1.13.3 The Committee has been given to understand that since the scheme guidelines are 
stringent as a result of which there is slackened execution of the scheme thereby the scheme gets 
warded off against the set mission & vision of the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry revisit the guidelines and make the Scheme guidelines more user 
friendly and in line with ease of doing business principle. The Committee also feels that the 
strategic course of action viz.  Road shows abroad, CMEs for foreign audie nce, Familiarization 
trips, Strategic Marketing -Communication through a professional agency, Collateral, Audio 

19 
 
Video Content, Social Media Marketing  can further be taken up by the Ministry for achievement 
of the Mission Objective of the Scheme. 
(Para 3.6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
Ayush Development Section 
1.13.4 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
1.14 AYURGYAN 
Recommendation: 
1.14.1 The research and innovation component of Ayurgyan Scheme should be designed to 
encourage Research &  Development in priority areas based on disease burden be aligned to 
National Health Programme. The Committee, in this response, highlights the priority areas of 
support that are fundamental research, basic principles, theories of Ayush systems, 
standardization/validation of Ayush drugs and new drug development. The Committee further 
recommends that the outcome of the Research Scheme should successfully demonstrate the 
effectiveness of Ayush systems and the novel technology successfully developed out of suc h R&D 
must harness the potential of Ayush in the interest of public health delivery. 
(Para 3.7.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.14.2 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
1.15 AYURSWASTHYA YOJANA 
 
Recommendation: 
 
1.15.1 The Committee expresses its concern over the budgetary allocation given to 
Ayurswasthya Yojana i.e., the combined project of public health initiative and Centre for 
excellence.  The Committee is of the view that since the Ayurswasthya Yojana aims to promote 
Ayush inter vention for community health care for achieving Sustainable Development Goal 2 
(SDG-2) and Sustainable Development Goal 3 (SDG-3) and documentation of the efficacy of the 
Ayush System, therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to take up the impleme ntation 
of the Ayurswasthya Yojana on priority basis and the Government should express it strong will 
by allocating adequate fund for successful implementation of the scheme.  The Committee, in 
this regard, recommends the Ministry of Finance to examine the  proposal to increase the total 
financial outlay of the scheme to the tune of Rs. 342.00 crore for five years and allocate the 
requisite fund to the scheme, thereby enabling the implementing agencies to achieve the set 
objectives of the scheme.  The Committee believes that the implementation of the scheme will be 
strictly followed as per the Annual Action Plan of the scheme. 
  
(Para 3.8.2ibid) 

20 
 
Action Taken: 
1.15.2 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. T he Ministry has sent a 
proposal to Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance for seeking their ‗In -
principle‘ approval to increase the total outlay of the AyurswasthyaYojana to the tune of 
Rs.342.00 Crores. 
1.16 NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMEOPATHY (NCH) 
Recommendation: 
1.16.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the services of Homeopathy should be 
promoted for equitable and universal healthcare on ground level as on date. In this direction, the 
implementation of the provision of the NCH Act , 2020, is concomitant for a medical education 
system to improve access to quality and affordable medical education and ensures availability of 
adequate and high-quality homoeopathy medical professionals in all parts of the country. To 
achieve such objectives, the Committee recommends NCH to take up initiatives to ensure quality 
education through homoeopathic medical colleges with competency based dynamic curriculum 
on priority towards improving clinical skills of the medical professionals so that whenever these 
professionals take up to their clinical practice through public or private mode, would be able to 
provide quality healthcare. 
(Para 3.12.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.16.2 Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. However, initiatives being taken by NCH 
to fulfil those objectives is as below: 
 NCH in compliance with section 26 of NCH Act 2020, Homoeopathy Education Board 
has notified the Homoeopathy Graduate Degree Course-BHMS regulation on 07.12.2022. 
The curriculum has been developed in consultation with the experts from education 
technology, subject experts. 
 Accordingly, the National Commission for Homoeopathy has adopted the competency 
based dynamic curriculum for BHM S from the academic year 2022 -23 in compliance 
with sub clause (b) of section 26 of NCH Act 2020 and more emphasis is given to clinical 
training, and it starts from the first professional year. 
 
1.17 NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE (NCISM) 
Recommendation: 
1.17.1 The Committee is of the view that NCISM should undertake concrete steps to increase 
availability of adequate and high -quality medical professionals of ISM evenly in all parts of the 
country.  The Committee believes that to improve the quality of education, NCISM need to 
develop the eco-system in all teaching institutions. The Committee is of the considered view that 

21 
 
NCISM should promote accomplishment of national health goals by encouraging medical 
professionals to adopt latest medical research in their work and to contribute to research. The 
Committee believes that NCISM would undertake an objective periodic and transparent 
assessment of medical institutions on the ground level and enforces high ethical sta ndards in all 
aspects of medical services but flexible enough to adapt the changing needs. 
(Para 3.13.3 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
1.17.2 The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020 has been notified in the 
Gazette of India on 21.09.2020, accordingly, Central Government has constituted commission 
namely the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) to prov ide quality and 
affordable medical education, ensure availability of adequate and high quality medical professionals 
of Indian System of Medicine and in all part of the country and encourages such medical 
professionals to adopt latest medical research in their work and to contribute to research. 
1.17.3 Also, Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine constituted under 
the provisions of NCISM Act, 2020 carries out the periodic and transparent inspections/monitoring 
of medical institutions imparting Ayush education  in India for their compliance to Minimum 
essential standards for continuous development and enhancement of the medical institutions so as to 
improve the quality of education. 
1.17.4 Suggestions and view of the Committee has been noted. 
1.18 CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES (CCRAS) 
Recommendation: 
1.18.1 The Committee takes into account the fact that 25 ongoing Research Projects are 
expected to be completed during 2022 -23, and a pproximately 74 new Research projects are 
expected to be undertaken during 2023-24 under Core areas of research. The Committee expects 
that the result of these studies will generate scientific evidence of efficacy and safety of quality 
assured Ayurveda formulations/ therapies  and will validate the Fundamental concepts of 
Ayurveda. The Committee recommends that the research outcomes of these projects should be 
disseminated through appropriate media. 
(Para 3.14.2 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.18.2 The Council publishes the research outcomes of the completed study as manuscripts, 
monographs, and technical reports. The manuscript of the completed study is published in peer -
reviewed Journals for wider dissemination in the scientific community. 
 

22 
 
1.19 CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN UNANI MEDICINE (CCRUM) 
Recommendation: 
1.19.1 The Committee is of the view that CCRUM Management should address key concern 
areas of functioning of the Council that include Clinical research in the priority areas including 
new drug development and clinical Vali dation of pharmacopoeial drugs and Validation of 
various modes of „Ilaj bit Tadbeer‟ and Important Unani Treatments, Experimental 
Pharmacology of Important Unani Drugs, Phytochemical studies, drug standardization, and 
Pharmacognostic Studies of Important U nani Drugs. In nutshell, CCRUM should chalk out 
strategy to provide research -oriented extension health services in all parts of the country by 
conducting more and more health camps, health melas, school health programmes, SCSP / TSP 
mobile programme etc. 
(Para 3.16.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.19.2 The Council took a note on the recommendation of the PSC. 
1.20 NORTH- EASTERN AREAS 
Recommendation: 
1.20.1 The Committee is of the view that the availability of herbs &  medicinal plant in NER can 
be utilized for enriching AYUSH in NER.  The availability of herbs & medicinal plant in NER 
should be documented through the exploration of herbs & medicinal Plants by conducting ethno-
botanical survey after establishing survey of the Medicinal Plants Unit at Regional Research 
Institute of Unani Medicine (RRIUM), Silchar. Keeping in view that North- Eastern region has 
diverse medicinal plants/herbs that are used in Ayush systems, the Committee suggests that the 
farmers who cultivate medicinal plants should be adequately supported to sustain the production 
of good quality plant raw materials.  Moreover, t he manufacturing unit of Ayurvedic medicine 
can be established in the NER, considering the rich diversity of herbs & medicinal pl ants. This 
establishment will also boost the economy of NER. 
(Para 3.21.5 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.20.2 Keeping in view of the availability of herbs & medicinal plant in NER, steps will be taken 
up for proper identification, cultivation, and preservation of the available medicinal fauna in 
NER. 
In this regard, various collaborative efforts can be made with various Central and State 
organization such  as Meghalaya Basin Development, ICAR and BRDC to strengthening the 
researchers in herbal/traditional medicine which will provide scientific platform for validation on 

23 
 
tribal / traditional herbal medicines.  Further, development of infrastructure is encouraged in 
NER. 
1.20.3 The Council noted the recommendation of the Committee to explore the north -eastern 
areas for the availability of herbs and medicinal plants in NER. Council has one of its centres in 
Ooty ( Tamil Nadu) wherein cultivation, collection of medicinal plants is being undertaken by 
conducting ethno - botanical survey s in the areas nearby to the Institute and in NER region. 
Council is initiating a study to identify the folklore traditions being practiced by local healers for 
treatment of diseases through its Clinical Research Unit (H), Gangtok, Sikkim. 
1.20.4During financial year 2018 -19 to 2022 -23, NMPB has supported seven projects to NER 
region under Research & Development Component of Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, 
Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants. NMPB for different research 
activities including documentation, ethnobotany etc. 
Recommendation: 
1.20.5 The Committee observes that for effective implementation of National Ayush Mission 
(NAM) in NER, there should have been dedicated Ayush Directorate in North East States. 
Officers of Health Department, as the officers presently posted who are also looking after 
different issues of Ayush including implementation of the NAM Scheme due to their prefixed 
assignments of respective Department, are unable to provide focused attenti on for Ayush related 
issues. The deployment of adequate manpower is essential for the smooth implementation of 
Scheme. 
(Para 3.21.6 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.20.6 Regarding smooth implementation of NAM, there is provision for establishment of SPMU 
/ DPMU in NER. However, State Govt. is also required to establish a dedicated Directorate of 
Ayush with dedicated Director Ayush for the smooth implementation of the Scheme. 
1.21 ISSUES CONCERNING MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
STATUS OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES (UCs) 
Recommendation: 
1.21.1 The Committee expresses concern over the status of pending UCs in the Ministry of 
Ayush, as despite plethora of monitoring mechanism for timely submission of UCs and to ensure 
liquidation of pending UCs there remains 1565 pending UCs amounting to Rs. 1638.57 crore as 
on 31stJanuary 2023 in comparison to a total of 1719 UCs amounting to Rs. 1804.83 crore as on 
1stApril 2022. The Committee notes that the Ministry has been able to liquidate a total of 154 
pending UCs amounting to Rs. 166.26 crore during 1 stApril 2022 to 31 stJanuary 2023. The 
Committee apprehends that with this pace of liquidating UCs, the Ministry would not be able to 

24 
 
liquidate the pending UCs within foreseeable timeframe. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the Ministry of Ayush to chalk out „Strategic Course of Action‟ to liquidate pending 
UCs within a stipulated timeframe. 
(Para 4.1.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.21.2 Following steps have been taken to liquidate the pending UCs under AyurgyanScheme & 
AyurswasthyaYojana: 
 
i. Grantee Institutions/Colleges are reminded regularly to submit pending UCs. 
ii. Meetings are held time to time with the representatives of the grantee institutions/ 
colleges to expedite all the pending UCs. 
iii. In compliance of Department of Expenditure (DoE)‘s OM dated 0 9.03.2022 
regarding revised procedure for flow of funds under Central Sector Schemes, the 
schemes viz. Ayurgyan scheme &  AyurswasthyaYojana comes under Central 
Nodal Agency (CNA) module -II.  This module allows beneficiary institutions to 
upload their expenditure details on PFMS on a real time basis.  This module also 
has a provision for online submission of UCs.  
iv. Under the above 02 CS Schemes, Online trainings were also arranged to the 
grantee organizations for proper utilization of released grants through Expenditure 
Advance Transfer (EAT) module. 
IEC Section 
1.21.3 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
1.21.4 163 UCs were liquidated in 2022 -23 for an amount of Rs. 30.72 crore including 20 UCs 
amounting to 6.98 crore for grant released during 2021 -22 under Central Sector Scheme of 
National Medicinal Plants Board. 
1.21.5 To speed up  liquidation of the pending UCs,Nodal Officers are designated . Regional 
Facilitation Centres are given  the mandate to co -ordinate with reference to the liquidation  of 
pending UCs with respective  States. Project Investigators  are also contacted  
and review meetings are also taken time to time. Review meetings are being taken.  The Nodal 
Officers are also directed to regularly pursue  with the defaulting organizations for early 
settlement of UCs. 
1.21.6 To resolve the issue of pending UCs the following steps has been taken up: - 
i. Regional Review Meetings under the Chairmanship of Secretary were conducted for 
different States/UTs for submission of UCs. 
ii. The H on‘ble Cabinet Minister of Ayush to the Hon‘ble Chief Ministers of different 
States/UTs and requested to expedite the process of utilization of grant and submission of 
UCs. 

25 
 
iii. D.O. letters were also written by Secretary to Chief Secretaries of State / UT 
Governments for expediting the expenditure and submission of UCs. 
iv. Ministry has also constituted teams for conducting field visits to review the physical 
progress in the States/UTs. Accordingly, these teams are conducting the field visits time 
to time as well a s handholding to resolve the issue w.r.t. to submission of UCs in time 
bound manner.  
v. Ministry has also conducted different review meetings in hybrid mode with States/UTs to 
review the progress of Ayush activities undertaken under NAM and for submission of  
UCs. 
vi. Ministry has also conducted one to one meeting for different States/UTs to review the 
progress and liquidation of UCs.   
vii. In various meetings like Appraisal Committee meeting and Mission Directorate meeting 
progress of the States/UTs were also reviewed for submission of UCs. 
viii. Regular follow-up and hand holding with States/UTs at senior officer level from Joint 
Secretary, Deputy Secretary, Deputy Adviser, Under Secretary and CPMU is also being 
undertaken and suggested to expedite the process of utilizati on of fund and submission of 
UCs. 
1.21.7 Further, Ministry is organizing a National AYUSH Mission Conclave on 18 -19 May 
2023 with State Ayush/ Health Ministers to take up different issues of implementation of NAM 
including submission of utilization certificate within stipulated time frame. 
Recommendation: 
1.21.8 The Committee has been given to understand that under NAM, a Web portal has been 
developed for Submission of SAAP, physical & financial report, MIS report as well as 
submission of Utilization Certificates. Further, training has also been given to officials of State 
PMU w.r.t. process of submission of SAAP, UCs, Phys ical & Financial progress report through 
Web portal. The Committee recommends that States may be persuaded and encouraged to 
upload UC on time. 
(Para 4.1.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.21.9 During the different regional review meetings and review meetings in the Ministry, it has 
been requested to States/UTs to submit their UCs through NAM Portal only. However, to resolve 
the technical glitches and problems faced by States/UTs during the submi ssion of UCs, a 
dedicated help desk has been setup in the Ministry under NAM Division, so that immediately 
issues may be resolved, and effective implementation of the NAM Web portal may be carried out 
by different State/UT Governments. 
 

26 
 
1.22 STATUS OF AYUSH EDUCATION 
Recommendation: 
1.22.1 The Committee, time and again, has highlighted the need for upgrading the quality of 
education that has been an area of concern and needs special focus. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to work out a clear roadmap to improve the quality of education. The 
Committee strongly believes that NCISM and NCH will play pivotal role in monitoring the 
educational institutions imparting Ayush education so that an improved Ayush education system 
would be in place.  The Committee further recommends the Ministry to chalk out a strategic plan 
of action on the employability of AYUSH under -graduates and graduates in the health sector of 
the nation. 
(Para 4.2.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.22.2 Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine and Medical 
Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy constituted under the provisions of the NCISM Act, 
2020 and NCH Act, 2020 respectively carries out the periodic inspections/monitoring of educational 
institutions imparting Ayush education in India for their compliance to Minimum essential standards 
for continuous development and enhancement of the medical institutions so as to improve the quality 
of education. 
1.22.3 Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine constituted under 
the provisions of NCISM Act, 2020 carried out the periodic inspections/monitoring of education 
in India for their compliance  to Minimum essential standards  for continuous  
development and enhancement of the Medical  Institutions so as to improve  the quality of 
education. 
1.22.4 ROAD MAP TO IMPROVE QUALITY of EDUCATION IN HOMOEOPATHY: - 
 Implementation of Competency Based Dynamic Curriculum from the year 2023 for 
academic year 2022-23 and include foundation programme of 10 days.  
Action taken: 
 In compliance with section 26 of NCH Act 2020, Homoeopathy Education Board, 
National Commission for Homoeopathy  has notified the Homoeopathy Graduate Degree 
Course-B.H.M. S regulation on 7.12.22.  
 Accordingly, the National Commission for Homoeopathy adopted the competency based 
dynamic curriculum for BHMS from the academic year 2022 -23 in compliance with 
subclause (b) of section 26 of NCH Act 2020.  
 The curriculum has been developed in consultation with experts from education 
technology, subject experts. 
 Training for competency-based training program was provided to 1216 teaching faculty of 
229 homoeopathy medical c olleges zone wise between 14 February to 14 March 2023 in 
compliance with subclause (g) of section 26 of NCH Act 2020. 

27 
 
 The Foundation program is introduced in Homoeopathy Graduate Degree Course -B.H.M. 
S regulation wherein awareness about various topics is provisioned. 
 More emphasis is given to clinical training, and it starts from the first professional year, 
for acquiring skills. 
 There shall be a finishing programme of 3 days which will inform students about the 
career opportunities, scholarship facility, social responsibility. 
 Implementation of special Electives in addition to course curriculum for career -
oriented motivation:  
 Various electives have been introduced for each year during BHMS course to ac commodate 
with current situations. 
 Grading of electives shall be in university mark sheet of students. 
 Various electives on recent technology developments in homoeopathy, soft & ICT skills, 
Agro homoeopathy, fundamentals of anthropometry, fundamentals of t eratology etc are 
proposed. 
Revising Minimum Essential Standards for Homoeopathic Medical Colleges/Institution. 
a. Minimum faculty of 28 raised to 41 in number to generate more employment and 
sufficient teacher student ratio. 
b. For each department in Homoeopath y Medical College, Methodology for Supplementing 
Modern Advancement, Research and Technology in Homoeopathy (SMART -Hom) is 
included in regulation. Purpose is to accomplish the supplementation of modern 
advancement; scientific and technology developments be  utilized for education in 
Homoeopathy System of Medicine. 
c. Bringing up Research Literacy at undergraduate level 
 Linking research with education 
 Special emphasis on research methodology in the Curriculum 
 Encouraging students to undertake short term projects. 
 National Exit Exam- There is provision for National Exit Exam in NCH Act 2020 and draft 
regulation is under approval process. 
 National Teachers Eligibility Test - There is provision for National Teachers Eligibility test 
in NCH Act 2020. 
 Assessment of Colleges and rating them on pre identified 11 parameters. 
 Mandatory NABH accreditation of Collegiate Hospital 
 Regarding employability there is need to open more avenues for job under various sectors 
a. Insurance sector 
b. Public Health Care services, Ayush Health and Wellness Centres, Primary Health Centres, 
CHCs, District Hospital and Tertiary Health Care facilities like AIIMS etc. 
c. Research organization 
d. Industries (Manufacturing centre) 

28 
 
Homoeopathic doctors can be employed  under various Health Care Program like RBSK, 
NPCDES, School Health Program, Mobile Clinics etc. 
1.23 NABH ACCREDITATION 
Recommendation: 
1.23.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the Ministry should undertake conclusive 
steps to ensure that various institutes working under CCRH, NEIAH, NEIAFMR, CCRAS, must 
obtain NABH accreditation within a stipulated timeframe. The Committee has been time and 
again recommending for obtaining of accreditation status of various institutes, however, 
adequate attention is not paid by the Institutes concerned, therefore, the Ministry should take up 
the matter with all the Institutes and ensure that the pre -requisites for obtaining the NABH 
accreditation are completed without much delay. The Committee, in this regard, recommends 
Ministry to ensure granting of adequate funds for construction of building and acquirement of 
other physical, technical, and trained manpowe r which are considered pre -requisites to obtain 
NABH Accreditation. 
(Para 4.5.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.23.2 The Council is putting its maximum efforts to expedite the process of NABH 
accreditation for its institutes. The status of NABH Accreditation is as follows:  
Full NABH Accreditation – 04 
Entry level Certification-04 
Other 11 institutes have applied for NABH Accreditation /Entry Level Certification for 
NABH. 
1.23.3 Further, the funds as demanded by the various institutes to obtain for various purposes for 
NABH Accreditation are being released by the CCRAS Headquarter from time to time to the 
institutes. 
1.23.4 The Institute has been accredited with NABH since 06 July 2017. It is the first Ayurvedic 
government hospital to be accredited with NABH. Second renewal of NABH was done  in 2020 
and now the process of 3 rd time renewal of NABH accreditation in ongoing. All the hospital 
policies & infrastructure are made as per the NABH guide lines. AIIA Hospital NABH certificate 
is attached herewith. (Year, July 6, 2017, to July 5, 2020), Year July 06,2020 to July 5,2023) 
&Scope of Accreditation Certificate (Year July 6, 2020, to July 5, 2023) (Annexure – ‗B‘). 
1.23.5 The Institute‘s IPD is not operational yet due to shortage of manpower. Some more time 
would be required for its operationalization after the creation of posts. At this stage, the Institute 
is not in a position to apply for accreditation by NABH. 
1.23.6 The CCRUM has obtained NABH accreditation for its following four institutes: - 

29 
 
i. National Research Institute of Unani Medicine for Skin Disorders (NRIUMSD), 
Hyderabad 
ii. Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine, Srinagar 
iii. Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine, Bhadrak  
iv. Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine, Chennai 
1.23.7 The pre- requisite infrastructures and safety measures required to apply for Entry Level 
NABH accreditation Standards for AYUSH Hospitals are partially completed by Siddha Central 
Research Institute, Chennai functioning under CCRS. 
1.23.8 NIUM accredited with NABH for three years i.e.up to  07th Jan 2024 and NABL 
accreditation for its laboratories is in process. The hospital attached with National Institute of 
Siddha is NABH accredited. 
1.23.9 The Council noted the recommendation of the Committee. Council is providing support 
to its institutes in terms of hiring of requisite manpower, essential equipment's as per 
requirements of NABH. 
1.23.10 Council's, Central Research Institute (H),Jaipur is in process of being NABH 
accreditation.The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
1.24 FINANCIAL AND PHYSICAL PROGRESS OF ONGOING CONSTRUCTION 
PROJECTS 
Recommendation: 
1.24.1 The Committee appreciates the Ministry and the projects implementing agencies for 
completion of construction which were long pending.  The Committee hopes that the projects of 
AIIA Sarita Vihar, Phase - II NISARGRAM NIN PUNE AND NEIAH would be completed by 
March 2023 an d the NIA Panchkula projects would be completed by the end of the year 2023. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry would have resilient monitoring mechanism over the 
progress of the on-going projects so that there is no further delay in successful complet ion of the 
projects. 
(Para 4.6.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
Ayurveda Section (Construction Cell) 
1.24.2 As suggested by the Committee to have resilient monitoring mechanism over the progress 
of the on-going projects so that there is no further delay in successful completion of the projects. 
Monitoring unit of the Ministry is making efforts so that the on -going works of the Ministry are 
completed at the earliest. The latest status of the projects is as under: 
 North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy Ph -II: Handing over / taking 
over of the 06 no. building (i.e. Type III quarter, Boys Hostel, Girls Hostel, Type IV A 
Quarter, Type IV B Quarter cum Director Quarter, Senior  Resident Hostel) except 01 
building (i.e. Guest House) under phase II project have been completed on 09.03.2023 

30 
 
between NEIAH, Shillong and M/s NPCC Ltd. The project is ready for inauguration. The 
financial progress is about 96.89% and the physical progress is about 100%. 
 NISARG GRAM, Pune as an Up -gradation centre of NIN, Pune:  The scope of work 
has been revised, as the build -up area has increased from 38351sqm to 47801sqm, which 
is 9450sqm. Due to that project cos t is revised from Rs.170.29 Cr. to Rs.213.55 Cr.  As 
per Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance OM No. 24(35)/PF -II/2012 
dated 5thAug, 2016, the cost was approved by Delegated Investment Board and the work 
is to be completed by June, 2023. The finan cial progress is about 99.76% and the 
physical progress is about 89%. 
 All India Institute of Ayurveda Ph -II, Sarita Vihar:  Super structure of all the blocks 
i.e. block no. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8 are at the verge of completion and simultaneously, the 
work in respect of finishing are in progress, the project is being monitored to ensure the 
completion of work by June, 2023.The financial progress is about 99.72% and the 
physical progress is about 89.00%. 
 National Institute of Ayurveda, Panchkula as satellite Institution of National 
Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur:  The works in respect of construction of basement of 
Hospital, College, Hostels and Residential buildings are under progress. As all the 
clearances have been obtained, the work is expedited. The financi al progress is about 
54.71%and the physical progress is about 35.00%. 
1.24.3 The Status of Construction projects of National Institutes up to  March 2023 is at 
Annexure – ‗C‘. 
1.25 PREVENTION OF ENDEMIC IN TRIBAL AREAS 
Recommendation: 
1.25.1 The Committee appreciates the course of action taken by various institutes of Ministry of 
Ayush to focus on diseases endemic viz. Sickle Cell Disease ( SCD) and TB, Malaria, 
Malnutrition in Tribal Areas and hopes that the efforts so undertaken would yield time bound 
outcome.  The Committee, however, recommends that Ayush prophylactic medicines can be 
distributed among Tribal population in a sustained manner to im prove their immunity and 
prevent them from endemic diseases. The Committee is of the view that a team comprising of 
Homoeopathic Doctors having clinical experience and Teaching faculty from the department of 
Preventive and social medicine may be sent to th ose areas to find the prospect of Homoeopathy 
in the diseases endemic in tribal areas. The Committee understands that clinical and 
fundamental research work can be undertaken depending on the diseases endemic in tribal area. 
Furthermore, intramural, and co llaborative studies can be undertaken in tribal pockets for 
specific disease conditions such as sickle cell anaemia, thalassemia, haemophilia, filaria, and 
other specific conditions through the institutes of the Council. 
(Para 4.7.1ibid) 
 
 

31 
 
Action Taken: 
1.25.2 CCRAS has undertaken a clinical research project on SCD under Tribal Health Care 
Research Programme in collaboration with DMIMS Wardha. Study will be initiated shortly as 
MoU has been signed and budget is already allocated to this project. 
1.25.3 The project on screening and management of Sickle Cell Disease (SCD) and malnutrition 
in the tribal dominant population in Odisha is under consideration with ICMR -RMRC, 
Bhubaneswar. 
1.25.3 Council has also undertaken another clinical study on sickle cell anaemia in collaboration 
with AIIMS Bhopal on tribal population. 
1.25.4 The Council took a note on the recommendation of the PSC. 
1.25.5 The observation has been noted and same may be complied by CCRS. 
1.25.6 This Institute is addressing the health issues faced by the Tribal People through the Tribal 
OPD established at Kothimangalam Village, Chengalpattu District. Prophylactic medicines are 
also provided in a sustained manner to the Tribal population. 
1.25.7 Council noted the recommendation of the Committee to send a team comprising of 
Homoeopathic Doctors having clinical experience and Teaching faculty from the department of 
Preventive and social medicine may to those areas to find the prospect of Homoeopathy in the 
disease‘s endemic in tribal areas. Counci l has undertaken research studies for the endemic 
diseases like filaria in tribal pockets of Odisha, Malaria in Agartala and Haemophilia in the tribal 
areas of Nashik district, Maharashtra. 
1.25.8 Council in collaboration with institutes under ICMR is also  undertaking fundamental and 
basic research studies. 
1.25.9 The Institute noted the recommendation of the Committee. 
1.25.10 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
1.25.11 Ministry of Ayush has signed a MoU with M/o Tribal Affairs for exploring possibilities 
to work on public health research initiatives for tackling endemic and genetic disease like sickle 
cell anaemia, TB, Malaria and Malnutrition. 
1.26 STRATEGIC COURSE OF ACTION 
Recommendation: 
1.26.1 The Committee recommends the Ministry to undertake certain strategic „Course of 
Action‟ in ensuing financial year for strengthening the Ayush Sector in the country and further 
recognition and acceptance of Ayush in international arena: - 
(i) The National Ayush Research Consortium may scale up Ayush Research in the field 
of clinical studies, therapeutic studies on principle and practices, research facilities 
with global standards. 

32 
 
(ii) Provision for at least one Ayush Institute of National importance in each State. 
(iii) Transforming Research Councils, NISR, and other Ayush National Institutes as tech-
enabled Ayush Institutes; 
(iv) Creation of employment opportunities linked to Ayush education eco-system. 
(v) Execution of the decision plan of establishing Department of Integrative Medicine in 
all New AIIMS with adequate provision of faculty and non-faculty human resources. 
(vi) Promoting AyurgenomicsProgramme and creating evidence on „Vat‟ „Pit‟ and „Kaf‟ 
and its relationship with human genome. 
(vii) Provision of Ayush Medicine in Pradhan Mantri Jan AushadiKendras; 
(viii) Completing Ayush Vertical in Central Drug Standard Control Organisation 
(CDSCO) and Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS). 
(ix) Integrating „Shree An na‟ Programme in the Ayush Sector, undertaking Ayush 
Research Projects on Millets and global proliferation of quality & and health benefits 
of Millets. 
(x) Inclusion of all Ayush Hospitals in PMJAY in convergence of recommendations of 
Directorate General of Hea lth Services (DGHS) chaired Committee for coverage of 
176 packages. 
(xi) Specific impetus on evidence-based research and Ayush drugs and herbal vaccines 
nutrition, Med-Tech including point of care diagnostics; and  
(xii) Operationalisation of 12,500 Ayush Health and Wellness Centres (AHWC) without 
cost and time overruns under Ayushman Bharat. 
(Para 4.8 ibid) 
 
Action Taken: 
1.26.2 The Institute is having various tech -enabled facilities such as internet, online library, 
online consultations, e-hospital facilities, etc. and funds are provided for proper maintenance and 
upgrading these facilities. The steps highlighted should be implemented for further development 
of AYUSH in the country. 
1.26.3 The research programme of Central Council for Research in Siddha  (CCRS) mainly 
focuses on clinical research including safety and efficacy studies of Siddha drugs, validation of 
the fundamental principles, drug standardization and quality control, survey and cultivation of 
medicinal plants and literary research.  
(i) CCRS i s equipped with state -of-the-art infrastructure with sophisticated instruments and 
facilities in the following Departments: Department of Clinical Research, Department of 
Biochemistry, Department of Pathology, Radiology, Department of Chemistry, Department  
of Pharmacognosy etc., to carry out IMR projects and other associated research work. 
(vi)  Currently there is no genomic programme related to Siddha system, however CCRS has 
developed the basic tool through app for Validation  of Siddha Udal Iyal Inventory  -YI for 
the Assessment of Body Constitution (ABC) vatham, pitham and kabham - It forms the 

33 
 
fundamental basis of diagnosing the diseases, the prognosis and in deciding the treatment 
modality. It will also provide lifestyle modification / recommendation bas ed on the 
constitution.  
(ix)  There is no integrative ‗Shree Anna‘ Programme in Siddha however, Poshan Abhiyaan 
activities like Health camps, awareness programmes, diet exhibition and herbal diet 
competition for creating awareness to improve nutrition and  lifestyle among Children, 
Adolescents and Women through Siddha System has been organized through CCRS.   
1.26.4 Currently various programmes highlighting the nutrition and health benefits of millets 
through Siddha System has been organised by the peripheral institutes of CCRS through 
observation of international year of millet programme.   
1.26.5 These recommendations made by the Committee have been noted by this Institute. This 
Institute is harnessing the IT tools to make in Tech -enabled. The Institute is also creating more 
employment opportunities to siddha doctors. 
1.26.6 The course of action proposed for the financial year 2023-24 is: - 
 Council has developed CCRH E -library consortium, an online platform to provide easy 
access of e -resources to the scientists. Also developed  an Online Union Catalogue as 
Homoeopathic Information; Documentation Centre (HIDOC) that contains bibliographic 
records of books available in various libraries of CCRH . Consortium of libraries with other 
Ayush organizations is in progress. 
 To develop its Central Research Institute(H), Noida as Institute of National importance. 
 CCRH has develop ed a Homoeopathic Clinical Case Repository (HCCR) for homoeopathic 
practitioners to build clinical evidence.  
 CCRH has also developed a web portal on ‗Archive of Homoeopathy‘:  http://aohindia.in, a 
digital repository of books, old journals, research articles, popular articles, event impressions, 
success stories, annual reports, newsletters, bulletins, etc. 
 All doctors of CCRH are being registered under the National Digital Health Mission. 
 CCRH is also uploading digital records in the Ayush Information Hub.  
 Council had prepared DPR for upgrading its centers thereby creating more employment 
avenues. 
 Council is conducting awareness programs for the general masses in its OPD and outreach 
activities. 
1.26.7 NIH has already initiated a strategic course of action for strengthening the Academic and 
Hospital section which will be visible by the end of F.Y. 2023-24. 
1.26.8 The New Campus at Narela, Delhi is on the verge of being operational. The Hospital 
Section is already functioning, and the Academic Section will start operating as soon as 
necessary permissions from the competent authority are received. 
1.26.9 The Recruitm ent process for Associate Professor and Assistant Professors have been 
initiated and the advertisement for Permanent and Contractual staff will be published shortly. 

34 
 
1.26.10 Provision of at least one Homoeopathic Institute of National Importance in each st ate 
will provide more awareness and to establish the efficacy of Homoeopathic treatment. 
Yoga and Naturopathy Section 
1.26.11The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
1.26.12 In this regard, Ministry of Ayush has set up AYUSHEXCIL (Ayush Export Promotion 
Council), a newly formed Export Promotion Council [supported by Ministry of Commerce, GOI 
and facilitated by Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry on April 20, 2022, by 
Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister at Global Ayush Investment and Innovation Summit held in 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat. The aim of AYUSHEXCIL is to enhance export potential of Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa and Unani systems and address trade i ssues pertaining to 
these sectors, to facilitate capacity building of its members on export procedures, organize B to B 
meetings, international events, road  shows, seminars, and workshops on the export of Ayush 
products, and to safeguard the scientific research in the field of Ayush healthcare. 
1.26.13 Following steps have been taken in regard to Ayush Vertical in CDSCO:  
Total 09 posts i.e. 04 posts of Drug Inspectors (01 in each stream - Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Unani, and Homoeopathy); 04 posts of Assistant Drug Controller (01 each for Ayurveda, 
Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy) and 01 post of Deputy Drug Controller (ASU&H) has 
been created for setting up of the Office of the Central AYUSH Drugs Controller in the 
Ministry of Ayush. Ministry of Ayush has appointed  its 09 officers for the additional 
charge of above mentioned 09 posts in addition to their normal duties in the Ministry of 
Ayush, without any additional remuneration vide gazette notification S.O. 4562(E) dated 
27.09. 2022.As  on date, 01 post of Assistant Drug Controller (Homoeopathy) has been 
filled. 
1.26.14 Following steps have been taken regarding inclusion of Ayush Hospitals in PMJAY: 
1.26.15 MoHFW constituted a Technical Committee for inclusion of AYUSH packages in AB -
PMJAY under the Chairmanship of Director General of Health Services, MoHFW on 11. 03. 
2021.The Technical Committee has examined the 289 packages proposed by Ayush in 4 rounds 
of meetings and finalized 181 packages.  
1.26.16Summary of AYUSH Packages: 
 Out of 281 total packages 181 packages were discussed as Phase I Packages.  
 Out of 181 Phase I packages, 46 have AB/Zero Rates (overlap is there) 9 packages were 
dropped from 46.  
 Hence effectively (181-9) 172 Ayurveda packages in Phase I. 45 (26.2%) reserved for public 
institutions (172-45 = 127). 127 for Public and Private hospitals both.  
 Out of 172 packages, For mild disease conditions Preauthorization for 5 days. For others Pre- 
authorization for 7 days. If required, then Reauthorization may be applied. 
  Criteria for reservation of packages for public institutions High cost, C omplex diseases and 
Possibility of misuse/fraud  

35 
 
 Costing of the packages is based on two factors -  
1. Per day rate Rs.1800/- with incentivization 
2. Therapy or Procedure cost as per CGHS therapy rates.  
 
NHA vide letter no. S-12012/04/2021-RSBY dated 04.08.2021 has requested –   
 To place the following recommendations of Technical Committee before the Governing 
Board for consideration- 
 i. Diseases /Disease conditions requiring hospitalization of the patients, indicative 
Ayurvedic therapies and likely duration of hospitalization and the unit cost thereof, as per 
list attached, may be included in PMJAY. These Ayurvedic treatment packages may be 
availed of by the beneficiaries of the scheme, as per their choice, in any of the 
empanelled hospital (public or private). 
 ii. A pilot study of all 289 packages identified by the Ministry of AYUSH may be 
considered by the Government to be undertaken separately to assess the economic 
viability of adopting these packages under PMJAY, in view of high cost of treatment 
through Ayurvedic packages as compared to CGHS and PMJAY packages. 
 To take steps to augment its capacity to process packages and claims. 
1.26.17However, two meetings of the said technical Committee were held thereafter on 
18.08.2021 and 23.08.2021. Now, action regarding inclusion of AYUSH packages in AB -
PMJAY is to be taken by NHA. 
 Ministry of Ayush has constituted a Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, Ayush 
along with the Secretaries of the Department of Science and Technology (DST), the 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(DSIR), the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), Department 
of Commerce (DoC) and Ministry o f Environment, Forest and Climate Change of India 
(MoEF& CC) for promoting collaboration in Ayush research among scientific bodies. 
Further outcome of the National Ayush Inter -Ministerial Research Committee (NSIMRC) is 
that a sub-committee under the Nation al Ayush Inter -Ministerial Research Committee was 
constituted on 30.09.2022. This Sub Committee has prepared a zero draft of the NARC 
scheme which is scheduled to be discussed in the National Ayush Inter-Ministerial Research 
Committee meeting on 20.2.2023. 
 Ministry vide letter no. S-15011/1/2020-ADS-Part (1) dated 27-01-2022 have been circulated 
to all directors of NI‘s and RC‘s, Chairman NCISM and NCH with yearly activity calendar. 
1.26.18Ministry has approved the 12,500 AHWCs by the year 2022 -23 with active support of 
State/UT Governments and as per the reports received from States/UTs, 5984 AYUSH HWCs 
have been made functional till date. Further, Ministry is taking appropriate steps with support of 
State/UT Governments for operationalization maximum n umber of AHWCs by the year 2023 -
24. 
1.26.19Steps taken by Ministry of Ayush to operationalize 12500 AYUSH HWCs: - 

36 
 
 Letter sent from Secretary ( Ayush) to Chief Secretaries of States/UTs 29.12.2022, 
26.12.2022, 16.11.2022,04.11.2022, 28.10.2022, 11.10.2022,23 .09.2022, 17.01.2022 
&12.01.2022. 
 Letter sent from Joint Secretary (NAM) to Addl. Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary of 
States/UTs 30.01.2023, 18.01.2023, 23.11.2022,23.11.2022, 15.11.2022, 
13.04.2022,24.02.2022 & 17.02.2022, 
 Regional Review Meeting physical mode 30.11.2022 
 Review Meetings through hybrid mode 05.12.2022 & 09.06.2022 
 Joint Review meeting by Joint Secretary (Ministry of Ayush & Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare) 12.11.2022, 12.10.2022 & 29.08.2022 
 
1.26.20In respect to point (iv) initiatives taken by NCISM and NCH is as below:  
1.26.21To enhance the employment opportunities in Ayush, various electives have been 
introduced for each year during BHMS course to accommodate with the current situations. Also, 
draft regulations proposed for Minimum Standards of requirement of homoeopathic colleges and 
attached hospitals recommends 28 teaching faculty. Proposed draft regulation under NCH of 
Minimum essentials of standards recommends 42 teaching faculty in Homoeopathy Medical 
Colleges which further has created employment for Homoeopathy Postgraduate all over India. 
1.26.22Also, NCISM has made provisions for appointing skilled supportive staff that will further 
enhance the employment opportunities in Ayush. 
Recommendation: 
1.26.23The Committee desires that the Ministry should provide details  and action taken in 
regard to each recommendation as mentioned in Para 4.8 of this Report. 
(Para 4.8.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.26.24 Detailed action taken regarding para-4.8. 
4.8 (ii) - National Institute of Siddha has noted this recommendation and will submit 
proposal to Competent Authority. 
4.8 (iii) - This Institute has already implemented A -HIMS in the attached hospital. It is 
harnessing other IT tools to make it Tech-enabled. 
4.8 (iv) - This Institute is creating additional employment opportunities to siddha doctors. 
4.8 (x) - Treatment under siddha system of medicine is provided with a nominal 
registration charge , which is also exempted for senior citizen/economically backward/ 
divyangjan etc. Hence, there is no need to cover the attached hospital under PMJAY. 
4.8 (xi) - The faculty members/ Ph.D./PG Scholars of this Institute undertake research for 
providing scientific evidence for the safety and efficacy of siddha medicines. 
4.8 (xii) - Does not pertain to National Institute of Siddha. 
 NIH 
1.26.25The progress and achievements will be reported to the Ministry. 

37 
 
1.26.26Ayush Development Section 
Same as para 4.8 above. 
1.27 FUTURE OUTLOOK OF AYUSH SYSTEM: AYUSH REVOLUTION 
NATIONALHEALTH POLICY, 2017 
Recommendation: 
1.27.1 The Committee takes note of the key policy principles in the National Health Policy and 
recommends CCRAS, CCRS, CCRH to create awareness on health, hygiene and ayurveda based 
diet and lifestyle. The Committee recommends the Ministry to standardize and validate 
Ayurvedic medicines and establish a robust and effective quality control mechanism for AUSH 
drugs. 
(Para 5.1.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.27.2 To generate robust evidence on impact  of Ayurveda diet and lifestyle , Council has 
undertaken a clinical study titled ―Impact of Ayurveda Based Lifestyle Advocacy and Practices 
among apparently healthy individuals across selected cities in India - A Randomized Parallel 
Group Study‖. 
 It is a com munity based study in which advocacy of Ayurveda diet and lifestyle is being 
given to the healthy volunteers.  
 The Council ensures the quality compliance of Ayurveda medicines before their utilization in 
the various research studies. 
1.27.3 The CCRUM is conducting Drug Standardization Research Programme to standardize the 
products of Unani Medicine for its quality and safety. The Council has developed monographs 
on 200 compound formulations/products which have been published in four volumes of Unani 
Pharmacopoeia of India (UPI) Part-II. 
 In Arogya Melas / exhibition, IEC materials are being distributed related to various disease 
conditions and its management through Siddha system of medicine.  
 CCRS has initiated many programmes for creating awareness on health, hygiene and Siddha 
based diet and lifestyle  among the public through social medica like Facebook, twitter, you 
tube, print media in national newspapers, audio jingles and video documentary films. 
 CCRS has been actively conducting various seminar / wor kshops / conference to disseminate 
the Siddha system of medicine for the beneficial of the public. 
 Health awareness campaigns related to various diseases are being conducted at all institutes / 
units for the beneficiary of the public.  
 Programmes like Poshan Abhiyaan & Poshan Maa creating awareness to improve nutrition 
and lifestyle among Children, Adolescents and Women through Siddha System of herbal diet 
has been organized by peripheral institutes/ units of CCRS. Health camps, awareness 

38 
 
programmes, di et exhibition and herbal diet competition have been organized to create 
awareness to the patients and public. 
 
1.27.4 NIUM, Bengaluru has undertaken 6 projects to standardize various Unani drugs. 
1.27.5 The Council noted the recommendation of the Committee to create awareness on health, 
hygiene, diet and adopting healthy lifestyles. Council through its outreach activities is 
conducting awareness camps to sensitize people about the role of hygiene, best practices, and 
balanced diet for promoting growth in ch ildren. Special drives for anaemia, healthy dentition, 
preventive medicine distribution are conducted in the rural areas as a part of awareness 
campaign. 
1.28 FUTURISTIC OUTLOOK OF EXPORT OF AYUSH RAW -MATERIAL, 
PRODUCT AND SERVICES 
Recommendation: 
2.28.1 The Committee recognizes that the increased global interest in the large Ayush 
companies, as well as a more open FDI policy, is spurring more investment in value -added 
segments of the industry that will contribute to the growth of the production of the Ayush 
products and raw materials. The global interest and opportunities are transforming the entire 
value chain of Ayush industry. The Committee believes that the strong branding of Ayush sector 
and the global recognition of the Ayurveda & Yoga will develop a testimony to  the inherent 
strengths of the Indian traditional health care system, thereby, ensuring the receipt of foreign 
exchange that will make India‟s Balance of Payment favourable and Ayush contributing to GDP. 
(Para 5.4.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.28.2 Following are the steps/initiatives undertaken by the Ministry of Ayush to strong 
branding of Ayush sector and the global recognition of Ayurveda & Yoga: 
o signed 24 Country -to-Country MoUs for Cooperation in the field of Traditional Medicine 
and Homoeopathy with foreign nations. 
o signed 40 Institute level MoUs with international institutes for undertaking Collaborative 
Research / Academic collaboration. 
o signed 15 MoUs with international institutes for setting up of Ayush Academic Chairs in 
foreign nations. 
o Supported organization of international exhibitions/conferences/ workshops/ seminars/ road 
shows/ trade fairs, etc i.e.,02events in 2021-22 and 08events in 2022-23 (e.g., 09th WAC, 29th 
SATTE, India Pavilion at Dubai Expo and SCO Event-Guwahati). 
o supported the establishment of 39 Ayush Information Cells in 35 foreign nations. 

39 
 
o Offering Ayush scholarships to foreign nationals for undertaking Ayush courses in 
recognized Ayush institutions in India.  
o Signed MoU with the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medici ne (LSH&TM), UK and 
Frankfurter Innovationszentrum Biotechnologie GmbH (FIZ), Frankfurt Germany for clinical 
research studies on mitigation of Covid-19 through Ayurveda. 
o Providing Training to regulators of foreign nations to generate awareness about the Ay ush 
systems. 
o Got developed the Quality Certification programme viz. Ayush mark and Premium mark in 
cooperation with QCI to increase the reliability of standards of ASU&H Products. 
o WHO-GMP (COPP) has been given to 31 Ayurvedic Drug manufacturers to facilita te the 
export of Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani & Homoeopathy Drugs. 
o Ministry of Ayush and WHO has signed an agreement to establish WHO -GCTM in 
Jamnagar, Gujarat which aims to support to implement WHO‘s traditional medicine strategy 
(2014-23) and to support n ations in developing policies & action plans to strengthen the role 
of traditional medicine as part of their journey to universal health coverage. 
o First Meeting of the Expert Working Group on Traditional Medicine of the SCO Member 
States was organized by the Ministry of Ayush on 9th, 10th and 22nd, February 2023 in New 
Delhi and a consensus was developed among the Experts from SCO Countries on EWG 
Regulations. 
o Supported the establishment of the Ayush Export Promotion Council (Ayushexcil) to 
promote the export of Ayush products/ medicines as well as Ayush services.  
o Established an India -EU Technical Working Group (TWG) on Ayurveda. The Technical 
Working Group has the representation of technical experts from the Ministry of Ayush, the 
Government of India, the European Commission, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) 
and its Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC). 
o Launched Heal in India initiative to promote Medical Tourism in the country. Under this 
initiative, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare& Ministry of Ayush have been working 
with the Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C -DAC) and Services Export 
Promotion Council (SEPC), to develop a portal (Heal in India) for the convenience and ease 
of credible information for those who want to take treatment in India from abroad. 
1.28.3 The Ayush Sector has contributed significantly to the GDP of India. T he growth rate of 
export of Ayush and Herbal Products to various countries  has been 34.20 per cent during the 
period FY 2017-18 (USD 456.12 Million) to FY 2021-22 (i.e., USD 612.12 Million)  
(Source: DGCIS) 
Recommendation: 
 
1.28.4 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should take concrete steps to focus on 
strategic areas of Research, Education, and Capacity Building, Healthcare, Manufacturing and 
Services with realistic targets and achievement in specified timeline.In order to go along with the 

40 
 
modern system of medicine there is a need to establish Research, Education and Capacity 
building, Healthcare, Manufacturing & Services within the earliest possible timeframe. 
(Para 5.4.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.28.5 The Institute is taking concrete  steps to focus on research by undertaking in -house and 
MoUs based research activities and collaborations with Government and private agencies, 
accelerating higher education in Ayurveda by adding more topics in U.G., P.G. and Ph.D. level 
other than prescri bed by regulatory authority so that the students and scholars passing out from 
NIA are the excellent scales in teaching and research.  The Institute‘s GMP certified pharmacy 
manufactures more than 300 types of medicines worth more than Rs. 300 lakh every y ear for 
dispensing in OPD, IPD and also to meet research requirements. This pharmacy is being 
expanded to meet further requirements of patients and research. 
 Integrative transitional research module to be developed. 
 Development ofresearch-orientedevidence-basedAyush education in Ayush Institutes. 
   Establishment of Skill and Non-skill Ayush courses for capacity building, establishment of 
integrative health care Institutes. 
 State-of-the-art manufacturing units of Ayush drugs and Ayush health products. 
1.28.6 The National Institute of Siddha is focusing on research, education, and capacity 
building. This Institute has started UG course in Siddha (BSMS) from the academic year 2022 - 
23. It has also entered MoU with reputed Institutions for enhancing research activity. 
1.28.7 To provide better health care services and also to manage the huge number of patients, a 
new hospital building with sufficient space for accommodating the OPD patients along with 
clinical classes, IPD, and other amenities is under process and the Institute  also noted the 
recommendation of the Committee. 
 Ministry of Ayush has signed MoUs with the Department of Biotechnology, Department of 
Science and Technology. 
 National Ayush Inter-Ministerial Research Committee was formed under the chairmanship of 
the Secr etary (Ayush) along with the Secretaries of DST, DBT, DSIR, DPIIT, DoC and 
MoEF& CC. 
 The Ministry of Ayush has developed a Central Sector Scheme Namely , Champion Services 
Sector Scheme (CSSS) –Medical Value Travel.  One of its components is Skill Developme nt 
to fill the gap in the availability of skilled manpower.  
 

41 
 
1.28.8 Objectives of the Scheme:  
i. To develop Ayush specific skilled human resource.   
ii. Capacity building of existing skilled human resources.   
iii. To promote Export of Services.   
iv. To develop supporting structure for Ayush health services. 
1.28.9 Ministry of Ayush is implementing Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH 
Mission (NAM) through State/UT Governments. Under NAM, Ministry is supporting the efforts 
of State/UT Governments for development & promotion of AYUSH systems of medicine by 
providing financial assistance to them under different activities as per the proposals received in 
their State Annual Action P lans (SAAPs). The Mission  inter-alia makes provision for the 
following activities: - 
(i) Operationalization of AYUSH Health & Wellness Centres. 
(ii)Co-location of AYUSH facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health 
Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs). 
(iii) Upgradation of existing standalone Government AYUSH Hospitals 
(iv)Upgradation of existing Government/ Panchayat/ Government aided AYUSH 
Dispensaries/Construction of building for existing AYUSH Dispensary (Rented/dilapidated 
accommodation)/Construction of building to establish new AYUSH Dispensary 
(v) Setting up of up to 10/30/50 bedded integrated AYUSH Hospitals   
(vi)Supply of essential drugs to Government AYUSH Hospitals, Government Dispensaries and 
Government/Government aided Teaching Institutional AYUSH Hospitals 
(vii) AYUSH Public Health Programmes 
(viii) Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) 
(ix) Mobility support at State and District level 
(x) AYUSH Gram 
(xi) Establishment of new AYUSH colleges in the States where availability  of AYUSH 
teaching institutions is inadequate in Government Sector. 
(xii)Infrastructural development of AYUSH Under-Graduate Institutions. 
(xiii) Infrastructural development of AYUSH Post -Graduate Institutions/ add on PG/ 
Pharmacy/Para-Medical Courses  
1.28.10 Under NAM, there is provision of financial assistance for training and capacity building 
for teaching staffs, medical officers and other para medical staffs working in the educational 
institutions and AYUSH hospitals/ dispensaries. Further, under Ayu sh HWCs, there is provision 

42 
 
for training and capacity building of Community Health Officer (CHO) wherein one time 
induction training of 2 weeks duration of capacity building as team leader and to perform 
expanded range of services such as community -based p opulation enumeration, screening, IT 
enabled programmes etc. Further, refresher training of physician and multi - skilling of MPWs 
and ASHAs is also envisaged. 
1.28.11 Initiatives taken by Ministry, NCISM and NCH to focus on strategic areas of research and 
education are as follows:- 
 Ministry of Ayush has a mandate for coordination and promotion of research and 
development in Ayush systems of Health Care. Ministry has 5 Autonomous Organizations 
working under it having a common objective of Evidence -based Research in their respective 
systems of medicine includes Medicinal Plant Research (Medico -ethno botanical Survey, 
Pharmacognosy and Tissue Culture), Drug Standardization, Pharmacological Research, 
Clinical Research, Literary Research & Documentation and Tribal Health Care Research 
Programme.  
 Apart from these autonomous organizations, Ministry of Ayush also runs Ayurgyan Scheme 
(Central Sector Schemes) which has Research and Innovation as a component of scheme. 
This Research and Innovation component (erstwhile Extra Mural Research Schem e) of 
Ayurgyan scheme was introduced to tap the potential of medical institutes, scientific research 
& development institution, universities, and organizations for the research needs of Ayush 
sector, with an aim to expand the ambit of research in Ayush sys tems. Research and 
Innovation component of Ayurgyan Scheme has been designed to encourage Research & 
Development in priority areas based on disease burden in alignment to National Health 
Programme. 
 Ministry of Ayush has conceptualized National Ayush Resear ch Consortium consisting of 
Ministry of Ayush, DSIR, DBT and DST in consultation with NITI Aayog, to develop an 
institutionalized system of high end, global standard quality research in Ayush systems. 
 NCISM made an MOU with Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) 
to provide research grant for UG and PG students under Studentship Programme for 
Ayurveda Research Ken (SPARK) scheme for their innovative idea, and outstanding 
research. Als o, NCISM has trained 60 master trainers to get well -oriented in publication 
ethics, research integrity and scientific writing to train all PG guides of ASUS post graduate 
institutions across the country to upgrade PG research programme. 
 
1.28.12 To produce highly competent/proficient/meritorious ISM & Homoeopathy medical graduates 
following initiatives by NCISM and NCH have been taken: 
(i) Minimum Standard in Medical Education (Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani Sowa -Rigpa and 
Homoeopathy undergraduate courses) have b een notified for implementation with immediate effect; 
Competency/Outcome Based Course Curriculum and Syllabus for first professional course in 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa (ASUS) and Homoeopathy have been implemented to 
ensure competency of the medical students; Early clinical exposure to medical students implemented 
from first year of the course/ program. 

43 
 
(ii) Methodology to supplement modern advances, and scientific and technological developments in 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa (ASUS) and Homoeopathy curriculum has been included 
in the regulations. 
(iii) To promote a multi-disciplinary attitude and approach, 28 online elective courses have also been 
started for first professional undergraduate medical students of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unan i, and Sowa-
Rigpa (ASUS). 
(iv) Industry-Academia interface has been initiated to provide industry exposure to the postgraduate 
students of concerned specialty in Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani. 
(v) To improve the quality of teaching institutions in Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa 
(ASUS) medical systems Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has been developed for the online 
visitation and assessment of ASUS teaching colleges and attached hospitals.  
(vi) To promote quality in teaching, NCISM has trained aro und 2000 teaching faculties of ASUS as 
educational technologists. 
1.29 NATIONAL PROGRAM FOR PREVENTION AND MANAGEMENT OF 
OSTEOARTHRITIS AND OTHER MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS 
Recommendation: 
1.29.1 The Committee is of the view that under National Program for Prevention and 
Management of Osteoarthritis and other Musculoskeletal Disorders , Ayush interventions like 
medicines, diet and lifestyle practices and yoga will be carried out to reduce Osteoarthritis and 
other Musculoskeletal disorders leading to minimize the burden of knee transplant. 
(Para 5.7.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.29.2 Specialized units for catering to the needs of osteoarthritis and other Musculoskeletal 
Disorders are by in the Institute and giving good services to such patients.  Regular yoga sessions 
are also conducted for such patients giving good results. 
1.29.3 Development of treatment protocol of osteoarthritis and muscular skeletal disorder 
through Ayush under National prevention programme for prevention and management of 
osteoarthritis and o ther muscular skeletal disorder with special reference to Ayush drugs,  diet, 
Yoga and Panchakarma. 
1.29.4 The Council took a note on the recommendation of the PSC. 
1.29.5 The observation has been noted and same may be complied by CCRS. 
1.29.6 This Institute is providing treatment to patients affected with osteoarthritis and other 
Musculoskeletal diseases. Patients are provided with internal medicines, external medicines, 
siddha therapies like Varmam, Thokkanam etc and Yogam. These are highly effective in the 
management of osteoarthritis and other musculoskeletal diseases. 

44 
 
1.29.7 Council has developed Standard Treatment Guidelines for the Prevention and 
Management of osteoarthritis and other Musculoskeletal Disorders. The same has been 
communicated to MOHFW for inclusion in the guideline being developed. 
1.29.8 Homoeopathy is e ffective for degenerative joint disorders like Osteoarthritis and other 
Musculoskeletal Disorders. Homoeopathy can extend its service with 
1. Individualized medicines, 
2. Diet: A) Calcium rich foods like curd, Milk, almond, walnut etc. B) Avoiding high cal orie 
diet. 
3. Suitable lifestyles, like proper exercise, maintaining ideal body weight, stress free lifestyle etc.  
1.29.9 Many patients who are chronically sick are availing treatments for such conditions at 
NIH with better results. NIH proposes to run special OPD for Osteoarthritis and other 
Musculoskeletal Disorders along with Physiotherapy, Yoga for documentation and analysis of 
the data. 
1.29.10 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
1.30 AYUSH MEDICAL AND WELLNESS TOURISM 
Recommendation: 
1.30.1 The Committee takes into account the announcement of the Prime Minister at Global 
Ayush Investment and Innovation Summit at Gujarat and strongly believes that such summit 
would lead to promotion of startup culture and unicorns in Ayush sector; modernization and 
expansion of Ayush e- market place for farmer‟s benefits; technology equipped Ayush mark with 
quality linkages for Global identity; promotion and Dissemination of Ayush Aahar; network of 
Ayush parks to promote research and manufacturing in Ayush sector to promote  Ayush product 
across the country. 
(Para 5.8.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.30.2 In this regard, Quality Council of India has been engaged for voluntary certification of 
quality of Ayurveda Siddha Unani (ASU) products. Through this scheme, drug manufacturers 
are awarded the quality seal to the products on the basis of the third -party e valuation of the 
quality, subject to fulfilment of the regulatory requirements. Ayush Standard and Ayush 
Premium Marks are awarded for products moving in the domestic and international markets 
respectively. 146 ASU products are reported to have been awarded Ayush Premium Mark and 97 
products Ayush Standard Mark. 
1.30.3 There is no proposal to set up Ayush Parks to promote research and manufacturing in 
Ayush sector to promote Ayush product across the country. 
 
 

45 
 
1.30 AYUSH MEDICAL AND WELLNESS TOURISM 
Recommendation: 
1.30.1 The finance minister  in her speech explicitly highlightedJan Bhagidari  through Sabka 
Saath Sabka Prayas. Embracing the same approach is crucial for mainstreaming the Ayush 
System and expanding its reach across the world. The Committee is of the considered view that 
India has to make concerted efforts and work towards integration of Ayush System with the 
Modern System of Medicine. The Committee believes that Ayush through its various medicinal 
therapies has the potential to develop Ind ia as an attractive destination for medical tourism. The 
Ministry must take the measures to promote India as a leader in Medical Tourism and spread the 
reach of ancient Indian spiritual knowledge and wellness systems. The Committee, in this regard, 
strongly believes that new initiatives undertaken under Medical Travel in Ayush, viz. e -medial 
visa including Ayush system for 166 countries; Heal in India with dedicated resources; NABH 
accreditation standards; adoption of ISO 22525 would yield into tangible ach ievement against 
set objectives and goals of MVT in Ayush sector. 
(Para 5.8.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.30.2 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
1.30.3 Heal in India is an Initiative of the Government to promote the Medical Tourism in the 
country. Under this Initiative, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India & 
Ministry of Ayush has been working with Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
and Services Export Promo tion Council for developing a One Step Heal in India portal for 
Promotion of Medical Value Travel. 
1.30.4 Couple of Chintan Shivir was organized by the Ministry of Health and Family welfare to 
promote Heal in India and Heal by India. Ministry of Ayush has also participated in these 
Chintan Shivir. Certain action points were identified in this Shivir to promote traditional 
medicine through Tourism in India. 
1.30.5 A Round Table and Plenary Session on Heal in India - Medical Value Travel were also 
organized during Global Ayush Investment and Innovation summit at Gandhinagar, Gujarat to 
promote India as No. 1 destination for Medical Value Travel.  
1.30.6 During the inaugural ceremony of the ―Global Ayush Investment and Innovation 
Summit‖ held on 20.04.2022 at Ga ndhinagar, Gujarat, the Hon'ble Prime Minister announced to 
launch a special category of Ayush visa for foreign visitors for Ayush medical 
travel/education/treatment including Yoga. The same has been taken up with the Ministry of 
Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 
Recommendation: 
1.30.7 The Committee recommends that in order to promote Ayush medical and wellness 
tourism the best in all Ayush components can be exhibited/ demonstrated in the forms of short 
films, the success stories of differ ent Ayush systems can be propagated through various official 

46 
 
handles of Social Medias. Homoeopathic wellness centres Arogya Mela, medical camps may be 
established and conducted in the tourist spots which are popular among international tourists 
like hill s tations, sea beaches, pilgrim areas etc.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may collaborate with foreign countries to organize melas to propagate the AYUSH system of 
Medicine. The Committee further recommends that the Government should organize GAIIS like 
Investment Summit frequently in various States and UTs. 
(Para 5.8.5 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.30.8 The Ministry of Ayush under its Promotion of International Cooperation for Ayush 
Scheme, organizes or supports in organization of Ayush Promotional and outreach events e.g. 
Ayurveda Day Celebrations, International Yoga Day Celebrations, holding Yoga Sessio ns etc. 
The MoA supported organization of international exhibitions/conferences/ workshops/ seminars/ 
road shows/ trade fairs, etc i.e.10events in 2021 -22 in foreign countries (i.e. Dubai, Croatia, 
Kyrgyzstan Germany, Mauritius, Suriname, Indonesia, Nether lands UAE & Sri -Lanka) and 
08events in 2022-23 in foreign countries (i.e. Austria, Finland, Germany, Colombia, Mongolia, 
Vietnam, and Switzerland). 
1.31 FUTURE OUTLOOK FOR AYUSH SYSTEMS 
Recommendation: 
1.31.1 The Ministry strive towards accelerated growth of the Ayush systems by strengthening its 
regulatory system, infrastructure, enhanced budgetary investment, ensuring the accessibility of 
Ayush services in un-served and far flung rural, urban slum and tribal areas etc. The need of the 
hour is strategic long-term planning and enhanced investment for Ayush sector. Given the huge 
disease burden in the country, Ayush Systems can offer an affordable and efficacious line of 
treatment. 
(Para 5.9 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.31.2 The Institute had been getting sufficient funds for enhancing and accelerating its 
education, patient care, and infrastructure facilities every year. The number of buildings has been 
constructed for expansion and the best equipment‘s and machineries have also added every year 
to strengthen education, research and patient -care activities in all spheres.  Patient -care services 
are also extended to rural and tribal population by org anizing medical camps and free dispensing 
of medicines.  Propagation for adopting Ayush health system in rural, urban slum and tribal areas 
of the country. 
 Development of treatment protocol in Ayush as a mode of treatment in neurological 
muscular skeletal and various lifestyle disorders. 

47 
 
 The Ministry of Ayush has been providing enhanced budgetary support to meet the needs 
of this Institute in view of increase  in the services. This Institute has been gradually 
increasing its activities in providing Siddha education and health care. 
 
1.31.3 Council noted the recommendation of the Committee that there is need for developing 
long term strategy with achievable goals taking into consideration the huge burden of diseases. 
Council‘s proposed initiatives are:  
 To undertake evidence-based studies on modern parameters 
 Undertake public health, policy, economic and operational research studies. 
 To collaborate with other institutes for basic research studies and diseases of national 
health importance 
 To develop research centers as Centers of Excellence 
 To develop research consortium 
1.31.4 National Inst itute of Homoeopathy already involved towards accelerated growth of the 
Ayush system by strengthening its regulatory system infrastructure, enhanced budgetary 
investment, accessibility of Ayush Service. NIH, Kolkata is providing Ayush services in the un -
served and far-flung rural areas, urban slums and Tribal areas through 09(nine) Peripheral OPDs 
in West Bengal. 
1.31.5 The MoA has developed a Central Sector Scheme for the Promotion of International Co -
operation in AYUSH (IC Scheme) under which the Ministry of Ayush provides support to Indian 
Ayush drug Manufacturers/ Ayush Service providers to give boost to the export of AYUSH 
products & services; facilitates the International promotion, development and recognition of 
AYUSH system of medicine; foster intera ction of stakeholders and market development of 
AYUSH at international level;  holding training workshop/symposiums for promoting and 
strengthening awareness and interest about AYUSH Systems of Medicine at international level. 
1.31.6 The Ministry of Ayush has taken the following steps towards the international 
recognition for AYUSH systems of medicine: 
 Launched four WHO benchmark documents developed by the Traditional, 
Complementary and Integrative Medicine Unit, WHO as part of the collaboration 
agreement (PCA). 
 Signed an agreement with WHO for the secondment at grade P5 to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), Traditional, Complementary and Integrated Medicine Unit within 
the Department of Integrated Health Services (IHS) 
1.31.7 The Ministry of Ayush and the World Health Organization Southeast Regional 
Office (WHO SEARO) signed a Letter of Exchange (LoE) for deputation secondment/deputation 
of an AYUSH expert to WHO‘s regional traditional medicine programme in New Delhi, India 
amidst a signing ceremony organized at WHO -SEARO‘s office, New Delhi on 15 February 
2021.  On the recommendation of WHO, an expert has been deputed as Technical Officer – 

48 
 
Traditional Medicine for two years to work with the WHO Regional Office for South -East Asia 
situated in New Delhi, India.  
1.31.8 Donor Agreement for developing a Second Module in the Traditional Medicine (TM) 
Chapter of the International Classification of Diseases -11 Revision (ICD-11). 
1.31.9A substantial increase has been seen in the utilization of funds under the IC scheme (i.e. 
from Rs.15.81 Cr in 2018-19 to Rs. 139.84 Cr in 2022-23). 
1.31.10Signed an agreement with WHO to establish WHO -GCTM in Jamnagar, Gujarat, the 
ground-breaking Ceremony of which was attended by the Hon‘ble Prime  Minister of India, 
Director General of WHO and other esteemed dignitaries on 19.04.2022 in Jamnagar, Gujarat. 
Funds of Rs. 1,38,65,36,366/- have been released to WHO for GCTM during 2022 and 2023. 
1.31.11Ministry of Ayush vide gazette notification S.O. 1776 (E) dated 11.04.2022 has 
constituted Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board (ASUDTAB) for the 
purpose of sub-section (1) of the section 33 C of the Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940.  A meeting 
of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Techni cal Advisory Board (ASUDTAB) was held under 
the Chairmanship of Director General of Health Services (DGHS), Government of India on 27 th 
June, 2022. 
1.31.12Ministry of Ayush has set up AYUSHEXCIL (Ayush Export Promotion Council), a 
newly formed Export Promo tion Council [supported by Ministry of Commerce, GOI and 
facilitated by Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry] on  April 20 , 2022,by 
Shri Narendra Modi, Prime Minister at Global Ayush Investment and Innovation Summit held in 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat. The aim of AYUSHEXCIL is to enhance export potential of Ayurveda, 
Homoeopathy, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa and Unani systems and address trade issues pertaining to 
these sectors, to facilitate capacity building of its members on export procedures, organize B to B 
meetings, international events, roadshows, seminars and workshops on the export of Ayush 
products, and to safeguard the scientific research in the field of Ayush healthcare. 
1.31.13Under NAM, there is provision for financial assistance for construc tion of building to 
establish new AYUSH dispensary in the area where there are no AYUSH facilities available so 
that un-served and far flung rural, urban slum and tribal areas etc. may avail Ayush treatment. 
1.32 FUTURE OUTLOOK FOR AYUSH SYSTEMS 
Recommendation: 
1.32.1 The Committee is of the considered view that the Ayush systems have immense potential, 
and the time has come for using traditional knowledge while keeping with modern technologies 
for better Ayush public health delivery services. The holistic approach aiming at wellness and 
prophylaxis proves that something which has come quite popular and Ayush systems can 
certainly occupy huge of national and global space and become more competitive, affordable, 
and accessible to mankind. 
(Para 5.9.1 ibid) 

49 
 
Action Taken: 
1.32.2 The Institute is also doing good services by providing the best medical -care and quality 
medicines manufactures in its own GMP certified pharmacy to the maximum extent possible.  
Modern technologies are also adopted in teaching, research and hospital servi ces including its 
Central Laboratory.  Holistic approach is also general in providing various therapies including 
Panchkarma, etc. 
 Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) is conducting research in Siddha system of 
medicine and provides health care fa cilities for diseases like Psoriasis, Eczema, respiratory 
disorders, Musculo-skeletal disorders, male and female reproductive diseases, non -
communicable diseases, paediatric diseases, vector-borne diseases through internal therapies 
and external therapies like varmam, fomentation, thokkanam etc. 
 Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) under Ministry of Ayush is an apex body for 
conducting research in Siddha system of medicine and provides health care facilities for 
various diseases through its periphe ral institutes / units of CCRS at Tamil Nadu, Kerala, 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, New Delhi, Puducherry and Goa. 
 Specialized treatments are being provided to the public through Non-communicable Disease 
OPD, Geriatric OPD, Reproductive and Child health care OPD, Varmam, Thokkanam and 
Bone setting and Yogam OPD.  
 Siddhar Kaayakalpam, Siddhar Yogam, external therapies like Varmam, Thokkanam are the 
strength of Siddha system for prevention, management, and treatment of diseases. 
 Kabsurakudineer has proven signif icant effect in the management and prevention of COVID 
-19. Nilavembu  Kudineer has proven effect in the prevention and management of Dengue 
and Chikungunya in epidemic outbreaks. 
 The traditional medicine system of Siddha had been utilized as preventive and  management 
perspective for COVID -19. CCRS have initiated pre -clinical and clinical studies with the 
support of Ministry of Ayush to assess the utility and effectiveness of Siddha formulation in 
improving immunity and aiding in the management & treatment of COVID -19 and 
published research articles in various indexed journals. 
1.32.3 The Institute has well equipped clinical laboratories, which are utilized for providing 
treatment under siddha system of medicine and clinical research. The Institute will str ive to 
increase its reach to provide healthcare under Siddha System of Medicines to more and more 
people. 
1.32.4 Council through its outreach activities by conducting mobile health camps aims to reach 
the population residing in rural areas and provide competitive, affordable and accessible health 
care services to mankind. 
1.32.5 The holistic concept is the foundation of Homoeopathy. The Homoeopathic medicines 
are prescribed based on  holistic approach, inclusive of mental, physical along with modern 
investigation techniques, physiotherapy and Yoga for treating patient. 

50 
 
1.32.6 Homoeopathic system has immense scope in prophylaxis at different level like 
primordial, primary, secondary and tertiary level. It is also a good system for prevention of 
epidemic diseases as it was evidenced in COVID -19 pandemic. Homoeopathic medicines ar e 
affordable, and it has no Known side effect. 
1.32.7 Thus, Homoeopathic system can certainly occupy huge national and global space and 
become competitive, affordable and accessible to mankind. 
1.32.8 The growth rate of export of Ayush and Herbal Products to various countries during the 
period FY 2017 -18 (i.e. USD 456.12 Million) To FY 2021 -22 (i.e. USD 612.12 Million) has 
been 34.20 per cent.(Source: DGCIS) 
 
1.32.9 Union Cabinet has approved operationalization of 12500 AYUSH Health & Wellness 
Centres (AHWCs) as a component under AYUSHMAN BHARAT for implementation through 
National AYUSH Mission for 5 years from 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
1.32.10 The objective of AHWCs is to establish a holistic wellness model based on AYUSH 
principles and practices. The Objectives of AYUSH HWCS are as under: - 
(i) To provide Comprehensive Primary Healthcare through AYUSH using team-based 
approach,  
(ii) To establish a holistic wellness model based on AYUSH principles and practices focusing 
on preventive, promotive, curative, rehabilitat ive healthcare by establishing integration 
with existing public Healthcare system and  
(iii) To provide informed choice to the needy public by making AYUSH services available.  
1.32.11 Under NAM, as per the proposals received from State/UT Governments through th eir 
State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs), a total of 12,500 units of existing AYUSH dispensaries 
and sub health centers have been approved to be upgraded as AYUSH HWCs. However, grant -
in-aid has been released for 9,108 units. As per the reports received from States/UTs, 5984 
AYUSH HWCs have been made functional till date. 
1.32.12 Methodology to supplement modern advances, scientific and technological developments in 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa (ASUS) and Homoeopathy curriculum has been included 
in the regulations by NCISM and NCH. 
Recommendation: 
1.32.13 The Committee believes that the Ministry, by implementing the provisions of NCISM Act, 
2020 and NCH Act, 2020, is making concerted efforts in promoting national health goals by 
encouraging the medical professionals to adopt latest medical research in their work and to 
contribute to research. The Committee is of the further view that the Ayush System must be 
amenable to adapt to the changing needs to take into account the latest technology and medical 
innovation into its ambit to enrich preventive, curative and rehabilitative „Wings of Ayush‟. 
(Para 5.9.2 ibid) 

51 
 
Action Taken: 
1.32.14 Following initiatives has been taken to take into account the latest technology by NCISM: 
 
SOP has been developed for the online visitation and assessment of ASUS teaching colleges 
and attached hospitals and successfully implemented to ensure integrity and transparency  in 
inspection procedures. Also, Advanced teaching methodologies are included in course 
curriculum like blended learning, flipped classroom etc For a yearlong program web portal has 
been developed by NCISM for the purpose of collecting data in respect of the school students/ 
college students/ public oriented healthcare/promotion activities by ASUS colleges. 
Recommendation: 
1.32.15 The Committee is of the firm view that Naturopathy & yoga, being a non -
pharmacological system of medicine, can be well integrated with modern system of medicine   
for almost all diseases from common cold to cancer. It would be more relevant in the era of 
lifestyle disorders for the prevention of diseases and stay self -health reliant with focus on both 
physical and mental health to accomplish the objective of „Azadi ka Amrit Kaal‟. There is no 
denying the fact that in the Pandemic Phase of Covid -19, the Y&N have already proved a 
panacea for curing many ailments including COVID. The Committee believes that Ayush system 
will definitely march forward through „Amrit Kal‟ to „SwarnimVarsh‟ – India‟s Journey to 100 
years in Service of mankind. 
(Para 5.9.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
1.32.16 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
  

52 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY‘S REPLIES 
 
2.1 CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES: - NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION (NAM) 
Recommendation: 
2.1.1 The Committee notes that the broad thematic area of Ayush activities is the key to 
accomplish the mission objectives of the Ministry i.e., improve access to high quality and 
affordable Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa (AUS&SR) &  Homeopathy medical 
education, availability of adequate and high quality AUS&SR & Homeopathy medical 
professionals in all parts of the country, promote equitable and universal healthcare that 
encourages community health perspective. The broad thematic area  of AYUSH activities in 2022 
under theme “Har Din Har Ghar Ayurveda” with sub themes as weekly based themes are 
namely Ayurveda for Holistic Health, Ayurveda for millennials, Ayurveda Aahar and Ayurveda 
for senior citizens. The thematic area of Quality res earch in Ayush is undertaken through 
pioneer research councils under MoA such as CCRAS, CCRUM, CCRS, CCRH and CCRYN. The 
Committee, however, feels that in order to address emerging challenges of healthcare, there is a 
need for functional integration of Ayu rveda and conventional medicine with its affordable and 
evidence-based use to boost Ayurveda in the paradigm of contemporary scientific, technological 
and medical parameters. 
(Para 1.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.1.2 The Council had celebrated its seventh Ayurveda day at its peripheral institutes from 
12thSeptember to 23 rd October 2022.  Under this activity, total population benefited with the 
advocacyof Ayurveda was approximately one lakh. The activities which were undertaken are E -
kit distribution, health  camps, Prakriti Parikshan, distribution of IEC material and Medicinal 
plant distribution etc.  Further the Council has undertaken a clinical research project to improve 
the quality of life of old age population in collaboration with the AIIMS centre of Co mmunity 
medicine at Ballabhgarh district of Haryana. 
2.1.3 The Institute provides the best treatment to patients for various diseases. Wherever 
required integration of conventional methods are also adopted. Various research activities are 
also going on regarding evidence-based use to boost Ayurveda. 
2.1.4 On behalf of same an MOU was signed between VMMC Safdarjung Hospital and All 
India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi and 6th Floor Emergency Block Safdarjung was 
inaugurated as Department of Integrated Medicine which is functional with services of Ayurveda 
experts in Allopathic background. 
2.1.5 The Institute has taken significant steps to accomplish and to achieve the objectives. The 
Institute has various provision to achieve and to promote and strengthen awareness about 

53 
 
AYUSH. As of now, the Institute runs 60 bedded Ayurvedic and 20 bedded Homoeopathic 
Hospitals.  The Institute regularly gives free consultation in the Institute Hospitals (both OPD  & 
IPD) and conducting free medical & awareness Camps at villages, schools, and at community 
levels etc. The Institute is running the BAMS and BHMS Undergraduate courses Homoeopathy. 
The Institute has already admitted 6 batches of BAMS and BHMS courses wit h intake 50 
students each during the academic sessions 2016 -17 and 63 students each in both courses from 
the academic session 2019 -20 onwards. First batches of BAMS and BHMS students have 
completed their graduation in August 2022. Apart from running BAMS a nd BHMS courses, a 
One-year Panchakarma Technician Certificate course with intake capacity of 20 students 
annually. Besides, the Institute is also taken up the step to start PG courses in different specialties 
of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy. The Institute has  already set up one Peripheral 
Pharmacovigilance unit of the Central Sector Scheme under the aegis of All India Institute of 
Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi. The Institute is trying to collaborate with other related scientific 
Institute for research, clinical trial to develop newly drugs. 
2.2 MICRO ANALYSIS OF DEMAND FOR GRANTS 
PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF NMPB DURING 2021 -22 AND 
2022-23 
Recommendation: 
2.2.1 The Committee recommends the Ministry to take concrete steps to improve the physical 
performance of NMPB, to achieve its mission objective, which remains short of target set for 
2021-22 and 2022 -23 on almost all counts. The Committee believes that the introduction of 
forward and backward linkage in supply chain of medicinal plants (Integrated component) 
would help the farmers by providing Quality Planting Material (QPM) and Post -harvest 
management infrastructure. 
(Para 3.2.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.2.2 The short of target for 2021 -22 and 2022 -23: Under Central Sector Scheme for 
Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants of NMPB, 
tentative physical targets were set against the budget outlay. However, actual Physical 
achievement is based on receipt of eligible project proposals. In addition, all efforts are being 
made to improve the physical performance of NMPB. 
2.2.3 The additional component -  
―Forward and backward linkage in supply chain of medicinal plants  (Integrated 
component)‖ was approved during Standing Finance Committee (SFC) meeting for the 
revision of Guidelines of Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and 
Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants of NMPB held on 03rd May, 2023 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Ayush. 
 

54 
 
2.3 PHARMACOPOEIA COMMISSION FOR INDIAN MEDICINE AND 
HOMOEOPATHY (PCIM&H) 
Recommendation: 
2.3.1 The Committee appreciates the concept of „One Nation, One Herb and One Standard‟ as 
put forward by Ministry of Ayush with the mission to merge the multiple standards of an herb 
into one. The Committee understands that to publish the standards under One Herbs One 
Standard by adopting and upgrading the available standard for Indian Medicine and 
Homoeopathy is a herculean task. The Committee, nevertheless, recommends PCIM&H to 
harmonize all the monographs published/being published through various Pharmacopoeias. The 
Committee also recommends PCIM&H and Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC) to sign 
MoUs with large number of companies for developing “ONE HERB-ONE STANDARD”. 
(Para 3.3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.3.2 Cognizance of the issue has already been taken and Ministry  of Ayush through PCIM&H 
has initiated an exercise for establishing Pharmacopeial standards under one herb one standard 
policy. Further the draft under consideration regarding revision of Drug and Cosmetics Act 1940 
and Rules thereunder has proposed provisions for accommodating such policy shift. 
Implementation is under process. 
 
2.4 AYURGYAN 
Recommendation: 
2.4.1 The Committee understands that the overall structure of the Ayurgyan Scheme aims to 
encourage Ayush personnel to undergo need -based professional training and bridge the 
knowledge gaps, therefore, the Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to give equitable 
impetus to all sub -component of the Capacity Building and Continuing Medical Education 
(CME) in Ayush.  Underlining the vital role of Research and innovation in Ayush Drugs for 
prioritized diseases, the Committee, recommends collecting data on safety, standardization and 
quality control for Ayush products and practices in order to develop evidence -based support on 
the efficacy of Ayush drugs and therapies. In order to inculcate scientific aptitude and e xpertise 
relating to Ayush systems, the Ministry should chalk out the strategy for development of 
potential human resource and its management in Ayush system. 
(Para 3.7.2 ibid) 
 
 

55 
 
Action Taken: 
2.4.2 Capacity Building and CME component: - Proposals under all sub -components have 
been considered if suitable proposals received from the eligible organizations/institutions. 
2.4.3 Research and Innovation in AYUSH component: -To generate data on safety, 
standardization and quality control for AYUSH products and practices and to develop evidence 
based support on the efficacy of AYUSH drugs and therapies are also objective of Research and 
Innovation in AYUSH component of Ayurgyan scheme. 
2.5 PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE SCHEME IN 2021 -22 
AND 2022-23 
2.5.1 The Committee expresses its concern over the physical and financial progress of 
AOGUSY as a result of which the targets set in strengthening and up -gradation of Ayush 
Pharmacies and Drug Testing Laboratories to achieve higher standards and Pharmacovigilance 
of ASU&H drugs including surveillance of misleading advertisements suffered a lot and remains 
a far-flung mission .  The Committee feels the need for strengthening of Central and State 
regulatory frameworks including Technical Human Resource & Capacity Building progra ms for 
Ayush drugs for Manufacturing of quality medicine from state and private pharmacies and 
NABL accreditation of DTL.  The Committee observes that there should be improved 
surveillance of adverse drug reactions through NPvCC, IPvCs and PPvCs.  Moreover , the 
Committee recommends for effective implementation of the Drug and Cosmetic Act 1940 and 
rules 1945 at the grass-root level for successful implementation of above scheme. The Committee 
understands that in  order to get the support for development of st andards and accreditation/ 
certification of Ayush products & materials, the collaboration with BIS, QCI and other relevant 
scientific institutions and industrial R&D centres is all the more necessary. 
(Para 3.9.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.5.2 The Financial performance during 2021-22 and 2022-23 is given below: 
   (Rs. In Crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimate 
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual Utilization 
2021-22 0.00 10.00 1.77 
2022-23 23.50 20.00 19.0530618 
(As on 31.03.2023) 
2.5.3 The component wise funds disbursed under the scheme Ayush Oushadhi  Gunvatta Evam 
Uttpadan Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) are as follows: 
 

56 
 
(Rs. In Crore) 
Components of AOGUSY 
scheme 
During FY 2021-
22                            
During FY 2022-23                         
Strengthening and up -
gradation of Ayush 
Pharmacies and Drug 
Testing laboratories to 
achieve higher standards. 
0.18 
(Funds released to 
State Govt. of 
Mizoram) 
14.6948 
(Funds released to the following 
applicants) 
1. InducarePharmaPvt.Ltd, Pune –. 3.00 
2. Ayurchem Private Ltd,  Maharashtra  - 
2.69 
3. Phytovedic India Pvt. Ltd. Maharashtra 
– 2.1461 
4. ViseshAyurvedic Pvt. Ltd Pharmacy 
Kerala – 1.9156 
5. Amar Pharmaceuticals and labs (I) Pvt. 
Ltd. U.P – 1.4343 
6. Amar Pharmaceuticals and labs (I) Pvt. 
Ltd. U.P (DTL) – 0.7767 
7. Shree BaidyanathAy urvedBhawan Pvt. 
Ltd, Madhya Pradesh– 2.0892 
8. Kollam District Ayurveda 
OushdhaNirmanaVyavasaya Co -
operative Society Ltd, Kerala– 0.6429 
Pharmacovigilance of 
ASU&H drugs including 
surveillance of misleading 
advertisements 
2.72 
(Funds released to 
All India Institute 
of Ayurveda, New 
Delhi) 
4.30 
(Funds released to All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi) 
Strengthening of Central and 
State regulatory frameworks 
including Human Resource 
Development & Capacity 
Building programs for 
quality control of Ayush 
drugs 
0.04 
(Funds released to 
National Institute 
of Unani 
Medicine, 
Bengaluru) 
- 
Total 2.94 18.9948 
 
2.5.4 Pharmacovigilance Program for Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy (ASU &  H) 
Drugs has been established under the AOGUSY Scheme. The program is working through a 

57 
 
three-tier network of a National Pharmacovigilance Centre (NPvC), Five Intermediary  
Pharmacovigilance Centres (IPvCs) and 99 Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres (PPvCs) 
established across the country.  
2.5.5 AWARENESS PROGRAMS:To generate awareness regarding the AYUSH therapeutic 
approaches and educate about the systematic use of AYUSH drugs, and to inculcate the reporting 
of any suspected adverse drug reaction in  healthcare professionals; awareness events have been 
regularly organized across the country. In the present year from January 2022 to November 
2022, 243 awareness programs have been conducted with 20521 beneficiaries. 
 
2.5.6 MISLEADINGADVERTISEMENTS: Under the program, Objectionable advertisements 
are being reported from different regions of the country and in various languages by IPvCs and 
PPvCs which are being reported to the respective State Licensing Authorities by these centers at 
regular intervals. From January 2022 to November 2022 a total of 6632 misleading objectionable 
advertisements have been noticed. COVID -related misleading advertisements have decreased 
during this year only in the month of January 2022, 4 COVID -related misleading advertisements 
have been reported. 
 
2.5.7 SUSPECTED ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS : Since 2018, the center has started 
receiving suspected reactions. These are the individual case safety reports and can be signals for 
future reference. These are being recorded and submitted to the Drug Policy Section, Ministry of 
Ayush for information. During the present year we have reported 285 such suspected reactions of 
AYUSH drugs. These reports are mild in nature. None of them were found to be serious and 
none required hospitalization. No fatality was noticed, and all the reports were self-limiting and 
non-serious in nature. 
2.5.8 CCRUM had conducted three Training Awareness Programmes on NABL Accreditation 
for Ayush Scientist at New Delhi, Kolkata, and Chennai wherein about 120 Ayush medical 
Scientist including Technicians participated. The details are as follows: 
S. 
No 
Details Date Venue No. of 
scientists 
participated 
1 NABL Meeting 05.08.20
22 
Hybrid mode 
2 First Awareness 
Programme 
15.11.20
22 
Ayush 
Auditorium, 
Janakpuri, New 
Delhi 
32 
3 Second 
Awareness 
Programme 
19.12.20
22 
Seminar Hall, 
NIH, Kolkata 
40 

58 
 
4 Third 
Awareness 
Programme 
21.02.20
23 
Auditorium, 
RRIUM, 
Chennai 
45 
 
2.5.9 A separate Ayush Technical department has been created Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS), Manak Bhawan , 9, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg , New Delhi – 110002 and Deployed 
Manpower - five Ayush experts - Research officer (Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, 
Siddha &  Homoeopathy)in the newly created AYUSH Department dedicated to developing 
standards for Ayush systems on loan basis. 
2.5.10 VISION: The scheme intends to promote and project quality, acceptability, and visibility 
of Ayush products for enhancing people‘s confidence in their use for health care and for 
improving trade.  
i. To inculcate culture of quality production of Ayush products assured with safety and efficacy.  
ii. To enable Ayush drug industry in complying with national and global regulatory requirements 
and standards.  
iii. To build up visibility and demand- driven market presence of Ayush products. 
iv. To strengthen Ayush pharmaceutical industry for enhancing trade and exports. 
 
2.5.11 OBJECTIVES: 
i. To enhance India's manufacturing capabilities and exports of traditional medicines and 
health promotion products under the initiative of AtmaNirbhar Bharat. 
ii. To facilitate adequate infrastructural & technological upgradation and institutional 
activities in public and private sector for standardization, quality manufacturing and 
analytical testing of Ayush drugs & materials. 
iii. To strengthen regulatory frameworks at Central and State level for effective quality 
control, safety monitoring and surveillance of misleading advertisements of Ayush 
drugs. 
iv. To encourage building up synergies, collaborations, and converge nt approaches for 
promoting standards and quality of Ayush drugs & materials. 
 
2.6 INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH IN AYURVEDA (ITRA), 
JAMNAGAR 
Recommendation: 
2.6.1 The Committee is of the considered view that conferring the status of “Institute of 
National Importance” (INI) will increase the interest of public to the Ayurveda.  The Committee 
is assured that the conferring of status of INI to ITRA would have domino effect on other  
institutes, therefore, having positive impact on excellence in the AYUSH education system. The 
Committee, however, recommends ITRA to amend Ayurveda Syllabi according to the need of 
classical Ayurveda and need of students.  The Committee believes that ITR A can have new 

59 
 
innovative experiments in Ayurveda syllabi and once such innovation proves to be successful in 
generation of more confident Ayurveda vaidyas, then that model can be implemented throughout 
the nation via NCISM.  The Committee recommends the I TRA to impart the professional 
pursuits & training and Research in A yurveda for further improvement in capacity building &  
skill development in Ayurveda system by modifying the training module and adequate use of 
dashboard and successful effort made for digital mode of training. Ayurveda can further be 
improved by implementing newer teaching and research methodology. The scho lars who have 
more interest in Shalya and Shalakya can have short course of Sushruta Samhita.  Such type of 
professional pursuits can be fulfilled for all Ashtangas.  The Committee further views that once 
AyuSim project of ITRA gains currency for digitaliz ing the Ayurveda clinical training , the 
Ayurveda scholars would be definitely benefitted to learn Ayurveda based diagnosis and 
treatment through simulation techniques. 
(Para 3.11.2 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.6.2 Recently, the Undergraduate regulation modified and sent for approval which  includes 
the horizontal model for teaching and learning and the syllabus and teaching methodology for the 
same is under construction. Director, Dean(Academic), faculties of Institute has al ready 
discussed the matter in this  regard at New Delhi with Officials of NCISM.   Methods for 
assessment and evaluation will be changed according to the  subject-specialty, the different kinds 
of assessment methods will be adopted.   Credit based evaluation and assessment will be 
followed. The emphasis will be  given to the skill development while teaching and assessing the 
student at each level. This more focus will be given on the execution of classical Ayurveda  and 
need of students. This will be updated and  finalized in due course of time.   Further, M.D. 
(Ayurveda) course includes the Ayurveda related topics as  mentioned by NCISM with the 
inclusion of many ot her topics such as  integrative approaches, practical training at clinical sites 
etc. Further, two  compulsory online -offline elective courses introduced during M.D. (Ayu)  
second year. The  Institute implemented the modified course work for Ph.D. scholars which  
includes many innovative techniques, topics like advanced Research  methodology, use of 
artificial intelligence, machine learning in the field of  Ayurveda research etc. Also, more focus 
given on Teaching methodology which builds the teaching proficiency in the scholars. As part of 
research, the research and clinical laboratories of Institute is  upgraded and accredited by NABL 
and in future the upgrading may continue toadopt the latest technology and meet the 
requirements of research. The MoU  has been signed with AcSIR, New Delhi for Dual or Joint 
Ph.D. research programme, under which the scholar can register with different supervisor at each 
Institute and after successful completion of the programme, scholar will  be awarded dual or joint 
Ph.D. degree. As part MoU partners with National and  International Organization, Institute is 
designing the various Ayu rveda courses  as per demand of partner countries.   Many CMEs, 
workshop and training programme are conducted on regular  intervals for research scholars, 
medical officers and faculties. Further, Institute  is planning to conduct training programmes for 
capacity building and various short-term courses in different specialty. Further, implementation 

60 
 
of the various suggestions received, the Institute is planning accordingly for the improvement in 
teaching, research, clinical training, hands on training and short-term courses on various aspects. 
 
2.7 CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN HOMEOPATHY (CCRH) SWOT 
ANALYSIS 
 
Recommendation: 
2.7.1 The Committee recommends that CCRH should chalk out strategy to combat weaknesses 
and threat and to capitalize on strength and opportunity. In order to improve the organisational 
competence CCRH should develop a policy for training and skill building of scientific staf f of 
CCRH.  For infrastructure strengthening  CCRH should undertake upgradation of centers along 
with requirements of new posts.  CCRH must approach the authority concerned for time bound 
NABH and NABL accreditation training, documentation and application f or all institutes (with 
in-patient departments) and laboratories. For Generation of Scientific evidence CCRH should 
undertake basic research and pharmacological studies in Homoeopathy and develop research 
guidelines, standard treatment guidelines, standard  operating procedures for research process 
and translational research procedures to create chain of evidence. The development of Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for flow of research projects, dissemination, records generation 
and record keeping and ma intenance and other technical activities are the other areas where 
CCRH should make entering into. 
(Para 3.15.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.7.2 The Council noted the recommendation of the Committee. Development of following 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) is completed: 
 Flow of research projects along with scheduling of scientific and ethical review activities 
 Research dissemination 
 Record maintenance, records generation and record keeping. 
 Standard Treatment guidelines completed on 50 conditions. 
In process: 
 Policy for training & skill development for scientists 
 Detailed project proposals for institutes at Jaipur, Noid4 Mumbai, Siliguri, Lucknow are 
being developed as per directions received from SFC of CCRH 
 NABH certification in process for CRIH Jaipur 
 NABH application for l0 institutes of CCRH 
 Studies on basic and pharmacological Research 

61 
 
 Documentation for NABL 
 Development of STGs on l5 conditions 
To be developed: 
 DPR for development of institutes at Shimla, Bhubaneswar 
 Studies on translational health research 
2.8 ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (AIIA), NEW DELHI 
Recommendation: 
2.8.1 The Committee takes into account the establishing stones of AIIA in line with „The Triple 
Billion‟ targets of the World Health Organization (WHO), an ambitious initiative to improve the 
health of billions by 2023.  The Committee is of the view that AIIA need to work upo n all three 
aspects of the targets - universal health coverage, addressing health emergencies, and 
maintaining better health and well -being to achieve the set targets. AIIA need to re -engineer 
holistic wellness model through strength of Ayurveda such as di et and lifestyle, punchkarma, 
oral ayurvedic medication and yoga supported with modern diagnostic tools and techniques so 
as to reduce out of pocket expenditure on health care to the needy public. 
(Para 3.17.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.8.2 AIIA is an Ayurvedic tertiary care Hospital under MoA for treatment of general to – 
critical disease in various specialities through Ayurveda with state of art diagnostic facilities.  
 Hospital has 33 clinics out of which 26 Super Specialty Ayurveda clinics (OPDs) Viz: 
(1) Kayachikitsa 
(i) Cardiorespiratory care & General Kayachikitsa OPD 
(ii) Gastrointestinal & Liver Disorders Care Unit 
(iii) Rheumatology & Musculoskeletal Care Unit/ Neurological & Degenerative Care Unit 
(iv) Diabetes & Metabolic Disorders Care Unit  
(v) General OPD/ Rasayan/ Vajeekaran/ Manas Roga 
(vi)Integrated Cancer/ Skin Care/ General OPD 
(vii) Post Covid OPD/ General OPD 
(2) Integrated AYUSH Clinic: 
(viii)UHS Clinic 

62 
 
(ix) Unani Cupping Method 
(3) SwasthaVritta 
(x)SwasthaVritta (Lifestyle, Dietetics & Yoga) 
(xi)  Lifestyle Clinic 
(xii)Yoga (09AM to 10AM & 3:30PM to 4:30PM) 
(4) Panchakarma 
(xii) Panchakarma 
(5)Shalakya 
(xiii) EYE 
(xiv) ENT/EYE 
(xv) Kriya Kalpa 
(xvi)Centre for Integrative Dentistry 
(6)Shalya 
(xvii) Shalya Samanya 
(xviii) Kshara Evum Anushastra Karma 
(xix) Integrative Orthopaedics& Sports injury 
(7) Stri Roga & Prasuti Tantra (Gynaecology & Obstetrics) 
(xx)Stri Roga & Prasuti Tantra (Gynaecology & Obstetrics) 
(xxi) Infertility Clinic 
(xxii) Ante Natal Clinic 
(xxiii) PCOD Clinic 
(xxiv) Menopause Awareness Cell 
(8) Kaumarbhritya (Paediatrics) 
(xxv)Bal Rog (Paediatric Care Unit)) 
(xxvi) Immunization OPD 
(9) Special OPDS 
(xxvii)Screening OPD  
(xxviii)Emergency OPD 

63 
 
(xxix) Mental Health OPD 
(xxx) Physiotherapy OPD 
(xxxi) Flu OPD 
(xxxii) Plaster OPD 
(xxxiii) Leech Therapy Unit 
2.8.3 Thus, AIIA is working on Universal Health through treatment of patients as per the 
specialty, by addressing health emergencies through Emergency OPD. Moreover, for the holistic 
treatment of the patients, separate Swastha  Vritta ( Lifestyle, Dietetics & Yoga) and Lifestyle 
Clinic are there. Daily Yoga sessions are held for patients visiting the hospital as well as for the 
staff. Hospital also has AYUSH clinic, where patients can avail treatment fro m other disciplines 
of AYUSH, like Yoga, Unani, Siddha, Homoeopathy under one roof. 
2.8.4 Hospital has well established Panchakarma Department with Panchakarma OPDs and 
Panchakarma Theatres on each floor of Hospital Building. AIIA has state of art investig ation 
facilities such as Pathology Biochemistry, Microbiology, Radiology labs for proper diagnosis of 
cases in patient care. 
2.9 ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (AIIA), NEW DELHI 
2.9.1 The Committee is of the view that to strengthen the Ayurvedic systems of Health care in 
strategic and identified research area more financial support to the research activities need to be 
provided in terms of infrastructure, finance support and technical expertise thro ugh various 
national research institutes. The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for establishment 
of a greater number of satellite centres of All India Institute of Ayurveda. 
(Para 3.17.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.9.2 All India Institute of Ayurveda  (AIIA) has recently established a satellite centre at Goa 
(All India Institute of Ayurveda, Darghal, Goa) which was dedicated to nation by Shri Narendra 
Modi, Hon‘ble Prime Minister of India on 11 thDecember 2022. It is spread in a campus of 50 
acres of land with facilities for OPD and 100 bed IPD based patient care, with teaching complex, 
hostels, and staff quarters. It also has different laboratories and research facility for carrying out 
quality research activities in Ayurveda.  
2.9.3 The Institute has also started the Integrative Medicine Department at Safdarjung Hospital, 
New Delhi as a satellite OPD and treatment centre. The Institute has two more satellite centres at 
LABSNA, Mussoorie, Uttarakhand and NIC, AIIMS, Jajjhar, Haryana.  
2.9.4 At AIIA, New Delhi, a new Ayur-informatics Laboratory has been started to give training 
and conduct of research on Bio informatics and Ayurveda. A molecular Biology laboratory is 
also functional at AIIA. The Shalakya OPD is furnished with state of art diagnostic instruments 

64 
 
for diagnosis and evaluation of Ayurveda interventions in the area of Ophthalmology, BERA 
testing facility is provided at Shalakya – ENT unit. The Integrative Medicine unit of AIIA is 
regularly upgraded with state of art diagnostic and treatmen t equipment and instruments (ICU, 
NICU, Dentistry, Colposcopy, Colonoscopy, Laparoscopy etc.).  
2.9.5 In the second phase of AIIA, New Delhi, a separate Panchakarma Hospital will be 
established with state of art facilities, the Pharmacy unit will be establ ished with state of art 
manufacturing facilities and quality control laboratories for supply of research drugs to the 
hospital and institute.  
2.9.6 AIIA has MOUs with many national repute research organizations such as IIT -Delhi, 
IGIB, ILBS, AIIMS etc. fo r conduct of quality research works at national level, and also 
internationally reputed research institutes like LSH&TM, FIZZ, Germany, Western Sydney 
University NICM Health Research Institute, Australia, AIST Japan etc.  
2.9.7 Under IMR, EMR and PHI schem es, AIIA is conducting research activities wherein 
requisite funding support is provided following institutional policy.  Research being one of the 
mandates of AIIA, due importance is given to this area, and every effort is made to promote and 
carry out quality research activities with the support of Ministry of Ayush, Govt. of India.  
2.9.8 The Institute provides funds for undertaking research activities by teachers as well as 
MoUs signed with outside organizations for which the Institute also gets funds from such 
agencies. The Ministry also provides funds for research.  A Satellite Centre of the Institute is 
coming up at Panchkula and it is expected that its Satellite Centre  will be functional by end of 
this year. 
2.9.9 Development intra AYUSH integrative research Institutes are encouraged to establish in 
the country in line with AIIA especially in NER. 
2.10 NATIONALINSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA, WEST 
BENGAL 
Recommendation: 
2.10.1 Taking into account the „Key Concern Areas‟ of functioning of NIH, the Committee spells 
out that NIH should undertake strategic measures to overcome the challenges of the institute so 
as to achieve its mission objectives. The Committee, in this regard, rec ommends NIH to 
undertake effective human resource planning and assessment of manpower in the Institute so as 
to improve work culture in academic, hospital services and administration. The first and the 
foremost step is required to identify the vacant post against the sanctioned posts and take further 
requisite steps to focus on recruitment process so as to fill up the vacant post without delay. The 
Committee also feels that NIH should also focus on capacity building and skill development 
programme. 
(Para 3.18.2ibid) 
 

65 
 
Action Taken: 
2.10.2 The vacant posts against the sanctioned posts are identified and are under process of 
recruitment.For achieving its objectives, National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata has 
initiated following measures during the current financial years, 2022-23:– 
i. NIH had requested for revival of 116 posts which were lapsed due to non -filling within 
the stipulated time. 56 posts have been revived and action for filling up of these posts 
has already been initiated and the advertisement will be published shortly. 
ii. In addition to the above another 15 posts which have become vacant during last 2 years 
are also being filled up for which action has been initiated along with the posts as 
mentioned at Sl. No. 1 above.  
iii. The posts of Joint Director an d Office Superintendent are being filled up on deputation 
and the offer of appointment has already been issued.  
iv. Further the posts of Administrative Officer, Accounts Officer, Maintenance cum Store 
Officer, and Assistants are being filled up on deputation and the last date for submission 
of application is 04.04.2023. 
v. NIH has submitted proposal for revival of another 60 posts which could not be revived 
along with the posts revived earlier (Sl. No.1 above) 
vi. Since the number of students in the Graduate and Post Graduate level has increased 
significantly and number of patients are also increasing day by day.  Due to increase the 
activities many folds, NIH is in the process of creating new posts of Professor, 
Associate Professor and Assistant Professor as well as some administrative posts to 
support the Hospital and Academic Sections. 
vii. NIH is in a process of sending administrative and Accounts staff to Staff Training 
Institute, New Delhi for capacity building and skill development. 
2.11 OTHER AUTONOMOUS BODIES 
Recommendation: 
2.11.1 The Committee has been given to understand that allocation to autonomous bodies is 
based on the proposal received from various institutes and allocation received from Ministry of 
Finance.  The Committee finds that the reasons for Higher GBS allocation are mainly on 
account of  construction of Punchkula NIA Building and filling up of vac ant post, construction 
activities at NIUM, construction of new building for UG college and construction of Hostel for 
the students etc. at NIS, construction activities at NEIAH, to undertake more core activities, 
additional infrastructure development and f or additional manpower at NIEAFMR, construction 
of Hospital/Girls & Boys Hostels/Staff Quarters etc. at NISR.  The Committee recommends that 
all the undertaken construction activities at various institutes must be completed without time 
and cost overrun. 
(Para 3.19.3ibid) 
 

66 
 
Action Taken: 
2.11.2 The Construction projects are being reviewed by Special Sec retary (Ayush) on regular 
basis as well as Hon‘ble Minister of Ayush & Secretary (Ayush) from time to time to ensure 
timely completion of these projects. 
2.12 NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION: PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMMES 
Recommendation: 
2.12.1 The Committee appreciates the approval of Union Cabinet for continuation of NAM from 
2021-22 to 2025-26 because the fruition of these programmes‟ delivery is intended, ultimately, to 
reach every corner of the country.  The Committee observes that the inclusion of 8 new dedicated 
public health programmes in NAM during 2022 -23 are of far-reaching consequences in delivery 
of health care services as all these 8 programmes are designed to cover health issues of all 
major vulnerable groups. The Committee believes that the Min istry would give equal impetus to 
all components of the public health programmes by prudently appropriating the allocated fund 
to achieve the enshrined mission objectives therein. The Committee is of the view that execution 
of NAM, the Ministry needs to st reamline the governance and institutional mechanism of 
implementing agency i.e. the States/UTs, the State Ayush Mission. 
(Para 3.20.5 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.12.2 Regarding streamline the governance and institutional mechanism of implementing 
agency under NAM , a dedicated institutional mechanism has been developed under the NAM 
guideline.  The Mission at National level will be governed by a National AYUSH Mission 
Directorate under the Chairmanship of Secretary Ayush. The Mission at National level will be 
facilitated by a National AYUSH Mission Appraisal Committee and Joint Secretary NAM is the 
chairman of this Committee. Similarly, the Mission at State level will be governed and executed 
by a State AYUSH Mission Society having the Institutional structure of Governing Body which 
will be chaired by Chief Secretary of respective State/UT Governments and Executive Body 
which will be chaired by Principal Secretary/ Secretary In charge of Ayush. 
Recommendation: 
2.12.3 The Committee feels that the focus of NAM should be on infrastructure creation and 
upgradation  for Ayush health services for effective implementation of Ayush based public health 
programs. The States/UTs are required to adequately position the Ayush hospitals and 
dispensaries/Health & Wellness Centres with Ayush doctors, pharmacists and supporting staf f. 
The Committee, in this regard, recommends that all the vacant post should be filled up without 
further procrastination. The Committee underscores the need for Capacity Building Measures 
(CBM) wherein induction training and re -orientation training needs to be imparted by 
States/UTs at all levels including Physicians, therapists, supervisors to ASHAs. 

67 
 
(Para 3.20.6ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.12.4 Public Health being a state subject, induction training and re -orientation training at all 
levels including Physicians, therapists, supervisors to ASHAs come under purview of respective 
State/UT Governments. However, under NAM, there is provision of financial assistance for 
training and capacity building for teaching staffs, medical officers and other para medical staffs 
working in the educational institutions and AYUSH hospitals/ dispensaries. Further, 
Accordingly, the State/UT Governments may avail financial assistance by submittin g suitable 
proposals through State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) as per their requirement. Further, under 
Ayush HWCs there is provision for training and capacity building of Community Health Officer 
(CHO) wherein one time induction training of 2 weeks durati on of capacity building as team 
leader and to perform expanded range of services such as community-based population 
enumeration, screening, IT enabled programmes etc. Further, refresher training of physician and 
multi- skilling of MPWs and ASHAs is also envisaged. 
2.13 NORTH- EASTERN AREAS 
Recommendation: 
2.13.1 In the NER States, there should be a greater  number of standalone Ayush hospitals 
/dispensaries to achieve the target of operationalization of Ayush HWCs. North -East States 
should be incentivized from time to time for formation of dedicated Ayush Directorate, so that 
different issues pertaining to Ayush may be addressed in appropriate way including 
implementation of NAM scheme. As per the provision of NAM guidelin e adequate manpower is 
required to be deployed for strengthening of PMU, so that their active support may be obtained 
for effective implementation of Scheme. The Committee, considering, the provision under NAM 
for establishment of integrated Ayush hospital s and Ayush dispensaries, recommends the State 
Government to project their demand as per the felt need through SAAPs for creation of Ayush 
health facilities in NER for providing health care services. 
(Para 3.21.7 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.13.2 Public Health being a state subject, establishment of integrated Ayush hospitals and 
Ayush dispensaries in the country including NE States comes under purview of respective 
State/UT Governments. However, under NAM, there is provision of financial assistanc e for 
setting up of 50 /30 /10 bedded integrated AYUSH hospitals and construction of building to 
establish new AYUSH dispensary in the area where there are no AYUSH facilities available. 
Accordingly, the NER may avail financial assistance by submitting sui table proposals through 
State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) as per their requirement. 

68 
 
2.14 PROGRAMME ON AYURVEDA -BIOLOGY INTEGRATED HEALTH 
RESEARCH 
Recommendation: 
2.14.1 The Committee opines that the programme contains the potential to optimally utilize the 
vast research potential available within the country and globally for studying effective 
integrative models for introducing Ayurveda in integration with basic sciences and conventio nal 
system of medicine.  The Committee recommends the Ministry should approach the Department 
of Expenditure to obtain green signal to the “Programme on Ayurveda -Biology Integrated 
Health Research” as the programme is designed to encourage R&D in priority areas based on 
disease burden in alignment to National and global health policy documents. 
(Para 4.3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.14.2 The Institute  is established with 100 bedded Ayurveda Hospital and 50 bedded 
Homoeopathy Hospital. At present, the  Institute is functioning with 60 bedded in Ayurveda 
hospital and 20 bedded in Homeopathy hospital.  The average number of patients visited the 
Institute hospitals is 135 -150 per day. Efforts are being made to increase the number of patients 
and bed capacity to 50 b edded for homoeopathy hospital. Advertisements for manpower have 
been given  from time to time to meet  the NABH criteria. The  Institute is in the process of 
fulfilling the requisite criteria for applying for NABH accreditation and it will be done as and 
when the criteria are fulfilled. 
2.15 GLOBAL CHALLENGES IN RECOGNITION AND ACCEPTANCE OF AYUSH 
SYSTEM 
Recommendation: 
2.15.1 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take up concerted efforts to position 
India as a global leader in the field of traditional medicines. The Ministry may appoint Ayush 
Experts under ITEC program of MEA as appointed earlier in Malaysia (Ayurveda and Siddh a 
Expert).  The Ministry may increase the evidence -based Research work on Ayush products and 
Academic Collaboration with foreign Countries. Foreign Ayush manufacturers/exporters may 
also be given chance to join Ayush export promotion Council which will pro vide support to 
Ayush Industry members to get detailed information about the Ayush products in foreign 
Countries. The Ministry may also develop more Ayush Centre for Excellence and set up more 
Ayush Academic chairs in different institutes of foreign countr ies. International Regulators meet 
may be organised on regular basis to provide knowledge about the regulatory authorities of the 
foreign countries USFDA/EMEA/UK-MHRA/ NHPD (Canada)/ TGA etc. 
(Para 4.4.1 ibid) 
 

69 
 
Action Taken: 
2.15.2 The Ministry of Ayush takes the initiative of deputing various Ayush Technical experts 
to Foreign Countries under ITEC towards the goal of global recognition of Ayush. MoA deputed 
Ayush Expert under ITEC scheme to Malaysia.  
 On the lines of ITEC Programme,  MoA deputed one Ayurveda Expert at Yoga and 
Traditional Medicine Centre, Ashgabat, Turkmenistan, and deputation of Ayurveda Expert 
Panchakarma Center, at La Pradera International Health Centre, La Habana, Cuba  is 
underway. 
 Signed MoU with the London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSH&TM), UK and 
Frankfurter Innovationszentrum Biotechnologie GmbH (FIZ), Frankfurt Germany for clinical 
research studies on mitigation of Covid-19 through Ayurveda. 
 Signed Tripartite MoU between All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), Federal University of 
Rio de Janerio (UFRJ), Brazil & Brazilian Academic Consortium for Integrative Health 
(CABSIN), Brazil on the establishment of academic collaboration in Ayurveda. 
 Signed a MoU on Research Collaboration in Ayurveda be tween the All-India Institute of 
Ayurveda, New Delhi, an autonomous body under Ministry of Ayush, India and National 
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology ("AIST") acting through its Department 
of Life Science and Biotechnology, Japan. 
 Establishment of A Panchakarma Centre in Cuba: This centre is established by the 
Ministry of Public Health, Cuba with the technical support of the Ministry of Ayush 
in 2019. 
 Centre of Excellence in Mauritius: The Ministry of Ayush has undertaken the 
initiative of setting up the Ayush Centre of Excellence in Mauritius. The Govt. of 
Mauritius has identified the 12 acres of land at Cote D'Or in Central Mauritius for this 
purpose. To conceptualize and prepare a project report, along with cost estimates , an 
Ayurveda expert was deputed to Mauritius for the special assignment  and submitted 
the said report to the Govt of Mauritius. The Government of Mauritius will select the 
Consultant for preparing the Detailed Project Report (DPR) of the project . The 
Ministry of Ayush, vide letter dated: 21.03.2023, requested the progress report in this 
regard. The reply from the Mauritian side is awaited.  
2.15.3 Following are the meeting held for apprising foreign regulators about the Ayush System: 
 Ministry organized a Workshop on "Regulators Interaction with Ayush Exporters‖ on 
22.04.2022. Total 07 Regulators/experts including one from TGA -Australia made 
presentations during the session and interacted with exporters/manufacturers. About 50 
Ayush exporters/ manufacturers attended  the Workshop and actively interacted with  the 
regulators/experts. 
 India-UK Free Trade Agreement (FTA ): The FTA, inter alia, includes a chapter on 
Government Procurement (GP) with mutual market access. It is envisaged that Central Public 

70 
 
Sector Enterprises  (CPSEs) would also be included as part of India‘s market access (MA) 
offer under the GP Chapter and such an offer would be based on the principle of reciprocity. 
The meeting was held on 4th May 2023 in Virtual mode. 
 A 2 nd TWG meeting on Ayurveda was held on 29th March, 10:00 -12:00 CET. (13:30 to 
15:30 hrs India time) in Virtual mode in between EU -India to continue the discussion with 
the Introduction to the European Pharmacopoeia and herbal drugs, Introduction by India on 
the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia to have the opportunity to reflect on the similarities and the 
differences between the pharmacopeia. After that, both sides could discuss next steps, for 
example, possibilities for new monographs of interest to both sides. 
 As an outcome of the meeting with the M oA, US FDA hosted a webinar titled ―Regulatory 
Expectations for Ayurvedic Products‖ for the AYUSH stakeholders in India on 23rd Jan 
2023. The objective of this webinar was to explain the different regulatory classifications 
under which Ayurvedic products may fall and the applicable regulatory expectations for each 
class for entry to US. 
2.15.4 Towards to goal of collaboration with foreign manufacturers/exporters, the Minist ry of 
Ayush in collaboration with Ayushexcil, recently organized the SCO B2B Conference & Expo in 
Guwahati wherein foreign buyers/Manufacturers/exporters participated in the said event. The 
Conference and Expo was intended to provide an opportunity to regu lators, industries and 
business leaders in all the SCO and partner countries to deliberate on various aspects of 
Traditional Medicine aspects such as products, services, education, skill development, cosmetics, 
herbal extracts and further deepen the trade and friendship among each other in the area of 
Traditional medicine and allied ﬁeld. This Conference was attended by a total of 214 
participants, out of which 83 were international delegates from 16 SCO Countries and 131 were 
Indian delegates. 
2.15.5 The M inistry of Ayush has signed 15 Ayush Chair MoUs with Foreign 
universities/Institutions for setting up of Ayush Academic Chair. 03 Ayush Experts are rendering 
services as the Ayush Chair in 03 Counties namely Bangladesh, Mauritius and Latvia. 02 More 
Ayush experts will soon be deputed as Ayush Chairs at Mexico and Malaysia. 
2.16 FUTURE OUTLOOK OF AYUSH SYSTEM: AYUSH REVOLUTION  
NATIONAL HEALTH POLICY, 2017 
Recommendation: 
2.16.1 The Committee has been given to understand that two systems i.e. Ayush -Allopathy 
currently work separately without any coherence, therefore, the referral mechanism between the 
two is required to be developed. The Allopathy as well as Ayush practitioners can be trained in 
holistic care in an integrated fashion and be placed in all prim ary caregivers in the government 
as well as private settings under National Health Mission. 

71 
 
(Para 5.1.2 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.16.2 The Institute provides training to practitioners of other organizations including allopathy 
to further propagate Ayurveda and also to make awareness about the system for the overall 
welfare of mankind.  
2.16.3 Integrative approach between allopath y and Ayush will help to achieve the objectives 
national health mission in a larger way. 
 KabasuraKudineer have been provided to all mild / asymptomatic COVID positive / patients 
in Allopathy medical colleges and hospitals as integrated therapy with modern medicine 
standard care of treatment and shown significant results which have been publish ed in 
international journal. During this pandemic outbreak of COVID -19 various collaborative 
clinical studies have been initiated with modern system of medicine and published research 
articles in indexed journals. 
 Integrated Siddha cancer OPD is successfu lly functioning at All India Institute of Ayurveda 
campus aiding the Palliative care of cancer patients through Siddha system through Siddha 
Clinical Research Unit, Safdarjung, New Delhi under CCRS. 
2.16.4 Evolution of referral mechanism will get boost by standard treatment guidelines. Use of 
wellness drugs and procedure of Unani will help.This Institute has modern medicine experts in 
the field of ENT, Eye, Dental. Medicine, Dermatology for providing experti se and to manage 
cases in both OPD & IPD whenever required. 
Recommendation: 
2.16.5 The Committee, taking note of the provision under National AYUSH Mission (NAM), for 
co-location of AYUSH facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres 
(CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs), recommends the Ministry to give impetus to the 
engagement of AYUSH Doctors/Paramedics and their training is supported by the Department of 
Health & Family Welfare. 
(Para 5.1.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.16.6 .Government of India has adopted a strategy of Co -location of AYUSH facilities at 
Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals 
(DHs), thus enabling choice to the patients for  different systems of medicines under sing le 
window. The engagement of AYUSH Doctors/ paramedics and their training is supported by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare under National Health Mission (NHM), while the support 
for AYUSH infrastructure, equipment/furniture and medicines are provide d by Ministry of 
Ayush under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM).  Further, 

72 
 
State/UT Governments have been suggested to submit the proposal for co -location of AYUSH 
facilities at PHC, CHCs & DHs in the SAAP as per the NAM guidelines. 
2.17 VISION AYUSH@2047 
Recommendation: 
2.17.1 The Committee takes into account the long -term vision of the Ayush System as drawn by 
the Ministry of Ayush that spans over the next twenty -five years till 2047. The Vision 
Ayush@2047 gives impetus to strategic areas of research, education and capacity building, 
healthcare, manufacturing and services that will act as wheel for Ayush Revolution. The 
Committee, in this regard, recommends the Ministry that each Strategic Area must have its own 
„Plan of Action‟ with short term set objectives and timelines. The Committee further desires the 
Ministry to estimate the requisite budgetary for achieving vision@2047 and approach the 
Ministry of Finance for timely allocation. The Committee is of the considered view that the 
objective and goals of AYUSH Revolution (2022 -47) would be a chieved only when there is 
substantial enhancement of funds for the Ministry. 
(Para 5.2.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.17.2 Ministry of Ayush has submitted its inputs regarding the targets for Vision@2047; with 
respect of SGoS 4 and SGoS 8 to the respective nodal ministry/department. Department of 
Higher Education is the nodal Ministry for SGoS4 and Department of Biotechnology is Nodal 
Ministry for SGoS8. The final document of Vision@2047 with respect to SGoS4 and SGoS8 are 
in consultation stage and yet to be  approved.  The Plan of Action for each strategic area with 
short term set objectives and timelines will be finalized after the final approval of Vision@2047 
document. 
2.18 RESEARCH POLICY AND VISION DOCUMENT 2030 
Recommendation: 
2.18.1 The Committee takes into account the salient features and goals of the vision document 
2030 for research policy as formulated by CCRAS.  The Committee is of the considered view that 
the provision and mission objective viz. translation of research outcome into clinical p ractice 
through Commercialization of new drugs developed by CCRAS through translational research 
for making them accessible to the public, mainstreaming of Ayurveda therapies through 
integration and incorporating in the National Health Programme, revalidat ion of certain 
Classical formulations for evidence on safety and efficacy would ensure the national and global 
recognition and acceptance of the Ayush system. The Committee believes that standardization of 
research parameters would go a long way in making the research objective and scientific 
development of new, safe and efficacious drugs to be introduced to the people looking towards 
an alternative system of medicine would enhance the credibility and acceptability of not just 
Ayurveda but all the Indian sy stems of medicine. The Committee desires that the effectiveness of 
AYUSH medicines need to be documented/published and should be popularised as alternative 

73 
 
system of medicine for various diseases thereby increasing its acceptability and demand in rural, 
tribal, hilly and urban slum areas. 
(Para 5.3.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.18.2 The Council undertakes validation of classical Ayurvedic formulations already in the 
healthcare system through clinical studies to generate evidence on clinical efficacy and safety . 
The research outcomes of these studies are being published in journals for wider dissemination.  
 Further these medicines are provided as medical aid and also by conducting public health 
studies through THCRP under TSP, AMHCP and RCH (under SCSP) at identi fied CCRAS 
institutes. 
 Besides validation of classical Ayurveda formulations, the council is engaged in drug 
development of new/coded formulations based on leads from classical texts, contemporary 
scientific and pharmacological leads for important diseases  of National importance based on 
strength of Ayurveda. These Ayurvedic drugs are made available into the healthcare system 
through systematic process of drug development viz. drug standardization and quality 
control, preclinical safety/toxicity studies and biological activity studies (as appropriate) and 
clinical trials as per requirement by transferring technology through NRDC. 
The Institute publishes documents, leaflets, handbills, etc. and also provide s information to 
general public through various media  on the effectiveness of Ayurvedic medicines.  These help 
in the increased footfall of patients in OPD and IPD for treatments of various diseases in the 
Institute.  Increased accept -abilities have been noticed with all these activities.  The Institute 
also undertakes regular medical camps in rural, tribal and hilly areas by organizing medical 
camps consultations and through dispensing of medicines in which separate funds are provided 
every year. 
2.18.3 The Council took a note on the recommendation of the PSC. 
2.18.4 The faculty members/Ph.D/PG scholars conduct res earch in establishing the efficacy of 
Siddha medicine, which are well documented and published. 
 Council‘s objective is to generate sc ientific evidence and integrating the research with 
modern technologies. Steps undertaken are: - Studies undertaken by CCRH both through 
intramural and collaborative research are based on scientifically designed protocols, time 
bound with predefined outcom e parameters. This helps in generating, validating, and 
consolidating scientific evidence (in terms of safety, efficacy, and effectiveness) of 
homoeopathic medications, and treatment regimes.  
 Council has undertaken public health programmes viz. Swasthya R akshan Program; 
Homoeopathy for Healthy Child Program, National Programme for Prevention and Control 
of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases & Stroke (NPCDCS). Under these programs, 
health services, screening for different disease conditions and homoe opathic treatment has 

74 
 
been provided to the common masses at grass root level in rural and urban areas. More than 
10 lakh people have been benefitted. Besides this, Council has undertaken public health 
outreach OPDs under Schedule Caste Special Component Plan.  
 Public health activities including outreach OPDs, geriatric care program, adolescent care 
program, COVID – 19 prevention, post COVID – 19 care and capacity building programs 
undertaken in 12 institutes/units benefitting 10 lakhs people. 
 Distribution campaigns for homoeopathic health promotion medicine for COVID – 19 
preventions in general population, specific high-risk populations (prison inmates, police 
personnel, etc.), scheduled caste dominated areas. 
 School health programs in NER region have been undertaken. 
2.18.5 NIH, Kolkata has signed MoU with NIPER, Kolkata and AIIMS, Raipur for research 
works.  Recently, a research work ―Evaluation of homoeopathic preparation of Condurango and 
its potency as a potential therapy for Inflammatory Bowel Disease‖ in collaboration with NIPER, 
Kolkata has been started. 
2.18.6 Further, following research works are completed by NI H, Kolkata and the publication of 
Manuscript is in process- 
 Community based cluster randomized open level-controlled field tria l to evaluate the 
effectiveness of homoeo-prophylaxis and standard prophylaxis against COVID-19. 
 Understanding the mechanistic pathways of Homoeopathy Medicine Cinchona (3C, 6C & 
12C) through in vitro study for their potential application as anti -viral drug to fight against 
COVID-19. 
 An Evaluation on Effectiveness of Homoeopathic Intervention as an Add-On Therapy in the 
Management of Covid -19 Infection – An Open Labelled Prospective Single Arm 
Observational Clinical Trials. 
 Incidence of Influenza -Like-Illness (ILI) in participants taken Arsenic Album 30 immune 
buster during SARS –COVID 19 Pandemic: A retrospective cohort study. 
2.18.7 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. 
2.19 EXPORT OF AYUSH RAW MATERIAL 
Recommendation: 
2.19.1 The Committee feels that AYUSHEXCIL would safeguard the scientific research in the 
field of Ayush health care, to set up codes of practices as the general guidance of manufacturers 
for trade & export with a uniform classification system for Ayush and Herba l products. The 
Committee desires that AYUSHEXCIL would develop brand value to the Ayush Medicines and 
Healthcare Science and undertake foreign market studies for Ayush for laying down standards of 
quality and packing in respect of Ayush medicines and heal thcare products etc. The Committee 
also believes that AYUSHEXCIL will work as a single -window system and a dedicated platform 

75 
 
under the Ministry of Ayush/Commerce for the promoting the export of Ayush products and 
Services. 
(Para 5.4.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.19.2 AYUSHEXCIL (Ayush Export Promotion Council) was launched by the Hon‘ble Prime 
Minister on 20th April 2022 at Global Ayush Innovation and Investment Summit in Gandhinagar 
(Gujarat). Funds of Rs. 25,38,184/- have been approved to be released towards the administrative 
expenses of the AYUSHEXCIL ( e.g., Salary/remuneration etc ). AYUSHEXCIL organized a 
Reverse-Buyer Seller Meet and Industry Consultation session  during 09 th WAC in Goa  (Dec 
2022) and SCO B2B Conference &  National Arogya Summit on Traditional Medicine  in 
Guwahati (March 2023).The Ministry of Ayush has approved the updated Article of Association 
of AYUSHEXCIL, and further processing to get it notified by the Directorate General of Foreign 
Trade (DGFT) is under process. 
2.20 AYUSH GRID (2020-25) 
Recommendation: 
2.20.1 The Committee observes that Ayush Grid Project under Digital India Programme has 
transformed Ayush operational efficiency, enhanced service quality and improved delivery of 
service.  The Committee, however, recommends the Ministry to chalk out Strategic Course of 
Action to steer Ayush System towards Ayush Revolution with perspective planning, adequate 
fund allocation & resources, promoting equitable and universal healthcare. The Committee, in 
this regard, recommends the Ministry to make concerted efforts to ensure that Ayush should be 
incorporated in the mediclaim facility. Wellness healthcare should also be considered as 
important as treatment of ailments in various field like medical Leav e, reimbursement system 
(mediclaim) etc. CCRS should make strategy for promoting equitable and universal healthcare 
through generation of scientific evidence for safety and efficacy of Ayush interventions and 
practices. Due emphasis may be given for capaci ty building and human resource development 
through quality education and training and Development of integrative and participatory public 
health system through fundamental changes in medical education, research, clinical practice, 
public health and the leg al and regulatory framework. The Committee further recommends that 
adequate insurance coverage for Ayush treatment and practices must be guaranteed. 
(Para 5.6.2 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
2.20.2 Health insurance companies functioning in the country offer cover for AYUSH 
treatments to their customers with certain limitations. 

76 
 
 The regulations of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
(IRDAI) enables general and health insurers to provide coverage for one or more systems 
under the AYUSH treatme nt. IRDAI's health insurance regulations, 2016 also define 
AYUSH treatment as medical and/ or hospitalisation treatments given under Ayurveda, 
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy system. 
 Central Council for Research in Siddha has granted 70 IMR projects and out of this 8 
IMR projects have been completed and 17 projects which have been completed are 
awaiting PEMC clearance and 45 IMR projects are ongoing.  
 The research programme of Central Council for Research in Siddha  (CCRS) mainly 
focuses on clinical research including safety and efficacy studies of Siddha drugs, 
validation of the fundamental principles, drug standardization and quality control, survey 
and cultivation of medicinal plants and literary research.  
2.20.3 National Institute of Siddha has implemented the initiatives taken by Ministry of Ayush 
under Ayush grid projects. Due emphasis is given for providing quality educations, research and 
capacity building. 
2.20.4 As part of the Ayush Grid, Ministry of Ayush has developed ASU morbidity codes, 
terminologies under Namaste Portal and assisted WHO in publishing standardized ASU 
terminologies. Further inclusion of ASU morbidity codes as module 2 in WHO ICD -11 Chapter 
No. 26 (Traditiona l Medicine) has been done. The ASU Morbidity Codes and ICD -10 are 
implemented for double coding in AHMIS and retrospective reports in Namaste portal. These are 
enabling steps to promote Mediclaim Insurance through Ayush Insurance schemes, promoting 
standardized clinical research and appropriate statistical reporting in public health schemes. 
Related links: 
(1) http://namstp.ayush.gov.in/#/index 
(2) https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240064935 
(3) https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240064973 
(4) https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240064959 
  

77 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.1 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION ANALYSIS 
Recommendation: 
3.1.1 The Committee also takes note of the budgetary constraints in implementing centrally 
sponsored schemes like National AYUSH Mission (NAM). The National Ayush Mission (NAM), 
being a centrally sponsored scheme where Center and States have fund share like 60% and 40%, 
some States/ UTs express their inability to contribute their share. Due to the resource crunch, 
the Mission is not effective in achieving goals. C onsidering that, the Ministry is facing huge 
financial crunch in translating envisaged provisions into actions, the Committee is apprehensive 
that the funds constraints would pose big hurdles in realizing set goals of the Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore, believes that enhanced budgetary allocation is the need of the hour to 
properly implement the National Ayush Mission. The Committee, in this regard, agrees with the 
Ministry of Ayush that the Finance Commission award may provide corresponding estimated 
State share.  The Committee further recommends the Ministry of Ayush to implement the plan to 
establish integrated AYUSH hospitals with inpatient facilities at every district of the country to 
provide the population with an option of availing referral services in AYUSH systems of 
medicine. 
(Para 2.4.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
3.1.2 Public Health being a state subject, establishment of integrated AYUSH hospitals in 
every district of the country comes under purview of respective State/UT Governments. 
However, under NAM, there is provision of financial assistance for setti ng up of 50 /30 /10 
bedded integrated AYUSH hospitals. Accordingly, the State/UT Governments may avail 
financial assistance by submitting suitable proposals through State Annual Action Plans 
(SAAPs) as per their requirement. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.1.3 The Commit tee appreciates that under NAM  Government has made provision of 
financial assistance for setting up of 50 /30 /10 bedded integrated Ayush Hospitals in every 
districts of States and states may  avail this   financial assistance by submitting suitabl e 
proposals through State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). The Committee believes  that 
making provisions  for financial assistance is not sufficient for  establishment of 
Integrated Ayush Hospitals  rather states may be encouraged by providing incentives for 
establishment of Integrated Ayush Hospitals. 
 

78 
 
3.2 CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF 
MEDICINAL PLANTS 
Recommendation: 
3.2.1 Keeping in view the mission objective of „Conservation, Development and Sustainable 
Management of Medicinal Plants‟, the Committee is of the view that Ministry should take 
concrete steps to ensure Quality Assurance, Supply chain and creating/optimizing mar ket 
linkages and value addition in the scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable 
Management of Medicinal Plants.  The Committee observes that there is a provision for 
supporting the projects on quality assurance for maintaining good standards wh ile collecting, 
cultivating and post -harvest handling of the raw material. In this regard, the Committee 
recommends the Ministry to ensure effective implementation of Voluntary Certification Schemes 
for Medicinal Plants produce (VCSMPP) to encourage Good A gricultural Practice (GAP) and 
Good Field Collection Practices (GFCP) in medicinal plants and enhance quality and safety of 
these plants. 
(Para 3.10.3 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
3.2.2 National Medicinal Plants Board in collaboration with the Quality Council of India 
(QCI), has launched a Voluntary Certification Scheme for Medicinal Plant Produce (VCSMPP) 
to encourage Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) and Good Field Collection Practices (GFCP) in 
medicinal Plants and enhance quality and safety of these plants. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.2.3 The Committee acknowledges the measures taken by the Ministry to enhance 
quality and safety of medicinal plants. The Committee, further recommends the Ministry 
to establish certain specific quality standards for the grading and certification of medicinal 
plants. The Ministry should also spread awareness and sensitise the cultivators of 
medicinal plants about these standards, Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) and  Good 
Field Collection Practices (GFCP). 
3.3 NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMEOPATHY (NCH) 
Recommendation: 
3.3.1 The Committee also observes that the Registration system of the existing homoeopathic 
professionals must be updated through an online platform so that the commission can track on 
each and every practitioner in the country that will help in understanding the availabilit y of 
homoeopathy healthcare services available in different parts of the country.  The Commission 
needs to sensitize practitioners through various conferences and issue guidelines from time to 
time for the homeopathy practitioners to adopt the latest treat ment approaches based upon 
research for their clinical successes. The Committee further feels that there is also the need for 
continuous interacting and bridging the gap with stakeholders to promote and contribute to 
research and development of homoeopathy , then and only then there would be promotion of 

79 
 
National Health goals. The Committee is of the view that there is need for periodical assessment 
of medical institutions for their compliance to minimum essential standards for continuous 
development and enhancement of the medical institution. 
(Para 3.12.4 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
3.3.2 Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy constituted under the provisions of NCH 
Act maintains a national register of all licensed practitioners of Homoeopathy.  Also, NCH has 
published its Regulations namely National Commission for Homoeopathy (Manner of Preparation 
and Maintenance of National Register for Practitioner of Homoeopathy) Regulations, 2022, on 
14.12.2022 wherein the provisions of NCH Act 2020 has been incorporated. 
3.3.3 Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy constituted under the provisions of 
NCH Act carries out the periodic inspections/assessment of Homoeopathic medical education & 
colleges for their compliance to Minimum essential standards for continuous development and 
enhancement of the medical institutions. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.3.4 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to include the findings of the 
periodic inspections/assessment of Homoeopathic medical education & colleges  and the 
subsequent remedial steps taken in its annual report. The Committee is hopeful that such 
information and dataregarding compliance to m inimum essential standards will help in  
enhancement of the Homeopathy institutions. 
 
  

80 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMME 
Recommendation: 
4.1.1 The Committee feels that for effective implementation of PFMS and SNA under NAM, the 
States should ensure the audit of NAM accounts annually and also undertake the concurrent 
audits. Besides Centre, the States/UTs may undertake regular monitoring visits and also review  
the mission in the field by combined review mechanism with the participation from other line 
departments, local self-governments, State resource centres etc.  With enhancing scope of NAM 
activities in the country, the Central Program Management Unit (CPMU ) also needs to be 
expanded by inducting personnel having public health expertise, financial and accounting 
consultants, IT personnel, Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) consultants, training 
consultants etc. 
(Para 3.20.7 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
4.1.2Under NAM there is provision to deploy 34 manpower in CPMU having different 
qualifications for different kind of posts. Out of 34 approved manpower, 6 are in position and 
deployment of required manpower is in process of onboarding. 
4.2 ―ONE NATION, ONE HERB AND ONE STANDARD‖ 
Recommendation: 
4.2.1 The Committee is of the considered view that PCIMH, under the directives of Ministry of 
Ayush, should strive to works for OHOS with various other organizations like IPC etc. and every 
effort should be made to galvanize the Indian standard along with  the international quality 
requirement to ensure that all Indian standards become competitive with global standard for the 
same botanical. 
(Para 5.5.1 ibid) 
Action Taken: 
4.2.2 Read with reference to response submitted against 3.3.3 above , it is further to state that 
the upcoming Pharmacopoeial monograph under one herb one standard policy would stand to 
international quality requirements. 
  

81 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION ANALYSIS 
The Committee appreciates that under NAM  Government has made provision of financial 
assistance for setting up of 50 /30 /10 bedded integrated Ayush Hospitals in every 
districts of States and states  may avail this  financial assistance by submitting suitable 
proposals through State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). The Committee believes  that 
making provisions  for financia l assistance is not sufficient  for establishment  of 
Integrated Ayush Hospitals  rather states may be encouraged by providing i ncentives for 
establishment of Integrated Ayush Hospitals. 
(Para 3.1.3) 
 
CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF 
MEDICINAL PLANTS 
 The Committee acknowledges the measures taken by the Ministry to enhance 
quality and safety of medicinal plants. The Committee, further recommends the Ministry 
to establish certain specific quality standards for the grading and certification of medicinal 
plants. The Ministry should also spread awareness and sensitise the cultivators of 
medicinal plants about these standards, Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) and Good 
Field Collection Practices (GFCP). 
(Para 3.2.3) 
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMEOPATHY (NCH) 
The Committee further recommends the Ministry to include the findings of the 
periodic inspections/assessment of Homoeopathic medical education & colleges  and the 
subsequent remedial steps taken in its annual report. The Committee is hopeful that such 
information and data  regarding compliance to m inimum essential standards will help in  
enhancement of the Homeopathy institutions. 
(Para 3.2.4) 
 
  

82 
 
Annexure – A 
[Para 3.2.5 of 145th Report] 
National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) 
(Rs. In Lakh) 
List of Project Proposals approved in the 85 thmeeting of Standing Finance Committee (SFC)  on 
Ashwagandha Campaign Govt. held on 30th January, 2023 
Central Sector Scheme for Conservation and Sustainable Development of Medicinal Plants –Ashwagandha 
Campaign (Government Institutions) 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
Ashwagandha Campaign 
Assam 
1 Z.18020/18
7/CSS/ 
ashwagand
ha 
campaign/
AS-
01/2022-23 
Project 
proposal on 
National 
Campaign on 
Ashwagandha- 
"A Health 
Promoter". 
 
PI: Dr. Mohan 
Lal, Senior 
Scientist 
(Plant 
Breeding & 
Genetics) 
Principal 
Investigaofr, 
RCFC-NER, 
Agrotechnolog
y & Rural 
Development 
Division, 
CSIR-NEIST 
P.O.RRL, 
Jorhat-
785006, 
Assam (M -
08811087277, 
Ph-0376-
2370121, ext. 
2306) 
IEC Activities:  
1.  Brochures on 
Ashwagandha 
(Withania 
somnifera) 
2.  Print Media 
(Hoarding & 
Digital) 
depending upon 
insertion in 
national or local 
newspapers 
3.  Electronic 
media inc luding 
documentary, 
awareness 
programme/ 
Doordarshan, 
All India Radio 
etc. 
4.  Organization 
of 
workshops/local 
fairs/competitio
n among 
students 
(Elocution, 
Painting & 
Drawings, 
Poetry writing 
etc.) 
1 18.90 18.90 18.90 18.90 Release
d on 
23.02.2
023 
Goa 
2 Z.18020/18
7/CSS/ 
National 
Campaign on 
IEC Activities:  
1.  Brochures on 
1 4.20 4.20 4.20 4.20 Release
d on 

83 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
ashwagand
ha 
campaign/
GOA-
01/2022-23 
Ashwagandha 
- "A Health 
Promoter" 
 
PI: Smt. 
Yasodha. K., 
IFS, Dy. 
Conservaofr 
of Forests, 
Office of the 
Dy. 
Conservaofr 
of Forests, 
Government 
of Goa, 
Research & 
Utilization 
Division, 
CEO-State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board, 
Aquem, 
Margao, Goa -
403601 
(Phone/Fax: 
0832-
2750099, 
Email: dcfru -
forest.goa@ni
c.in) 
Ashwagandha 
(Withania 
somnifera) 
2.  Print Media 
(Hoarding & 
Digital) 
depending upon 
insertion in 
national or local 
newspapers 
3.  Organization 
of workshops/ 
local fairs/ 
competition 
among students 
14.02.2
023 
Jammu & Kashmir 
3 Z.18020/18
7/CSS/ 
ashwagand
ha 
campaign/J
&K-
01/2022-23 
National 
Campaign on 
Withania 
somnifera 
(Ashwagandha
) 
 
PI: Dr. Mohan 
Singh, 
Direcofr 
Ayush, J& K, 
Chief 
Executive 
Officer, J&K 
Medicinal 
Objectives: 
1.  of create 
awareness about 
importance of 
Ashwagandha. 
2.  of generate 
low cost herbal 
remedies. 
3.  of enhance 
accessibility of 
natural and 
fresh 
Ashwagandha 
plant material.  
4.  of revive the 
1 20.10 18.38 18.38 18.38 Release
d on 
20.03.2
023 but 
released 
on 
13,15,6
77/- full 
pyment 
not 
released 
due to 
5,22,32
3/- fund 
is 

84 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
Plants Board, 
Direcofrate of 
Ayush, Indra 
Chowk, 
Jammu-
180001 (M -
9419180738, 
Email: 
dgism786@g
mail.com) 
traditional 
health care 
system. 
5.  of create 
green and 
healthy 
environment by 
plantation in the 
public premises.  
6.  of enhance 
means of 
revenue 
generation 
through 
Ashwagandha 
cultivation. 
7.  of create 
interest about 
the importance 
of 
Ashwagandha 
among the 
general public 
for inculcation 
of tis curative 
properties. 
Proposed 
Medicinal Plant 
Species: 
Withania 
somnifera 
insiffent  
Kerala 
4 Z.18020/18
7/CSS/ 
ashwagand
ha 
campaign/
KE-
03/2022-23 
Project 
Proposal for  
the promotion 
& propagation 
of 
Ashwagandha 
(Withania 
somnifera) in 
Kerala. 
 
PI: Chief 
Executive 
Officer, State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board, 
Objectives: 
1.  Promotion 
and propagation 
of 
Ashwagandha in 
the State 
through schools, 
colleges, 
hospitals, 
revenue land 
and forest areas.  
2.  of support 
cultivation by 
farmers, buy 
back 
1 19.00 18.90 18.90 18.90 Release
d on 
27.02.2
023 

85 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
Shornur Road, 
Thiruvambady 
P.O., Thrissur, 
Kerala-
680022, (Ph: 
0487-
2323151, 
Email: 
smpbkerala@
gmail.com) 
arrangement 
with industries 
of ensure 
sustainable 
supply of 
quality raw 
material. 
3.  of promote 
cultivation on 
govt. revenue 
and forest lands 
involving 
SHGs, VSS and 
JFMCs. 
4.  of create 
awareness 
among all 
sections of 
society on the 
importance of 
conservation 
and sustainable 
utilization of 
Ashwagandha 
through 
seminars, 
trainings, 
exhibitions, 
workshops etc.  
5.  Spreading 
the message of 
"Ashwagandha-
a health 
promoter", 
mission of 
NMPB in the 
state through 
print & visual 
media. 
Maharashtra 
5 Z.18020/18
7/CSS/ 
ashwagand
ha 
campaign/
MH-
Withania 
somnifera for 
Socioeconomi
c 
Empowerment 
 
Objective: 
1.To publish 
and distribute in 
community 
information 
brochure of 
1 19.50 18.90 18.90 18.90 Relesed 
on 
24.02.2
023 

86 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
01/2022-23 PI: Dr. 
Sharada L 
Deore,M.Phar
m, Ph.D  
Associate 
Professor,Gov
t. College of 
Pharmacy,Kat
hora Naka, 
Amravati- 
444604 MS.  
Email: 
sharudeore_2
@yahoo.com 
M:  
09766577646 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
comprising 
Complete 
Pharmacognosti
c, scientific, 
pharmacological 
information, 
Analyzed 
qualitative data 
in the context of 
literature 
references for  
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
processing 
methods, 
Analyzed 
market search 
for 
value added 
products, 
salable products 
and buyers  
2. To involve 
community 
groups and 
educational 
institutes in 
raising two lakh 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
saplings 
3. To distribute 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
samplings of 
community 
4. To aware 
community 
through Print 
Media 
(Hoardings and 
Digital) inserts  
5. To aware 
  
  

87 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
community 
(Students, 
teachers, 
women, 
farmers) about 
uses of 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
and assess the 
income 
generating 
potential of 
processing 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
products 
6. To arrange 
scientific poster 
presentation on 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha)f
or life  
sciences, 
agriculture, 
Ayurveda and 
pharmacy 
students/profess
ional in one day 
national 
conference 
7. To arrange 
exhibition of 
different value -
added products 
of different 
parts of 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
8. To perform 
community 
(Students, 
teachers, 
women, 
farmers) group 
activities for  

88 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
cultivation and 
or conservation 
of Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
as per GACP  
guidelines 
9. To perform 
community 
(Students, 
teachers, 
women, 
farmers) group 
activities for  
preparation of 
value-added 
products of 
different parts 
of Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
10. To prepare 
analyzed market 
search for value 
added product/s, 
salable products 
and 
buyers 
11. To prepare 
analyzed 
qualitative data 
in the context of 
literature 
references for 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
processing 
methods. 
12. To aware 
community for 
Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
value in order of 
• foster seedling 
survival, 
• identify 
additional 

89 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
markets in 
advance, and  
• encourage 
participation in 
plant part 
(leaves/stems/fr
uits/roots) 
collection 
• encourage 
participation in 
preparation of 
value-added 
products 
• encourage 
participation in 
self-earnings 
from Withania 
somnifiera 
(Ashwagandha) 
and derived 
products 
Propsed Area:  
Propsed 
Medicial Plants 
Species: 
Withania 
somnifera 
Mizoram 
6 Z.18020/18
7/CSS/ 
ashwagand
ha 
campaign/
MZ-
01/2022-23 
A Roadmap 
for species 
specific 
Nation-wide 
Campaign on 
Withania 
somnifera 'A 
health 
promoter' in 
the State of 
Mizoram. 
 
PI: Dr. C. 
Lalzepuii, 
Member 
Secretary, 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
& Direcofr, 
Objectives: 
1.  To establish 
a future vision 
and define the 
best means for 
the mass plants 
production, 
consumption 
that would 
contribute of its 
socio-economic 
and health 
development i n 
the secofr of 
Medicinal 
Plants. 
2.  Facilitate the 
economic 
development of 
the region by 
1 18.90 18.90 18.90 18.90 Release
d on 
14.02.2
023 

90 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
Direcofrate of 
AYUSH, 
Government 
of Mizoram, 
Aizawl, 
Mizoram. 
enhancing and 
modernizing the 
production of 
medicinal 
plants. 
3.  Establish a 
database that 
collects 
information on 
all the 
initiatives, 
programme and 
activities in the 
state, providing 
an information 
and knowledge 
pool and serving 
as the centre for 
the exchange of 
experience and 
new task.  
4.  Increrase the 
cooperation and 
communication 
among 
stakeholders/ 
herbal 
practitioners, 
cultivaofrs 
responsible for 
the producti on, 
commercializati
on and 
innovation of 
medicinal 
plants. 
Odisha 
7 Z.18020/18
7/CSS/ 
ashwagand
ha 
campaign/
OD-
01/2022-23 
Project 
Proposal on 
campaign 
roadmap for 
popularising 
the cultivation 
& usage of 
Ashwagandha 
(Withania 
somnifera) in 
Odisha 
Actitivies: 
1. Nursery 
Raising of 
Ashwagandha & 
free distribution 
of Ashwagadha 
seedlings. 
2. Advertisment 
will be 
published in 
various local 
1 18.90 18.90 18.90 18.90 Release
d on 
14.02.2
023 

91 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
 
PI: Shri 
Sudeep 
Nayak, IFS  
Chief 
Executive 
Officer,  
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board 
(SMPB), 
Forest 
Headquarters, 
Aranya 
Bhawan, 
Chandrasekhar
pur, 
Bhubaneswar, 
Odisha-751 
023. 
Email: 
smpborissa@g
mail.com 
M:  
09437065344 
news papers 
under the 
Banner National 
Campaign for 
Ashwagandha 
as Health 
promoter. 
3. Hoardings on 
the promotion 
of uses and 
cultivation of 
Ashwagandha 
of be placed at 
strategic 
locations od the 
State. 
4. Priniting & 
distribution of 
Brochures 
(during State & 
Regional Herbal 
Fairs, 
Workshops etc.) 
on the benenfits 
of 
Ashwagandha 
consumption. 
5. Awareness 
Campaign / 
Programmes on 
the uses and 
promtion of 
cultivation of 
Ashwagandha in 
Doordarshan, 
AIR& other TV 
Channels. 
6. Regional 
Level 
Workshops on 
the benefits of 
Ashwagandha 
consumption of 
be held at 
Koraput/ 
Deogarh/ 
Kalahandi/ 
Bargarh/ 
Baripada 

92 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
Foreest 
Divisions (Any 
three places of 
be selected)  
Proposed 
Medicial Plants 
Species: 
Withania 
somnifera 
Telangana 
8 Z.18020/18
7/CSS/ 
ashwagand
ha 
campaign/T
G-01/2022-
23 
Ashwagandha-
A health 
promoter': 
Promotion of 
Ashwagandha 
in Telangana.  
 
PI: Smt. A. 
Sonibala Devi, 
IFS, Chief 
Executive 
Officer, 
Telangana 
State 
Medicinal 
Plants Board, 
5th Floor, 
TSGLI 
Building, 
Tilak Road, 
Abids, 
Hyderabad-
500001 (Ph: 
040-
66364094, 
24764096, 
Email: 
tsmapb@gmai
l.com) 
Activities: 
1.  Withania 
somnifera 
(Ashwagandha) 
saplings will be 
distributed in 
Educational 
Institutions, 
Govt. 
Organisations, 
NGOs, 
Households and 
of general 
public for 
awareness. 
2.  Brochure on 
Withania 
somnifera with 
its medicinal 
uses and 
primary health 
care remedies 
will be printed 
and distributed 
in Educationa l 
Institutions, 
Govt. 
Organisations, 
NGOs, 
Households and 
of general 
public for 
awareness. 
3.  Workshop 
and awareness 
programmes 
will be 
conducted in 
1 18.90 18.90 18.90 18.90 Release
d on 
14.02.2
023 

93 
 
S. 
No. 
Project 
No. 
Title of the 
project- PI 
Name & 
address of the 
organizations 
Area in ha.,  
activities, 
species, 
personnels, 
equipments & 
other facilities 
sought 
Perio
d (in 
yrs.) 
Propose
d  cost 
by PI  
Project cost 
recommende
d by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
instalment 
Remar
ks 
Educational 
Institutions and 
Households on 
use of 
'Ashwagandha' 
in primary 
health care and 
brochures will 
be distributed.  
4.  Awareness 
through 
Electronic 
media and print 
media will be 
taken up of 
reach out the 
mass audience.  
5.  Exhibiting 
the products of 
Ashwagandha 
and their uses at 
local fairs and 
Expos. 
6.  Competitions 
like Drawings, 
Painting, Essay 
writing, 
Elocution will 
be conducted in 
Schools for 
awareness in 
children and 
teachers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

94 
 
List of Project Proposals approved in the 86thmeeting of Standing Finance Committee (SFC)  on 
Ashwagandha Campaign Govt. held on 20th February, 2023 
Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants  
(Rs. In Lakh) 
S. 
No. 
Title of the project - 
PI Name & address 
of the organizations 
Area in ha., activities, 
species, personnels, 
equipments & other 
facilities sought 
Project 
period 
(in yrs) 
Proposed  
cost by 
PI  
Project cost 
recommended 
by PSC  
Project 
Cost 
approved 
by SFC  
1st 
installme
nt  
Rem
arks 
of 
SFC 
Government Organizations 
Madhya Pradesh 
1 " National campaign 
on Ashwagandha in 12 
districts of Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
PI: Shri Prateek Haiela 
( lAS )  
Principal Secretary  
Department of 
AYUSH, Govt. of MP  
Vallabh Bhawan, 
Bhopal (MP) (Email: 
psayush@mp.gov.in, 
smpb.mp@mp.gov.in,) 
IEC Activities  
 
1. Brouchers on 
Ashwagandha 
(Withania somnifera ) 
2. Print Media 
(Hoarding & Digital) 
depending upon 
insertion in national or 
local newspapers  
3.  Electronic media 
including documentary, 
Awareness 
programme/ 
Doordarshan, All India 
Radio etc.  
4. Organisation of 
workshops/ local 
fairs/competition 
among students 
(Elocution, Paintings & 
Drawings, Poetry 
writing etc.) 
1 226.8 75.6 75.6 75.6 Relea
se for 
SC 
Comp
onent  
on 
07.03
.2023 
73,13
,440/- 
SC 
Comp
oent 
and 
other 
2,46,
562/-  
 
  

95 
 
Annexure – B 
[Para 4.5.1 of 145th Report] 
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi 
 
 


96 
 


97 
 
 


98 
 
Annexure – C 
[Para 4.6.1 of 145th Report] 
Construction Cell 
 
Status of construction projects of National Institutes upto March, 2023 
As on 01.04.2023 
(Rs. in crore)  
S. 
No 
Project Estima
ted 
cost of 
Project 
Date of 
start 
Likely 
date of 
completi
on 
Total 
Funds 
allocat
ed to 
PMC 
upto 
March
, 2023 
Expendi
ture 
made by 
PMC 
upto 
March, 
2023 
Physical 
progress 
achieved 
in % 
upto 
March, 
2023 
Balanc
e fund 
availab
le with 
PMC 
as on 
31.03.2
023  
PMC 
Agency 
1 AIIA, Sarita 
Vihar, Ph-II 
228.21 06.04.2019 30.06.20
23 
227.56 203.98 89.00% 23.58 M/s 
NPCC 
Ltd. 
2 NIA, 
Panchkula 
270.54 08.08.2018 31.12.20
23 
148.00 65.95 35.00% 82.05 M/s 
WAPCO
S Ltd. 
3 NISARG 
GRAM, NIN 
Pune 
213.55 05.08.2017 30.06.20
23 
213.03 152.70 89.00% 60.33 M/s 
WAPCO
S Ltd. 
4 NEIAH, 
Shillong Ph-
II 
57.19 28.03.2018 31.03.20
23 
55.29 55.22 100.00% 0.07 M/s 
NPCC 
Ltd. 
Total 769.49   643.88 477.85  166.03  
 