 1
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
39 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-11 (DEMAND NO.46) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY 
WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28TH   APRIL, 2010) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2010 /Vaishakha, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


 2
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2010-11 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2010) 
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28TH   APRIL, 2010) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 2010 /Vaishakha, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 


 3
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE-------------------------------------------------------------      (i)           
2. PREFACE---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   (ii)         
     Part -A   
     (HEALTH SECTOR ) 
 
3. REPORT----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE - (HEALTH SECTOR)…... 
 
     P a r t  - B    
     (NRHM SECTOR ) 
 
5. REPORT----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
6. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE - (NRHM SECTOR)…...  
 
*7. M INUTES--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------     
           
               
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* To be appended at the printing stage.
 

 4
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010) 
                        
    
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Amar Singh    -    Chairman 
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak 
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
5. Shri Balbir Punj 
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
10. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
11. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
12. Shri Ashok Argal 
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel 
14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
18. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
19. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
20. Shri N. Kristappa 
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
22. Shri Datta Meghe 
23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
26. Shri M. K Raghavan 
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
28. Shrimati Meena Singh 
29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
31. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
              
 Shrimati Vandana Garg,            Additional Secretary 
Shri R.B.Gupta,                         Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta,     Joint Director 
             Shri Dinesh Singh,                    Assistant Director 
 Shri Satis Mesra            Committee Officer 
 
 
(i) 
 

 5
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Thirty-ninth Report of the Committee on the 
Demands for Grants (Demand No.46) of the De partment of Health and Family Welfare, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2010-11. 
2. The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received 
from the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare and also heard the Secretary and other officials of that Department on the said 
Demands for Grants (2010-11) in its meetings held on the 23rd March and 6th April, 2010. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting 
held on the 26th April, 2010. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                     Amar Singh 
   
                   AMAR SINGH 
26
th April, 2010                                                                            Chairman, 
Vaishakha 7, 1932 (saka)                                    Department-related Parliamentary 
                                                                Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
  
 

 6
PART – A        
HEALTH SECTOR 
 
II   BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
2.1 The Ministry had projected a demand  for Rs. 26985.00 crore to the Planning 
Commission for the Department of Health an d Family Welfare (including funds for the 
Department of AIDS Control) for the Annu al Plan 2010-11. As against the proposed 
outlay, the Planning Commission approved an outlay of Rs. 21000.00 crore, indicating a 
shortfall of Rs. 5985 crore. The proposed an d approved outlays for the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare work out to Rs . 25720 crore and Rs. 19565 crore respectively. 
Keeping in view the inter-sectoral priorities  within the Department of Health & Family 
Welfare, the distribution of outlay between  NRHM and Health Schemes was fixed at Rs. 
15440 crore and Rs. 4125 crore respectively.  
 
2.2 The Committee was informed that this re duction in outlay was likely to affect 
implementation of a number of ongoing sc hemes in the Health Sector like Pradhan 
Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY ), Oversight Committee, Upgradation of 
Government Medical Colleges, Upgradation/Strengthening of Nursing Schools/Colleges 
and revised strategy for implementation of Cancer Control and Mental Health 
Programme. Some new initiatives like National Programme for Cardio Vascular Diseases 
& Stroke, Strengthening/Creation of Parame dical Institutions and Health Care for 
Elderly may also require additional funds during  the year 2010-11. To offset the effect of 
shortfall of funds, a mid-year exercise is prop osed to be carried out by the Department to 
assess the requirement of fund s under the schemes/programmes based on the activities 
planned and progress made therein and addi tional funds would be sought from the 
Ministry of Finance accordingly. 
2.3 Against an approved Outlay of Rs. 41092. 92 crore for the Eleventh Plan, allocation 
during the first four years of the plan period  shows a gradual increase. However, pace of 
utilization so far has not matched with the allocated funds as indicated below: 
 

 7
 (Rs. In crores) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
BE Actuals BE Actuals BE Actuals 
(Upto 28.2.2010) 
BE 
2985.00 2183.71 3650.00 3008.22 4450.00 2559.61 5560.00 
 
2.4 With this trend of allocation of funds and utilization thereof, the Committee 
does not have much hope about optimum release of funds out of the approved outlay 
of Rs. 41092.92 crore in the remaining two years of the Eleventh Plan.  The Department 
will have to make concerted efforts so as to ensure optimum utilization of plan 
allocation of Rs. 5560.00 crore in 2010-11.  On ly then, there are chances of enhanced 
provision being made in 2011-12, the last year of the Eleventh Plan. 
2.5 The Committee in its 27
th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) had 
commented on the Department’s inability to project its budgetary requirements in an 
effective way for the simple reason that th e utilization of funds during the Tenth Plan 
was far from satisfactory. The Committee finds that the same trend continues in the 
Eleventh Plan period also. During 2007-08 a nd 2009-10,  keeping in view the pace of 
expenditure, allocated funds were substantiall y reduced at the RE stage. What is more 
worrisome is that the Department could not achieve optimum utilization of this 
reduced allocation during these two years.  Enhanced Plan allocation of Rs. 4450.00 in 
2009-10 failed to serve the purpose as it had to be brought down to Rs. 3825.25 crore, 
marginally lower than the 2008-09 allocation of Rs. 3650.00 crore.  Utilization status in 
2009-10 was more disappointing.  As on 28
th February, 2010, expenditure reported was 
Rs. 2559.61 crore which is less than the utilization of Rs. 3008.40 crore in the previous 
year. The Committee also takes note of th e fact that expenditure reported upto 31
st 
January 2010 under Plan head was only Rs. 2034. 06 crore. This clearly points to the fact 
that major utilization is taking place in th e last quarter of the financial year, thus 
indicating non-adherence to fiscal discipline. 
 2.6 The Committee’s examination of the following major heads of account has 
revealed recurrent and persistent sub-optimal utilization of budgetary provisions 
(Plan) during the Eleventh Plan period:- 

 8
 
Sl.  
No. 
Major Heads 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
  BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Exp. Upto  
28-2-2010 
1. Hospitals and  
Dispensaries  
88.70 126.00 118.42 139.20 216.47 214.28 181.30 270.36 230.83 
2. Medical Education  
Training and 
 Research 
1016.95 891.81 872.31 1254.61 1512. 91 1175.62 2279.52 1659.03 1123.01 
3. Public Health 1829.85 1258.63 1144.09 2187. 80 1837.51 1550.99 1919.79 1806.95 1157.12 
 
2.7 The Committee is dismayed at the fact that its continuous concerns and 
recommendations to the Department to put a proper mechanism in place for - 
presenting its case for fund requirement before the Planning Commission  in a 
realistic manner, and to arrest the trend of under utilization of funds seem to have 
failed to make any impact.  Atleast the Department needs to try some innovative 
methods to achieve optimum utilization of funds. Health is a crucial sector for the 
allround development of the nation and accordingly the Committee has been 
advocating higher allocation of funds for this sector every year.  But with the 
Department itself admitting to the slow pace of expenditure in respect of many 
schemes/programmes initiated by it, the Committee finds advocacy for additional 
funds serving no purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department 
to undertake a comprehensive analysis of th e trend of expenditure for the past three 
years with a view to identifying the underlying causes of underutilization. Such an 
exercise should enable the Department to no t only improve the utilization level of the 
budgeted funds but also to improve upon the existing system of assessing requirement 
of funds. The Committee is also of the opinion that the Department needs to take up 
with the implementing agencies as and when schemes are found not being 
implemented as per the Action Plan.  
 
2.8 The Committee desires to be apprised  of the necessary action initiated and 
pursued by the Department to streamline the formulation of budgetary requirements 

 9
in a realistic fashion and also to expedite necessary approvals for operationalization of 
various formulated schemes/projects. 
 
2.9 The Committee is specially concerned with  the slow pace of implementation of 
schemes like Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Sur aksha Yojna (PMSSY), Cancer Research, 
National Mental Health Programme, Assistance for Capacity Building for Trauma 
Centers, Oversight Committee, Upgradat ion/strengthening of Nursing Services, 
Strengthening/Upgradation of Pharmacy schools/colleges, Strengthening/creation of 
paramedical institutions as well as underutilization of allocated funds by some of the 
Hospitals/institutions. The Committee observes that this recurrent and persistent 
trend of underutilization is indicative of ineffectiveness of monitoring of 
implementation of schemes and utilization of funds.  The Committee therefore 
recommends to the Department to keep the activities of these schemes/institutions 
under constant scrutiny/monitoring and take urgent remedial steps so that the 
stumbling blocks in the optimum utilization of allocated/sanctioned funds are 
removed. 
2.10 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by unspent balances lying with a 
number of Institutions.  As on 1
st December, 2009, maximum unspent balances 
amounting to Rs. 28.79 crore, Rs. 36.52 cror e and Rs. 80.43 crore were reported against 
the North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences, 
Shillong, LGB Regional Institute of Ment al Health, Tezpur, Assam and AIIMS New 
Delhi. Except AIIMS, the other two Institutes had unspent balances as on 1 st April, 
2009.  Reasons for availability of such a huge amount of unspent balances are not 
known to the Committee.  However, such a st ate of affairs in national level institutes 
is indeed a cause of concern for the Committ ee.  This clearly shows that some major 
activities both ongoing/proposed might be  adversely affected.  The Committee would 
appreciate if the matter is taken up with the concerned authorities without further 
delay.  
2.11 The Committee has been keeping track of the pendency level of utilization 
certificates (UCs) for the past several years. The Committee takes note of the fact that as 
per latest figures, as on 1.04.2009, provided by the Department, as many as 2091 UCs 
were pending which amounted to Rs. 2003.23 crore. The major defaulter States were – 

 10
Delhi (273 UCs amounting to Rs. 214.88 crore), Madhya Pradesh (66 UCs amounting to 
Rs. 191.73 crore), Tamilnadu (137 UCs amounting to Rs.  147.5 crore),  Andhra Pradesh 
(114 UCs amounting to Rs. 141.45 crore), Maharashtra (147 UCs amounting to Rs. 139.83 
crore), UP (109 UCs amounting to Rs. 135.54 crore) and Meghalaya (20 UCs amounting to 
Rs. 109.08 crore). In addition, there were 11  unreconciled UCs amounting to Rs. 148.77 
crore. 
2.12 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Department has taken remedial 
measures like for non-recurring grants, no fresh releases are being authorized unless 
audited Utilization Certificate for grant released in the year prior to the last year (i.e. 
with a ‘grace period’ of one year) has been received, subject to the condition that the 
sanction for the earlier grant does not permit a longer period of utilization. Further, the 
provisions of the General Financial Rules, which require that in case of recurring 
grants, funds for the same purpose beyond 75% of the next year’s provision will not be 
released unless audited Utilization Certificate for the grants released in the previous 
year is received, are being strictly implemented. Impact of such measures does not 
seem to be very effective as number of pending UCs continues to remain very high.  
Not only this, such a trend also indicates that schemes are not being implemented as 
envisaged.  
2.13 The Committee notes that as a further effort to maximize liquidation of UCs, a 
communication has been sent by the Secr etary (Health) to the Principal Health 
Secretaries of all the States. If need be, th is exercise needs to be pursued further with 
higher authorities.  
 
2.14 In response to another specific query regarding audit of various 
Programmes/Bodies, the Committ ee has been informed that 24  Autonomous 
Bodies/Societies/Grantee Institutions/Programmes were covered during 2008-09  and 25 
during 2009-10.  
 
2.15 The Committee appreciates this forward movement w.r.t. audit of Autonomous 
Bodies/Societies/Grantee Institutions/Programmes receiving Grants-in-Aid from the 
Department. The Committee recommends to the Department to furnish the major 
audit findings of 2008-09 and 2009-10 and actio n taken thereon. A list of Autonomous 

 11
Bodies/Societies/Grantee Institutions/Programmes likely to be covered during 2010-11 
may also be furnished to the Committee.    
2.16 The Committee notes that the irregularities pointed out by the Internal Audit 
Wing in its audit paras concerning NVBDCP, Delhi, NIMHANS, Bangalore, ICMR, 
New Delhi and V.P. Chest Institute, Delhi University (for two paras 24 & 28) are yet to 
be settled.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the updated status in this 
regard.  
2.17 The Committee has been keeping a close watch on the level of pendency of 
Audit paras contained in CAG Report on matters relating to the Department. The 
Committee observes that around 60 paras are under various stages of pendency and 
some of them date back to the period 1998-2000. Committee’s attention has been 
especially drawn by the following pending Audit paras: 
Period of 
Report 
Para No Gist of CAG para 
2 of 1998 7.2 Loss due to expired medicine -GMSD 
2 of 2002 2 (chapter II) Working of Govt. Medical Store 
 Department, Kolkata 
3 of 2002 Chapter 1 (Section 2) All India Review on Prevention and  
Control of Diseases-National  
TB Control Programme  
3 of 2004 Entire Report National AIDS Control Programme 
3 of 2006 1.1.2 Annual Accounts of Autonomous 
 Bodies-NIMHANS/PGIMER/CNKI 
20 of 2007 Entire Report Performance Audit: Procurement of 
 medicines and medical equipment 
 
 The Committee would appreciate if matter of reconciliation of all the pending 
CAG Audit Paras is taken up with the concerned authorities on an urgent basis. The 
Committee would like to be apprised in this regard.  
2.18 The Committee has for long been empha sizing the Department to make all 
conceivable efforts to strengthen its intern al audit wing as also take all corrective 
measures so that the laid down procedures are adhered to in letter and spirit at the 
outset. The Committee is, however, surprised to observe that pendency of internal 
Audit Paras continues to be on the high side.  Following details are self-revealing: 
 

 12
Year No. of Units Audited No. of Paras raised Paras Outstanding 
2007-08 68 737 448 
2008-09 73 651 478 
2009-10 44 415 396 
  
 The Committee fails to understand as to why more than half of the Audit Paras 
raised during 2007-08 and 2008-09 continue to remain outstanding. The Committee 
would like to have a Status Note on the details of major units showing pendency 
alongwith instances of serious deviations from the prescribed financial norms (unit 
wise). 
 
III CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
3.1 The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) is a scheme for providing health 
care to serving Central Government employ ees/pensioners and their dependant family 
members and certain other categories like Members of Parliament, freedom fighters, 
employees of some select autonomous bodies as  also PIB accredited journalists.  Initially 
started in Delhi, it covers 25 cities at pres ent.  As on 31-3-2009, there were 9,34,825 card 
holders with 31,81,719 beneficiaries.   
3.2 Status of allocation of funds and utilizati on thereof during the Eleventh Plan is as 
follows: 
 
                           (Rs. in crores)  
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals 
(as on 
 28.2.2010) 
40.00 40.00 35.20 50.00 59.37 45.45 51.00 66.64 40.92 
 
3.3 The Committee is unhappy to note the continuous underutilization of Plan 
funds during the first three financial years of the Eleventh  Plan, more so when the 
Department had sought an increase of funds during the RE stage during 2008-09 and 
2009-10 and it could not even utilize the funds provided to it at the BE stage. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the Department has to justify the need for 
additional funds by ensuring optimum utilization thereof and be careful in 

 13
placing/proposing its revised estimate so that funds are not unnecessarily blocked and 
go unspent.  
 
3.4 The Committee notes that the earmarked fund for 2010-11 un der the scheme are 
not in tune with the projected demands of the Department.  From the figures made 
available to the Committee, it is evident that  the reduction in allocation has been mainly 
on account of Materials & Supplies in No n-Plan where Rs. 159.85 crore have been 
allocated as against the requirement of Rs. 250.75 crore and Medical Treatment for 
Pensioners Head for which only Rs. 377.87 crore have been provided as against the 
projected demand of Rs. 627.00 crore. Simi larly, a shortfall of Rs. 5.33 crore under 
Materials & Supplies and Rs. 2.86 crore under IT Head under Plan allocation has been 
reported.  
 
3.5 The Committee does not find any logic for under provisioning for CGHS under 
Materials & Supplies as also for IT activ ities Head which are bound to affect the 
quality of services available to the CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee also observes 
that total tentative pendency with regard to medical claims of pensioners as on 
January, 2010 is Rs. 200 crore, including bill s pertaining to 2008-09.  In such a scenario, 
allocation of Rs. 377.87 crore for pensioners  against the projected requirement of Rs. 
627.00 crore for 2010-11 is bound to increase th e pendency further.  The Committee is 
of the view that full allocation of required funds has to be there so that pensioners are 
not made to face uncalled for hardships.  
   
3.6 The Committee is happy to note that a number of initiatives under CGHS are 
proposed to be undertaken during 2010-11. On e such initiative is expansion of a pilot 
project for Preventive Health Check-up for pensioners and serving employees over the 
age of 40 years at CGHS dispensary, Sector -12 and Sector-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi. The 
Committee would like the Department to share its experiences of the pilot project and 
recommends to the Department to expand the initiative to more dispensaries in a time-
bound manner.  
3.7 The Committee also welcomes the intr oduction of a proposal under which the 
empanelled hospitals will forward the bill for the treatment of pensioner CGHS 

 14
beneficiaries to UTI-TSL and payment of the same within 10 days.  Such an initiative 
is bound to help the pensioners in availing of healthcare without any hindrance.  
 
3.8 The Committee is given to understand that the Department is coming up with the 
Central Government Employees and Pensioners Health Insurance Scheme (CGEPHIS) for 
Government servants and pensioners. Details of the proposed scheme are as under: 
• The Scheme is proposed to be implem ented on voluntary basis for existing 
employees and pensioners and compulsorily for future employees and pensioners. 
•  It shall provide coverage for meeting expenses of hospitalization and surgical 
procedures for beneficiaries up to Rs. 5.00 lakh per family per year on floater basis in any 
of the empanelled hospitals.  
• The beneficiary will have to pay an annual  premium, according to the grade pay, 
which will be in the range of Rs. 8,000/- to Rs. 12,000/- p.a. which is proposed to be 
subsidized by the Government.  
• Family will include self, spouse, two depe ndent children and dependent parents. 
New born will be covered as a part of insure d family member during the currency of the 
policy. Additional dependent family member can be covered by paying the fixed 
percentage of premium per additional dependent family member.  
3.9 The Committee views the introduction of the current proposal of the Ministry 
with serious concern. The Committee is no t convinced by Department’s categorical 
statement that it does not intend to replace the CGHS with this new insurance scheme. 
It is amply clear that the scheme would be mandatory for future employees and 
pensioners.  The Committee would like to point out that CGHS is one of the very 
important social security measures which ha s been providing health care services at 
economical rates to its beneficiaries for so many decades. The Committee fails to 
comprehend the rationale for depriving all the beneficiaries of such an essential 
service in the long run.  The Committee would like to point out that there is a well-
structured set up of CGHS dispensaries, Govt. Hospitals providing allopathic and 
AYUSH healthcare and also a number of empanelled diagnostic centres and private 
hospitals.  In the recent years a number of initiatives have also been taken for 
strengthening/revamping different comp onents under the Scheme.  A number of 
additional dispensaries are also proposed to be set up in the near future.  The existing 

 15
CGHS scheme is part of the social responsibility of Govt. for its serving/retired 
employees. Full reimbursement as per th e prescribed norms is payable to the 
beneficiaries. There is no upper limit on annual expenditure on the treatment of a 
beneficiary.  The very idea of capping the amount of coverage to Rs. 5 lakh per family 
per year as well as the limit of coverage to only - Self, spouse, two dependent children 
and dependent parents and thereby forcing for payment of the fixed percentage of 
premium per additional dependent family member under the proposed scheme 
indicates that the Govt. intends to dilute its social obligation primarily to its 
employees. This is unacceptable to the Committee.  
 
3.10 The Committee has for quite some time now been emphasizing for the 
introduction of two shift system in CGHS dispensaries. It had recommended starting it at 
least on a test case basis. However, as per the latest feedback given to the Committee, the 
Department has stated that starting of the two shift system has not been found feasible 
with the existing staff. 
 
3.11 The Committee is dismayed at the Depart ment’s approach from the very outset.  
First, it had taken the plea of a large number of private hospitals and diagnostic 
centres empanelled under the CGHS and the opposition from the staff side to any 
such move. Then, subsequent to Committee’s recommendation that flexible timings 
are order of the day and  desirable in the interest of many of the CGHS beneficiaries 
who are unable to avail the facilities of dispensaries in the morning hours, the 
Department in its Action Taken Note on Committee’s 27
th Report had stated that the 
Ministry intends to take the matter before the Committee of Secretaries. The latest 
reply proves beyond doubt that the Department is not willing to move forward in the 
matter. Like in the previous instances, the new plea taken by the Department is its 
inability to go ahead on account of its existing staff strength.  The Committee is of the 
opinion that if there is shortage of manp ower, necessary action plan may be drawn up 
and approval sought for requisite manpower at appropriate level. The Committee 
would like to reiterate that the matter needs to be taken up seriously and in the right 
spirit.  The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made in this regard. 
 

 16
 
3.12 The process of computerization under the CGHS which was initiated during 
2005 is continuing. The Committee notes that finally the Department has been able to 
finish the work of computerization in six cities i.e. Delhi, Kolkata, Nagpur, Pune, 
Chennai and Ranchi and it is nearing comp letion in Hyderabad, Mumbai and Patna. 
However, the Committee is constrained to no te that the Department has not been able 
to add momentum to the computerization wo rk even after the expiry of about five 
years as 15 cities still remain to be covered.  The Committee therefore recommends 
that the computerization work in the remaining cities be completed in a mission mode 
by the end of the Eleventh Plan.   
3.13 The Committee has been informed th at for successful implementation of 
computerization in CGHS facilities, onlin e high capacity UPS systems have been 
provided as part of the computerization package.  Training in Delhi has been provided to 
the staff by the National Info rmatics Centre (NIC) and Staff from outstation cities are 
deployed to Delhi for ‘hands-on’ training apart from local training sessions. 
3.14 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department to neutralize the 
teething problems afflicting the smooth implementation of the computerization. 
However, the ground realities are not much encouraging. The Committee is informed 
that there is shortage of computer operat ors and the doctors have to first see the 
patients and then feed the relevant data in the computer system leading to delays and 
the resultant long queues. This way the computerization has only been able to help 
keep a check on the inventory in the store room and save time in putting up request 
for local purchases wherever required. Howe ver, it has not been able to obviate the 
problems faced by the beneficiaries particularly the old age pensioners who have to 
stand for long hours in queue.   The Committ ee, therefore, recommends that adequate 
trained manpower may be made available at the earliest.  
3.15 The Committee has been informed that  one dispensary for CGHS beneficiaries 
residing in Dwarka has already commenced fu nctioning. It has also purchased three 
plots of land in Dwarka for construction of dispensaries. CGHS dispensary at NOIDA 
has already started functioning from the ne wly constructed dispensary building. CGHS 
has already taken possession of plot allotted fo r construction of dispensary in Sector 5, 
Gurgaon. Building plan prepared by Cent ral Design Bureau, Directorate General of 

 17
Health Services has been approved by HUDA. CPWD has been requested to prepare the 
estimate of the cost of construction of the dispensary.  
3.16 The Committee is happy to note that after much delay the Department has 
finally been able to open a dispensary each in NOIDA and Dwarka. However, as the 
number of CGHS beneficiaries is very la rge in that area, the Committee recommends 
to the Department to put all its acts togeth er to start the three dispensaries for which 
plots have been purchased in Dwarka and one dispensary at Gurgaon.  
3.17 The Committee is given to understand that the workload on the dispensaries in 
Delhi has increased manifold. The Committee therefore recommends to the Department 
to have a realistic assessment of workload in CGHS dispensaries in Delhi with a view 
to explore opening up of new dispensaries  to mitigate the problems faced by the 
beneficiaries. The Committee would recomm end to the Department to furnish a 
detailed status note on the no. of beneficiaries attached with each dispensary, zone-
wise in Delhi and the NCR and plans of the Department to open new dispensaries in 
underserved areas of Delhi and NCR. The Committee may also be briefed about the 
availability of unused land lying with CGHS in different cities covered by CGHS 
alongwith the purpose of their acquirement.  
3.18 The Committee has been continuously vo icing its concern over the scarcity of 
manpower which is obviously bound to affect the quality of services being offered by the 
CGHS. The Committee notes the following status of manpower under CGHS, Delhi:- 
Sl. No.    Name of post        No. of Sanctioned Posts In Position     Vacant  
 
1.  Specialists   117         93     24 
2.  SAG      34         26     08 
3.  GDMO   667         612     55 
4.  Dental Surgeon    10         10     00 
5.  AYUSH     83         63     20 
 
3.19 The Committee also takes note of the large number of vacancies in different 
dispensaries across cities served by CGHS as indicated below: 
Group A :- 25 out of 94 in Chennai, 35 out of 116 in Mumbai, 18 out of 51 in Kanpur, 18 
out of 73 in Bangaluru and 32 out of 110 in Hyderabad 

 18
Group C :- 13 out of 66 in Jaipur, 26 out of 1 56 in Chennai, 26 out of 95 in Nagpur, 57 out 
of 280 in Mumbai, 22 out of 67 in Kanpur, 18 out of 57 in Allahabad 32 out of 116 in 
Bangaluru, and 120 out of 167 in Hyderabad 
  
3.20 The Committee has been given to understand that action has been initiated at 
various levels for filling up of vacancies in different categories of posts.  In the meantime, 
appointments on contract basis are being made. 
 
3.21 The Committee is not very happy with the element of adhocism in such a 
crucial area. The Committee would like to point out that the number of vacancies in a 
particular grade are bound to put pressure on the existing workforce thereby 
compromising with the quality of services provided to the beneficiaries. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to urgently chalk out a strategy 
to fill up the vacant positions in all grades under CGHS in a time-bound manner.  
 
3.22 The Committee notes that  there is a laid down procedure followed for 
empanelment of private hospitals and diag nostic centers under CGHS. As per this 
procedure, CGHS notifies procedures / test s / treatment which can be availed of by 
CGHS beneficiaries in institutions and th e conditions applicable to selection of 
Hospitals/Centers for provision of selected  services. Tenders are thereafter invited 
seeking applications/bids from eligible parties.  Short-listed institut ions are inspected by 
the Quality Council of India which recommen ds institutions fulfilling the eligibility 
criteria.  Lowest rates for each procedure / test / treatment are determined. Eligible 
institutions accepting the terms and conditio ns (including the rates) are thereafter 
empanelled on submission of required performance bank guarantee. 
 
3.23 The Committee has noticed substantial variation in approved rates of 
investigations / treatment procedures in various metro cities. The Committee does not 
find much merit in the argument of the Department that rates offered by the private 
hospitals and diagnostic centres depend upon the prevailing market rates, number and 
business volume from CGHS beneficiarie s likely to be derived by eligible 
institutions/private institutions, which vary from city to city. The Committee is of the 

 19
opinion that substantial variation of 50 to 100 per cent in approved rates and that too in 
cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolk ata cannot be considered commensurate 
with the variation in economic dynamics. The Committee accordingly, recommends to 
the Department to come up with a strategy to counter this variation of rates by having 
minimum disparities in the rates. 
  
3.24 The Committee has been informed that the CGHS has again in itiated the process 
of fresh empanelment of private hospitals and di agnostic centres.  It has been stated that 
institutions with accreditation with Nati onal Accreditation Board for Hospitals & 
Hospital care Providers (NABH) and Nati onal Accreditation Board for Testing & 
Calibration of Laboratories (N ABL) (respectively for hospitals and diagnostic centers) 
will be considered for empanelment. Institut ions already empanelled have been directed 
to obtain NABH / NABL accreditation within  a period of one year, failing which their 
names will be removed from the approved list. 
 
3.25 Though the Committee appreciates Department’s initiative for ensuring quality 
service to CGHS beneficiaries and has no doubts over the professionalism of 
NABH/NABL, yet it does not find much merit in making it compulsory as a 
precondition for empanelment under C GHS. The NABL/NABH lay down certain 
norms and standards to be observed and on inspection, they provide accreditation to 
those who fulfill the said standards. There is no guarantee that once accredited, the 
Hospital/diagnostic centre will maintain those standards till the next inspection by 
NABL/NABH. Further, it has been observed that many of the reputed hospitals don’t 
go for accreditation under them. In such a scenario it may be counterproductive as the 
beneficiaries may be deprived of services  under such reputed Hospitals/diagnostic 
centres. The Committee accordingly recommends to the Department to be cautious on 
this move.  
 
3.26 The Committee would also like to have  information regarding the number of 
NABH/NABL accredited Govt. hospitals/diagnostic centres as well as private 
hospitals/diagnostic centres empanelled under CGHS. 
 

 20
3.27 The Committee has been voicing its co ncern about the hardships being faced by 
cancer patients due to reputed specialized ho spitals in Delhi not opting for empanelment 
under CGHS.  Such patients have been permitted to take treatment in any multi-
speciality general purpose hospital subject to  the condition that reimbursement will be 
limited to actual expenditure or the rates noti fied in 2001, whichever is lower. CGHS has 
also now empanelled one hospital, viz. M/s SMH Curie Centre [Shanti Mukund 
Hospital], Vikas Marg, Karkardooma, Delhi fo r offering treatment to cancer patients. 
Further, the Department has stated that it is hopeful that the rates that would emerge 
from the fresh tender process will be realistic and acceptable to major hospitals. 
 
3.28 The Committee would like to point out that prior to 2001, all the premier 
specialized Hospitals had opted for CGHS empanelment.  The Committee wonders as 
to whether the recently empanelled Hospital of Delhi can provide the same services as 
being provided by Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital or Dharamshila Cancer Hospital.  
The Committee is also not aware about the quality status of the only empanelled 
Hospital.  The Committee reiterates that the kind of specialized services being offered 
by a particular hospital, specially for terminal diseases like cancer and not the lowest 
rates should be the basic criteria for selection of a hospital.  One must not forget that 
the main objective of CGHS is to provide qu ality health care at economical rates. Not 
only this, Government is supposed to reimbu rse only the packages rates.  Payment of 
difference in treatment expenditure is the co ncern of the beneficiary.  In Committee’s 
view, package rates need to be governed by quality service.  Nobody stops the 
concerned authorities to negotiate with the applicant hospitals for arriving at mutually 
acceptable package rates. It cannot be that services offered by a small hospital can be 
considered on an equal footing with an advanced well established hospital.  The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends framing of a policy for revision of rates after 
every two years to realistically fix the ra tes of treatment. The Committee may be 
informed about the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
3.29 The Committee has been informed that Local Advisory Committees, consisting of 
representatives of resident welfare associat ions; pensioners’ associations; and Area 
Welfare Officer appointed by the Departme nt of Personnel & Training have been 

 21
constituted at each dispensary level, which me ets at least once in a month, preferably on 
the second Saturday of the month to attend to grievances of the beneficiaries. A 
complaint / grievance box and complaint / grieva nce register is also required to be kept 
at every dispensary. CGHS has also set up help line wherein any beneficiary can lodge 
his / her complaint, which is attended to by the concerned authorities and a reply sent in 
a time-bound manner. Claims adalats are being held annually in Delhi in each zone to 
settle any pending / outstanding bills of pensioner beneficiaries.  All Additional 
Directors / Joint Directors in CGHS cities out side Delhi have also been directed to hold 
Claims Adalat. 
 
3.30 The Committee appreciates the number of initiatives taken by the Department 
for effective functioning of CGHS. The Committee however, feels that wide publicity 
through local and print media needs to be given in this regard.  Only then CGHS 
beneficiaries will be in a position to avail of such facilities.   
 
IV SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHAVEER MEDICAL 
COLLEGE, NEW DELHI 
 
4.1 Safdarjung Hospital, with a total bed st r e n g t h  o f  1 5 3 1 ,  p r o v i d e s  m e d i c a l  c a r e  t o  
millions of citizens from Delhi and the neig hboring States. Plan allocation of Rs. 69.00 
crore for 2009-10 for the Hospital was raised to  Rs. 129.92 crore at the RE stage, keeping 
in view funds required for payment of 6
th Pay Commission arrears; procurement of 
essential items and Equipment and Machinery etc. However, expenditure reported upto 
28
th February 2010 is Rs. 112.76 crore.  
 
4.2 The Committee notes that against projected Plan requirement of Rs. 180.60 crore 
for 2010-11 for the Hospital, allocation of Rs. 118.60 crore has been made. Given the 
fact that out of the RE plan allocation of Rs. 129.92 crore for 2009-10, the Hospital was 
able to spend Rs. 112.76 crore upto 28 th February, 2010, with every possibility of full 
utilization by the end of the year, the Committee is unable to comprehend the reasons 
behind a huge gap of Rs. 62.00 crore between the projected and budgeted funds for 
2010-11.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that additional funds be allocated for 

 22
the Hospital at RE stage so that lack of funds should not hamper the re-developmental 
activities undertaken by the Hospital.  
 
4.3 Committee has been constantly voicing its concern about continuance of large 
number of vacancies in different categories of posts in Safdarjung Hospital and VMCC.  
The Committee finds that positio n remains unchanged. As on 31 st January, 2010, out of 
total sanctioned strength of 5116 posts in di fferent categories, as many as 639 posts are 
lying vacant. What is more worrisome is that strength of Resident Doctors reflects the 
maximum shortfall.  As many as 245 Resident Doctors are required to be in place out of 
total strength of 1214.  Group ‘A’ Gazetted posts is the second category most affected 
with 62 vacant posts out of total 383 sanctioned  posts.  Percentage of vacancies in other 
categories is also quite alarming.  The Commi ttee is not aware about the status of filling 
up of Group ‘A’ posts to be initiated by the Department.  But from its post experience, the 
Committee can only conclude that it wo uld be a long drawn affair. During the 
presentation of the Secretary, Department  of Health & Family Welfare before the 
Committee, the Medical Superintendant of Safd arjung Hospital drew the attention of the 
Committee to acute shortage of manpower, sp ace and equipments in the Hospital owing 
to tremendous patient load.  Against an intake capacity of 1531 since 1960, present 
average bed occupancy was 2100. Thus actual  requirement of the hospital for both 
medical and para-medical personnel was su bstantially higher than the sanctioned 
strength.  
4.4 The Committee is very concerned with the vacancy position in different 
categories of posts at the Hospital. This coupled with the admission of the head of the 
Hospital itself that the sanctioned strength is far below the practical requirement, 
presents a sorry state of affairs. The Co mmittee is of the opinion that vacancies 
irrespective of any category are not only directly or indirectly bound to have an 
adverse impact on the quantity and quality of the services rendered by the Hospital 
but also result in overstressing of the existing staff. Further, the vacancies also have 
the potential to affect the quality of education imparted at the attached medical 
college. The Committee is given to understand that in case of Resident Doctors, 
vacancies occur frequently and are filled regularly depending on the requirement. The 
Committee is, however, not able to comprehend as to why there is about 25% of 

 23
vacancies at any given point of time. At least the Department can take pre-emptive 
action so that it has the next batch of Reside nt Doctors available to  step-in in place of 
the outgoing Resident Doctors. Similarly, vacancies in Group A and Group B Gazetted 
posts are far above the justifiable limits.  The Committee accordingly recommends to 
the Department to take up the issue of vacancies seriously and on priority basis. It also 
recommends a review of the requirement of manpower vis-à-vis the sanctioned 
strength of the Hospital and college. The Committee would like to be informed about 
the progress made in this regard.  
 
4.5 Committee’s attention was also drawn to wards acute shortage of nursing staff at 
the Hospital. Non-availability of good accommodation for nursing staff was cited as the 
main factor responsible for such  a situation.  Existing staff qu arters at Srinivaspuri were 
considered to be too inadequate.  The Comm ittee was given to understand that another 
project was coming up at Dwarka. The Committee is of the view that provision of 
accommodation nearest to the Hospital is the basic requirement for all hospital 
employees, especially for the nurses rendering 24 hour services.  The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that provision of required accommodation facilities for 
nurses should be taken up on priority basis.  Viability of such facility at the Hospital 
premises itself under the ongoing Redevelopm ent Plan of the Hospital needs to be 
looked into.  
 
4.6 The Committee is aware that the Redevelo pment Plan of SJH with an outlay of Rs. 
2000 crore has already been included in the a pproved schemes for the Eleventh Plan. The 
plan involves systematic and phased demolition of existing structures in the Hospital 
and simultaneously rebuilding  m u l t i - s t o r e y  t o w e r s  w i t h  t i m e  b o u n d ,  s t a t e - o f - a r t  
construction over a period of six years. The Committee has been informed that the 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has recommended the Redevelopment proposal 
for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on  Economic Affairs (CCEA) with a total 
project cost of Rs.4821.17 crore. It has been stated that as the project outlay exceeds the 
amount earmarked for the purpose in the Eleven th Plan, it will have to necessarily be 
spread over the Twelfth Plan. Before submission  of the matter to the CCEA, a view is to 

 24
be taken about the resources which can be deployed for the purpose having regard to the 
overall availability of funds for the health sector.  
 
4.7 The Committee is unhappy with the pace with which things are moving in 
respect of the Re-development Plan of the Hospital. The Committee in its 27
th Report 
had urged the Department to make wholeh earted efforts to expedite the procedural 
formalities regarding this. The Committee notes that the Department itself has now 
stated a timeline of six years for the entire work to complete. Keeping in view the 
inordinate delay already made since its inclusion in the Eleventh Plan, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to make all conceivable efforts so that the whole 
redevelopment work is completed within this period of six years. For this to happen, 
targets need to be set, resources placed  at the disposal in time and implementing 
agencies need to be made accountable to  accomplish the set targets from the very 
outset.  
  
4.8 The Committee has for several years now been monitoring the progress made in 
the projects relating to establishment of Renal Transplantation Unit in the Department of 
Surgery/Urology and In Vitro Fertilization (IVF) clinic in Obs. and Gynae Department of 
the Hospital. As per the latest feedback given by the Department, preparatory work to 
start the Renal Transplantation Unit has been  completed and registration of unit under 
THO Act has already been obtained from Dte.  GHS. Infrastructure work was under final 
process. Staff has been identified and training carried out. Site (2
nd floor of Old 
Cardiology Wing) for setting up of IVF Unit  has been inspected in August, 2009. Orders 
were issued for carrying out necessary renovations. 
 
4.9 The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department to the 
following status of the two projects furnished to it two years back:- 
“The space has been identified and funds allo cated. Rs. 98.48 lakhs for the purpose have 
been placed at the disposal of CPWD for the renovation work. Equipments are under process 
of procurement and likely to be completely pr ocured within next quarter of 2008-09. Two 
Surgeons, one Pathologist and 15 Nurses have already under-gone training in Renal 
Transplant at AIIMS. As regards IVF Unit, a proposal has been submitted by the HOD, Obs. 
& Gynae for approval in principle.”  
 

 25
4.10 The Committee is extremely disappoin ted with the persisting slow progress 
made by the Department w.r.t. setting up of the Renal Transplantation Unit and IVF 
Unit. The Committee recommends to the Department to remove all bottlenecks in 
setting up of the two units at the earliest. The Committee would like to have a status 
note on the same inter-alia containing details regarding the original timeline set, 
reasons for inordinate delay, resultant cost escalation and fresh timeline set with 
special efforts taken to meet the timeline this time.  
 
4.11 The Committee notes that Plan allocati on of Rs. 15 crore for the VMMC was 
reduced to Rs. 10 crore at the RE stage.  However, the expenditure reported till 28 th 
February, 2010 is only Rs. 7.44 crore. The College has been allocated Rs. 7 crore under 
Plan head for 2010-11. The Committee has been  informed that the reduction in 2009-10 
was made on a realistic assessment of the need s of the institution. Going by the current 
year’s progress of expenditure, the funds allocated for 2010-11 appear to be sufficient.  
 
4.12 The Committee is constrained to observe that the allocated funds for 2009-10 
could not be utilised even after steep reduction at the RE stage. To add to this the 
Department’s reply that the reduction was due  to realistic assessment of the needs of 
the Institute, proves that the earlier estimate, at the BE stage was not proper. Moreover, 
the fact that the College could not utilize this reduced amount also makes it clear that 
there is some element of improper planning at some stage. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends to the Department to have a realistic assessment of the fund 
requirement for the College at the outset itself. 
 
 V DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPTIAL, NEW DELHI 
 
5.1 Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital has been a centre of excellence in the health care 
under the Government Sector Hospitals for ov er 75 years. The Hospital has round-the-
clock emergency services. All the services  are free of cost except Nursing Home 
treatment and some nominal charges for specia lized tests. It is a 1055 bedded hospital 
providing services in almost all major specialities and many super-specialties.  
 

 26
5.2 The Committee notes that the Plan and Non-Plan allocations in respect of Dr. RML 
Hospital in 2009-10 were Rs. 76.30 crore an d Rs. 117.00 crore, respectively, which were 
increased to Rs. 94.30 crore and Rs. 127.38 cror e at the RE stage. Additional funds were 
required for the payment of 6 th Pay Commission arrears to the staff, for Trauma Care 
Centre, expenses on medicines, consumables etc. As on 5 th March, 2010, 99% of the Non-
Plan funds and 85% of the Plan funds were utilized. For the year 2010-11, the Hospital 
had projected fund requirement of Rs. 227. 46 crore (Both Non-Plan and Plan) against 
which provision of Rs. 213.94 crore (Rs.107 crore in Non-Plan and Rs. 106.94 crore in 
Plan) has been made.  
 
5.3 The Committee was informed that most of the projects have been executed as 
scheduled and there was no delay in the ongoin g projects also. The Hospital proposes to 
start a general Maternity Ward (to start with 25 beds).  Moreover, the construction of a 
New Casualty Building, multi-storey super speciality block after likely possession of land 
in the G point near Trauma Care Centre was also proposed. Operationalisation of Renal 
Transplant Unit, setting up of a Nuclear Medi cine Department, setting up of Centre of 
Excellence for Mental Health and face lif ting of the hospital due to Commonwealth 
Games are the other projects being initiated/executed during the financial year 2010-11. 
 
5.4 The Committee takes note of the fact that inspite of a lot of developmental work 
being undertaken by the Hospital, several of the items of work like setting up of the 
Renal Transplantation Unit have gone beyond the targeted time-line.  Concerned that 
time-overruns are certain to result in cost overruns, the Committee recommends that 
the Hospital chalk out a time-bound Action Plan for such projects. The Committee 
would like to point out that the emphasis should not only be on the optimal 
utilization but also on the judicious utilizat ion of scarce funds. The Committee at the 
same time recommends to the Department to ensure that the developmental activities 
initiated by the Hospital do not get hampered due to scarcity of funds.  
 
5.5 The Committee welcomes the proposal to start a general maternity ward, 
construction of a New Casualty Building, multi-storey super speciality block and 

 27
setting up of Centre of Excellence for Mental Health. However, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to keep a close watch on the progress of new 
initiatives from the outset so that they are accomplished as targeted. The Committee 
also recommends to the Department to take  all necessary steps for early possession of 
land in the G point near Trauma Care Cent re. The Committee may be informed of the 
progress made w.r.t. the new initiatives.  
 
5.6 In response to another query regarding the sanctioned strength vis-à-vis the in- 
position status of posts in the Hospital an d the attached PGIMER, the Department has 
furnished the following position :- 
 
Post Sanctioned  
Posts 
In position Vacant 
Group 'A' CHS posts 219 174 + 20 (contract)   27 
Group 'A' Non-CHS posts   37 13  24 
Group 'B' Gazetted   43 21  22 
Group 'B' Non-Gazetted   41 25  16 
Group 'C' Clerical  175 131 + 1  44 
Group 'C' Technical 493 366 127 
Jr.Resident+ Sr,Resident 636 480 161 
Group 'C' Nursing 1116 791 + 200 (cont.) 310 
 
5.7 At the outset the Committee places its displeasure over the mismatch in the 
figures provided to it with respect to vacant posts vis-à-vis ‘sanctioned and in-position’ 
posts.  For example, in respect of Group ‘A’ CHS posts, sanctioned and in-position 
posts are 219 and 194 (including 20 contractua l posts) respectively while vacancies 
shown are 27.  Such variations exist in respec t of some other categories of posts also.  
The Committee would like the Department to explain this mismatch. The Committee 
is constrained to find a lot of vacancies across the grades. The Hospital is already 
overburdened with patient load and in such a scenario it is really a matter of concern 
that such a large number of vacancies are allowed to continue. The Committee is of the 
opinion that in the smooth functioning of the hospital services, all the posts whether 
they are in technical side, nursing side or in the clerical side, have their part to play. 
Vacancies beyond permissible limits in an y grade affect the overall patient care 
offered by the Hospital as well as resu lt in overburdening the existing set of 

 28
employees. Taking into account the increased patient load, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to take immediate steps for reassessment of the 
manpower requirement in the Hospital and fill up the vacant posts in the various 
grades at the earliest. The Committee may be apprised of the steps initiated by the 
Department to streamline the existing procedure of recruitment so that vacancies in 
the different grades are filled up at the earliest. 
 
VI ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS) 
  
6.1 AIIMS was established in 1956 by an act of Parliament as an institution of national 
importance. It continues to be a leader in the field of medical education, research and 
patient- care in keeping with its mandate. 
 
6.2 The Committee was informed that Plan allo cation of Rs. 177.00 crore for AIIMS in   
2009-10 was substantially increased to Rs. 320. 51 crore at the RE stage.  Owing to the 
stage of preparedness of projects, ‘Plan’ allo cation for 2009-10 for the Institute was fixed 
at Rs 177 crore against the projected demand of Rs. 900.00 crore. Later, at the RE stage, 
estimate of Rs.  320.51 crore was projected by  the Institute for the purchase of high end 
equipments, capital works and spill over proj ects like Jai Prakash Narain Apex Trauma 
Centre and Center for Dental Education & Research, which was acceded to. The 
Committee however notes that as on 28
th February, 2010, expenditure reported under 
Plan head was Rs. 270 crore. 
 
6.3 Allocation of Rs. 800 crore and Rs. 400 cr ore each under Plan and Non Plan heads 
has been earmarked for the Institute in 2010-11. 
  
6.4 Expansion of OPD block and New Emer gency Ward, Teaching Block, Research 
wing, OT/ICU and Private Ward Refurbishin g, Air-conditioning of Main Hospital, 
Multi-level parking and Multi-storey Animal House and Site development of Ansari 
Nagar campus & Community Centre at AV Nagar are the major projects proposed to be 
undertaken during 2010-11. 
 

 29
6.5 The Committee is anguished to note that out of a total allocation of Rs. 1461 
crore for the Eleventh Plan, the Institute do es not seem to be able to utilize the 
earmarked funds for the Plan period during the first three years of the Plan period. 
The Institute has been able to utilize on ly Rs. 648.00 crore (as on 28-2-2010).  The 
Committee sees little hope for optimum utiliz ation of remaining funds during the last 
two years of Eleventh Plan. As a result, the initiatives/ongoing projects are not likely 
to be executed as targeted originally. Th e Committee observes that as many as 21 
projects were envisaged to be completed during the Eleventh Plan for which an outlay 
of Rs. 623.63 crore was made. The Committee is, however, dismayed to note that by the 
end of the first three years of the Plan, utilization reported is only Rs. 70.18 crore. The 
situation is worsened by the fact that work in respect of as many as 14 projects is yet to 
start. These projects include expansio n of OPD Block and New Emergency Ward, 
Burns Unit at JPN Apex Trauma Centre, Multi-level parking, Pediatrics Surgery. Out 
of total expenditure of Rs. 70.18 crore, Rs. 55.00 crore has been utilized for minor works 
in Hospital/ hostels/ residential areas of the campus. Thus, progress made in the 
remaining six projects can also be considered at the initial stage only. The Committee 
cannot remain a silent spectator to present circumstances as AIIMS is India’s premier 
Institute providing specialized health services to patients from across the country. The 
Committee is of the firm view that it is  high time that an effective monitoring 
mechanism is set in motion. 
 
6.6 The Committee has been informed that 300 acres of land allotted by Haryana 
Government in District Jha jjar in February 2009 is proposed to be utilized for the 
development of the second campus for AIIMS in order to decongest the existing campus 
by shifting the non-critical areas. The Se cretary, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare and the Director, AIIMS during their deposition before the Committee on 23
rd 
March, 2010 informed that there was a limit to  expansion of the services in the present 
campus. Therefore AIIMS was planning to expa nd various capabilities in OPD Block in 
Masjid Moth where the Institute has got 35 acres of land.  
 
6.7 The Committee takes note of the fact that AIIMS has initiated the process of 
making a composite Redevelopment Plan of its Masjid Moth, Ansari Nagar and A.V. 

 30
Nagar campuses. The work of preparation of redevelopment plan of A.V. Nagar 
campus has been entrusted to CPWD. The work of Ansari Nagar and Masjid Moth 
campuses has been entrusted to HSCC by the Governing Body on 23 rd January, 2009. 
The concept Master Plan was finally a pproved by the Proj ect Implementation 
Committee on 12 th May, 2009. The revised Master Plan as presented before the 
Institute Body in December, 2009 has since been submitted to NDMC for approval. 
HSCC has also been entrusted with the co nsultancy and project management work of 
the redevelopment of old OPD Block. 
 
6.8 On being queried on the performance  level of the HSCC, a Public Sector 
Undertaking, the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare expressed 
unhappiness with their approach and admitted to the laxity on the part of HSCC in 
carrying out the assigned developmental tasks at the Institute.  
 
6.9 While appreciating the candid statemen t of the Health Secretary, the Committee 
fails to comprehend the basis for such a Company being allowed to be associated with 
carrying out tasks of such magnitude and of public interest. The Committee 
understands that a number of projects in different areas are being handled by HSCC at 
present. The Committee recommends that a St atus Note giving all the details of the 
various projects awarded to HSCC may be furnished to it at the earliest. The 
Department should take the issue very seriously and if need be, some kind of penalty 
clause may be introduced in the agreement itself to fix liability for any delay. The 
Committee may be apprised of the development in this regard.  
 
6.10 Committee’s attention has been drawn by a very disturbing trend of utilization of 
allocated funds by AIIMS. Director, AIIMS du ring his deposition before the Committee, 
informed that during 2008-09 and 2009-10 some Plan Funds were diverted to Non-plan 
for paying the Sixth Pay commission’s arrear s and various other allowances to AIIMS 
employees. As a result, development projects could not be taken up. Frequent changes in 
the plan projects also had a negative impact. The Committee would like to point out 
that diversion of plan funds to non-plan side is in direct contravention of fiscal norms. 
The Committee deplores such a development at  the premier Institute of the country. It 

 31
seems that this trend has been continui ng since long. The Committee wonders about 
the role of Internal Audit Wing and Financial Adviser of the Department. The 
Committee is also very unhappy with the non-provision of required non-plan funds 
meant for payment of arrears and allowances to the employees which are anticipated 
beforehand. The Committee would appreciate  if fiscal management at AIIMS is 
brought to order. The Committee cannot accept the diversion of plan funds meant for 
development projects to non-plan side. Urgent action needs to be, taken in this crucial 
matter so that this trend is not allowed to continue any further. 
 
6.11 The issue of implementation of the Valiathan Committee Report has been 
engaging the attention of the Committee for quite some time now. The Committee set up 
on 11
th July, 2006 to study the functioning of AIIMS had submitted its Report on              
10th October, 2006.  It has taken more than  three years to complete the process of 
examination of recommendations by the Academic Committee, Governing Body and 
acceptance in principle of majority of th e recommendations by the Institute Body of 
AIIMS on 8th December, 2009.   
6.12 The Committee has been informed th at 31 recommendations not requiring 
structural changes and 7 recommendation s requiring amendments in the AIIMS 
Act/Rules/Regulations are at various stages of implementation.  Amendments requiring 
statutory amendments raise major policy issu es concerning the pattern of autonomy and 
the long term implications of major changes in governance structure of the Institute. 
These are being actively considered by a Hi gh Powered Committee and monitored at the 
highest level. Given the complexity of issues it is expected that the matter will require 
some more time. 
 
6.13 The Committee is happy to note that though inordinately delayed, finally there 
is some concrete action on the recommendations of the Valiathan Committee Report. 
The Committee would, however, recommend full implementation of the 
recommendations at an early date. The Co mmittee also hopes th at the process of 
examination of recommendations requiring  statutory amendments by the High 
Powered Committee will be completed at the earliest and implemented without 
unnecessary delay.   

 32
6.14 The Committee has been pursuing the issue of setting up of a Burns Unit at AIIMS 
at an early date. In response  t o  a  q u e r y  o n  t h e  p r o g r e s s  m a d e  i n  t h i s  r e g a r d ,  t h e  
Committee has been informed that the pr oposal, initially approved by SFC, was 
considered by the President of the Inst itute during a discussion on AIIMS re-
development master plan and it was noted that a Burns Ward already exists at the 
Safdarjung Hospital, located next to the JP N Apex Trauma Centre. In order to avoid 
duplication of facilities, it was felt that the proposal may not be pressed further. 
 
6.15 The Committee is unhappy with the dilly-dallying approach of the Department 
on the issue of setting up of the Burns Unit. The Committee notes with displeasure 
Department’s attitude from the outset whic h has been evident from the delay in the 
matter. ‘Avoiding duplication’ can never be  considered as a valid justification for 
dropping this project. The Committee notes th at funds to the tune of Rs. 48 crore have 
been earmarked for this purpose during the Eleventh Plan. The Committee is unaware 
whether the Department, before taking a view in the matter, has taken into account the 
patient load in the Burns Unit at the Safdarjung Hospital. Further, the Committee 
would also like to point out that availability of any service at Safdarjung Hospital 
cannot be made the criteria for not initiating the same at AIIMS. If that be so, the same 
argument can be put forth for not adding a particular service at Safdarjung Hospital 
since the same was available at the next door AIIMS.  The Committee would like to 
point out that with the ever increasing patient load, both the hospitals have been 
providing exemplary services. Any addition or expansion of service will be going to 
provide better healthcare to our people.  
 
6.16 The Committee notes that AIIMS is facing acute shortage of manpower at present. 
Out of total sanctioned strength of 9730 in different categories of posts, 1621 are lying 
vacant. The Committee notes that out of 6 29 Faculty posts, 190 posts are lying vacant. 
Similarly, Institute is facing shortage of 495 nurses. 
 
6.17 The Committee had in November 2008, re ceived a representation from Faculty 
Association, AIIMS, against the proposed mo ve of AIIMS authorities to earmark all the 

 33
existing 92 vacancies as reserved for SCs/STs/OBCs at all faculty levels - Assistant 
Professor, Associate Professor, Additional Pr ofessor & Professor, and in all specialties 
and super-specialties including Neurosurgery , Cardiac surgery etc. The Committee had 
subsequently taken up the issue with th e Department and has been constantly 
monitoring the progress thereof. The Comm ittee was informed that on this issue, a 
Committee was set up by the PMO under the chairmanship of Secretary, Coordination 
(Cabinet Secretariat) in February, 2009.  The Report of that Committee was duly 
forwarded to the Department on 22nd April, 2009. The Department thereafter approached 
the PMO on 30 th October 2009 to withdraw its earlie r direction of ‘kee ping recruitment 
process in abeyance’. 
6.18 Latest position in this regard is that an expert has been appointed to work out a 
comprehensive reservation roster for filling up  all the vacancies. The work of preparing 
such rosters keeping in view the Government  circular and orders as well as various 
judicial pronouncements was currently unde rway. During her deposition before the 
Committee on 23 rd March 2010, the Secretary, Departme nt of Health & Family Welfare 
informed that the report was expected to be submitted by 25 th March. The Department 
would be moving towards filling up the vacant Faculty posts, thereafter. 
6.19 The Committee is pained by the acute shortage of the manpower at the Institute 
and is of the opinion that the same is not justifiable in any manner. The Committee 
applauds the existing set of employees of th e Institute, who inspite of the tremendous 
work pressure, have been able to uphold the high standards and reputation of the 
Institute. With large number of vacancies at Faculty level posts, it is practically 
difficult to maintain the high standards of patient care and teaching in the Institute for 
which it has been known. The Committee accordingly recommends to the Department 
to make all out efforts to fill up the vacant  posts – both faculty and non-faculty and all 
other groups in a time-bound manner. 
 
6.20 In response to a query regarding Depa rtment’s efforts regarding checking the 
trend of doctors and nurses leaving the Government Sector /Country, the Committee is 
informed that only seven Faculty Members as against the total sanctioned strength of 629 
faculty posts (1.11 %,) have either resigne d or taken voluntary retirement from the 

 34
service of the AIIMS “on personal grounds” during the last one year. The number is, 
therefore, not abnormally high. Institute does  not have information about the number of 
personnel, if any, who left the country after quitting the service of the AIIMS.  
6.21 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the Department’s view. The 
Committee is aware that as per media repo rts during recent time some very prominent 
doctors of the Institute have left it citing pathetic working conditions. This coupled 
with the existing vacancies does not present a rosy picture of the Institute.  
 
6.22 The Committee would also like to invite the attention of the Department to its 
concerns raised in its 27th Report on Demands for Grants of the Department wherein it 
has cited a WHO report  according to which out of 428 students of AIIMS (studying 
between 1989 and 2000), 233 (54%) are residing abroad. This presents a very disturbing 
picture that on the one hand there is acute shortage of staff in the Institute and on the 
other hand pass outs from this one of the best training grounds in India are turning to 
greener pastures, that too after availing highly subsidized quality education. The 
Committee therefore reiterates it’s earlier stand that the Department should seriously 
come up with some kind of bond or legislation in respect of premier institutes like 
AIIMS so that the young graduates or post graduates are made to serve in AIIMS or 
other Government Hospitals/Institutes for a certain period. The Committee wishes to 
be informed of some concrete steps in this regard.
 
 
VII POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION & RESEARCH 
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
 
7.1 The Postgraduate Institute of Me dical Education & Research (PGIMER), 
Chandigarh is a premier national centre of medical education, research, post graduate 
medical education and specialized hospital.  
 
7.2 The Committee notes that out of Plan  funds of Rs. 75.00 crore for PGIMER, 
Chandigarh for 2009-10, expenditure reported as on 28
th February, 2010 is Rs. 74 crore.  
As regards the Non Plan allocation, it was enhanced from Rs. 310 crore to Rs. 317 crore at 
the RE stage and the expenditure reported is Rs. 294.13 crore.    
 

 35
7.3 The Committee is happy to note that durin g the first three years  of the Eleventh 
Plan, there has not been a reduction in the Pl an funds at the RE stage. This is an 
indication that the allocated funds are being fully utilized by the Institute for its 
developmental activities.  
 
7.4 The Committee is given to understand that for the  11th Five Year Plan, an amount 
of Rs.625.00 crore has been sanct ioned for various projects of th e Institute. Out of this, in 
2007-08 and 2008-09, an amount of Rs. 70.00 crore and Rs. 60.00 crore, respectively were 
released and utilized by the Institute. In 2009-10, Rs. 75 crore have been released. The 
Committee notes that in BE 2010-11, Rs. 90 cror e have been provided as Plan grants for 
the Institute. In response to a query, th e Committee is informed that the present 
allocation of funds for 2010-11 is as per the projected requirements of the Institute. 
 
7.5 The Committee is constrained to note that the fund allocation during the first 
four years (including the current fiscal) amounts to less than half of the 11 th Plan 
allocation.  The funds allocated for the first 3 years of the Plan have been utilized 
optimally by the Institute.  The Committ ee is not aware about any new projects 
proposed to be taken up during the remaining period of the Plan. If that is not the 
case, the Committee can only conclude that th ere is some unrealistic assessment of the 
requirements of the Institute for the current Plan period leading to excess allocation of 
funds.  It is highly impractical to make out that the Institute can spend an enormous 
amount of Rs. 330 crore left for the final year of the Plan. The Committee would like to 
be updated in this regard.     
 
 7.6 The Committee notes that all the projects undertaken by the Institute during the 
Ninth and Tenth Plan are functional. The only exception  is the Advanced Trauma 
Centre (Phase-I) which is stated to be complete but not functional. The Committee 
would like to have the reasons for the abnormal delay in the operationalisation of the 
Centre. 
 
7.7 As regards the projects undertaken during the Eleventh Plan, the Committee 
finds that out of 14 projects, 6 are reported to be complete and functional.  The 

 36
Committee has been informed that the only major project with an estimated 
expenditure of Rs. 35.92 crore is the Advanc ed Trauma Centre (Phase II) which is 
likely to be completed by September, 2010. The Committee would, however, like to 
point out that the Centre needs to be made functional also at the earliest.  The 
Committee is not aware about the likely date  of Advanced Trauma Centre (Phase I) 
becoming functional. For a project completed in the previous Plan remaining non-
functional by the end of next Plan period  is indeed a cause of serious concern.  The 
Committee would appreciate if Advanced Trau ma Centre (Phase I) is made functional 
without any further delay. Simultaneously preparatory exercise for 
sanction/appointment of required staff and procurement of equipment for the 
Advanced Trauma Centre (Phase II) may also be initiated. 
 
7.8 Committee observes that out of the sanct ioned strength of 7013 posts in different 
categories, 906 posts are lying va cant. The Committee is given to  understand that bulk of 
the vacancies i.e. 152 vacancies out of 363 sanctioned posts in the teaching positions is at 
the level of Additional/Associate Professors which are to be filled on promotion basis. 
Positions at the level of Assistant Professors ar e stated to be largely on account of either 
recent creation of posts or non-availability  of suitable candidates from the reserved 
categories.  
 
7.9 The Committee is constrained to observe that nearly 50 percent of the vacancies 
are lying vacant at the level of Additional/Associate Professors. The Committee opines 
that the teaching standards at the Institute are being compromised with such a large 
number of vacancies. This situation can not be allowed to remain to persist any 
further. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to go for special 
recruitment drives at the earliest to fill up the vacant positions at the Institute. The 
Committee may be apprised of the efforts put in by the Department in this regard.  
 
VIII NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI  REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH 
& MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG 
 
8.1 The Institute has recently been established  in Shillong, on the lines of AIIMS, New 
Delhi and PGIMER, Chandigarh with the objective to provide specialised health care to 

 37
the people of North East region. An amount  of Rs. 1266.38 crore has been allocated for 
the Institute in the Eleventh Plan. 
 
8.2 The Committee notes that there has been  optimum utilization of funds allocated 
for the Institute during the first three years of  the Eleventh Plan.  A provision of Rs 67.85 
crore has been made for the Institute during 2010-11. In respect of physical achievements 
made by the Institute, it has been intimated that procurement of most of the ‘high end’ 
equipments, the process of which was pendin g for many years, has been completed. 
Further, second batch of MBBS students an d fourth batch (Degree Course) of Nursing 
Students have been admitted. Further develo pment plan of the Institute has also been 
finalized. 
  
8.3 The Committee would like to be briefe d about the components of ‘further 
development plan’ of the Institute. The Committee would also like to be given an idea 
whether the Institute has become fully operational and all the pending items of 
developmental work have been completed.  
 
8.4 The Committee has been keeping a clos e watch on the availability of the 
manpower for the Institute.  The Committee notes that as on 31
st December, 2009, out of 
the sanctioned strength of 1524 posts in diffe rent categories, as many as 684 are lying 
vacant. Position is very disappointing in all the categories as indicated below: 
 
                                                                        
 
 Post sanctioned Filled up Vacancy position 
Faculty  141 40 101 
Group A  63 16 47 
Group B  577 424 153 
Group C 383 199 184 
Group D 171 55 116 
SRD 105 69 36 
JRD  84 37 47 
Total  1524 840 684 
 

 38
8.5    As regards the efforts made by the Department to fill up the vacancies at the 
earliest, it has been stated that despite addi tional financial benefits, there is an acute 
shortage of technically qualified personnel in  the North-East due to remote location and 
infrastructural deficiencies.  The Institute had launched a drive to fill the maximum 
number of teaching/faculty position and a recruitment process was set in motion. 
However, on a petition of some faculty me mbers, the Central Admi nistrative Tribunal 
(Guwahati Bench) stayed further process in October last year. The Institute Authorities 
are doing their best to get the case discharged or at least have the stay vacated.  
8.6 The Committee is very concerned at the continuance of a very large number of  
vacant positions  in the Institute that is supposed to be developed on the pattern of  
AIIMS, New Delhi and PGIMER, Chandigarh and provide  specialized0 health care to 
the deprived regions of North East India . The Committee notes that the efforts of the 
Institute to fill up Group “B” and “C” technical posts have yielded some fruits. But the 
same is not the case w.r.t. other categories of posts.  The Committee wonders as to how 
the Institute can be considered functional when more than one-third of sanctioned 
Faculty posts are lying vacant and out of total strength of 189 posts of SRD/JRD, only 
83 are in position. Both the teaching and healthcare facilities as envisaged are simply 
not there at present in the Institute.  The Committee is of the opinion that manpower 
alongwith the infrastructure is the foremost  important ingredient which is a must for 
smooth functioning of this Institute. The infrastructure having been put in place to a 
satisfactory level needs to be backed with requisite manpower. The Committee 
accordingly recommends to the Department to approach the CAT (Guwahati Bench) or 
an appropriate authority with a sense of urgency in public interest so that the case is 
settled or at least the stay is vacated to fa cilitate an early filling up of the vacancies. 
The Department needs to keep its relentless  efforts to attract manpower by special 
incentives and special recruitment drives. The Committee may be updated on the 
issue.  
IX CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, KANKE, RANCHI (CIP, RANCHI) 
 
9.1 The CIP, Ranchi is a pioneer Governme nt of India institution in the field of 
psychiatry and the only of its nature in eastern India. It was established in pre 

 39
independence era in 1918. The Institute has a be d capacity of 643. It provides diagnostic 
and treatment facilities in mental health and conducts PG courses in psychiatry. 
 
9.2 The Committee has been given to unders tand that the EFC for Rs.100.00 crore has 
been approved during the 11th Five Year Plan for the re-development of Institute and also 
to provide reservation for candidates of OB C category in the vari ous courses conducted 
by the Institute. The enhanced allocation of Rs. 21.64 crore and Rs. 27.25 crore at the R.E. 
2009-10 and B.E. 2010-11, respectively, has been  made to meet the above requirement of 
EFC. Plan funds utilized as on 28th February, 2010 were Rs. 19.41 core.  
 
9.3 The Committee has been voicing its co ncern over the stat us of the Premier 
Institute for the last few years. The Committee had noticed that re-development work of 
the Institute was being monitored by the Jhar khand High Court.  A writ petition (PIL) 
was filed by an NGO, namely, Jharkhand Hi ll Resource Development Society in 2003, 
against the Union of India and others regard ing inadequate facilities, vacant posts and 
m a n p o w e r  a t  C I P ,  R a n c h i .  I n  c o m p l i a n c e  w i t h  t h e  o r d e r s  p a s s e d  b y  t h e  H o n ’ b l e  
Jharkhand High Court, several schemes rega rding development of the Institute were 
submitted to Director General Health Services, New Delhi for their finalization and 
efforts were made to fill up the vacant post s of the Institute. The Hon’ble High Court has 
finally disposed off the PIL in its order dated 5
th May, 2008 with the direction to the 
respondents to fill up the vacant posts as expeditiously as possible with liberty to the 
petitioner to approach the Court again if there be lack of adequate response. 
  
9.4 As per the latest status note furnished by the Department in this regard, a 
proposal for creation of 140 additional post s (including 21 posts of Junior Residents & 6 
posts of Senior Residents) has been form ulated. The proposal, however, requires 
furnishing of some details for which the In stitute has been approached. The Secretary, 
Department of Health and Family Welfare during her deposition before the Committee 
on 23rd March, 2010 stated that the Department  would be able to fill up the posts very 
quickly.  As regards construction of 210 bedded hostel and 15 Married Residential flats, a 
rough cost Preliminary Estimate has been given by the CPWD which was under process 

 40
for according the administrative approval  and the financial sanction. Further, the 
Institute has been asked to submit the de tailed architectural designs for the OPD, 
Neurology Block, Casualty & Service Block, Residence Ward (Family Ward), Renovation 
and up-gradation of various wards, OT Bloc k, Diagnostic Centre, Pharmacy, CSSD Block 
and Corridors etc. 
 
9.5 The Committee notes with displeasure that the matter of creation of additional 
posts continues to be at a proposal stage ev en after about two years of directions given 
by the Jharkhand High Court. If this is the state of affairs inspite of a High Court 
intervention, the Committee is compelled to  conclude that things are not going to 
show any marked improvement in the near future. The Committee would like to point 
out that the Department has to play a more pro-active role in improving the services in 
a national level premier institute, especially because of High Court intervention. The 
Department must be aware that the area of services where CIP used to hold a 
commanding position in the earlier times is the most neglected area of our present-day 
healthcare. 
 
9.6 As regards the redevelopment plan, in spite of the proposal being approved way 
back in 2008-09, the progress w.r.t. the redevelopment of the Institute is at snail’s pace. 
The Committee would like to have a status note on the redevelopment plan of the 
Institute inter-alia covering the components of the plan, funds earmarked and spent, 
timeline set for completion alongwith the progress made so far. The Committee 
recommends to the Department to give all requisite support – in monetary terms as 
well as in terms of expeditious bureaucrati c clearances so that the redevelopment of 
the institute is achieved in a time bound manner.  
 
X LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA KRIPALANI 
HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI   
 
10.1 The Committee notes that during BE 2 009-10, the Plan and Non-Plan funds of Rs. 
60 crore and Rs. 95 crore, respectively, were i ncreased at the RE stage to Rs. 70.50 crore 
and Rs. 116 crore. However, the expenditure reported is only Rs. 38.10 crore under Plan 
head and Rs. 111.04 crore under Non Plan head. 

 41
 
10.2 The Committee was informed  that underutilization of the Plan funds was due to 
the fact that construction related to phase-1 of Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan 
could not be started during 2009-10 as a result of procedural delays. 
 
10.3 The Committee finds that during 2008-09 for the first phase of the Redevelopment 
Plan of LHMC and its associated Hospital  architectural & project consultants were 
appointed, design prepared and submitted for approval to statutory authorities. In 2009-
10, works related to comprehensive re-devel opment of hospital were under progress 
which were to continue during 2010-11 also. 
 
10.4 The Committee is disappointed that there has been considerable delay in 
achieving the target of first phase of rede velopment of the college  and its associated 
hospital. When enquired about the same, the Prin cipal and Medical Superintendent of 
the College during his deposition before the Committee on 23 rd March, 2010 informed 
that EFC for the comprehensive redevelopment plan envisaged three years back has 
already been cleared. The same was approved by the Cabinet Committee of Economic 
Affairs in the beginning of the last year . The approved plans were subsequently 
submitted to specific authorities of the Delh i Government and other institutions and out 
of 12 such authorities, approval from the Delhi Urban Arts Commission and the Forest 
Department was yet to be received. Accordingly, construction work could not be started. 
As soon as all the NOCs are available, te nder would be floated for construction of 
buildings under phase -1 of Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan.  
 
10.5 The Committee would appreciate if all th e procedural delays coming in the way 
of Phase I of Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan of the Lady Hardinge Medical 
College and Sucheta Kriplani Hospital are removed at the earliest. The Department 
needs to play a more pro-active role in such matters.  
 
10.6 The Principal and Medical Superintendent of the College also invited the attention 
of the Committee towards the acute shortage o f  m a n p o w e r  p a r t i c u l a r l y  a t  t h e  c l e r i c a l  

 42
level and safai karamchari level. He also submitted before the Committee that the bed 
occupancy rate is more than one at any given point of time. The existing staff strength of 
the Hospital was overburdened due to the high bed occupancy rate at the Hospital.   
 
10.7 The Committee is very disturbed with the persisting shortage of staff in the 
college/hospital under the Department. The Committee recommends to the 
Department to make all conceivable efforts for an early filling up of the vacant posts 
so that the high standards of patient care are maintained. 
 
XI COMMON RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING HOSPITALS 
 
11.1 The Committee is concerned with the procedural hassles coming in the way of 
the developmental work in various hospitals and institutions of repute under the 
Department. Though the Committee considers the laid down procedures as means of 
systemic checks and balances, yet it finds no merit in their coming in the way of 
urgent developmental work, and that too for a project targeted at taking care of the 
health care needs of the common man of the country. The Committee is of the 
considered opinion that the imperatives of development and environmental concerns 
need to be reconciled without further loss of time to avoid further time overruns in 
respect of this project.  The Committee th erefore recommends to the Department to 
have a centralized cell under a dedicated senior officer to coordinate all such 
procedural issues with the various agencies. The Department needs to play a proactive 
role here. If required, the matter may be taken up at the senior most level to facilitate 
early sanction of requisite statutory cl earances and the concerned approving 
authorities may also be apprised of the Co mmittee’s concern over approval delays in 
this regard.  The Committee may be informed about the progress made in this regard. 
 
11.2 The Committee is pained by the fact that the healthcare fraternity under the 
Department has to function under very stressful conditions.  Taking strong view of the 
enormous patient load in almost all the institutions/hospitals under the Department, 
which is in many cases manifold than envisaged, the Committee would like to make a 
general recommendation to the Departme nt.  It recommends strongly to the 
Department to have an independent reassessment of manpower done in all the 

 43
institutions/hospitals under it – sanctioned vis-à-vis the patient load of the hospital. 
The Committee also recommends a close mo nitoring of the vacancies in all the 
institutions/hospitals of the Department under a dedicated senior officer for 
coordination between the institutions/hospitals and the recruitment agencies so as to 
facilitate early filling up of vacant posts. 
XII OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE  
12.1 The Committee notes that the Department  is statutorily bound to implement the 
27 percent reservation for OBCs. Accordingly, a time-bound action plan was chalked out 
covering medical, non-medical and nursing courses. This is to be operationalized 
through the existing institutio ns directly under the contro l of Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare. Allocation of seats amongst the institutions have  been identified and the 
expansion will be in disciplines where seats can be enhanced initially with the existing 
infrastructure by filling up vacancies agai nst sanctioned strength and creation of 
additional faculty and support staff.  
12.2 The Committee is aware that there is an approved outlay of Rs. 1827.00 crore for 
this scheme for the Eleventh Plan.  However, utilization status during the first three years 
of the Plan period has been negligible.  A pproved outlay of Rs. 600 crore was brought 
down to Rs. 100.00 crore in 2008-09.  However,  expenditure of only Rs. 79.66 crore could 
be made by the end of 2008-09.  However, in  response to a query regarding utilization 
status of Plan funds allocated in 2009-10, the Committee was informed that the final 
(revised) allocation of Rs.50 crore has been fully utilized. This statement of the 
Department is contrary to the figures of Rs . 16.90 crore furnished by the Department 
itself in response to another query. The Co mmittee has further been informed that the 
major activities under this head during the current year were of preparatory nature and, 
therefore, no physical targets were fixe d. However, two major milestones were - 
finalization of contract for the works exce eding Rs.300 crores for JIPMER, Puducherry 
and recommendation for clearance of project of Rs.454 crore by the EFC in respect of 
PGIMER, Chandigarh. Thus funds under this he ad were diverted for the time being to 
sectors needing supplementary funding.  

 44
12.3 On the justification regard ing increase in the Plan allocation to six times at Rs. 
300.00 crore during BE 2010-11 compared to the figure in RE 2009-10, the Committee has 
been informed that apart fr om major investments likely to be made by JIPMER and 
PGIMER under this head, expansion of infras tructure in the AIIMS to implement the 
recommendations of Oversight Committee will receive clearance of the competent 
authority. Accordingly it is expected that  the earmarked funds would be fully utilized 
and even more funds might be required later on.  
12.4 The Committee views with serious concern the non-implementation of the 
recommendations of the Oversight Committee.  The matter is more serious when the 
Department is apparently going for expansion only in those disciplines where seats 
can be enhanced initially with existing infrastructure with suitable augmentation of 
manpower. Funds do not seem to be a problem in the instant case as most of the 
approved outlay for the Eleventh Plan is still lying unutilized. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends to the Department to chart out a concrete strategy for 
implementing this constitutional obligation in a time bound manner and on priority 
basis. The Committee would also like the Department to explain as to how the 
expenditure figures of Rs. 16.90 crore (upto 28-2-2010) jumped to Rs. 50.00 crore in a 
matter of one month. 
 
XIII PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJNA (PMSSY)  
  
13.1 Government of India had launched an ambitious scheme Pradhan Mantri 
Swasthya Suraksha Yojna (PMSSY), on 15th July, 2003, with the objective of reducing the 
gaps in the availability of tertiary health care across States by developing AIIMS like 
Institutions  in States  to cater to speciali zed  tertiary health ca re and also to augment 
facilities for quality medical education in the country. The scheme involves setting up of 
6 AIIMS like Institutions in Phase-I and 2 more in Phase-II. Another component of 
PMSSY is the upgradation of 13 Govt. Medical Colleges in Phase-I and 6 more in Phase-II 
by 2011-12. The AIIMS-like institutions ar e being set up in Patna, Raipur, Bhopal, 
Bhubaneshwar, Jodhpur and  Rishikesh. Each Institution will have a hospital of  850 beds 
providing medical treatment in 42  discip lines out of which 350 beds would  be 
exclusively for super  speciality and  ICU. These Institutes would also provide under-

 45
graduate and post graduate medical educat ion with admission capacity based on MCI 
norms.   
 
13.2 During the Tenth Plan, the outlay of  Rs. 999.00 crores for PMSSY was brought 
down to Rs. 385.00 crore and expenditure reported at the end of the Plan was only a 
meagre Rs. 20.00 crore.  The scheme has an approved outlay of Rs. 3955.00 crore for 
Eleventh Plan. The Committee however, notes th at trend of utilization of allocated funds 
has not picked up so far. 
 
13.3 The Committee notes that the Plan allo cation of Rs. 1447.92 crore was drastically 
reduced to Rs. 683.58 crore at the RE stage during 2009-10  and expenditure of only Rs . 
452.16 crore has been reported by the end of the year . Position was more or less same in 
the previous two years.  Non-awarding of ci vil works has been cited as the main factor 
responsible for the trend of utilization of allocated funds during 2009-10. 
 
13.4 Such a slow progress of implementation is bound to result in huge amount 
remaining unutilized at the end of the Plan period. The Committee had time and again 
been inviting the attention of the Department towards the urgent need to take some 
corrective measures, but it appears that the sa me has not yielded fruits atleast as of 
now.  
 
13.5 The Committee has been given to understand that against the projected demand 
of Rs. 1124 crore for 2010-11, allocation of Rs. 750 crore would not be sufficient to meet 
the requirements of activities under the PMSSY as the entire upgradation work and 
major portion of the civil work of the medical college and hospital complex would be 
completed in the financial year 2010-11.  It ha s also been pointed out that the estimated 
requirement of funds would be to the tune of Rs. 1700 crore. 
 
13.6 After an assessment of the progress of various components under the Scheme, 
the Committee in its 27
th Report had made its apprehensions very clear that with the 
way things were moving, it would take at least another Plan period before the six 

 46
AIIMS like Institutions would actually start functioning. After a gap of two years, the 
Committee finds that its apprehensions have proved to be correct. It is still a distant 
dream to see these Institutions functioning . The reason is that even after the 
completion of infrastructure related work , the Department has to concentrate on a 
whole lot of issues including manpower.  The Committee would like to point out that 
this ambitious project is of critical importance for creating much required tertiary 
health care facilities in the country. Under funding of the project should not be 
allowed to come in the way of access to quality and affordable health care for all.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that higher level of funds, as required, be allocated 
under this head at RE stage during 2010-11. 
 
13.7 In respect of a query regarding the ab normal delay in implementation of the 
project, the Committee is informed that process for selection of single Project Consultant 
and Architectural design concept for the 6 AIIM S- like institutions started in 2004 had to 
be abandoned. Whole process was initiated de novo in 2007 with each AIIMS site to be 
treated as a separate and independent project. It was also decided that the construction of 
housing complex be separated from that of the Hospital and Medical College so that it is 
constructed earlier. The Design DPR Consultants could be appointed only in October, 
2007 and Project Consultants in June, 2008.  
 
13.8 Status of six AIIMS like  Medical Colleges and Hospital Complex is as follows: 
 
 Scheduled Date Likely Date 
Selection of Contractors April, 2009 April, 2010 
Start of Civil Work September, 2009 June, 2010 
Date of Completion March, 2012 December, 2012 
 
During her deposition before the Committee on 23 rd March 2010, the Secretary, 
Department of Health & Family Welfare very candidly admitted to the procedural lapses 
on the part of the Department initially whil e implementing this scheme. She admitted to 
an error in decision making for selecting single Project Consultant and Architectural 
design concept for the 6 AIIMS- like institut ions which went horribly wrong. Secondly, 
she also admitted to lack of monitoring at an appropriately higher level. However, the 

 47
Committee was apprised that now the project is being strictly monitored dedicatedly at 
the level of a Joint Secretar y and the Secretary would be monitoring the progress every 
fortnight.  
13.9 As regards delay in construction of residential complexes, the Committee is given 
to understand that the reasons cited were ranged from removal of overhead electric lines, 
tree cutting to shifting of existing office and material by the State Government. The 
Committee takes note of the latest status of residential  complexes for the six Institutions:- 
 
Name of site Commencement  
of work 
Scheduled date for 
completion of work 
% of work 
completed 
Likely date of 
completion 
Jodhpur Nov.  2007 Apr.  2009 95 April, 2010 
Patna Sept.  2008 Mar.  2010 50 August, 2010 
Raipur Sept.  2008 Mar.  2010 95 April, 2010 
Bhubaneswar Sept.  2008 Mar.  2010 15 December, 2010 
Rishikesh Sept.  2008 Mar.  2010 50 August, 2010 
Bhopal Nov.,  2008 May, 2010 20 Decembers, 2010
  
 
13.10 In the opinion of the Committee, the reasons cited for the delay are very flimsy 
in nature and indicative of ineffectiveness of monitoring and coordination 
mechanism.  The Committee is of the firm opinion that had  proper coordination been 
done with the concerned agencies of the St ates and if the Department had pursued the 
project vigorously towards achieving the set targets, it could have approached the 
State Governments at an appropriate high er level to thrash out State specific 
problems. The same is apparently lacking on the part of the Department.    
 
13.11 The Committee also notes the status of  upgradation of the 13 medical college 
institutions as follows:- 
 
Name of site Scheduled date  
of Completion 
Likely date of  
completion 
Tiruvananthapuram Medical College June  2009 Work completed.  
Ready for  
inauguration 
Govt. Mohan Kumarmanglam  
Medical College & Hospital, Salem 
 August,  2009 April, 2010 
Bangalore Medical College October  2009 April, 2010 
NIMS, Hyderabad June, 2009 May, 2010 

 48
Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute  
of Medical Sciences, Lucknow 
June,   2009 May, 2010 
Kolkata Medical College July, 2009 May, 2010 
Jammu Medical College Sept.   2009 April, 2010 
Srinagar Medical College Mar.   2010 December, 2010 
Institute of Medical Sciences,  
BHU, Varanasi 
June, 2010 December, 2011 
Ranchi Institute of Medical  
Sciences 
February, 2011 December, 2011 
B.J. Medical College,  
Ahmadabad 
August, 2009 June, 2010 
SVIMS, Tirupati August, 2009 June, 2010 
Grants Medical College,  
Mumbai 
August, 2009 June, 2010 
 
13.12 The Committee has been monitoring the progress of implementation of PMSSY 
very closely.  The Committee observes th at scheduled dates of various stages of 
different components of both AIIMS like institutions alongwith their residential 
complexes and upgradation of 13 existing medical colleges have been revised time and 
again for varying reasons.  The Committee is perturbed to note that this ambitious 
programme was launched on 15 th July, 2003.  Even after a lapse of more than six years, 
the likely date for selection of contractors has been given as April, 2010, with civil 
work supposed to start in June, 2010 and date of completion projected as December, 
2012.  As per the latest information, bids  for the project are under finalization.  
Similarly, with regard to residential complexes, time-lines have been revised, 
indicating a delay of six months to one year.  The Committee apprehends that there are 
all chances of further revision of date of completion.  For example, whereas only 15 
percent and 20 percent of construction work in respect of Bhubaneswar and Bhopal 
residential complex, respectively, has been reported, their likely date of completion is 
December, 2010.   
  
13.13 Position with regard to upgradation of 13 medical colleges is also quite 
discouraging.  Here also with the exception of Trivandrum Medical College (reported 
to be complete and ready for inauguration), likely date of completion in respect of the 
remaining colleges indicates shifting 6 months to one year.  Here again in respect of 

 49
RIMS, Ranchi 15 percent progress, and fo r Srinagar Medical College, 39 percent 
progress has been made so for.  
 
13.14 The Committee appreciates the candid admission of the Secretary regarding 
errors of judgment of the Department and lack of adequate monitoring while 
implementing the Scheme. The Committee woul d, however, like to point out that this 
alone would not suffice. The new monitoring mechanism has to be in place 
immediately and every effort has to be made to adhere to the fresh timelines set under 
various components of the Scheme.  The Committee would also like to emphasize that 
the revised estimate of Rs. 820 crore for each AIIMS like Institution is more than two 
and half times when compared with original estimate of Rs. 332 crore.  Therefore, it is 
essential to adhere to the new time lines, otherwise there is every possibility of further 
escalation.  The Committee finds that PMSSY was conceptualized in the first year of 
the Tenth Plan.  As the things stand today, one can hope of its becoming operational 
only in the beginning of the Twelfth Plan.  
 
13.15 The Committee also recommends to the Department to start ground work in 
respect of the issues like requirement of manpower, machines and equipments etc. so 
that once the construction work is comple te, no further delay is caused in the 
operationalisation of the Institutes.  
 
13.16 The Committee takes a very serious view of the persistent non-compliance of an 
assurance given by the then Secretary during his presentation before the Committee 
during examination of Demand for Grants (2008- 09) of the Ministry to furnish a status 
report to the Committee regarding implemen tation of PMSSY project after every two 
months. The project is one of the landmark initiatives to enable the people of this 
country across states to have access to quality healthcare. Further, it involves enormous 
amount of precious tax payer’s money.  Therefore the Committee needs to keep a close 
watch on the progress of the Scheme. The Committee therefore reminds the 
Department to be careful and keep its assurance given before a Parliamentary 
Committee mandated to scrutinize its work.  
 

 50
13.17 The Committee also takes note of the fact  that the  Phase-II of PMSSY approved in 
March 2009 is yet to take off as the location  of the Institutes is under finalization in 
consultation with the State Governments of UP and West Bengal. Under Phase – II, it is 
proposed to set up two AIIMS-Like institutio ns in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. It is 
also proposed to upgrade 6 medical colleg e institutions - (i) Government Medical 
College, Amritsar, Punjab; (ii) Government Medical College, Tanda, Himachal Pradesh; 
(iii) Government Medical College, Madurai, Tamil Nadu; (iv) Government Medical 
College, Nagpur, Maharashtra and (v) Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College of Aligarh 
Muslim University, Aligarh (UP); and (vi) Pand it B.D. Sharma Postgraduate Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Rohtak. 
13.18 The estimated cost of each AIIMS-like institution is Rs.823 Crore. For upgradation 
of medical college institution, Central Govern ment will contribute Rs.125 Cr. each. The 
Expenditure Finance Committee approved the proposal on 2.12.2008.  Cabinet approved 
the Phase II of PMSSY on 5.2.2009.    
 
13.19 The Committee is happy to note that the second phase will extend the reach of 
AIIMS like facilities to more underserved areas of the country and will help in 
upgradation of other medical college institutions. However, the Committee cautions 
the Department to be careful from the outset  so that the problems that afflicted the 
first phase do not recur here. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in implementing the second phase of the Scheme. 
 
XIV DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES 
  
14.1 The objective of the development in nurs ing services is to maintain the pace of 
nursing education and nursing services with other developments in medical and 
technological services. Accordingly, the Co mmittee has been emphasizing the urgent 
need for expansion and strengthening of nursing services in the country.   
 
14.2 In respect of a utilization status of  Plan funds under various components, the 
Committee was inter-alia informed that allocation of Rs. 18 crore  provided in 2009-10  
was reduced to Rs. 2 crore at RE stage and the expenditure reported as on 28
th February, 

 51
2010 was only Rs. 0.50 crore. However, the Comm ittee is surprised to note that in respect 
of another pointed query regarding utilizat ion status of Plan funds during 2009-10 
earmarked for the scheme, the Committee has been furnished an altogether different 
picture. It was stated that at the time of finalization of RE, the modification/revision of 
the scheme was under process and therefore on  the basis of slow progress, funds were 
reduced drastically. However, subsequent to Government’s approval for implementation 
of the modified scheme and based on the pr oposals cleared by the Finance Division, the 
Department has enhanced the provision in th e final estimates to Rs. 15.00 crore by re-
appropriation. 
 
14.3 On a specific query regarding the Plan al location of Rs. 17 crore for the Scheme for 
2010-11, the Committee has been informed that the allocation of funds has been made on 
the basis of pre-revised scheme which will not be sufficient. As per the approved revised 
scheme the proposed detailed break up is as under: - 
(Rs. in crores) 
Training of Nurses 3.95 239 courses to be conducted 
Strengthening/ 
Upgradation  
83.50 94 institutions to be streng thened, 9 institutions to be  
upgraded into College of Nursing 
Nurses Award 0.80 Nurses Award Ce remony to be held on 12.05.2010 
Total 88.25  
 
14.4 When enquired about the poor progress w.r.t. to the implementation of the scheme 
during 2009-10 during Secretary’s deposition before the Committee, it was conveyed that 
there had been delay in getting the Cabinet approval. Now that the scheme has been 
approved the Department has released all the funds for various components earmarked 
for 2009-10. The Department also informed that more money would be required to 
implement the approved scheme. 
 
14.5 The Committee is not happy with th e abnormal delays in bureaucratic 
procedures of seeking approval. However, now that the new scheme has got the 
requisite approval of the Cabinet, the Committee would recommend to the 
Department to pursue the various components under the scheme vigorously. The 

 52
Committee also recommends to the Department to make a realistic assessment of 
funds requirement for various components and seek more funds at the RE stage.  
 
14.6 On an analysis of various physical targets set and their achievement level 
during the first three years of the Eleven th Plan, the Committee finds a discouraging 
scenario. Achievement in the most crucial component, i.e., training of nursing 
personnel has remained much below the the targeted coverage. Against a target of 
training of 8000, 9000 and 12000 nursing personnel during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10, 
funds could be released for training of only 2400, 2880 and 2800 nursing personnel 
during these three years. It is not known as to whether the reported number of nurses 
could be eventually trained. 
 
14.7 The Committee is not prepared to accept the stand of the Department that for 
both training and strengthening of institutions proposals have to come from the 
States. When the Department has started the scheme, and rightly so as per requirement 
of the profession, it has to take lead and responsibility to make it successful. It should 
motivate the nursing institutions to come up with proposals to avail the benefits under 
the scheme. Mere formal requests do not make any scheme successful. Concerted 
efforts need to be made by the Department in this regard.  
 
14.8 Another area of concern for the Committee has been strengthening of RAK 
College of Nursing as Centre of Excellence. Even before the beginning of the Eleventh 
Plan, this project is being shown as unde r progress. The Committee finds that the 
work for upgradation of RAK College of Nursing into Centre of Excellence had been 
entrusted to HSCC which has completed the work of renovation of existing building. 
However, the new construction has not ye t started due to pending clearances and 
approval of concept plan from various statut ory bodies. When asked on this specific 
issue during the meeting of the Committee on 23
rd March, 2010, the Committee was 
informed that there has been a problem due to the fact that the Department does not 
have the ownership of the land in favour of RAK College of Nursing. The matter has 
been taken up with the Department of Urban Development and the Land and 
Development Office and would be sorted out.   

 53
 
14.9 The Committee is not happy with the stat e of affairs of the work of upgradation 
of RAK College of Nursing into Centre of Excellence. This is the position when this 
old institution is located in Delhi itself.  The Committee wonders as to whether any 
attempt of monitoring has been made by the Department so far. The project has been 
in the pipeline for many years now. The Committee recommends to the Department to 
make sincere efforts to sort out all the outstanding issues and problem areas 
hampering in the upgradation of the College at the earliest. 
 
14.10 The Committee observes that acute shorta ge of nurses and high attrition rate of 
nurses are the twin problem areas coming in the way of availability of required nursing 
services in the country. In response to a qu ery regarding any specific initiatives taken by 
the Department so far, the Committee was in formed that the Indian Nursing Council has 
taken a number of measures to meet the shortages of nurses which include relaxation in 
various norms and conditions applicable in  nursing education both for students and 
teachers as well as for the institutions. 
 
14.11 Besides that the 6
th Pay Commission recommendations have led to improvement 
in the pay scales of nurses. 413 dwelling units at Sriniwaspuri have been built for nurses 
working in the Central Government Hospitals in Delhi viz. Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML 
Hospital, LHMC and Kalawati Saran Hospita ls. The Directorate of Estate has also 
allowed accommodation for Nurses in general pool. With all these measures the 
satisfaction level of nursing personal has been considerably increased. 
14.12     The Committee appreciates and we lcomes the aforesaid initiatives taken by 
the Department. The Committee infers that these measures will help in producing 
more number of nursing personnel. The Committee is happy to note that the 
Department has constructed 413 dwelling units for nurses and the Directorate of Estate 
has also allowed accommodation for Nurses in general pool. However, the Committee 
is still skeptical whether this would suff ice the requirements. The Committee would 
like to be enlightened about the availability of dwelling units vis-à-vis the demand.  

 54
14.13 The Committee has been very concerned about the need to keep a record of the 
number of nurses available in the country and accordingly it has been taking up the issue 
with the Department. As per the latest inform ation, the States of West Bengal, Gujarat 
and Maharashtra have already started upda ting Live Registers. They have been 
maintaining live register for nurses. The othe r State Councils have also been advised for 
maintaining up to date live register of nurses.  
 
14.14 The Committee is of the considered opinion that maintaining a Live Register of 
nurses would be of great help in formulating the various policies w.r.t. the nursing 
personnel. Accordingly, the Department needs to take up the issue with all the State 
Councils with some sense of urgency. The Department may also think of some kind of 
framework whereby the State Councils are persuaded to start maintaining a live 
register of nurses as also share the details with the Department to facilitate better 
policy formulation. 
 
14.15 Quality of training programmes (both pre and in service) for nurses and the 
functioning of Training Institutions for Nurs es has been another area of concern for the 
Committee. The Committee notes that the WHO,  in collaboration with Indian Nursing 
Council, has made rapid assessment of nurs ing training programmes in Bihar, Orissa, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. According to its findings, the teacher-
student ratio, qualification and experience, physical facilities, adequacy of books in 
library are not as per INC norms. In addi tion, ‘Hands-on’ Training on conducting 
delivery were also found to be not satisfacto ry. It has further been stated that the same 
position prevails in the training programmes of other States as observed in the review 
taken by the Task Force consultative meeting on strategic frame work for XIth Plan on 
Nursing. The major reason for this drawback is lack of funding by the States. To address 
these issues, it has been decided to provide gr ant-in-aid of Rs.25.00 lakhs per institution 
instead of Rs.10.00 lakhs by the central go vernment for strengthening of training 
institutions. Similarly, the grant from centra l government has also been increased from 
Rs.75,000/- to Rs.1, 65,300/- per training cour se in training programmes during the XIth 
Plan period.   

 55
 
14.16 The Committee is very concerned with the shocking findings of the  nursing 
training programmes in Bihar, Orissa, Ra jasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh 
that came into light after the  rapid assessment made by WHO, in collaboration with 
Indian Nursing Council. The picture of other states is also stated to be no better. While 
appreciating the initiative taken by the Department, the Committee recommends that a 
strategy needs to be chalked out whereb y institutions getting grants from the 
Department are brought under some kind of regular training quality assessment 
schedule. This would not only help in plugging the loopholes but also help in 
devising better strategy for achieving desired training standards. 
 
XV NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME (NMHP) 
 
15.1 The National Mental Health Progra mme (NMHP) was started in 1982. Main 
objective of the Programme was to ensure the availability and accessibility of minimum 
mental healthcare for all in the foreseeable future, particularly to the most vulnerable and 
underprivileged sections of the population. 
 
15.2 The proposal for NMHP during the Eleven th Plan with an outlay of Rs.1000 crore 
was considered by the EFC in July, 2008.  Based on EFC recommendations, CCEA 
approval for three main co mponents of the Programme i.e., Manpower Development in 
Mental Health, Spill over ac tivities of the Tenth Plan and continuation of existing 
DMHPs  on existing norms with outlay of Rs. 473.445 crore was obtained and sanction 
for the same conveyed to the State Governments. 
 
15.3 The Committee observes that during the first two years of the Plan period, 
utilization of allocated funds was minimal. Against an allocation of Rs. 70.00 crore in 
both the years, expenditure reported at the end of year was only Rs. 14.57 crore and Rs. 
23.26 crore, respectively. Plan allocation of Rs. 70.00 crore in 2009-10 was reduced to Rs. 
55.00 crore at the RE stage. The expenditure reported as on 28
th February 2010 is Rs. 38 
crore only.  
 

 56
15.4 The Committee finds that achievement level vis-à-vis the physical targets set 
during 2007-08 and 2008-09 was also very discouraging as indicated below: 
 
 
2007-08      
 
Physical Targets Achievement level 
Extension of Distt. Mental  
Health Programme in 30  
old/new districts 
 
Upgradation of psychiatric  
wings in 25 medical colleges   
Funds released to 15 new DMHPs and  
5 old DMHPs 
 
 
Funds released to 7 medical colleges 
 
2008-09 
Physical Targets     
       
  
Achievement level 
 
Assistance to 125 new and  
100 old districts 
 
Upgradation of 2 existing  
Mental Hospitals to the  
level of NIMHANS     
Grants released to 7 old districts.  
For new districts, scheme is under process  
         
                  
                              ---- 
 
 
 
 
 
15.5 The Committee is disappointed to note that situation has deteriorated further in 
2009-10.  Following details are self-revealing: 
 
                  Target Achievement (till date)                  Remarks 
Extension of DMHP to 50 new  
districts 
 
 
Support to 110  Old DMHPs on 
 new pattern  
 
 
Modernisation of Mental  
Hospital  : 4 
 
 
Upgradation of Psychiatric wings  
of 38 Medical Colleges/ General  
Hospitals 
Nil 
 
 
 
2 DMHP on existing  
pattern 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
Upgradation of  
Psychiatric wings of 3  
Medical Colleges/ General
 
Hospitals 
Expansion to new DMHP not  
approved by Government 
 
Non submission of Utilization  
Certificate led to grant of  
support to only 2 old DMHP.  
 
Non receipt of complete  
proposal from the State  
Government.  
 
Lack of receipt of adequate and  
complete proposals under the  
scheme from the States.  
 

 57
 
 
Initiation of work of 11 Centers of 
Excellence and 40 PG departments 
in mental health specialties; 
 
 
 
 
NGO/PPP 
 
 
Other (Monitoring, Evaluation &  
Research): 
 
 
Initiation of work of 6  
Centers of Excellence and  
13 PG departments in   
mental health specialties 
 at 7 institutes; 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
Completion of evaluation 
of NMHP Programme 
 
 
Lack of receipt of adequate and  
complete proposals for Center  
of Excellence and PG  
departments under the scheme  
from the States.  
 
 
Scheme not yet approved by 
Government  
 
Research component of NMHP 
 not approved yet 
 
15.6 The Committee is aware that the slow pace of the implementation during the 
Tenth Plan has already resulted in the spillover of many components of the 
Programme to the Eleventh Plan. The Comm ittee is dismayed at the persistent 
discouraging level of achievem ents under the parameters, viz., the financial and 
physical, set under this ambitious Programm e. The Committee has been voicing its 
concern time and again in this regard and recommending to the Department to take 
immediate corrective measures to achieve th e targets set under the Programme. But no 
corrective measure seems to have been taken by the Department so far.  
 
15.7 In response to a pointed query in respect of the dismal performance under the 
various components of the Programme, the Secretary, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare during her presentation before the Committee attributed this to the lack of 
proposals and cooperation from the States. She also brought to the knowledge of the 
Committee the acute shortage of manpower especi ally of psychiatrists, stating that it has 
been a major hindrance in implementation of the Programme. Committee was given to 
understand that the situation was worsened by the availability of limited number of 
trained psychiatrists with a large number of them moving to private sector or abroad 
thereby resulting in human resource crunch under the Programme.  
 
15.8 The Committee is aware that active cooperation of the State Governments is key 
to the success of a Programme of vast magnitude like this. However, it cannot buy the 
argument that it is only the States who are responsible for not achieving the intended 
results under the Programme. The fact that EFC considered the proposal of NMHP 

 58
only in July, 2008 and only after that it was placed before the CCEA for approval is 
proof of the procedural ha ssles that are hampering the Programme. Further, the 
Department needs to take a pro-active approach and try to bring all the States on board 
for effective implementation of the Programme and have regular interactions with 
them.  It is high time that the problem areas hampering the implementation of the 
Programme are identified and suitable and timely action taken accordingly. 
 
15.9 As regards, the issue of shortage of manpower like trained Psychiatrists, 
Clinical Psychologists and Psychiatric social workers, the Committee shares the 
concerns of the Department. The Committee can only suggest that the requisite 
manpower needs to be attracted by offering a suitable compensation package and 
offering good working conditions. Another initiative which can be taken is to increase 
the number of seats in the field of Mental Health in the medical colleges across the 
country. The Committee would like to be briefed about the steps taken by the 
Department in this regard.  
 
15.10 The District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) is a vital component of the NMHP 
introduced in 1996.  The main objective of DMHP is to provide basic mental health services to the 
community and to integrate these with general health services. The Committee has been 
informed that as on date, 123 districts across the co untry have been covered under the 
District Mental Health Programme. Extens ion of DMHP to 200 new districts of the 
country with added components of Life Ski lls Training and Counseling in Schools, 
College Counseling Services, Work Place Stress Management and Suicide Prevention 
Services has been proposed in th e EFC proposal on NMHP for the 11
th Plan. The 
extension of DMHP is subject to the approv al of Expenditure Finance Committee and 
subsequent approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. 
 
15.11 The Committee notes with displeasure that though the Department has 
proposed to include 200 more districts under this component during the Eleventh Plan, 
final approval is yet to be given by the competent authority. The Committee is 
informed that during 2010-11, the Department  proposes to implement DMHP on new 
pattern to only existing 123 districts.  

 59
 
15.12 Majority of districts in the country have not still been covered under District 
Mental Health Programme, which was initiated  way back in 1996.  It has taken almost 
15 years for extending the component to only 123 districts. With about 500 districts still 
remaining outside the reach of this vital aspect of the Programme, the Committee can 
only conclude that it has failed to take off so far. With the Secretary herself indicating 
a further delay, the Committee does not ha ve hope of more districts being covered 
under this component and of the Programm e in the near future. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Department to seriously take all conceivable measures to 
cover the 200 Districts under DMHP, as envisaged in the Eleventh Plan period.  
 
XVI NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP) 
  
16.1 Cancer is stated to have become one of the ten leading causes of death in India. It 
is estimated that there are nearly 7 to 9 lakh cases occurring every year. Focus area for the 
Eleventh Plan period is early detection, diagnosis and treatment of common cancers 
especially among women that include cervical cancer, breast cancer and oral cancer.  
  
16.2 The Committee observes that, at present, NCCP is being implemented based on 
the norms of Tenth plan. The EFC of revised N C C P  f o r  E l e v e n t h  p l a n  i s  s t a t e d  t o  b e  
under preparation. Under the proposal, efforts are being made to provide basic cancer 
detection facilities in district hospitals, Community health centres and primary health 
centres. Also, it is intended to set up oncology wings in all medical colleges.  
 
16.3 The Committee has been witnessing a consistent unsatisfactory level of 
performance under the various components of  the Programme. Gap in physical targets 
and achievement level under different components of the Programme is evident in the 
Eleventh Plan period also. Neither the existing Regional Cancer Centres are being 
strengthened nor recognition being given to new Regional Centres. Shortfall is 
reported in the assistance being provide d to existing/new oncology wings of Govt. 
Medical Colleges. District Cancer Programme has also not been showing satisfactory 
progress.  
 

 60
16.4 Performance level of the Programme be comes all the more discouraging when it 
is noticed that there is no shortage of funds. Funds are being duly allocated every year, 
religiously reduced at the RE stage and the utilization status at the end of the year 
reported to be under-utilized. The Comm ittee notes the following figures of 
expenditure for 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 in respect of the National Cancer Control 
Programme (NCCP):- 
 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 (as on 28.2.10) 
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals 
140 70 46.32 120 120 33.60 95.00 35.00 14.24 
 
16.5 The Committee is dismayed at the fact that the Department does not appear to 
be serious w.r.t. the implementation of this programme and the same is evident from 
the fact that the EFC for 11 th Plan is being prepared by the Department and there is no 
approved scheme for the current Plan.   
 
16.6 The Department itself has been admitting cancer to be one of the ten leading 
causes of death in India with nearly 7 to 9 lakh cases occurring every year. The 
Committee opines that this Programme can be singled out as one of the classic 
examples where inspite of ample fund alloca tion and good objectives, the Programme 
has not been able to take off in the desired manner due to apparent apathy of the 
Department. 
 
16.7 The Committee is aware that the Depa rtment could utilize only Rs. 252.95 crore 
during the Tenth Plan out of an approved outlay of Rs. 333 crore. The Committee notes 
that the approved outlay for the Eleventh Pl an has been increased about eight times to  
Rs. 2400  crore out of which only Rs. 94.16 crore have been utilized upto 28
th February, 
2010. This leaves Rs. 2300 crore (approx.)  remaining to be utilized during the 
remaining two financial years of the Plan. Taking into account the provision of Rs. 155 
crore during 2010-11, it still leaves behind a huge amount of funds to the tune of Rs. 
2150 crore (approx.) left for the last financial year. With the current pace of utilization, 
the Committee apprehends that it is going to show a worse performance when 
compared with the Tenth Plan track record. 
 

 61
16.8 The Committee is very concerned with the persisting underutilization of funds 
earmarked under the Programme. The Comm ittee in its earlier reports has been 
commenting on this issue and has been recommending to it to take some corrective 
steps in this regard. The Committee cannot accept any justification in this regard as it 
is a clear indication of poor planning and execution as well as monitoring mechanism. 
The Committee hopes that at least now, the Department would take a more pro-active 
approach in getting all the requisite approvals without further delay and try to 
implement the revised Programme vigorously in the last two financial years with a 
focused strategy.  
 
16.9 In order to identify weak links and en sure effective implementation of various 
components of the programme, the Committee had in its 27
th Report recommended to 
the Department to give utmost priority to evaluation of the National Cancer Control 
Programme by a premier agency having experience of work in such Disease Control 
Programmes. However, in respect of a query in this regard, the Committee is informed 
that the programme was last evaluated in 2004 by the National Institute of Health and 
Family Welfare (NIHFW). Certain amendmen ts in the programme were incorporated 
in 2005, in the light of that assessment.  Another review has now become due. The 
process to select an independent outside agency has been initiated.  
 
16.10 The Committee is unhappy to note that the Department has actually not taken 
any step further in the last two years. The Committee would like to point out here that 
it was informed during examination of the Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the 
Department that the proposal submitted by the NIHFW for second evaluation of the 
NCCP was not up to the mark. In addition ICMR also submitted the proposal for 
evaluating the NCCP. It was stated that th e Department decided to invite proposals 
from other organizations including IIM. However, no response had been received in 
the matter and hence no final decision co uld be taken regarding selection of the 
agency for evaluating the NCCP. Th e Committee opines that the severe 
underutilization of funds as well as the ph ysical targets under the Programme warrant 
an immediate evaluation and necessary co rrective measures. The Committee therefore 
recommends to the Department to immediately evaluate the implementation of the 

 62
Programme so that all the loopholes and hurdles afflicting the smooth implementation 
of such an ambitious Programme are identified and corresponding corrective measures 
taken at the earliest.  
 
16.11 The Committee notes that a large number of Utilization Certificates are pending 
against various colleges spread across the country. Maximum amount of pending UCs 
is against the following colleges:- 
 
Sl. No Year of release 
the grant 
State Name of the Institute Amount 
(in Rupees) 
1. 2007-08 Assam Dr. B.B. Barooah Cancer Instt. 
Guwahati under Centre of 
Excellence Scheme 
05.00 crore 
2 2007-08 Himachal Pradesh Indira Gandhi Medical College, 
Shimla under RCC Scheme 
296,48,463/- 
3. 2007-08 Madhya Pradesh 
 
Cancer Hospital & Research Instt., 
Gwalior under DCCP Scheme  
 
88.00 lakh 
4. 2007-08 Mizoram Civil Hospital, Aizawl  for 
development of oncology wing 
01.00 crore 
5. 2007-08 Punjab Govt. Medical College, Patiala for 
development of oncology wing 
03.00 crore 
6. 2007-08 Kerala Govt. Medical College, Kottayam, 
Kerala for development of oncology 
wing  
01.00 crore 
7. 2007-08 Chhattisgarh Pt. J.N. Me dical College, Raipur 03.00 crore 
8. 2007-08 Haryana  Govt. Hospital, Bhiwani under 
development of oncology wing 
03.00 crore 
9. 2007-08 Rajasthan RNT Medical College, Udaipur for 
development of oncology wing 
1,95,87,000 
10. 2007-08 West Bengal R.G. Kar Medical College & 
Hospital, Kolkata for development 
of oncology wing 
98,66,320/- 
11. 2008-09 Nagaland Naga Hospital Authority, Kohima 
for development of oncology wing 
90.00 lakh 
12. 2008-09 Punjab Guru Govind Singh Medical 
College & Hospital, Faridkot for 
development of oncology wing  
03.00 crore 
13. 2008-09 Tripura Cancer Hospital, Agartala (Under 
new RCC Scheme) 
05.00 crore 
14. 2008-09 
 
Rajasthan S.N. Medical College, Jodhpur 
(Development of Oncology Wing) 
01.50 crore 
 
 
The Committee recommends to the Department to take immediate action to liquidate 
the pending Ucs . The Committee may also be informed about the efforts made by it in 
this regard along with a status of all the pending UCs under the Programme. 

 63
 
XVII NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME (NTCP) 
 
17.1 The National Programme on Tobacco Cont rol (NTCP) aims to help implement the 
provisions of ‘Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and 
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003’ and 
also to bring about greater awareness, sen sitize about the harmful effects of tobacco 
consumption and provide tobacco cessation facilities.   
  
17.2 The Committee is constrained to observe that in 2007-08 and 2009-10 BE funds 
had to be revised downwards substantially at the RE stage keeping in view the pace of 
expenditure under the Programme. Against an  allocation of Rs. 40.00 crore and 30.00 
crore in 2007-08 and 2009-10 respectively, an expenditure of only Rs. 13.98 crore and Rs. 
16.60 crore has been reported.The Committee opines that time and again the 
Department brings the rhetoric of scarcity of funds and here it is not utilizing the 
available resources persistently. The Commi ttee may be informed of the measures 
taken by the Department to optimally utilize the available resources under this 
Programme.  
 
17.3 The Committee observes that launched as  a pilot project in 12 districts of 6 
States in 2007-08, by the end of 2009-10, Programme has been extended to only 42 
districts of 21 States.  It would not be wrong to conclude that the Programme continues 
to be run on a pilot basis even after three year  of its launch.  This is the position when 
the target was to extend the coverage to 100 districts by the end of 2008-09. 
 
17.4 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the progress made w.r.t. the setting 
up of the National Tobacco Regulatory Author ity. Proposed to be set up in 2008-09, the 
present position is that its setting up is unde r consideration of the Ministry. Further, as 
regards Referral Labs for testing of Tar and Nicotine contents in various tobacco 
products, the Committee has been informed that the Government has approved the 
setting up of tobacco testing labs under th e National Tobacco Control Programme. The 
Ministry will soon issue tenders for procur ement of equipment for the proposed tobacco 
testing labs. 

 64
 
17.5 The Committee would like to remind th e Department that subsequent to its 
examination of Demands for Grants of  the Ministry for 2008-09, in its 27 th Report, it 
had taken a strong view of the fact that despite the ‘in principle’ approval of the 
Planning Commission for setting up of the National Regulatory Authority and 
Referral Labs for testing Tar and Nicotine content and initiation of the process for 
seeking approval of the competent authority, no progress had been made for quite 
some time.  Accordingly, the Committee had called for concerted efforts of the 
Department to achieve the approval of th e competent authority for setting up of the 
National Regulatory Authority. However,  as per information available with the 
Committee now, there has been ‘no’ improvem ent on this front even after a period of 
two years. The Committee is dismayed at the Department’s attitude in this regard.  
National Tobacco regulatory Authority is supposed to be pivotal to the whole 
Programme to help in effective implementation of Tobacco free initiatives. Even the 
progress w.r.t. setting up of tobacco testing labs has not seen any improvement. To 
aggravate the matter further, the Depart ment has not been able to expand the 
Programme in more districts of the country as scheduled. Even the first Adult Tobacco 
Survey has been lingering on for quite some time. The Committee is upset with the 
way things are being managed under the Programme. Fixing realistic targets on paper 
is only the first step towards achieving a goal and the Committee does find the targets 
set to be realistic and achievable. Therefore,  it is not able to comprehend itself with 
the reasons for the delay in achieving the targets. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend some urgent and concrete action plan in achieving the targets set under 
the Programme in a time bound manner.  
 
17.6 In response to a query in respect of the Department’s efforts to generate mass 
media/ IEC campaign regarding harmful effe cts of tobacco products, the Committee is 
given to understand that Rs 14.91 crore wa s released during 2009-10 for advertising and 
publicity activities.  The Committee also notes that an enhanced amount to the tune of Rs. 
23 crore has been earmarked for 2010-11 for this purpose.  
 

 65
17.7 The Committee is happy to note that the Department is focusing on Mass 
Media/ IEC campaign to generate awareness among the common people about the 
harmful effects of tobacco products. Awareness among the common masses, especially 
the younger generation, is the key to success of the whole Programme. The Committee 
would recommend that events like coming Commonwealth Games, venues of cricket 
and other matches being played in India, public gathering like the kumbh melas etc. 
may also be utilized to generate awareness among people with Mass Media/ IEC 
campaign at the sites. 
 
17.8 The Committee notes that the State Go vernment /UTs are the main enforcing 
agencies for implementing provisions of th e Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products 
(Prohibition of Advertisement and Regula tion of Trade and Commerce, Production, 
Supply and Distribution) Act (COTPA), 2003. However, litigation in Supreme Court and 
High Courts against various provisions of COTPA and Rules made thereunder have been 
cited as a major barrier in effective implementa tion of the Act. To tackle such issues,  a 
Steering Committee has been constituted for taking suo-moto action with regard to 
violation of the Act. State Governments have also been advised to form State/Districts 
level Steering Committees. Inter-Ministerial ta sk force has been constituted to sensitize 
stakeholders on cross cutting issues of tobacco control and implementation of COTPA. 
Department has also stated that strengthen ing of legal support and establishment of a 
dedicated Tobacco Cell in the Ministry and co nstitution of National Tobacco Regulatory 
Authority will help in effective implementation of Tobacco free initiatives.  
 
17.9      The Committee notes that though  the Department has been able to come up 
with a law for restricting use and sale of the Tobacco products, the ground realities 
have not changed much. The various provisions of the Act are not being implemented 
in letter and spirit even in metro cities in India. Situation in respect of small towns 
and rural areas can well be imagined. The Department cannot remain a silent spectator 
on such vital issues. A proper pro-active st rategy should be developed whereby all the 
States are roped in to work sincerely in this regard.  
  

 66
XVIII            MEDICAL EDUCATION 
18.1 The Committee is given to understand that at present, there are 300 medical 
colleges in the country. Out of this, 229 ar e recognized medical colleges and 71 medical 
colleges which have been approved for runn ing MBBS courses will be considered for 
recognition as per the provisions of Medica l Council of India (MCI) regulations. The 
Committee is informed that while there is no provision for review of MBBS courses every 
five year, MCI carries out periodic inspection  of medical colleges as per the provision of 
IMC Act, 1956 and Regulations made there-un der to maintain the standards of medical 
education in the country. The medical co lleges which are found not meeting the 
requirement as per the regulations are given an  opportunity to rectify the deficiencies. In 
the recent past, MCI has recommended for with drawal of recognition in respect of 10 
medical colleges. Besides, MCI has also issued show cause notices to 15 medical colleges 
and sought compliance report. On receiv ing the compliance report from college 
authorities, MCI will verify the same  and, wherever necessary, submit its 
report/recommendations to the Central Go vernment for appropriate action. For the 
academic year 2010-11, recommendations from MCI are awaited in respect of 59 medical 
colleges for grant of annual renewal of perm ission for which the last date is 15.5.2010. It 
has also been informed that so far, 4 medica l colleges have filed court cases with regard 
to withdrawal of recognition.   
 
18.2 The Committee is concerned with the fact  that as many as 10 colleges are being 
considered for withdrawal of recognition and 15 more being issued show cause 
notices. From the large number of colleges caught compromising the standards while 
being scrutinized, it is clear that all is not well. This clubbed with the fact that these 
colleges are those which have come under scheduled scrutiny and there may be many 
which keep on functioning until they come under inspection scrutiny, makes the 
matter more serious.  The Committee would lik e to have a brief about the status of 
inspection of all the medical colleges inter-alia containing – the selection procedure 
vide which the colleges are selected for inspection, the date of establishment of 
college, date of inspection/s, shortcomings noticed and action taken during the last 5 
years. The Committee may also be informed of the details w.r.t. the progress made for 

 67
withdrawal of recognition of 10 colleges, show cause notice to 15 colleges and the court 
cases in respect of the 4 colleges.  
 
18.3 The Committee is given to understand th at as per Section 11(2) of the Indian 
Medical council Act, it is for the college authorities to apply for recognition to the Central 
Government through the relevant University  when the first batch of MBBS students 
appears for final year examination. Medical Co uncil of India carries out the inspection of 
the Applicant College and recommends to the Central Government to accord recognition 
to the medical degree if all facilities are av ailable at the medical college as per MCI 
norms. In respect of a pointed query regardin g the latest status with respect of medical 
colleges seeking recognition vis-à-vis their final batch of students appearing in the 
examination, the Committee has been informed that there are 15 medical colleges where 
the first batches of MBBS students have appe ared for final examination but are yet to be 
recognized in the academic year 2010. The recommendations in respect of these medical 
colleges are awaited from Medical Council of India.  
 
18.4 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the Department’s view that all is 
well with the existing procedure for reco gnition of MBBS degree colleges. The 
Department cannot escape from its responsibility by citing that it is the responsibility 
of the individual colleges to seek re cognition. The Committee opines that the 
Department needs to have into consideration the psychological impact of such a 
situation on the final year students who in its opinion would be more anxious to see 
their college getting recognit ion rather than taking their examinations seriously. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the whole procedure of recognition should 
be complete well before the final year  students take their examinations. The 
Committee therefore recommends to the Depa rtment to revisit its stand on the issue 
and come up with some concrete steps. A status note on the issue of recognition to 15 
medical colleges where the first batches of MBBS students have appeared for final 
examination in the academic year 2010 may be furnished.  
 
18.5 The Committee observes that out of 20,880 Bachelor of Dental Surgery seats, 1990 
remained vacant in 2007-08; 4347 out of 22,500 remained vacant in 2008-09 and 1651 out 

 68
of 23,570 remained vacant in 2009-10. The Committee also takes note of the fact that there 
are only 11,000 jobs created nationally in the Government Sector with  no projection of 
increase. However, the Dentists are eligible to practice privately and teach in private 
dental colleges. But the Committee is also aware of the limitations of the private sector to 
consume this supply.   
 
18.6 The Committee also notes that in 2004,  Dental Council of India proposed a 
moratorium on new colleges and addition of  new seats in existin g institutions for a 
minimum period of 5 years which was not ag reed to by the Government. The Committee 
is also informed that recently, the DCI has sent a proposal to the Government to make 
norms of opening new college more stringen t which includes replacing the 100 bedded 
hospitals in dental institution with an a ffiliation to an approved/recognised medical 
college in the interest of clinical traini ng and quality education, which is under 
consideration. Further, the Council has proposed to restrict the attachment of 
Government General Hospital with one dental college only irrespective of beds available 
there which is also under con sideration. Stringent criteria  for infrastructure and the 
requirements of publications for faculty have  been enforced. A central bio-metric system 
to monitor the presence of faculty on the day to day basis has also been introduced.  
 
18.7 The Committee is in full agreement with the initiatives proposed by the DCI 
especially in view of the fact that so many seats are lying vacant year after year. 
Further, the Committee is of the firm opinion that education and accordingly the 
number of seats should be need based an d keeping in view the demand and supply 
scenario. Here, by the figures available with the Committee, it is amply clear that there 
is an urgent need for intervention to bala nce the same. In view of the above, the 
Committee recommends to the Department to take some urgent steps in consultation 
with the DCI and the various State Governments, so that this unwanted trend is 
arrested at the earliest and precious resource s are utilized purposefully in other areas 
of medical education. The Committee also recommends to the Department to actively 
consider the proposals submitted to it by the DCI regarding making norms of opening 
new college more stringent. 

 69
 
XIX VACANCIES IN CHS CADRE 
 
19.1 The Central Health Service (CHS) cadr e comprises of four sub-cadres, viz., 
General Duty Medical Officers (GDMOs), Teac hing Specialists, Non-Teaching Specialists 
and Public Health Specialists. The Commit tee has been continuously keeping a close 
watch on the vacancies under the cadre. Following is the latest status of vacancies in CHS 
cadre:- 
 
                   
19.2 The Committee has been given to understand that constant efforts are being made 
to fill up the vacancies by regular mode of recruitment i.e. through UPSC by direct 
recruitment at entry level. DPC meetings are held regularly to fill up the vacancies by 
promotion method. Efforts are also being made to fill up the existing vacancies at entry 
level on contract basis temporarily.   As of now, a proposal for review of CHS Rules is 
under active consideration of this Ministry. As a result, requisitions for non-clinical 
specialties cannot be sent to UPSC till the amended CHS Rules are notified. In super-
specialties, in most of the sp ecialties, suitable officers are not found by the UPSC and 
thus the recruitment process proves to be  infructuous , which results in unfilled 
vacancies. It has also been observed that th e response of the candidates for vacancies at 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands as also at Lakshadweep Islands is not very encouraging, 
which leaves a gap for unfilled vacancies. However, this Ministry is making up the 
shortage by deputing Doctors from the mainland on rotation basis. 
 
19.3 The Committee would like to invite the attention of the Department to the 
following vacancy status in various cadres  in 2007 and 2008 furnished by it during the 
Committee’s examination of Demands for Grants of the Department 2008-09:- 
 
Name of sub-cadre Sanctioned posts Filled Vacant as in Jan., 2010 
Teaching                  892     687                     205 
Non-teaching 862     647                     215 
Public Health                    79      60                       19 
GDMOs                 2789    2400                     389 

 70
Name of sub-
cadre 
Sanctioned 
Posts as o n
date 
Filled as on 
29.02.2008 
Vacancies as 
on 29.02.2008 
Vacancies as on 
01.02.2007 
Teaching   769 557+7 112 239 
Non-
Teaching 
 776 588 188 252 
Public Health  078 053 025 026 
GDMO 3101 2606  495* 640 
 
 
19.4 The Committee notes with serious concern that apart from marginal 
improvement in GDMO sub-cadre, that too far too below any satisfactory level, there 
is seemingly no improvement in the filling up of the vacant positions across all the 
sub-cadres inspite of the sanctioned strength increasing in the three sub-cadres other 
than GDMO. The Committee is not convinced with the Department’s efforts because 
had the Department made sincere efforts there would have been some kind of forward 
movement in filling up the vacancies over the years. The Committee cannot make out 
the delay in making recruitments by UPSC. Promotion vacancies can be filled up by 
convening DPCs. Further, the Committee is unable to understand the delay in 
notifying the revised CHS rules especially when there is urgency involved in the 
matter. Temporary and contractual measures can never be a solution in the long run.  
 
19.5 The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of 
contractual/temporary appointments made under CHS for the past one year. The 
Committee would also like to be furnished a detailed note in respect of the posts 
under each sub-cadre, inter- alia covering issues like when it approached the UPSC for 
making direct recruitments, holding of DPCs, reasons for delay in notifying CHS rules 
and the efforts made by the Department for early filling up of the vacancies. 
 
19.6 In respect of a query regarding the st atus of proposals for –‘lateral entry of 
General Duty Medical Officers with PG qualification in the specialist sub-cadre’ and 
creating/upgrading 17% of total Senior Duty  posts in CHS for SAG level, the Committee 
is given to understand that the proposal for lateral entry of General Duty Medical 
Officers with PG qualification in Specialist sub-cadre has been included in the proposed 
amendment of CHS Rule-1996, and the same has been referred to UPSC for the approval. 

 71
There is no proposal for up-gradation of 17% of total senior posts in CHS for SAG level. 
However, the DACP Scheme has been extend ed up to SAG level post under which the 
promotion would be made to SAG post without linkage to vacancy. 
 
19.7 The Committee is happy to note that fina lly there is some respite in the offing 
to General Duty Medical Officers with PG qualification. The Committee recommends 
to the Department to pursue the matter sincerely so that the amendments are approved 
without further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised about the progress 
made in this regard. The Committee would also like to have the details of the DACP 
scheme.  
 
XX NEW INITIATIVES/PROGRAMMES 
20.1 A number of new initiatives/programmes were proposed to be launched during 
the Eleventh Plan, preparator y exercise for some of which started even before the 
beginning of the Plan period.  The Committ ee is constrained to observe that against 
the approved outlay of Rs. 12609.63 crore for the Eleventh Plan, very meagre allocation 
has been made for the first three years which has also remained almost unutilized.  
Status by the end of 2009-10 in respect of these initiatives/programmes clearly 
indicates that there is little hope of their ta king off in the real sense by the end of 
Eleventh Plan, i.e. 2011-12.  Following details are self-revealing: 
NEW INITIATIVES/PROGRAMMES
 
 
STATUS BY THE END OF 2009-10 
E-Health including Telemedicine  Detailed  EFC under preparation 
National Programme for Prevention and  
Control of Diabetes, Cardio-vascular  
Diseases and Stroke 
EFC under process for approval 
National Organ Transplant Programme  Proposal is under Process  
Oral Health Scheme yet to be launched  
National Programme for Healthcare 
 for Elderly 
Under process for approval 
National Centre for Disease Control  Under process for approval 
Setting up of Para-medical Institutions  Under process for approval 

 72
Strengthening/upgradation of pharmacy  
Schools 
Under process for approval 
Upgradation/strengthening of Nursing  
Services 
Under process for approval 
 
20.2 Besides that, programmes on Contro l of Human Rabies and Prevention and 
Control of Flurosis are still being run on pilot project basis.  So far only utilization of 
allocated fund has been very nominal.  The Committee therefore recommends that 
process of approval for all these initiatives/programmes needs to be expedited so that 
substantial allocation proposed for 2010-11 is put to use for the targeted beneficiaries. 
 
XXI    MISCELLANEOUS 
 
21.1 National Essential Drug List of India (N EDL), notified by Drug Controller General 
of India (DCGI) in 2003 contai ning 354 drugs, is at present under further revision by the 
DCGI. 
21.2 The Committee opines that seven years is a long period and during this period 
several drugs would have become necessary fo r inclusion or deletion as per practical 
requirements. It is not happy with the delay in the revision of the List. It recommends 
an early updation of the List. The Committee may also be informed when did the 
updation process of NEDL started and whethe r there is a set time gap prescribed for 
initiating revision of the List. The Committee may also be informed of the progress 
made in this regard.   
21.3 The Committee notes that  “Whistle Blower Policy” has been announced with a 
provision of Rs. 3.50 crore by the Government  of India to encourage vigilant public 
participation in the detection of movement of spurious drugs in the country. Under this 
policy the informers would be suitably reward ed for providing concrete information in 
respect of movement of spurious drugs to the regulatory authorities. To give wide 
publicity to the initiative, the details of poli cy have been posted at the website of CDSCO 
(www.cdsco.nic.in
). 
21.4 The Committee is happy with the introduction of such a policy tendering 
monetary award to informers providing in formation about the spurious drugs. The 

 73
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the policy along with any 
achievement made so far under the policy. 
21.5 The Committee takes note of a recent  Delhi High Court directive given on 23 rd 
March, 2007 whereby private hospitals whi ch were allotted cheap or free land by 
Government agencies are required to provide fr ee treatment to poor patients at the rate 
of 10% in the Indoor Patient Department  (IPD) and 25% in the Outdoor Patient 
Department (OPD) of their total respective treatment capacities. Hospitals to whom land 
was allotted on institutional/concessional rates have been directed to provide 10% of the 
total beds free for poor (whose family inco me is Rs.4, 000/- or less per month) and free 
treatment to 25% of total patients free in the OPD in pursuance of Hon’ble High Court 
orders dated 22.3.2007 and 17.7.2007. Three hospitals namely, Rajiv Gandhi Cancer 
Institute, St. Stephens Hospital and Mool Chand Khairati Ram Hospital are not providing 
free treatment stating that they are not covered under High Court orders. Ten other 
hospitals having 171 beds have approached Hon’ble Supreme Court against the orders of 
Hon’ble High Court and have got interim stay with regard to providing free X-ray, CT 
Scan, Diagnostics etc. However, they are prov iding free treatment as in accordance with 
orders of Hon’ble Supreme Court. Remaining 25 hospitals are providing free treatment 
as per direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Committee may be informed about the 
progress w.r.t. the case filed by ten hospitals in Hon’ble Supreme Court.  
 
21.6 The Committee noticed that the bigger nations like USA are switching over to the 
generic medicines while India is still followin g branded medication pattern. India is the 
only country where generic branded and branded medicines are sold in the open markets.  
Either it should be generic or branded.  But in India, all big pharma companies are making 
generic branded medicines with manifold pric e tag in comparison to generic medicines.  
The Committee also notices that even if there is no difference of formulations, therapeutic 
use and the quality between a generic and branded machine, yet the branded and generic 
branded medicines are being sold at substantiall y higher prices in the open market.  Thus, 
the poor and the common men are forced to shell out extra money when they approach the 
chemist to buy such medicines which in the opinion of the Committee needs to be 
addressed with the sense of urgency.  The Co mmittee is further given to understand that 

 74
generic branded and branded medicines are be ing procured in all the Govt. hospitals, 
dispensaries and CGHS at substantially higher prices.  
21.7 The Committee is pained by the fact that  the poor patients have to pay for the 
branded name of the medicines.  This state of affairs is leading the poor patients to huge 
financial debts.  Besides, procurement of  the branded/generic branded medicines for 
Govt. hospitals, dispensaries and CGHS leads to heavy burden on the Exchequer 
comprising of precious taxp ayer’s money.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to make it mandatory for the Go vt. hospitals and CGHS to procure only 
generic medicines so that their procuremen t cost is reduced substantially without 
compromising on the quality and efficacy of such medicines.  The Committee further 
recommends the Department to initiate some measures so that generic medicines are not 
marketed and sold as generic branded medicines leading to exorbitant prices by the 
profiteering companies so that such medici nes are available to the common man at 
reasonable prices.  The Committee also recommends that it should be made mandatory 
for the Government Doctors to prescribe on ly generic medicines. The Committee may 
be informed of the action taken by the Department in this regard.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 75
 
DFG 2010-11   NRHM 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The National Rural Health Mission was launched by the Hon’ble Prime Minister 
o n        1 2
th April 2005, to provide accessible, a ffordable, accountable, effective and 
reliable primary healthcare services, especially to the poor and vulnerable sections of the 
rural population. The thrust of the Mission is on establishing a fully functional, 
community owned, decentralized health delivery system with inter sectoral convergence 
at all levels, to ensure simultaneous action on a wide range of determinants of health like 
water, sanitation, education, nutrition, social and gender equality.  
 
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
 
2.1 The allocation for Health Sector ha s been substantially enhanced from Rs. 
36378.00 crore in the Tenth Plan to Rs. 1,31,650.92 crore in the Eleventh Plan. Approved 
outlay for NRHM for the Eleventh plan is Rs. 90558.00 crore. The Committee observes 
that plan allocation during the first four years of the plan period shows a gradual increase. 
However, substantial plan allocation still remains to be released. Out of total approved 
outlay of Rs. 90558.00 crore for NRHM, total allocation for the first four years of the 
eleventh Plan amounts to Rs. 52,190.00 cr ore with a balance of Rs. 38368.00 crore 
remaining with only one year of the plan period left. The Committee is constrained to 
observe that shortfall has been reported every year in the utilization of the allocated 
funds. Utilization status has simply failed to keep pace with the upward trend in the 
allocation as indicated below:- 
(Rs in crores) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Approved 
outlay 
Expenditure Approved 
outlay 
Expenditure Approved 
outlay 
Expenditure 
(upto 
January, 
2010) 
10890.00 10380.40 11930.00 11260.18 13930.00 10013.91 
 
What is more worrisome is that this di scouraging trend is noticed under all the 
major sectors of NRHM, the only exception being Flexible Pool for State PIPs. The 
following details are self revealing:- 

 76
(Rs in crores) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 Scheme 
Allocatio
n 
Expenditur
e 
Allocatio
n 
Expenditur
e 
Allocatio
n 
Expenditur
e (upto 
31.01.2010) 
Disease 
Control 
Programme 
10575.00 10160.45 11580.00 11117.85 13580.00 9898.07 
Family 
Welfare 
9418.00 9022.28 10193.43 10035.26 12178.93 9015.48 
Routine 
Immunisatio
n  
317.00 236.64 615.00 166.52 414.21 247.77 
 
2.2 The Committee has been informed that against the projected demand for Rs. 
19,989.00 crore for NRHM, the Planning Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 
15440.00 crore for 2010-11. The lower approved outlay as compared to proposed outlay 
is likely to affect implementation of a number of ongoing schemes under NRHM like 
Mission Flexible Pool,     RCH Flexible Pool, Infrastructure Maintenance, National 
Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, Revised National TB Programme, 
Management Information System and Routine Immunization. The Committee would, 
however, like to point out that under al l such programmes which are going to be 
adversely affected due to non-allocation of  required funds, funds allocated so far 
have remained underutilized during 2009-10, as indicated below:- 
(Rs in crores) 
2009-10  
Schemes Allocation Expenditure (upto 
30.01.2010) 
Vector borne Disease Control 
Programme 
442.00 227.73 
National T.B.Control 
Programme 
312.25 259.60 
Infrastructure Maintenance 3087.68 2642.60 
RCH Flexible Pool 3545.00 2641.84 
Mission Flexible Pool 3567.27 2479.17 
IEC 186.31 75.95 
Routine Immunization 414.21 247.77 
 
2.3 Not only this, with the exception of Mission and RCH Flexible Pool in other 
programmes, position has been more or  less the same during 2007-08 and 2008-09 
also. Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the fact that provisions for all 
these programmes have been made at an enhanced level in 2010-11 when compared 

 77
with 2009-10 allocations. The Committee wo uld, therefore, appreciate if concerted 
efforts are made by all concerns for opti mum and judicious utilization of allocated 
funds. If required, at the time of mid-ye ar assessment, the Department can pursue 
for additional funds with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 
 
2.4 The Committee views with serious conc ern the trend of allocation of funds 
and utilization thereof in some other crucial programmes such as National 
Programme for Control of Blindness, Io dine Deficiency Disorder Control 
Programme, Procurement of Drugs and Equipments under RCH, Information 
Education and Communication (Both RCH  & Non-RCH) and Area Projects are 
some of the other programmes under which performance level during the Eleventh 
Plan so far has also been far from satisf actory. The Committee has been repeatedly 
cautioning the Department to take remedial measures to ensure optimum utilization 
of funds year after year. However, no si gnificant improvement has been noticed so 
far. The case for Procurement of Drugs and Equipments under RCH remains a 
classic example, where, during 2008-09 Rs. 300 crore were allocated and no 
expenditure was made.  Again, in 2009-10 an initial outlay of Rs. 100 crore were 
made under the same head which was revised upwards to Rs. 150 crore and no 
expenditure is reported to be there up till January, 2010. Approved outlay of Rs. 
1500 crore for the Eleventh Plan has thus remained unspent in spite of three years 
of the Plan period being over. 
 
2.5 The Committee strongly feel that poor planning and execution on the part of 
the Department regarding the various on-going schemes have been responsible for 
such a discouraging scenario. The Committee is well aware of the fact that in a vast 
country like ours, with healthcare facilities specially in the rural areas showing a 
negligible presence, need for additional fu nd will also be there.  The Committee has 
also been strongly advocating the case fo r enhanced allocation of funds for NRHM 
but the trend of under-utilization/ unutilis ation weakens the justification for higher 
provision of funds. The Committee is also aware of the fact that Union Government 
alone cannot achieve the targeted goals. It has to carry out the implementation with 
the active support of State Governments. The Committee, therefore, once again 
recommends the Department to make its monitoring mechanism more effective so 
that such large amount of funds do not lapse/remain unutilized. The Committee also 

 78
suggests the Department to undertake a comprehensive self-assessment study on the 
means and methods used to improve financ ial accountability under the Mission so 
far, and based on the findings, to devise  a mechanism whereby funds utilization for 
the rest of the Mission period could be in a better state. Taking note of significant 
and persistent shortfall in utilization of the budgeted funds, the Committee would 
like the Department to exercise greater prudence in their budget formulation and 
make their estimates only after proper assessment and planning. 
 
 2.6 NRHM is targeted to provide accessible, affordable and equitable health care 
services for people living in rural areas of the country with focus on under-served 
population and marginalized groups. Therefore, it is the considered view of the 
Committee that              under-funding should not be allowed to come in the way of 
delivery of essential and quality health care  to the most vulnerable sections of our 
society. The Committee, therefore, recommen ds that additional funds be allocated 
under NRHM wherever required. 
 
2.7 The twin problems of pending Utilizati on Certificate (UCs) and Unspent Balances 
under various programmes/ components of NRHM have been engaging the attention of 
the Committee since long. The Committee finds that the year 2009-10 was also no 
different. The Committee was informed that as on 1
st April, 2009, there were 2083 UCs 
amounting to Rs. 7785.90 crore outstanding in respect of grants released upto March, 
2008. This pendency must have increased manifold by the end of March, 2010.  
 
2.8  On being asked specifically about the measures taken by the Department to 
liquidate pending Utilization Certificates, the Department has informed that as per the  
provision of the General Financial Rules it is necessary that in case of recurring grants, 
funds for the same purpose beyond 75% of the next year’s provision will not be released 
unless audited Utilisation Certificate for the grants released in the previous year is 
received. Further, for non-recurring grants, no fresh releases are being authorized unless 
audited Utilisation Certificate for grants released in the year prior to the last year (i.e., 
with a ‘grace period’ of one year) has been received.  
 
2.9 Besides that, this matter, apart from being regularly monitored in the Department, 
is also annually reviewed with the State Financial Advisers by Secretary (Expenditure) 
and the Union Finance Minister separately. And as a further effort to maximize 

 79
liquidation of UCs, a DO at the level of Secretary (Health) has been issued to all the 
Principal Health Secretaries of the States co ncerned. Lastly, with the intent to improve 
financial accountability, Financial Monito ring Groups comprising of MBAs, CAs, 
Accounts & Finance Managers are being deployed at the State-level under NRHM. 
 
2.10 The Committee observes that 2083 num ber of pending UCs amounting to Rs. 
7785.00 crore is too large to be comfortable with. The Committee notes that the 
biggest defaulters in terms of amount involved in pending UCs are Uttar Pradesh 
(Rs. 1097.39 crore), Karnataka  (Rs. 596.08 crore), Bihar (Rs. 537.74 crore) and 
Assam (437.11 crore) and unreconciled amount is to the tune of Rs. 707.40 crore 
involved in 31 UCs. The Committee is also astonished to find that the pendency of 
UCs has been continuing year after year, esp ecially in case of the High Focus States,  
EAG States and NE Region, although well ov er two-thirds of the time period of 
NRHM( 2005- 2010) is over. What is more astonishing is that  Union Territories like 
Delhi, Chandigarh, Puduchery and A&N Islands also figure in the list.  
 
2.11 The Committee would like to point out that mere advisories/ DOs to States 
for liquidation of pending UCs is not a tenable solution for expeditious liquidation 
of pending UCs. The Committee is of the view that monitoring of pending UCs 
needs to be further strengthened. The Committee also recommends that a senior 
officer be assigned the task of laising wi th the States and monitor the progress in 
this regard on a quarterly basis. The Co mmittee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken to revamp the monitoring of pending UCs. The Committee is also of the 
view that the Department take up the matter with the States showing maximum 
pendency of UCs at the highest level impressing upon them the imperative of 
furnishing the UCs timely and exercising fiscal discipline. 
 
 
2.12 The Committee observes that availability of unspent balances continues to remain 
on the high side, both under Mission Flexible Pool and RCH Flexible Pool, the two major 
components under NRHM. Opening balance as on 01.04.2008 with different State 
Governments/ UTs under Mission Flexible Pool was Rs. 4150.07 crore, while funds 
provided during the year 2008-09 were             Rs. 2597.44 crore. Against the total funds 
amounting to Rs. 6747.51 crore with the state,  utilization figures are only Rs. 3254.29 
crore, less than half of the total availabi lity of funds. The Committee finds that final 

 80
position as on 01.04.2009 was no different from the previous year as opening balace of 
Rs. 3493.22 crore was again lying with the State Governments. Following are the States/ 
UTs where level of utilization of funds avai lable from the previous year as well as 
releases made during the year was very low: 
 
 
[Rs. in crores] 
State/UT Opening 
Balance as on 
1.4.2008 
Allocation Release Exp.   Unspent 
balance as 
on 31.03.09 
% 
Utilization 
Bihar 309.94 216.20 216.20 106.24 419.90 20% 
Chandigarh 2.46 1.75 0.04 0.56 1.94 22% 
Chhattisgarh 96.03 54.18 54.18 8.92 141.29 6% 
Delhi 28.51 27.59 27.02 10.78 44.75 19% 
Goa 2.69 2.76 2.38 1.21 3.86 24% 
Himachal Pradesh 39.99 12.29 12.29 16.72 35.56 32% 
Jharkhand 113.97 70.23 90.23 59.47 144.73 29% 
Madhya Pradesh 220.52 157.51 157.51 109.54 268.49 29% 
Orissa 161.71 95.81 123.44 65.70 219.45 23% 
Puducherry 4.23 2.01 2.01 1.73 4.51 28% 
Tamil Nadu 235.99 124.15 124.15 136.86 223.28 38% 
Tripura 43.26 27.88 27.88 25.93 45.21 36% 
Uttar Pradesh 654.12 432.93 305.43 300.53 659.02 31% 
West Bengal 318.07 160.77 160.77 180.13 298.71 38% 
Others    5.80   0.00   
Total (All India) 4150.07 2603.24 2597.44 3254.29 3493.22  
 
2.13 Not only this percentage of utilization in respect of States/ UTs like A&N Islands, 
Haryana, J&K, Lakshadweep, Meghalaya and Uttrakhand was between 45% to 50%. The 
very fact that the level of expenditure of Rs. 3254.29 crore as on 31.03.2009 is even less 
than the opening balance of Rs. 4150.07 crore as on 01.04.2008 available with States, 
compels the Committee to conclude that States are simply not able to take the full benefit 
of Central funds. A number of reasons ha ve been cited by the Department being 
responsible for low capacity of States.  The Committee is not prepared to accept the 
Department’s contention that delay in ta king up execution of civil works due to 
State healthcare departments being dependent on PWD and other State agencies, as 
the main factor behind such a scenario . The other reasons like requirement of 
opening of Back Account at each level and lack of proper planning for under-served 
areas are also equally unconvincing. The Co mmittee strongly feels that these are all 
such matters which should have been reso lved in the initial one or two years of 
NRHM. The Committee would also like to point out that monitoring and joint 
review missions of NRHM need to be followed by resolving of major constraints like 

 81
shortage of qualified and trained manpower and lack of infrastructural facilities. 
Otherwise allocated funds will contin ue to remain under-utilized every year 
defeating the very purpose of launching of NRHM in a mission mode.       
 
2.14 The Committee is surprised to note that under RCH Flexible Pool also 
Opening Balance amounting to Rs. 1157.46 crore was available as on 01.04.2008 
with different States. Assam with availability of Rs. 126.67 crore, Maharashtra with 
Rs. 209.69 crore, Tamil Nady with Rs. 97.73 crore, U.P with Rs. 192.33 crore and 
West Bengal with Rs. 101.59 crore can be considered slow perf orming States. Not 
only this, States like Goa, Meghalaya and Tr ipura failed to utilise even the opening 
balance during the course of the year. Perc entage of utilization of total allocated 
funds (opening balance + Release) was very low in respect of A&N Islands (44%), 
Assam (53%), Goa(23%), Haryana (52%), Himachal Pradesh (53%), J&K (40%), 
Manipur (54%), Meghalaya  (26%), Nagaland (45%), Tamil Nadu (40%), Tripura 
(33%) and West Bengal (40%). The Committee is very disappointed with such a 
utilization status, specially because under RCH Flexible Pool, States/ UTs have the 
flexibility to plan on a need basis without being bound by rigid normative 
prescriptions. The Committee, therefore, feel s that with more than two-third of the 
mission period already being over, it is high  time that the Department identifies the 
problem areas in the implementation of var ious components of RCH Flexible Pool 
and takes measures for resolving the same. A beginning can be made by 
approaching the states lagging behind on a priority basis. 
 
III INFRASTUCTURE STRENGTHENING 
 
Healthcare Units  
 
3.1 NRHM aims at strengthening of Primary Health Infrastructure and improving 
effective service delivery across the country. Sub-centers, Primary Healthcare Centers 
and Community Health Centres are the three cornerstones on which rural infrastructure is 
built upon. The Secretary, during the course of deposition before the Committee on 6 th 
April, 2010, highlighted the overall progress ma de in the achievement level of different 
healthcare infrastructure of NRHM, stating that as on date 1,46,036 Health Sub Centers  
(HSCs) were functional with 9144 new HS Cs taken up for construction and 8997 for 
renovation; 23,458 PHCs were functional with 8324 PHCs  functioning 24X7 while 1009 
new PHCs have been taken up for construction and 2081 for renovation. Out of 4276 

 82
CHCs– 930 were added after NRHM. Among the District Hospitals (DHs), 578 District 
Hospitals were functional with 57 new DHs  being constructed and 357 DHs have been 
taken up for renovation. Besides, 2463 centres were functioning as First Referral Units.  
 
3.2 The Committee while taking note of progress made in strengthening the 
primary health infrastructure after the la unch of NRHM would like to point out 
that considerable gap still continues to pe rsist. In this connection, Committee’s 
attention has been drawn by Performance Audit of NRHM by CAG (Report No. 8 
of 2009-10) there was a shortfall of 43987 Sub-Centres (27%) in 22 States/ UTs, 8613 
PHCs (31%) in 21 States/ UTs and 4200 CHCs (55%) in 23 States./ UTs which were 
required to be created during the NRHM period (2005-12). Target of creation of 
30% of new infrastructure by 2007, i.e. 13196 sub-centres, 2585 PHCs and 1261 
CHCs could not be fulfilled. According to the CAG Report, as many as 14 States/ 
UTs failed to take any initiative for bridging the gap. Out of the target of 43987 sub-
centres 8613 PHCs and 4200 CHCs only 2562 Sub-centres, 685 PHCs and 138 CHCs 
could be set-up. The Committee only hopes that 935 Sub-Centres, 178 PHCs and 67 
CHCs reported to be under construction during CAG Audit must have been 
completed and become fully functional by  now. The Committee would like to point 
out that even as per the target of 2007, there was a shortfall of 9749 sub-centres, also 
1722 PHCs and 1056 CHCs. Against this backdrop, bridging the gap of 43987 sub-
centres, 8613 PHCs and 4200 CHCs by the end of mission period i.e. 2012 seems to 
be an uphill task. The Committee would like to be point out that the targets set up 
under NRHM were as per the population norms of 2001. The shortfall of 
infrastructure is bound to increase manifold once 2011 census is over and 
population norms revise. The Committee has also taken note of the fact that only 
very few states like Assam, Chhatisgarh,  Rajasthan, Uttarkhand and Lakshadweep 
had made an attempt to achieve the target of 2007, while the remaining states 
reported nil achievement. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department has to pursue vigorously with all the non-performing states, otherwise 
even the basic objective of NRHM of havi ng the minimum required infrastructure 
would also remain unfulfilled.  
 
3.3 On a query about the progress in the construction work of sub-centres under the 
‘Infrastructure Strengthening Project’of NRHM, the Committee was informed that the 

 83
progress of Sub-Centre construction is being followed on priority basis to ensure 
functional facilities at Sub-Centre level across the country at the earliest. As per RHS-
2008, out of total 1,46,036 Sub-Centres functioning across the country, a total of 78,803 
were functioning in Government buildings, and  9684 SCs were being constructed across 
the country. The Committee was given to under stand that estimated cost of construction 
is Rs.968.4 crores at the rate of Rs.10 lakhs for 9684 sub-centres, for which funds were 
released through NRHM Flexible Pool.  
3.4 The Committee is perturbed to find that out of 1,46,036 Sub-Centres, as many as 
67233 Centre are functioning from rented bu ildings. From the details furnished by 
the Department, the Committee finds that a large number of States have simply 
failed to take benefit from Central funds being provided for construction/ 
upgradation of sub-centre buildings. In St ates/UTs like Himachal Pradesh, J&K, 
Tamil Nadu, A&N Islands, D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu, Chandigarh, Lakshadweep, 
Puducherry no construction activity has been  initated so far. In States which have 
taken some initiative in this regard, per centage of sub-centres being strengthened/ 
upgraded is very low.  
3.5 The Committee is not convinced by the clarification given by the Department 
that in some States, sub-cen tres are working in other Go vernment buildings/ spaces 
provided by Panchayats etc. The Committee also apprehends that condition of PHC 
and CHC buildings would also be no better. The fact remains that there is an urgent 
need for undertaking a review of present condition of all the Sub-centre/ PHC/ CHC 
buildings across the country and undertak e the required construction under a time-
bound Action Plan.  
 
3.6 The Committee’s attention is also drawn by the damaging report given by 
the CAG in its latest report on this cr ucial aspect. As per CAG report, among 
audited units, 216 sub-centres (16%) of 10 States and 19 PHCs (3% of 4 states, were 
operating without buildings 435 sub-centres (32%) of 28 states/ UTs and 102 PHCs 
(15%) of 17 States and 7 CHCs of 4 Stat es were operating in a rented building/ 
Panchayat Bhawan/ Others. 217 Sub-cent res (16%) of 16 States/ UTs, 86 PHCs 
(13%) of 16 States/ UTs and 23 CHCs (7%) of 5 States/ UTs were functioning in 
dilapidated buildings.  
 

 84
3.7 Another cause of serious concern fo r the Committee is the lack of basic 
infrastructural facilities noticed by the test checks carried out by the CAG. 
Following details are self-revealing:- 
 
Sub-Centres PHCs CHCs  
Infrastructural 
Deficiences States No. of 
SCs 
%age States No of 
PHCs 
%age States  No. of 
CHCs 
%age 
Lack of separate 
utilities for men 
and women 
28 1108 81 26 431 63 22 102 32 
No arrangement 
for water supply 
27 529 39 18 120 17 27 529 39 
No 
infrastructure 
for water 
storage 
28 1008 74 24 287 42 28 1008 74 
No sewage 
disposal facility 
18 668 49 23 241 35 18 668 49 
 
The Committee would like to point out that  Performance Audit by CAG covered all 
the 33 States/ UTs with 123 districts cove ring 2369 health Centres.  These 123 
districts were selected from all the States. In each selected district-3 CHCs, 6 PHCs 
and 12 Sub-Centres were audited. The Committee, taking note of CAG findings, in 
these 123 districts, apprehends that position  would be more or less the same in the 
remaining districts of the country. 
 
3.8 The Committee would like to point out that one of the key objectives of 
NRHM is to provide improved health care services through creation of adequate 
number of SCs, PHCs and CHCs. However, this basic goal of NRHM has failed to 
show the desired results. This has been  amply proved in the latest Performance 
Audit of NRHM conducted by the CAG. The Committee has also been expressing 
grave concern regarding lack of adequate rural health infrastructure, especially in 
High Focus States from time to time. Even though NRHM has completed its 5
th year 
since commencement, much remains to be accomplished so far as infrastructure 
development is concerned.  With two more years of the Mission period remaining, 
the Committee wonders if the targets to overcome the shortfall of Health Care 
Infrastructure would be met in the real sense. The Committee, therefore, once again 

 85
urges the Department to quicken the pace of  implementation so that it does not 
remain very far off from the targeted goals.  
 
RURAL HEALTH FUNCTIONARIES 
Status of ANMs at Sub-Centres and PHCs 
 
3.9 The Committee has been monitoring the manpower resource availability and 
progress made in filling up of vacant posts in Health Centres. From the information 
furnished by the Department, the Committee has been informed that out of the total 
requirement of 1,69,494 ANMs @ one each at 1,46,036 Sub-Centres and 23,458 PHCs, 
the number of posts sanctioned as on March, 2008 are 1,43,269. On being asked to throw 
light on the latest position of sanctioned pos t of ANMs for Sub-Centres and PHCs, the 
Department has informed that as per available latest data, there are a total number of 
1,87,902 ANMs (1,39,798 in 2005) at Sub Centr es/PHCs presently. From a detailed 
analysis of the information furnished by the Department the Committee notes that  in the 
following States there is a gap between sanctioned posts and in-position posts  
  
State Sanctioned In-position Vacant 
Bihar 10,557 9127 1430 
Chhattisgarh 5462 4850 612 
Himachal Pradesh 2813 2496 317 
Karnataka 8487 8028 459 
MP 9983 8718 1265 
Maharashtra 12,645 12,027 618 
Orissa 7121 6768 353 
Punjab 3129 2706 423 
UP 23,570 21,024 2546 
 
3.10 Not only this, with regard to a number of crucial States/ UTs like Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, J&K, Jharkand, Tripura and A&N Islands, information about even 
sanctioned posts was not available with the Centre. These were also States where in-
position ANMs exceeded their required strength. The Committee also notes that 46,690 
ANMs have been recruited on contract basis by the States across the country.  The 
Committee would like to point out that the filling of vacancy of ANMs at Sub-Centres 
and PHCs is a thrust area under NRHM.  However, the clarification given by the 
Department that limited capacity at ANM schools poses problem in availability of ANMs 
depicts another glaring shortcoming in the provision of healthcare facilities in rural areas. 

 86
The Committee is not ready to accept the contention of the Department that since the 
training of ANM requires 18 months, it will take  some time in availability of ANMs and 
filling up of the vacant ANM posts at various levels.  The fact remains that the key 
functionary, i.e. ANM, is not there at all the health centres indicates that large number of 
targeted beneficiaries still continue to be deprived of the very basic healthcare facilities. 
 
   Status of Health Assistants (Female)/LHVs at PHCs 
3.11 Against the requirement of one Health Assistant (Female)/LHV per PHC, status 
thereof as on March 2008 is very discouraging. Out of total 23,458 required posts of 
Health Assistant (Female)/ LHV, sanctioned posts are only 19,920 and in-position posts 
are even less i.e. 17,608. The position in this regard in some of the States is very 
discouraging as indicated below: 
States Required Sanctioned In-Position Vacant 
Arunachal Pradesh  116 NA 0 NA
Assam 844 NA NA NA
Bihar 1641 850 479 371
Gujarat 1073 481 267 214
Himachal Pradesh 449 198 114 84
J&K 375 120 27 93
Jharkhand 330 NA NA NA
Karnataka 2195 1209 1170 39
Kerala 909 830 740 90
Meghalaya 103 85 75 10
Punjab 484 241 179 62
  
3.12 Asked to clarify the situation, the Department has informed that Lady Health 
Visitor is a promotional post for ANM and before promotion they are required to undergo 
6 months training in LHV training schools. In many States, LHV training schools were 
closed down. Under NRHM, support is provided for running of LHV training schools. It 
is likely to take some time to fill up the gaps of Health Assistant (Female)/ LHV at PHCs.  
 
 
 
 
 
Status of Health Workers (Male) at Sub-Centres 
 3.13 Similarly, against the requirements of 1,46,036 Health Workers(Male), only 
78,813 posts of these workers have been sanctioned as on March, 2008, against which 

 87
only 60247 workers are reported to be in-posi tion. The Committee finds that in quite a 
few States the sanctioned posts of Health Workers (Male), inspite of being less than the 
required number of posts, remain vacant as indicated below: 
 State Required Sanctioned   In-position     Vacant 
Assam 4592 NA NA NA 
Andhra Pradesh 12,522 7340 6127 1213 
Bihar 8858 2135 1074 1061 
Gujarat 7274 6206 4456 1750 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
2071 2008 1270 738 
J&K 1907 NA NA NA 
Karnataka 8143 5009 3762 1247 
Kerala 5094 2672 2654 18 
MP 8834 7170 4030 3140 
Orissa 6688 4911 3392 1519 
Rajasthan 10742 3968 2528 1440 
Tamil Nadu 8706 5062 3278 1784 
Uttarakhand 1765 771 616 155 
West Bengal 10356 6543 4215 2328 
 
3.14 Replying to a query regarding the reasons behind the non-avilability of Health 
Worker (Male) in the States, the Department has informed that posts of Health Worker 
(Male) at Sub-Centers are lying vacant in many States because the States had stopped 
recruitment of Health Worker (Male) for many years, due to closing down of training 
schools and financial austerity measures. The Department has further srtated that now, 
under NRHM, States are being encouraged to fill up the posts of Health Worker (Male) 
by allowing engagement of 2
nd ANM if they post a Health Worker (Male). Consequently, 
several States have initiated steps for engaging Male Health Worker.  
 
Lab-Technicians at PHCs and CHCs 
3.15 Out of the required number of 27,734 of Lab-Technicians, only 15,223 posts have 
been sanctioned so far, and in-position Lab-Technicians are even less i.e. 12,886, with 
acute shortages being seen in U.P. (3 120 against 4205) Bihar (1576 against 1711), 
Madhya Pradesh (928 against 1419), Karnat aka (1276 against 2518), Maharashtra (1454 
against 2223) West Bengal (832 against 1273) , Orissa (1199 against 1510) the others 
being Kerala, Himachal Prasdesh, Uttarkhand and Tamil Nadu and Punjab. The 
clarification for non-availability of required technical manpower given by the 
Department is that under NRHM, Lab-Technicians are permitted to be engaged on 

 88
contract basis. Moreover, the multi-skilling of Lab-Technicians is also encouraged to 
provide services for various purposes at CHC or PHCs wherever single Lab-Technician 
is available. To the Committee’s observation that generally there is a mismatch between 
the required and sanctioned number of posts of different workers of Sub-Centres, the 
Department has stated that many of the States are yet to sanction the required number of 
posts of Lab-Technicians; hence, a mis-match between number of posts required and 
sanctioned by the States is observed.    
 
The status of available posts of Doctors at PHCs and Specialists at CHCs  
3.16 As on March, 2008, against the required number of 23458 doctors at PHCs (1 
doctor for each PHC) the sanctioned number is 25086 and the in-position number is 
24375. There are 4708 vacancies and the All I ndia shortfall figures are 3537. The states 
where vacancies of doctors are highest are A ssam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Punjab, U.P. and West Bengal. The Committee observes that as on 31
st January, 2010, a 
total of 8624 doctors have been recruited at PHCs on contract basis.  
3.17 Four Specialist doctors are required to be posted at one CHC. The Committee 
finds that against the required number of 17104 Specialist for CHCs, sanctioned strength 
is less than half i.e. 8376 and Specialists in-position are only 4279. State-specific details 
are more disappointing. While no specialists have been posted in CHCs in Manipur, 
Mizoram, Delhi, Lakshadweep and Puducherry, no information is available in this regard 
with respect of Orissa, Tamil Nadu and Tripura. The Committee is also constrained to 
observe that Specialists recruited by the States fall short of their actual requirements. 
Maximum gap is noticed in respect of the following States:- 
 
 
States/ UTs CHCs Functioning Specialists 
Required 
In-position 
Arunachal Pradesh 44 176 9 
Gujarat 273 1092 81 
Himachal Pradesh 73 292 10 
Jharkhand 194 776 40 
Meghalaya 26 104 2 
Nagaland 21 84 1 

 89
West Bengal 349 1396 186 
 
In all the above States, against the requirement of four Specialists per CHC, not even one 
Specialist is available in all the CHCs. 
 
3.18 The Committee is also quite disappointed with the progress made over the 
past four years regarding filling up the vacant posts of the various healthcare 
functionaries under NRHM. The Committe e observes that one of the most 
important objective with which the Mission was launched at the outset was to 
ensure the availability of the various healthcare functionaries, i.e. ANMs/ MPWs(M) 
/LHVs/ Lab Technicians, doctors and speci alists at Sub-Centres, PHCs and CHCs 
at the right places.  Realizing that thei r presence is essential for the smooth 
functioning of health centres and hence, important for the success of the Mission, 
the Committee has been recommending to the Department year after year to take 
up the issue of non-filling up of the vaca ncies with the States/UTs. However, there 
seems to be no significant improvement in the situation.  The Committee feels that 
four years of focused attention, and cons iderable infusion of funds under NRHM, 
aimed to create a brigade of healthcare is a long enough time for the situation to 
have improved. Neither the flow of funds  nor the efforts of the Department are 
found wanting. The only conclusion the Committee can draw is that required 
manpower for the Health Centres is simply not available in majority of the States. 
 
3.19 The Committee also notes with dismay that the latest data about healthcare 
functionaries is not available with the Department.  The Committee would like to 
emphasize  that building up of capacity at the grass roots level is an essential part of 
a proper planning process and improvements in this regard can only be noticed if 
the planned measures are put to implementation. One must not forget that these key 
functionaries are also pivotal in the collec tion and dissemination of health related 
information from the field levels. The Comm ittee would, therefore, appreciate if 
updated data is got collected by the Depa rtment in coordination with the States/ 
UTs. Only then it would be possible to  make a proper assessment of the ground 
realities and plan for augmentation of both the extant and future capacity of 
manpower in the States.  
 

 90
3.20 Another area of concern for the Committee is the number of contractual 
appointments being made under the Mission to fill up the various vacant posts. The 
Committee observes that out of total 1,53,568 ANMs in-position in health centres 
across the country, 46,315 ANMs are on contract basis. The Committee is 
constrained to note that such ANMS are co ncentrated in a few states as indicated 
below:- 
States ANMs in-position Contractual ANMs 
Bihar 9127 5896 
Jharkhand 5011 3204 
Assam 8289 4575 
Andhra Pradesh 12541 9505 
Haryana 2592 2465 
Maharashtra 12027 6250 
 
Similarly, out of 4279 Specialists in-position, as many as 2426 are on contract basis.  
3.21 The Committee feels that for effective delivery of public health services, it is 
essential that service personnel are present continuously in their place of postings. 
However, with more and more number of  contractual manpower being recruited 
under NRHM, the Committee fears that the accountability mechanism under the 
programme would get diluted, thereby affect ing the delivery of quality services to 
the masses. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Department that an 
All India level drive for filling up of the vacant posts, first against the sanctioned 
strength and thereafter against the required strength needs to be  undertaken in a 
mission mode so that by the end of NRHM significant improvement is more than 
evident. 
 
IV       MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL 
 
4.1 Mission Flexible Pool provides for act ivities like selection and training of 
ASHAs, upgradation of CHCs and PHCs to First Referral Units and Indian Public Health 
Standards (IPHS), constitution of Rogi Kalyan Samitis and District Hospital Management 
Committees, Mobile Medical Units, untied funds  for Sub-Centres etc. States have the 
flexibility of utilizing the funds as per thei r priorities for the approved activities. The 

 91
Committee notes that maximum expenditure (31%) is towards infrastructure upgradation, 
followed by Untied Funds (24%) and State Innovations (9%). 
 
4.2 The Committee has been informed that the total approved outlay under Mission 
Flexible Pool for the Eleventh Five Year Plan is Rs. 33181.07 crore and the expenditure 
figures for 2007-08,   2008-09 and 2009-10 (upto January 2010) are Rs. 3151.64 crore, 
Rs. 2599.13 crore and Rs. 2479.17 crore respectively, totaling Rs. 8229.94 crore for the 
three years taken together.  Thus an amount of Rs. 24951.13 crore (approx.) is still left to 
be utilized during the remaining two financial years of the Eleventh Plan. However, 
against the projected demand of Rs. 8000.00 cr ore, plan allocation of Rs. 3569.70 crore, 
has been made in 2010-11. 
 
4.3 The Committee observes that allocation of Rs. 3567.27 crore for 2009-10 was 
reduced to Rs. 3276.17 crore at the RE stage. This cut was imposed by the Ministry of 
Finance on account of slow pace of expenditu re. The Committee concerned to note that 
as on 31
st January, 2010, expenditure reported was only Rs. 2479.17 crore. Position was 
no better during 2008-09 with  States like U.P, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh could utilize less than 50% while Bihar and Chattisgarh were able to spend only 
13% and 17% respectively. Very low use of untied funds provided under the Mission 
Flexible Pool in Bihar and delayed transfer of  funds to the districts in Chattisgarh have 
been cited as the main reason for unsatisfactory performance in the two States.  
 
4.4 The Committee is anguished to note the huge shortfall in utilization of the 
budgeted funds and also the substantial variation between the projected demand for 
funds and the sanctioned provisions.  The Committee observes that at a time when 
equitable access to health facilities across the social and geographical expanse of the 
country is the declared policy of the Govern ment such inefficiencies in utilization of 
funds can prove to be a potent deterrent. The Committee would like the Department 
to impress upon all concerned including the State Governments the imperative need 
to review their existing mechanism for assessment of requirement of funds and take 
corrective action to overcome the deficiencies in the existing system so that the 
possibility of surrendering unspent/under-utilized funds is obviated.   
 
Upgradation of PHCs/ CHCs 

 92
4.5 Upgradation of CHCs and PHCs which are to be upgraded to First Referral Units 
is another major component under Mission Flexible Pool. The Committee notes that out 
of 23458 PHCs in the country, only 8324 PHCs have been strengthened to provide 24x7 
services. Similarly, as on date only 2463 PHCs and CHCs have been upgraded as First 
Referral Units. State-wise details indicate that there is considerable gap in the 
achievement level under the most vital component of strengthening of healthcare 
facilities for the rural population as indicated below:-  
 
State / UTs Functional  PHCs 
 
Funcational 
CHCs 
24X7 PHCs First Referral Units 
(FRUs) 
Bihar  1641 17 533 76 
Chhattisgarh  721 136 418 56 
Himachal Pradesh  449 73 95 51 
Jammu & Kashmir 375 85 105 58 
Jharkhand  330 194 194 19 
Madhya Pradesh  1149 270 212 87 
Orissa  1279 231 64 48 
Rajasthan  1503 349 500 100 
Uttar Pradesh  3690 515 648 136 
Assam  844 103 343 60 
Manipur  72 16 20 1 
Andhra Pradesh  1570 167 800 194 
Gujarat 1073 273 331 148 
Maharashtra  1816 407 663 466 
West Bengal  924 349 168 61 
 
4.6 The Committee observes that while Tamil Nadu has been able to 
operationalise all its PHCs 24x7, no other state has been able to achieve such a feat. 
The Committee observes that the status of PHCs running 24x7 in some of the States 
need to be revisited. States indicated above  need to double up their efforts so as to 
achieve the targets of making all the PHCs operational 24x7. The Committee fails to 
understand as to what could be the hindrance, specially when funds are available 
for the purpose. The Committee recommends the Department to take up the matter 
of increasing the number of PHCs operating  24x7 as well as upgradation of PHCs/ 
CHCs to FRUs with all the States/ UTs so that a critical service like Health Care is 
available to the targeted beneficiaries wherever required.  
 

 93
4.7 Another initiative under NRHM was to upgrade all CHCs to IPHS standards 
by 2010 in a phased manner in all the States/UTs. From the latest information 
furnished to it the Committee finds that in States/ UTs like Bihar, Chattisgarh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, Lakshawdeep, Delhi, inspite of CHCs being selected for upgradation 
to IPHS, no progress has been reported so far.  
 
4.8 The Committee also notes that the status of percentage of physical 
upgradation of CHCs in States like J&K (26%), Orissa (13%), MP (4%), Tripura 
(33%), Kerala (29%), West Bengal (9 %) and A&N Island (25%) is far from 
satisfactory. The Committee fails to understand as to what could be the inherent 
constraints being faced by these States in upgrading their CHCs inspite of required 
funds being made available by the Centre. The Committee would like to impress 
upon the Department that the very objective of NRHM was to provide quality 
health care facilities which were not available earlier and therefore, the Department 
had embarked upon upgrading the facilities into IPHS. With such low level of 
achievements it cannot be said that the St ates are doing well in the progress of the 
work. This is all the more disturbing wh en there is a considerable gap between the 
required and existing CHCs. The Committee is constrained to note that the 
Department is perhaps not persuing the ma tter with the State Government for the 
need to focus their attention so that the targets are met within their prescribed time-
lines. With only 1255 CHCs taken up for renovation so far, the target of upgrading 
all CHCs to IPHS standards by 2010 is likely to remain unaccomplished.  
 
4.9 As per the mandate of Implementation Framework of NRHM, all Integrated 
District Health Action Plans (IDHAP) were to be finalised by the end of 2008.  On being 
asked regarding the latest State-wise progress made so far, the Department has informed 
that though there was a delay initially, now States/UTs have shown remarkable 
improvement for preparation of IDHAP. As on date, 617 districts of the country have 
already finalised IDHAPs, and teams from NHS RC were sent to backward districts to 
facilitate decentralised planning.  
 
4.10 The Committee, however, notes that  only 22 States/UTs have furnished 
IDHAPs fully, while, even by the end of March 2010, as many as 12 States/UTs are 

 94
yet to furnish the IDHAPs 100 percent. Goa, D&N Haveli and Lakshadweep have 
not been able to submit a single IDHAP, while Rajasthan has been able to furnish 
only 26 out of the 33 IDHAPs. This is the position when timeline to complete the 
submission of IDHAPs by the States/UTs was by the end of 2008. The Committee 
fails to understand what could be the possible reasons for such inordinate delays in 
the submission of IDHAPs.  The Committee would like to emphasise that Integrated 
District Health Action Plans are the very basis for improving the availability of 
health care facilities in a district.  In the absence of a concrete plan of action drawn 
by the districts, proper health care facilit ies for people residing in such districts 
cannot be developed optimally.  The Committee therefore, impresses upon the 
Department to vigorously pursue this issue with concerned States/UTs to furnish the 
same as early as possible. 
 
Rogi Kalyan Samitis 
4.11 As per the latest information made av ailable by the Department, 568 District 
Hospitals in the country have Rogi Kalyan Samitis (RKS). RKS are also there in 4164 
CHCs and 16687 PHCs. Resources are provided to all RKS. 
Committee’s attention has been drawn by the assessment of RKS by the CAG in 
its latest performance Audit of NRHM. A number of discrepancies have been pointed out 
by CAG in its Report. 
• RKS did not receive all the annual Central grants in any State. 
• During 2006-07 in 11 States, Rs. 41 crore were released in excess of 
requirements. 
• In Uttar Pradesh, Rs. 36.60 crore were rele ased to all the 3660 PHCs as corpus 
grant as against only 560 eligible PHCs. 
• In Bihar, State Government released annual grant for 84 Referral Hospitals and 
470 PHCs, inspite of RKS being formed only at 44 Referral Hospitals and 311 
PHCs. 
• Utilisation of funds available with RKS was very low with all 16 States/ UTs 
reporting 31 to 98% available funds with RKS remaining unspent. 
 
4.12 The Committee would emphasis that th ere is an urgent need for monitoring 
of the functioning of RKS at ground level. Merely obtaining quarterly/ annual 

 95
reports about funds allocated/ utilized will not serve the purpose. A beginning needs 
to be made by taking up follow-up action with all the States/ UTs where 
performance of RKS has not been found satisfactory by CAG. 
 
Grants to State Training Institutions 
  
4.13 The success of Family Welfare Programme depends to a large extent, upon the 
availability of qualified, trained and dedi cated healthcare functionaries. Training at 
various level is imparted through the network of Training Centres and Schools. Approved 
outlay of Rs. 669.58 crore has been kept under Eleventh Plan for grants to State Training 
Institutions. The Committee notes that out of this allocation, major funding of Rs. 
520.48 crore is meant for basic training for ANMs/ LHVs and Rs. 56.09 crore for 
basic training for MPWs (Male). The Comm ittee notes that out of Rs. 520.48 crore 
kept for training of ANMs/ LHVs, only Rs . 218.04 crore have been released during 
the first three years of the Eleventh Plan. With Rs. 85.18 crore proposed for 2010-
11, more than Rs. 200.00 crore would be left for the last year of the plan period. Not 
only this, during 2008-09 and 2009-10, th e allocated funds have remained under-
utilised. The Committee finds that funds meant for basic training for MPWs (Male) 
also could not be put to optimum use during the Eleventh Plan period so far. 
4.14 While trying to analyse the reasons for such a state of affairs under the most 
crucial component i.e., training of key functionaries positioned at Sub-Centres and PHCs, 
the Committee finds that limited capacity of ANM schools poses problems in availability 
of ANMs. In other words, the lack of training school for ANMs is also indirectly 
responsible for shortage of ANMs. The Committee was given to understand that States 
have the option to use NRHM resources to restart/ open new ANM training schools. The 
Committee also notes that Lady Health Visitors, a promotional post for ANMs, are 
required to undergo 6 months training in LHV training schools. However, due to LHV 
training schools being closed down in many States, required training was not being 
imparted to LHVs. Situation is more grim w ith respect to training of MPWs (Male) as 
States have simply stopped recruitment of MPWs (Male) for many years due to closing 
down of training schools. The Committee is not aware about the reasons for lack of 
interest on the part of State Governments for creating/ strengthening the training 
schools meant for key Health functionaries with the support of Central Funds. The 
Committee strongly feels that it is high  time for the Department to make an 

 96
assessment of this crucial area in consultation with all the States/ UTs and bring 
about all round improvement. One must not forget that a fully trained and qualified 
health worker alone can handle his job responsibilities effectively. 
 
ASHA  
 
4.15 ASHA - a social health activist - is one of the most important strategic 
intervention under the National Rural Health Mission who is required to inform, interact, 
mobilize and facilitate improved access to preventive and promotive healthcare and also 
provide basic curative care through her drug kits.  The requirement for ASHA is one per 
thousand population with relaxation to this norm depending upon the workload and 
terrain.  ASHA is necessarily a woman of the village between the age group of 25 to 45 
years, who would be selected by the Gram Sabha following an intense community 
mobilization process.   
 
Training of ASHAs 
 
4.16 Capacity building of ASHA is critical in enhancing her effectiveness as a link 
between the community and the health facility.  The initial orientation training is for a 
period of 23 days spread in 5 rounds over a period of 12 months and followed by periodic 
re-training for about 2 days once every alternate month, apart from the on-the-job 
training she would be getting.  Training modu les for this purpose have been developed 
based on a thematic approach and States have also constituted district and block training 
teams for this purpose. The Secretary, during the course of her presentation had informed 
the Committee that till date 7.90 lakhs ASHAs have been selected, and from amongst 
them 75% have been trained upto the IV
th Module and have been provided with Drugs 
kits.  However, as per the details made available to the Committee, out of 7,91,069 
ASHAs selected across the country, only 5,92, 395 ASHAs have been provided training 
upto IVth Module. Considerable gap is found in some of the States, as indicated below: 
 
State Selected ASHAs Training 
(upto IVth Module) 
Bihar 71,395 20,225 
West Bengal 23,518 9075 
Madhya Pradesh 43792 26820 
Arunachal Pradesh 3599 1528 
Gujarat 25,861 12,413 
Maharashtra 60,457 32,602 

 97
Punjab 17056 0 
Tamil Nadu 2650 0 
Himachal Pradesh 2393 0 
  
 4.17 About the State-specific variations in the training of ASHAs, the Committee was 
informed that some State Governments, specially non-high focus States like Tamil Nadu, 
Punjab and West Bengal, had taken up the pr ovision of ASHAs at a later date and hence 
the selection process and training was somewh at delayed. All these States have been 
asked to expedite the training of ASHAs up to the 4 th module and complete the same 
during the current financial year.  
4.18 The Committee views with serious conc ern the gap in meeting the targets of 
ASHA training upto IV
th Module in most of the States. The Committee is not 
convinced by the reason furnished by the Department that the delay is only confined 
to the 4th Module training in ASHAs in some of  the States. Keeping in view the key 
role ASHA plays in achievement of various NRHM objectives, these gaps need to be 
addressed with a sense of urgency. The Committee observes that given the low level 
of availability of health care services in th e rural areas of high focused States, they 
cannot afford to be off-target in such a crucial area as training to ASHA. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to impress upon all the 
States/UTs, particularly those lagging behind, to take immediate corrective steps to 
meet the targets fixed in this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the state-wise updated status of progress made towards bridging the gaps in the        
IV
th Module training of ASHA.  
 
Drug Kits for ASHAs
  
 
 4.19  The Committee notes that drug kits are provided to ASHAs only on completion 
of 4 modules of training. As per the latest information furnished by the Department, out 
of 7,91,069 selected ASHAs, 5,92,395 ASHAs have been given training upto IV
th 
Module. However, drug kits have been provided to only 5,55,867 ASHAs so far. Not 
only this, the Committee finds that in many States considerable gap exists in this regard, 
with a large number of ASHAs inspite of being eligible for  drug kits remaining to be 
covered so far. Following details are quite alarming: 
                                                                                           
State Selected ASHAs Training upto Drug Kits 

 98
IVth  Module. provided  
Bihar 71,395 20225 0 
Gujarat 25,861 12413 0 
Haryana 14,000 14000 0 
West Bengal 23,518 9075 0 
Karnataka 39,000 39000 21,500 
Maharashtra 60,457 32602 8,131 
 
4.20 The Committee also notes that in quite a few States, although ASHA have not 
been trained upto IV
th Module they have been provided with drug kits. The Committee is 
not aware whether such untrained ASHAs will be in a position to administer drugs to 
patients. Committee also notes that in Ma dhya Pradesh, out of 43792 selected ASHAs, 
only 26820 ASHAs have been given training upto IV th Module but number of drug kits 
distributed is 50,000.   
 
4.21 The Committee genuinely believes that unless all the eligible ASHAs are 
provided with drug kits, the initial health activities/ work bestowed upon her would 
be hampered. The Committee would like the Department to furnish state-wise 
updated details of drug kits distribute d to the ASHAs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that along with all the selected ASHAs being fully trained, equipping 
them with drug kits also needs to be monitored. Gaps, wherever noticed, have to be 
removed without any further delay. At the same time the Department should take 
up with all the States where discrepancies have been noticed in the distribution of 
drug kits.  
 
Role of ASHA 
 
4.22 The Committee notes that the major job responsibilities  of ASHA are :- 
-           awareness generation on  Health, RCH, HIV/AIDS among the people. 
-           advising newly married couples for their special needs. 
-        providing escort services to and guiding pregnant women for availing of 
institutional facilities for Anti-  Natal, Natal and Post-Natal needs. 
-          counselling on nutrition, pregnancy, breast-feeding, immunization and 
family planning 
-          stablishing link with PHCs, private providers and others for service 
requirement of beneficiaries. 
-           mobilising parents for child survival interventions 
-           promoting basic sanitization 

 99
-           provision of non-clinical spacing contraceptives 
-           surveillance of communicable diseases. 
 
4.23 Apart from all these, ASHA is also the primary interface conferred with the duty 
of detection, follow up and counseling of pa tients for all National Health Programmes 
run under the banner of NRHM. She is the Depot Holder for a number of health 
commodities like Vitamin A, Impregnated bed nets, ORS etc. She is also supposed to 
handle treatment of minor ailments and use the Drug Kit assigned to her effectively for 
preliminary investigations.  Another major task  assigned to ASHA is to provide escort 
services for women seeking de livery services at institutions, requiring emergency care 
and MTP services, women and men for clinical contraception services and VCTC. The 
Committee would like to note that it had raised serious apprehensions regarding the 
effectivity of ASHA as a multipurpose social health activist as envisaged under the 
NRHM, given the increasing number of job responsibilities that she was being burdended 
with, in its 27th Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09. The Committee had also voiced 
its concerns on the remuneration package of the ASHA vis a vis the various activities she 
was to be associated with, and had accordingly recommended that the role of ASHA 
needs to be reassessed and reformulated. 
 
4.24  The Committee is aware that the National Health System Resource Centre 
(NHSRC) had been entrusted with the work of reviewing the ‘job responsibilities’ and 
‘Role clarity of ASHA’ as well as that of AWW and ANM. On being asked about the 
latest status on the matter and to furnish details thereof, the Department has informed that 
NHSRC has reviewed the job responsibilities and role clarity of ASHA. To ensure that 
the current roles played by ASHA in various States are reflected in redefining the role 
clarity and job responsibilities, a process of consultations and reviews was undertaken. 
These include Consultations with ASHA Monitoring Group (AMG) members, reviewing 
the reports of the Common Review Mission, decision of various consultative meetings, 
and reports of Phase I evaluation of ASHA programme done in eight States namely 
Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Jharkhand, Ra jasthan, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal. 
Based on these consultations and reviews, a note on the role of ASHA, her 
responsibilities and payment mechanisms  has been prepared by NHSRC.  The 
Department has further stated that NHSRC is in final stage of preparing its Report on 

 100
review of job responsibilities and role clarity of ANM and AWW which would be 
available by March 2010. 
 
4.25 The Committee notes that from the in terim findings of the National Health 
System Resource Centre (NHSRC) note made available to the Committee that 
NHSRC has identified five areas for strengthening the ASHA programme:- 
 
 
- Role Clarity 
- Payment mechanism 
- Training strategies and focus 
- Supervision and Support 
- Financing package. 
 
The initial findings of the NHSRC note, among other recommendations, confirm the 
Committee’s apprehensions regarding role clarity of ASHA and reinforces the 
Committee’s view point that ‘a clear set of measurable health outcomes on priority 
goals’  may be determined for ASHAs with  a ‘provision of a limited range of 
services’. The Committee understands that by now the NHSRC Report on the 
review of job responsibilities and role cl arity of ANM and AWW would have been 
submitted to the Department. The Commi ttee recommends to the Department to 
take due cognizance of the observations of  NHSRC and to take immediate measures 
to implement the same right from the first quarter of 2010-11 so that positive results 
in this regards become visible by the year-end. The Committee also recommends 
that in the meanwhile, a minimum amount per month as allowance as 
recommended by the Mission Steering Group, apart from the incentives per 
programme as currently done, may be given to ASHA as remuneration.  
 
Mobile Medical Units 
 
4.26 Under NRHM, one Mobile Medical Unit (MMU), was to be provided in each 
district to  serve under-served/ unserved areas with the aim of taking healthcare to the 
door-step of the needy people. Operationalisation of Mobile Medical Units (MMUs) in 
400 districts in the country by March 2009 was the target set under NRHM. As per the 
latest details made available to the Committee there are 354 Districts where facility for 
MMUs under NRHM is available. The Committee has also been given to understand that 
many States have made their own arrange ment for MMUs. 1263 State MMUs fall under 

 101
this category. From the State-specific information given by the Department, the 
Committee is constrained to conclude that this very crucial component is simply not 
visible in some of the States as indicated below: 
States/ UTs No. of 
Districts  
Districts where 
MMU provided 
under NRHM 
No. of MMUs 
run by States 
Achievement (in 
%)  
Chhattisgarh  18 0 0 0 
Himachal Pradesh  12 1 1 8 
Jammu & Kashmir 22 2 2 9 
Uttar Pradesh  71 0 0 0 
A & N Islands 4 0 0 0 
 
4.27 The Committee has been given to understa nd that States were advised to analyse 
this situation vis-à-vis the existing resources available locally/ on the spot. Accordingly, 
several States have asked for financial assist ance for MMUs and accordingly, funds were 
released to the States. However, the Commi ttee doubts whether funds so released were 
put to any use. Committee’s apprehensions have been confirmed by the latest CAG 
findings in Performance Audit of NRHM. As per CAG, during 2006-07, Rs. 19.95 crore 
and Rs. 5.13 crore were released to U.P. (for 70 Districts) and to Punjab (for 18 Districts) 
respectively which included excess release of Rs. 2.28 crore (U.P. ) and Rs. 58.50 lakhs 
(Punjab). During 2007-08, Rs. 12.56 crore was released to 5 States i.e. Karnataka, 
Rajasthan, U.P , Manipur and Tripura, as recu rring cost of MMUs without ascertaining if 
MMUs were made operational in these States at all.  
 
4.28 The Committee further note as per CAG assessments, MMUs were not found 
operational in any district of as many as 13 States, and in majority of districts in the 
remaining 22 States MMUs were found non-functional.  
 
4.29 The Committee is not very convinced by the Department’s replies regarding 
procurement and provision of MMUs. The Department has informed that States, 
based on their need and the resources pu t forth their demands for MMUs in the 
state PIPs. However, the Committee feels th at the Department should take active 
interest in promoting and providing MMUs to the uncovered/ under-covered 
districts of the country. The Committee  notes that States/ UTs like U.P, 
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh are some of the States where the health care 
indices are already on slippery ground. However, with not even a single MMU 

 102
available in any of the district in the afo resaid States one can imagine the status of 
accessibility of healthcare services in under-served/ unserved areas.                        
Non-operationalisation/ inadequate functioning of MMUs aggravated the problem 
further. The Committee observ es that the Department would have to devise other 
means and methods beyond mere pursuance with the States, to impress the need for 
the presence of MMUs at the district level so that some emergency medical services 
can be made available to needy. 
 
4.30 Of the 354 MMUs operational in the country, the fact as to how many of 
them are actually functional is unclear. Mo reover, it is also unclear as to whether 
any assessment has been made to find out that the MMUs purchased till date 
confirm to the standards. CAG findings in its latest report are quite alarming. The 
Committee notes that MMUs procured in Manipur remained unutilized as of 
October, 2008 for want of technical know-how and Specialist doctors. Similarly, 
MMUs were duly procured by Tripura but remained unutilized. Expression of 
interest was floated in May, 2008 in viting interested NGOs/ Charitable 
Organisations for operationalising the MMUs. 
 
4.31 The Committee can well imagine that there may be any number of similar 
cases in other States also. In such a scen ario, the Committee strongly feels that the 
Ministry needs to undertake a country-w ide review about functional status of 
MMUs. Thereafter, constant monitoring at regular intervals has to be carried out so 
as to ensure the accessibility of healthcare facilities to the general masses 
 
  
V. RCH FLEXIBLE POOL 
 
5.1 The main objective of RCH Flexible Pool is to bring about the change in the three 
critical health indicators: Infant Mortality Rate (IMR), Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) 
and Total Fertility Rate (TFR) consistent with the goal of National Population Policy 
2002, the Tenth and Eleventh Plans and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). The 
targets to be achieved by the year 2012 are to  bring down IMR to less than 30, MMR to 
less than 100 and TFR to 2.1. Against this, the achievement levels as per latest available 
studies are: IMR 53 (SRS 2008), MMR 254 (SRS 2004-06) & TFR 2.6 (SRS 2008). One 
of the most important strategies adopted under the Programme is the freedom given to the 

 103
States to prepare their Annual State and District level Project Implementation Plan (PIPs) 
after assessing their need- based requirements.  
 
5.2 Secretary, Health, during her presentation before the Committee, highlighted the 
main strategies for Maternal Health and stat ed that the main factors for high rate of 
MMR could be broadly classified as delay in decision-making, delay in reaching the 
hospital and delay in initiating appropriate care. Delay in decision-making takes place 
mainly due to lack of awareness and financ ial constraints. The Committee was informed 
that to tackle these basic constraints, a nu mber of significant interventions have been 
made so far. Awareness and counseling through ASHAs/ ANMs/ AWWs, availability of 
financial assistance through Janani Suraksha Yojana for institutional delivery, and skilled 
providers for domiciliary birth were cited as the main interventions. The other problem 
area coming in the way of checking MMR was delay in reaching the hospital due to lack 
of knowledge about danger signs and availability of transport facilities. Here again, 
ASHAs/ ANMs/ AWWs are meant to do the counseling on danger signs.  Transport 
facilities are being made available through JSY and referral services through 
Government ambulances/ PPP arrangements. Another hindrance noticed was lack of 
availability of operational facility for tracking pregnancy and its complications. The 
Committee was given to understand that these hindrances were being tackled by 
upgradation of infrastructure at the district level and multi-skilling of Doctors to 
overcome shortage of critical specialists. As  on date, 1024 doctors have been trained in 
anesthesia skills, 543 doctors trained in obstetric skills and 37,162 Staff nurses/ LHVs/ 
ANMs trained as skilled birth attendants.  
 
5.3 The Committee was also apprised about the main factors found responsible for 
high rate of IMR, which were severe infec tions (36% deaths), pre-term birth (25% 
deaths), birth asphyxia (23% deaths) and neo- natal tetanus (4% deaths). Steps taken so 
far for checking this high incidence of neo-na tal deaths were Integrated Management of 
New Born and Childhood Illness, Basic New Born Care and Navjat Shishu Suraksha 
Karyakaran etc. 
 
5.4 Allocation for RCH Flexible Pool for 2009-10 was Rs 3545.00 crore and the 
actual expenditure reported upto January , 2010 was Rs. 2641.84 crore. The Committee 
observes that there has been optimum utilization of allocated funds. Against a provision 

 104
of Rs. 1872.00 crore and Rs. 3126.04 crore in  2007-08 and 2008-09, utilization reported 
was Rs. 1999.25 crore and Rs. 3077.16 crore respectively. Committee’s attention has, 
however, been drawn by State-wise utilization status which depicts wide ranging 
disparities, that too in NE state specially as indicated below: 
 
 (Rs in crores) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10  
State Allocation Exp Allocation Exp Allocation Exp (upto 
31.12.09) 
Assam 166.84 105.24 240.33 194.74 338.62 110.37 
Manipur 14.24 7.85 21.50 15.45 30.29 6.15 
Meghalaya 13.87 4.95 21.13 6.87 29.29 4.98 
Nagaland 11.88 4.57 18.12 11.54 25.32 5.88 
Tripura 18.53 5.47 28.57 14.41 40.72 4.94 
 
5.5 Another disturbing trend noticed by  the Committee was that in respect of 
many States, Central funds released during th e year were higher than the proposed 
allocation. While trying to understand the reasons therefor, the Committee came to 
know that all the States/ UTs were having unspent balances at the beginning of the 
year. As per the details made available to the Committee, as on 01.04.2008, opening 
balance amounting to Rs. 1157.46 crore was available with Assam (Rs. 126.67 
crore), Maharashtra (Rs. 209.69 crore), Orissa (Rs. 60.99 crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs. 
97.73 crore), U.P. (Rs. 192.33 crore) and West Bengal (Rs. 101.59 crore) reporting 
the maximum. 
 
5.6 This clearly shows that States have generally failed to take the full benefit of 
various Central interventions inspite of their having the discretion to spend money 
as per their requirements. The Committee, ther efore, strongly feels that if despite 
the availability of funds the states are unable  to utilize them, and thus is a cause for 
a  thorough review of strategies. The low utilization of funds has seriously hampered 
Government’s initiatives for bringing down IMR, MMR and TFR. Seriously 
concerned with this state of affair s, the Committee recommends that the 
Department, in consultation with the St ates/ UTs, should devise alternative 
strategies so that the funds allocated are utilized optimally so that the poor and 
weaker sections of the society are not b ereft of the benefits of various on-going 
health care initiatives.  

 105
 
5.7 On being asked as to whether any assessment has been made so far about the 
main factors responsible for some of the High Focus States/NE States and Hill States of 
Himachal Pradesh and J&K failing to avail of maximum facilities under RCH Flexi pool 
the Department has highlighted the following main constraints:- 
- Shortage of Human resources in the relevant States 
- Difficult geographic conditions (NE states, J & K, Uttarakhand, HP) 
- Low absorption capacity 
- Absenteeism 
- Tenures of key officers like, Programme  Officers and Administrators are not 
assured, which affects programme ownership and continuity of interventions 
 
5.8 Following are the remedial measures suggested to States for inclusion in their 
State Programme Implementation Plans (PIPs). 
 
- Hiring health staff on contractual basis and local people 
- Providing hardship allowance to health staff  
- Capacity building of the State and district programme officers in decentralized 
planning and financial matters. 
 
 
5.9 The Committee desires to know wh ether the PIPs of the States under 
reference has started reflecting the deficien t areas as flagged off by the Department, 
and asking for funds to overcome them.  
 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION 
 
5.10 A provision of Rs. 2457.16 crore has been made for Routine Immunization during 
the Eleventh Plan. The Committee observes that funds allocated during the first three 
years have remained under-utilised with only less than 50 per cent being spent so far. 
 
5.11 The Committee was informed that ag ainst the budget allocation of Rs.466.30 
crore during the year 2008-09, a sum of Rs. 159.96 crore was utilized. Out of this Rs 
145.08 crore was utilized for procurement of vacc ines including Hepatitis B. Further, the 
saving was mainly under the sub-head ‘Vaccine  for Hepatitis B/Pentavalent Vaccine’ for 
which a fund of 205.30 crore was allocated ou t of which Rs. 21.16 crore could only be 
utilized as the scheme regarding introduction of Pentavalent Vaccine was deferred for 
technical re-examination of the issue. Out of the budget provision of Rs. 86.0 crore under 
Needle syringes and Rs. 47.0 crore under cold  chain equipment, a sum of Rs. 13.09 crore 

 106
and Rs. 1.79 crore was utilized respectively,  due to non-finalization /less procurement of 
these items.  
 
5.12 Allocation in 2010-11 has been increased to Rs 417 crore against an allocation of 
Rs 388.21 crore during 2009-10. The Committee was given to understand that the 
enhanced allocation of Rs 28.79 crores has been proposed for procurement of cold chain 
equipments and Hepatitis B/ Pentavalent vaccines. 
 
5.13 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is yet another case of inept 
handling of budgeted funds by the Department. The Committee finds to its dismay 
that despite the efficacy and relevance of  Pentavalent Vaccine being in question, a 
substantive amount of Rs. 205.30 crore was allocated for the same out of which      
Rs. 184.14 crore remained unutilised and had to be surrendered. The Committee 
would like the Department to exercise greater caution in future and not allow repeat 
of such fiscal imprudence.  
5.14 Asked to furnish the latest state-wise details of full immunization in the country, 
the Department has informed that as per latest DLHS III survey in 2007-08 full 
immunization coverage of children (12-23 mo nths) in the country increased to 54.1% 
compared to 45.9% as per the DLHS-II (2002 -04).  However, in some of the States, 
percentage of coverage still remains much below the national average: 
 
Full Immunization 
State/UTs/India 
DLHS 2 
(2002-04) 
DLHS3 
(2007-08) 
Andhra Pradesh 62.0 68.5
D & N Haveli 84.6 52.3
Haryana 59.1 61.8
Madhya Pradesh 30.4 38.5
Meghalaya 13.5 34.3
Tamil Nadu 91.4 81.6
Uttar Pradesh 25.8 31.1
Arunachal Pradesh 21.6 40.3
Bihar 20.7 41.4
Tripura 32.6 38.5
ALL INDIA 45.9 54.1
 
5.15 The Committee notes that population left out because of poor access to health 
care facilities has been cited the main factor responsible for such a situation. The 

 107
Committee has been given to understand that a number of initiatives have been taken by 
the Department which include: 
   
- Micro-planning for routine immunization sessions 
- Social Mobilization to ensure universal access. 
- Support for Cold chain maintenance 
- Quarterly Review meetings for programme monitoring. 
- Mobility Support to assist active supervision. 
 
 
5.16 From a perusal of the information made available, the Committee would like 
to state here that significant progress un der the Immunisation Programme has not 
been noticed in many of the States. This fa ct holds true both for the high focus and 
EAG States and also the non-high focus States .  In some instances like that of Tamil 
Nadu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, the immu nization coverage has infact dropped 
below the DLHS II rate. The Committee observes that a low coverage rate in some 
of the very densely populated States like Bihar and Uttar Pradesh means that a very 
large number of children remain exposed to the vagaries of diseases resulting in 
high incidence of IMR in the country. The Committee observes that unless proper 
execution of the plans are made by the programme authorities, visible impact on the 
immunization coverage would remain a distant dream. It, therefore, urges the 
Department to take up the issue with th e respective State Mission Directors during 
the next Common Review Mission, who need to be impressed upon to achieve the 
required quarterly/ annual targets. 
 
5.17 Cold chain maintenance is the mo st crucial component for effective 
implementation of the Immunisation  Programme. The Committee, however, 
observes that so far this has proved to be the weakest link under the programme. 
Committee’s apprehensions have been confirmed by the assessment of cold chain 
maintenance arrangement made under the Performance Audit of CAG. As per the 
CAG Audit, none of the cold chain equipment was available in any of the 124 test 
checked PHCs in Haryana, Meghalaya, Madhya Pradesh, Puducherry and West 
Bengal. Besides, in Bihar, Lakshadweep and Uttar Pradesh, 31 to 68 per cent of cold 
chain equipment was found non-functional. 
 

 108
5.18 The Committee is more disturbed by  the fact that Government of India 
budgetary support for maintenance of cold chain equipments, supply of spare parts, 
provision of alternate power supply has prove d to be of no avail. The States have 
simply confirmed their inability to abso rb the funds for envisaged purposes. The 
Committee is of the view that the absence of cold chain management has indirectly 
resulted in adverse impact on the UIP, a high priority area under the Mission. 
 
PULSE POLIO PROGRAMME 
 
5.19 Under Pulse Polio Programme, Rs 1150.94 crore were allocated in BE 2009-10 
which was revised upwards to Rs 1191.31 crore at the RE stage, with full utilization by 
the end of the year. 
 
5.20 The Committee was informed that the increased allocation during 2009-10 at RE 
stage was based on the number of rounds i.e. two National Immunization Day (NIDs),        
7 Sub-National Immunization Days (SNIDs) and 3 Mop-Up. As compared to 2009-10, a 
reduced provision of Rs. 1017.08 crore has been  made for 2010-11. It has been clarified 
that during 2010-11, based on the epidemiological picture of polio infection being 
confined to western Uttar Pradesh and Kosi region of Bihar, the area of operation has 
reduced and hence the reduced allocation would not affect the on-going activities.  
 
5.21 The Committee has been informed that currently type 3 & type 1 virus was in 
circulation, limited mainly to 107 high risk blocks of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. High 
density populations, poor hygiene practices, nearly non-existent sanitation infrastructure, 
compromised drinking water supply, inadequate health and routine immunization 
services, high malnutrition rates, and povert y have been cited as the main factors 
responsible for such a scenario. A multi- pronged strategy is being planned which 
includes cross-cutting activities to minimize the factors facilitating poliovirus 
transmission in these 107 blocks while at the same time ensuring the highest possible 
quality of polio immunization activities.  
 
5.22 As a special intervention, the new-born tracking is being done in U.P. and Bihar 
for coverage during pulse polio round upto the age of one year, (now been extended to all 
the States). It has also stated that although in 2009, a total of 602 polio cases were 
reported compared to 305 cases in 2008 from Uttar Pradesh, it may be noted that only 34 

 109
cases were due to more virulent Wild Polio Virus (WPV)-1 type as against 62 cases of 
WPV-1 in 2008.   
 
5.23 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has been diligently 
pressing forward with various measures to contain the spread of WPV-1 and WPV-
3 types, especially entrenched in Biha r and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee hopes 
that the introduction of the bivalent vacci ne (P1& P3) during 2010 would go a long 
way in eradicating polio from the country.  Though the Department has cited that 
the absolute numbers of polio cases have been reducing over the years, given the 
massive scale on which the programme is being implemented with NIDs, SNIDs and 
mop-up rounds reported polio cases have shown no significant improvement during 
the past three years. The Committee woul d like to reckon here that as per the 
findings of DLHS III (2007-08) survey, th e all India figures of polio immunization 
stand at 66.2% only, with Bihar (53.1%), UP (44.4%), Madhya Pradesh (55.1%), 
Mehghalaya (46.5%), Jharkhand (64.4%), Ra jasthan (63.9%)  and most of the NE 
States performing less than the all India average. Given the above levels of PPI 
coverage in various states, the Committee would like the Department to explain us 
as to how the goal of zero transmission can be achieved at the earliest.  
 
 
JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA 
5.24 Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) launched on 12 th April, 2005 a safe motherhood 
intervention under NRHM being implemented with the objective of promoting 
institutional delivery among the poor pregnant women. Being implemented in all 
States/UTs JSY as a 100 per cent Centrally Sponsored Scheme and it integrates JSY 
benefits with delivery and post-delivery care.  
 
5.25 The Yojana has identified ASHA as the main link between the Government and 
the poor pregnant women, whose main role is to facilitate pregnant women to avail 
maternal care services and a rrange referral transport. In  Low Performing States, all 
women, including SCs and STs opting for getting deliveries conducted in Government 
Health Care Centres/Institutions or accredited private institutions are eligible to receive 
cash assistance. In High Performing States, BPL women and SC and ST women are 
eligible to receive cash assistance under the Yojana.  
The Scale of cash assistance for Institutional Delivery is as under:- 

 110
(In Rs.) 
Rural Area Urban Area Category 
Mother’s 
package 
ASHA Package Mother’s 
package 
ASHA Package 
In LPS 1400 600 1000 200 
**In HPS 700 200* 600 200* 
*w.e.f. 01.04.2009            **upto 2 live births. 
      
5.26 The Committee notes that JSY, as a financial package, has done well to improve 
institutional deliveries. Institutional deliveries have increased from 7.30 lakh in 2005-06 
to 84.26 lakh in the year 2008-09.  However, CAG in its Performance Audit of NRHM 
(2009-10) has pointed out a number of shortcomings in the implementation of JSY, out of 
which some are as follows:- 
(i) 
  In 13 out of 20 States, less than 50 per cent of total registered pregnant women 
preferred institutional delivery at health centres. Details of following States are 
self-revealing. 
 
 
States  Women Registered Not opting for institutional delivery 
Punjab  12,08,563 2,99,544 
Uttarakhand 4,82,854 1,50,652 
MP 46,74,067 15,71,933 
J& K 7,52,269 3,49,977 
UP   1,08,43,000 52,04,000 
Assam 12,46,815 6,63,420 
                                              
(ii)  Proper records and vouchers in support of payment of incentive were not always 
maintained. Cases of fraudulent and excess payment, non-payment and inordinate 
delay have been pointed out by CAG.  
(iii) Quarterly physical and financial report s to be furnished by States/UTs were not 
being regularly sent. 
(iv) There were variations in the quarte rly/annual reports and Financial Management 
Reports sent by field nodal officers of JSY and State Health Societies.  The CAG 
also mentioned that the Ministry's data on institutional deliveries and number of 
beneficiaries was inconsistent with the da ta verified during audit. According to 
Quarterly Report upto December, 2009 sent to Audit by the Ministry, number of 
beneficiaries of domiciliary deliveries was 15.95 lakh which came down to 11.30 
lakh at the end of the year.  
 
5.27 The Committee views with serious concern the high level of pregnant women 
registered for institutional delivery not op ting for the same. This clearly indicates 
that various interventions made under JSY so as to make aware the targeted 
population about the positive impact of institutional delivery both on the mother 

 111
and child have not proved to be very eff ective. Situation becomes more worrisome 
by the fact that high focus States where need was the most have been showing such 
a trend. The Committee fails to understand the reasons behind ground level 
functionaries not monitoring the trimest er check-up of the registered pregnant 
women. The Committee would like to point out that the achievement of 47 per cent 
of institutional deliveries (DLHS-III 2007- 08) from 37 percent (DLHS-I  1998-99) 
although indicates a slow but steady increase, however, one must not forget that 53 
per cent women still continue to remain de prived of the benefits of institutional 
deliveries. The Committee is of the view that the role of ASHA/ ANM under the JSY 
seems to be limited to payment of cash incentives only. Consistent tracking of 
expectant mother for antenatal and post-partum check-up and deliveries needed 
more focused attention. For this, regular monitoring and surprise inspections need 
to be included as an essential component of JSY. 
5.28 The Committee has also been informed that an Evaluation Study of JSY is 
being conducted by an Expert Group led by the Executive Director, National Health 
Systems Resource Centre (NHSRC) with inter-alia the following objectives: 
 
(a) Procedure for random verification of beneficiaries; 
(b) Fund Flow mechanism for administering JSY scheme and mechanism 
adopted for ensuring timely payment to the beneficiaries; and 
(c) Impact of JSY services on maternal mortality ratio and infant mortality rate. 
 
The Committee would like to be informed about the latest status in this regard.  
 
5.29 The Committee was informed that the Government is actively pursuing the goal 
of reduction in Maternal Mortality by focu sing on the 4 major strategies of essential 
obstetric and new born care for all, skilled at tendance at every birth, emergency obstetric 
care and referral services. However, these critical components which figure among the 
four major strategies adopted for reducing MMR suffer from grave inadequacies.  
Operationalisation of 50 per cent PHCs for 24x7 Services is the most important initiative 
under Essential Obstetric Care. However, status of 24x7 PHCs in States having very high 
Maternal Mortality is very discouraging as indicated below: 
 
      State    PHCs functioning 24x7 PHCs 
Assam 844 343 
Bihar 1641 533 

 112
Chhattisgarh 721 418 
Jharkhand 330 194 
Madhya Pradesh 1149 212 
Rajasthan 1503 500 
Uttarakhand 239 94 
Uttar Pradesh 3690 648 
 
5.30 Estabilishing referral linkages between the community and First Referral Units 
are an essential component for access of services particularly during emergencies. 
However, very few CHCs/PHCs have been upgraded as FRUs in States having high 
Maternal Mortality like Bihar (76), Chhattisgarh (56), Jharkhand (19), Madhya Pradesh 
(87), Rajasthan (100), Uttar Pradesh ( 136), Uttarakhand (72) and Assam (60).  The 
Committee notes that  to manage and handle some common obstetric emergencies at the 
time of birth, Government has taken a polic y decision to permit Staff Nurses and ANMs 
to give certain injections and perform ce rtain interventions under specific emergency 
situations. However, no significant progress in this regard has been noticed so far as 
indicated below: 
      State ANMs in position  ANM/SN  trained  
Assam           8289         2051 
Bihar           9127          2237 
Chhattisgarh           4850            303 
Jharkhand           5011          1318 
Madhya Pradesh           8718          1850 
Rajasthan          12271              52 
Uttarakhand            1903            415 
Uttar Pradesh           21024            274 
5.31 Asked to indicate the reasons for such a dismal scenario, the Department has 
stated that MMR of poor performing States has seen considerable decline during the 
period 2004-06 as compared to the MMR during the period 2001-03. In the area of 
Essential Obstetric Care, Referral Services and Skilled Attendants at Birth, there has been 
considerable improvement in the poor perform ing States also.  However, owing to acute 
shortage of manpower, these States are not in a position to relieve the trainees at time for 
getting multi-skilled or even for upgradation of their existing skills.  
 
5.32 The Committee observes that the goal of reducing MMR to 100 per lakh like 
births by 2012 is very difficult to achieve at the present rate of decline. The goal can 
be achieved only if there is rapid ex pansion of Skilled Birth Attendants and 

 113
Emergency Obstetric Care (EmOC) . It is in this context th at deficiencies in EmOC 
and Skilled Birth Attendance are very worrisome.  
 
5.33 The Committee is of the view that in the absence of required ground-level 
health functionaries who have to be qual ified, trained and semi-skilled personnel, 
the outreach of JSY and ot her specific interventions wi ll remain confined to the 
barest minimum. Number of ambitious schemes with high objectives and 
availability of massive funding will not succeed in reaching the targeted 
beneficiaries. Close monitori ng, not on paper but at the ground level, in the real 
sense alone can strengthen the effective implementation of all the initiatives taken so 
far. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME                                  
(NVBDCP) 
 
 
6.1 The National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme is a comprehensive 
programme for prevention and control of vector  borne diseases namely Malaria, Filaria, 
Kala-azar, Japanese Encephalitis (JE), Deng ue and Chikununya which is covered under 
the overall umbrella of NRHM. Central Gove rnment provides technical and financial 
assistance and also logistics support and the State Governments have to meet the other 

 114
requirements and operational costs. NE States are provided 100 per cent central 
assistance under the programme.  
6.2 The general strategy for prevention an d control of vector borne diseases under 
NVBDCP is through Disease Management,  Integrated Vector Management  and 
Supportive Interventions.  The Committee was informed that for the year 2010-2011, 
the Directorate of NVBDCP has projected their demands amounting to Rs.698 crore. 
However, allocation of Rs.418 crore has been  made considering overall allocation of 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Out of the allocation of Rs. 418.00 crore for 2010-
11, the EAP component is Rs 165.26 crore (GFATM 84.87 crore and World Bank 80.39 
crore).  
6.3 The Committee notes that against an allocation of Rs. 442.00 crore in 2009-
10, expenditure reported as on 28.02. 2010 was only Rs. 278.61 crore. The 
Committee observes that this trend of under-utilisation of allocated fund is also 
there in the first two years of the Eleventh  Plan. Against the provision of Rs. 399.50 
crore and Rs. 472.25 crore in 2007-08 a nd 2008-09, expenditure was only Rs. 383.66 
crore and Rs.  299.38 crore respectively. Th e Committee is constrained to observe 
that against the total Plan outlay of Rs. 3190.00 crore for the Eleventh Plan, less 
than half of the funds were released and that too remained under-utilised. 
Committee’s repeated attempts for optimum utilization of allocated funds under 
NVBDCP has failed to make any impact. 
6.4 The Committee has always been responsive to the genuine demands of the 
Department. The Committee would, however, also like the Department to focus on 
better utilization of the scarce resource s. The Committee, once again, recommends 
that the Department need to focus on analyzing the reasons for reduced utilization 
of the allocated funds and take corrective action accordingly.  
 
The Committee would also like to know whether any commitment charges 
are to be paid by the Department in case of shortfall in utilization of EAP 
component and if so, the charges paid during the last three years. 
 
MALARIA 
 
6.5 The National Health Policy (2002) has set the goal of reduction in mortality on 
account of malaria by 50 percent by 2010. The Committee was informed that reported 
Malaria cases declined from 1.78 million in 2006 to 1.53 million in 2008 and deaths from 

 115
Malaria declined from 1708 in 2006 to 1055 in 2008.  Still it  continued to be a major 
public health challenge in the North East States, Orissa, Jharkhand, West Bengal, and 
Chhatisgarh.  In 2008, these states accounted for 65 percent of the total reported Malaria 
cases,   85 percent of total Pf cases and 68 percent of total  reported malaria deaths.    
  
6.6 It is also informed that though  the number of reported Pf cases in the country has  
declined but  out of the total mala ria cases reported,  proportion of Plasmodium 
falciparum cases has increased from 44.32% in 2005  to 52.09% in 2009 (Prov.) As per 
the latest  information furnished by the Department, in 2009, Meghalaya (with 192 
deaths), Orissa (192), Mizoram (119), Tripura (62), West Bengal (74), Maharashtra 
(159), Nagaland (35), and Assam (63) were leading the table for malaria-related deaths. 
6.7  The Committee notes that the number of  cases reported is already on the 
rise in many of the States, especially the North-Eastern States, where the problem is 
acute. Under the GFATM project all the 77 district in 7 NE States, 7 districts of 
Jharkhand, 6 districts of West Bengal and 16  districts of Orissa are covered.  The 
Committee is not fully convinced by the Departments, contention that due to remote 
and inaccessible areas with poor access to malaria diagnosis and treatment facilities, 
NE states continue to remain a major cha llenge.  The Committee would like to state 
here that the programme has been these for considerable period and with 100 
percent central funding and also Internatio nal assistance, these challenges, should 
have been significantly lessened. The Comm ittee also finds that major interventions 
like introduction of Rapid diagnostic kits , for the field workers, introduction of 
specialized therapy for Pf cases and long lasting insecticidal nets have all been made 
for North East States.  However, inspite of such huge funding under the programme 
significant progress is not visible. The Committee can only conclude that 
supervision and monitoring, which is one of the main strategies adopted for effective 
control of malaria, is perhaps not being implemented to the desired levels, especially 
in NE region and Orissa.  
6.8 The Committee is of the view that shortage of manpower is the main stumbling 
block in the successful implementation of malaria control measures. The Committee has 
been given to understand that for strengthening supervision and monitoring, additional 
manpower like consultants at state level, Vect or Borne Diseases Consultants at district 
level and Malaria Technical Supervisor at sub district level have been provided in high 
endemic areas under the World Bank and GFATM supported projects.   

 116
 
6.9 The Committee would however, like to draw the attention of the Department 
to the status of some key functionaries under Malaria control programme. The 
Committee is astonished to find that inspit e of special attention being given to the 
NE States important functionaries are simply not there as indicated below: 
- Vector borne Disease Control (DVBOC) Consultant is not there in any of 
the                 NE States and Sikkim.  
- Only 522 PHC-MOs are posted in Arunachal Pradesh. Remaining States 
do not have this functionary. 
- Assam does not have a Lab-Technician/ Lab-Technician(Contractual)  
- Both Assam and Nagaland do not have a Health Supervisor (M) 
- No Health Supervisor (F) is post ed in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. 
- Multi-Purpose Worker (M) is not there in Arunachal Pradesh and Assam. 
- Only Nagaland has 28 Malaria Inspectors 
- Surveillance Staff (307) is there only in Meghalaya. 
- Only Meghalaya has 54 Spray Squads. 
- In Sikkim and Tripura Malaria Tec hnical Supervisors (Contractual) are 
not  there  
- n Arunachal Pradesh and Assam there are no regular MPW (M) at all  
 
6.10 The fact that these functionaries play a vital role in disease detection and 
surveillance cannot be set aside. By not appointing these functionaries, the States 
leave a large gap in the field-level disease surveillance and treatment. The 
Committee can only conclude from the above that it would be impractical to expect 
noticeable improvements in malaria control with key functionaries missing, that too, 
in the malaria endemic States.   Hence, the Committee advises the Department that, 
apart from allocating sufficient funds to these States/ UTs, it should also pursue 
with State Governments to fill up the vacancies without delay so that  the targets set 
to control malaria could be met within a realistic time-frame. The Committee would 
like the Department to furnish details of various measures adopted by the States 
Governments in the past year to fill up these vacancies. 
 
 
KALA-AZAR 
 
6.11 The National Health Policy (2002)  has se t the goal for elimination of    Kala-azar 
from the country by 2010. Kala-azar is endemic in four States - Bihar, West Bengal, 
Jharkhand and U.P.  More than 80 percent of  cases and over 90 percent of deaths are 
reported from Bihar.  340 out of 523 Block PHCs, which are Kala-azar endemic reported 
less than one case of Kala-azar per 10,000 populations in 2009.  

 117
 
6.12 During 2010, 2534 Kala-azar cases in Bihar, 59 in West Bengal and 1 case in U.P 
have been reported.  Strategies for Kala-a zar elimination include Vector Control (with 
DDT spray), upscaling use of new diagnostic tools i.e. rK39 , use of new oral drug 
Miltefosine as the first line of treatment in 10 pi lot districts of Bihar, West Bengal and 
Jharkhand.  For Bihar, the most endemic stat e pucca houses for the poorest of the poor 
were being constructed to prevent the breeding of the Vector.  
 
6.13 The Committee observes that though the National Health Policy (2002) had 
set the goal of elimination of Kala-azar by 2010, the above target is yet to be 
realized. This is evident from the fact th at 2534 reported cases of Kala-azar from 
the States of Bihar, West Bengal and Utta r Pradesh have been reported during the 
first two months of the year 2010. It is in  this context that two rounds of door-to-
door search which were to be undertaken  for elimination of Kala-azar, assume 
added significance. However, the Committee fails to understand as to why Kala-
azar fortnights could not be observed in  the most endemic States of Bihar and 
Jharkhand during the past year.  Inspit e of the Committee’s repeated comments on 
carrying on intensive door-to-door surveill ance and monitoring by the Department 
the situation so far has been far from encouraging.  The Committee would like to be 
enlightened about the reasons behind not undertaking the door-to-door search in 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh. The Committee rec ommends that effective surveillance, 
timely treatment and compliance of treatmen t regimens in all PHCs in the affected 
districts need to be continued without any let-up.  
 
6.14 The Committee would like the Department to apprise it in clear terms the 
number of PHCs in the endemic districts that have been provided with anti-Kala 
azar drugs, the number of household/ population covered district-wise under the 
door-to-door surveillance activities, and the physical outcomes of such initiatives. 
The Committee would also like to be  apprised about the number of NGOs/ 
FBOs/PRIs involved in Kala-azar eliminatio n activities in the above States, the 
funds provided to them during the last th ree years, the cases treated by them and 
the initiatives taken by them to ensure treatment compliance of the patients.  
 
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS 
 

 118
6.15 Japanese Encephalitis is a viral disease with a tendency of seasonal outbreaks. JE 
is endemic in 14 States out of which, Assam, Bihar, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh have 
reported repeated outbreaks. Over the past 5 years, maximum number of cases had been 
reported in the year 2005. The number of cases detected and d eaths during 2007,  2008 
and 2009 are given below: 
 
 
 
 
Affected 
States/ UTs 
2007 
Cases      Deaths 
2008 
Cases       Deaths 
2009 (upto Nov.) 
   Cases    Deaths 
Assam 424 133 319 99 462 92 
Bihar 336 164 203 45 194 12 
Goa 70 0 39 0 36 3 
Haryana 85 46 13 3 6 5 
Tamil Nadu 42 1 144 0 259 7 
Uttar Pradesh 3024 645 3012 537 2936 520 
Grand Total 
 ( All India) 
4110 995 3838 684 4090 650 
 
  
6.16 There is no specific anti-viral drug for JE and cases are managed 
symptomatically. A vaccination programme for children between 1 to 15 years of age 
under the Universal Immunization Programme, using single dose vaccine has been 
launched in 2006 and ever since, 85 JE endemi c districts in the States of Assam, Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal have been covered under the programme.  
6.17 On being asked by the Committee regarding the details of Immunization 
Coverage in UP, the most endemic state Department has stated that as per a recent report 
of the UNICEF on the reported JE vaccinati on coverage in Gorakhpur and Bahraich 
districts of Uttar Pradesh, the coverage was found to be only 51 and 52 percent 
respectively in these two districts. Realizing that many eligible children were left out 
during 2006 campaign conducted in Uttar Pradesh, a special JE vaccination campaign for 
left out children in all seven most sensitive districts of U.P covered during 2006 is under 
the consideration of Government of India.  The Committee notes that the overall figures 
of immunization for 2009 stand at 46.62 per cent only. A perusal of the state-wise 
coverage reveals that the vaccination coverage in West Bengal has been far from 
satisfactory with 56 per cent  in 2006, 74 per cent in 2007, 57 per cent in 2008 and less 

 119
than 30 per cent (provisional) during 2009. What is astonishing is that out of 41,34,072 
children (between 1-15 years) targeted in four districts from Andhra Pradesh  no children 
could be vaccinated , similarly, in Bihar out of the 13,62,508 children targeted in Gaya 
District and in Tamil Nadu 15,52,386 children targeted in two districts, none could be 
vaccinated. The  
 
6.18 The Committee is dismayed to note that  more than four years have elapsed 
since the vaccination programme was launched in 2006, yet the all India coverage of 
JE vaccination campaign is only 46.62% uptill 2009 as against the targeted 85% 
coverage. What is more worrisome is that JE vaccination coverage in four districts 
of Andhra Pradesh, one district of Assam and two districts of Tamil Nadu is nil, 
which paints a very grim picture, especially  in the context of there being no specific 
anti-viral drug for JE. The Committee feels that if such gaps are not addressed 
immediately, efforts to contain JE outbreaks will stand jeopardized. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that th e Department should, in coordination 
with the State Government concerned, chal k out an action plan to achieve the 
targeted coverage of JE vaccination and also apprise the Committee of the progress 
made in this regard. Similar efforts for vacc ine coverage of the affected districts of 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam and Tamil Nadu are also required.   
6.19 The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made towards 
establishing sentinel sites for regular surveillance and Apex Referral Laboratories 
for advanced diagnosis, circulation of stan dard guidelines, capacity building and 
intensive IEC campaign and vaccination with single dose under Universal 
Immunization Programme. Keeping in view th e fact that Uttar Pradesh is the most 
endemic State which contributes 80% of JE cases, the Committee recommends that 
the Government must quickly take a decision on conducting a special JE 
vaccination campaign for left out children in the seven most sensitive districts of 
Uttar Pradesh along with the affected di stricts of Andhra Pradesh, Assam and 
Tamil Nadu. The quarterly progress made in this regard may be communicated to 
the Committee. 
6.20 The Committee was also informed that apart from establishing field unit of NIV, 
Pune at BRD Medical College, Gorakhpur for de tecting and isolating non-JE viruses, the 
management of AES/JE cases has been accorde top priority. Prevention and control 
guidelines have already been circulated to all the affected districts in the State for 

 120
initiating control measures against entero-vir uses. The diagnostic facilities have been 
strengthened at 50 sentinel and 13 Apex Refe rral Laboratories including 15 sentinel sites 
established in Uttar Pradesh. These have been supplied with diagnostic kits free of cost 
from National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune. One Vector Borne Disease Surveillance 
Unit (VBDSU) and one JE sub-office was established at BRD Medical College, 
Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh. Lastly, for establis hing a Physical, Medicine & Rehabilitation 
(PMR) department at BRD Medical College for treating physical disabilities due to 
AES/JE, MOU has been submitted to the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
6.21 The Committee is happy to note that finally some action to check 
aggravation of non-JE viruses in Eastern UP  have been initiated by the Central 
Government. It can only hope that the situation would improve this year during the 
outbreak season. The Committee hopes th at the manpower required to make the 
sentinel sites, referral labs operational and the Diagnostic kits provided free of cost 
by National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, are in position.
 
 
VII NATIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME  
 
7.1 Tuberculosis is a major public health problem in India. The country accounts for 
nearly one-fifth of the global incidence. In 2007, out of the global annual incidence of 
9.23 million TB cases, 1.96 million were estimated to have occurred in India, of whom 
0.8 million were infectious cases. About tw o persons die from TB in India every three 
minutes; 900 people every day and almost 3.28 lakh every year. The Committee was 
informed that the Revised National TB C ontrol Programme (RNTCP) has been extended 
to the entire country in 2006. Till date, 11 million T.B. patients have been initiated on 
treatment with 2 million additional lives saved. 
  
 7.2 To tackle HIV/TB co-infection, TB + HIV collaborative activities with 
NACP, initiated in 2001, have been scaled up across the country. The Committee 
notes that intensified TB/HIV package of services have been started in nine HIV 
high prevalence States (Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Pondicherry and Tamil Nadu) in 2008 and has been extended 
to nine additional States (Delhi, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Kerala, Assam, West 
Bengal, Orissa and Chandigarh) in 2009-10 with a vision to cover the entire nation 
by 2012. Monitoring of co-infected patients was started from 4
th quarter of 2008, 

 121
and out of a total of 31047 such cases, 5171 cases were treated with a 75 per cent 
success rate. The Committee is happy to note that the Department has been pursuing its 
concerns diligently to identify and provide treatment to HIV/T.B co-infected patients. 
  
7.3 To control this major health problem of the country, Revised National TB Control 
Programme (RNTCP) based on internationa lly recommended strategy of Directly 
Observed Treatment Short Course (DOTS) . The Programme has the objective of 
detecting at least 70% of cases and curing at  least 85% of sputum positive patients. In 
order to address the problem of Multi Drug Resistance TB (MDR-TB), establishment of a 
network of 43 accredited Culture and Drug  Susceptibility Testing Laboratories for 
diagnosis and follow-up of MDR TB patients across the country was being undertaken in 
a phased manner. It is planned to roll out se rvices for Drug Resistant Tuberculosis in all 
State/ UTs by March 2011. 
7.4 The Committee observes that the emergence of multi-drug resistant TB has 
increased the severity and magnitude of the problem in terms of cost, longer and 
difficult treatment regimen. In this contex t, the Committee welc omes the initiative 
of establishing a network of 43 Laboratories for diagnosis and follow-up of MDRTB 
patients. The Committee hopes that such Laboratories will be set up across the 
country in such a way that people from all parts of the country have equity in access 
to such facilities. The Committee would like to have an idea of the location of such 
Laboratories and also of the structure of charges, if any, proposed to levied for 
availing of the facilities therefrom. 
7.5 The Committee observes that utilizati on status of allocated funds under the 
programme has been satisfactory. For 2009-10, against the total allocation of Rs. 296.25 
crore an expenditure of Rs. 294.83 crore has been made till 12
th March, 2010. The 
Committee is however, surprised to observe that unspent balances are available with all 
the States/ UTs in the beginning of the year. The opening balance of Rs. 32.20 crore as 
on 01.04.2009 has reached the figure of Rs. 79.19 crore by 31 st December, 2009. 
Following States show the maximum amount of unspent balances. 
  
                                                           (Rs. in crore) 
State/ Union Territory Unspent Balance 
as on 01.01.10 
Andhra Pradesh  5.13 

 122
Karnataka 4.69 
Kerala 4.14 
Madhya Pradesh 4.22 
Maharashtra 6.12 
Rajasthan 4.03 
Tamil Nadu 4.39 
Uttar Pradesh  15.50 
West Bengal 5.03 
 
7.6 The Committee observes that it is a matter of serious concern that a huge 
amount to the tune of Rs. 79.19 crore was left unspent with the States, and that too, 
the scare resources allocated to counter one of the deadliest diseases. The 
Committee is not aware about any specific measure to check this negative trend. 
The Committee would, therefore, like th e Department to at least outline the 
roadmap for reducing, if not entirely wiping out, the extent of unspent balances. 
7.7 The Committee takes note of the fact that out of a total outlay of Rs. 1156 
crore for the Programme, Rs. 756.00 crore is the credit from World Bank. The 
Committee would like to be enlightened if the credit from World Bank has any 
financial implications by way of debt or commitment charges and if so, the extent of 
financial liability involved so far. 
7.8 As per the information furnished by the Department 2524 NGOs, 19202 
Private Practitioners, 268 Medical Colleges and 150 Corporate Hospitals are 
involved under RNTCP. The Committee would like to be apprised of the extent of 
financial assistance extended to the NGOs, the amount utilized, the number of 
pending UCs from them and the amount involved therein. 
 
 7.9 To the Committee’s query regarding the latest status on the new drug for treating 
patient with MDR-TB being developed by M/s Johnson and Johnson, the Department has 
informed that the new molecule (TMC 207) is currently undergoing Phase II clinical 
trials to evaluate its efficacy, safety and tolerability in patients suffering from MDR-TB. 
Tuberculosis Research Centre, Chennai and Al l India Institute of Medical Sciences are 
participating in this trial which is being unde rtaken in 17 countries across the world. The 
details on the cost, affordability, efficacy etc. will be available only after successful 
completion of the clinical trials and once the drug is approved for marketing by the 
regulatory authorities. The Committee would like the Department to furnish the latest 
status on the Phase II clinical trials and its findings. 
 

 123
7.10 Committee’s attention has also been drawn by Drug Resistance Surveys (DRS) 
undertaken in Gujarat and Maharashtra in 2005-06, which have estimated the prevalence 
of Multi-drug Resistant TB (MDR-TB) to be around 3% amongst new TB cases and 14-
17% amongst                re-treatment TB cases. It has also been informed that in Andhra 
Pradesh the study has been completed and the results of which were expected to be 
available by Second quarter of 2010.  In    U.P. and Orissa similar surveys were going on. 
 
7.11 The Committee would like the Department to share with it the state-wise 
details of the Survey Reports while submitti ng its action taken note. The Committee  
has been given to understand that a ba seline social assessment study at the 
beginning of the RNTCP II project had b een undertaken to assess some of the 
predisposing factors contributing to the spread of the disease, and that another such 
survey is being planned to be made in 2010-11 which will also include  evaluation of 
the predisposing factors for spread of TB.  The findings of the baseline survey may 
be shared with the Committee.  
 
 
VIII. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME 
 
8.1 The goal of leprosy elimination at the Na tional level is less than 1 case per 10000 
population. National level elimination of Leprosy has been achieved since 31
st December, 
2005 when the prevelance rate came down to 0.95 or less than 1/10000 population. 32 
States/ UTs have achieved the status of leprosy elimination. Only 3 States/ UT i.e. Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh and Dadra & Nagar Haveli are ye t to achieve elimination level, which have 
the prevalence rate of 1.07, 2.30 and 2.21 respectively. 
                                             
8.2 The Committee was informed that in Bihar & Chhattisgarh reduction in 
prevalence of leprosy started late, due to late introduction of Multi Drug Therapy (MDT) 
for treatment of leprosy.  D & N Haveli being an industrial area has large number of 
migratory cases from nearby States/UTs, and du e to less population, a small increase in 
the number of recorded cases resulted in enormous increase in the prevalence rate.   
 
8.3 The Committee takes note of a number of preventive measures like involvement 
of ASHAs, focused attention in endemic blocks, urban areas, training of all General 
Health Services functionaries for leprosy diagnosis and management and Intensified 
Information, Education & Communication (IEC). 

 124
 
8.4 While appreciating the steady progress in the elimination of leprosy from the 
endemic states, the Committee would like the Department to closely monitor the 
efficacy of the measures taken and intro duce suitable interven tions for elimination 
disease leprosy in D&N Haveli.  
 
8.5 On a specific query the Committee was informed that against a Budgetary 
allocation of    Rs. 44.50 crores for 2009-10, till 31
st December, 2009, an expenditure Rs 
27.35 crore has been made. However, as per the background material submitted by the 
Department, upto January, 2010 expenditure reported is Rs. 26.66 crore. Committee’s 
attention has also been drawn by unspent ba lances available under the programme with 
different States. 
 
8.6 The Committee notes that as on December, 2009 unspent balances amounting to 
Rs. 22.12 crore were available with States like Bihar (Rs. 1.34 crore), Madhya Pradesh 
(Rs. 1.49 crore), Maharashtra (Rs. 1.67 crore) , Orissa (Rs. 1.77 crore), Uttarakhand (Rs. 
2.92 crore) and West Bengal (Rs. 1.39 crore) having the maximum balance. 
   
8.7 Committee’s attention is especially drawn to the utilisation status shown 
against Bihar. The Committee notes that ne arly Rs. 2.67 crore were lying unspent 
with the state uptill March, 2008. However,  inspite of non release of funds during 
2008-09 and 2009-10 to the State, the unspent balances had to be carried forward 
from March, 2008 and could not be exhausted completely during the next two years 
with Rs. 1.34 crore still remaining by     31 st December, 2009. Similarly, in case of 
Orissa, Uttarachal, Jharkhand, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, West Bengal and 
Maharashtra large sums of money have been carried forward unspent from the 
previous year. The Committee feels that given the trend over the past couple of 
years, this year too, substantial amount of funds would lie under utilised/ unutilised.  
 
8.8 The Committee is of the considered view that judicious utilization of funds is 
indispensable for sound financial administrati on without which it would be difficult 
for the Department to obtain the targeted results under NLEP. The Committee is 
compelled to conclude that much needs to be done especially in the endemic States 
of Bihar, Jharkand and the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The Committee, 
therefore, urges the Department to take up the matter of fund utilisation on an 

 125
emphatic note with the State Programme Officers during its quarterly review 
meetings. The Committee would like the De partment to find out the underlying 
causes of underutilization of funds and take corrective action accordingly. 
 
8.9 The Committee has been monitoring the progress made in providing incentive of 
Rs.5000/- for Reconstructive Surgery to leprosy disabled persons from BPL families and 
to 20 institutions for conducting RCS. List of 52 recognized Reconstructive Surgery 
Centres (20 Govt. & 32 NGO) was also communicated to the States/ UTs. The States 
were further requested to identify more ce ntres for conducting RCS.  As per the latest 
information given by the Department, 26 more centres have been recognized thus making 
total of 78 centres for carrying out Recons tructive Surgery (40 Govt. & 38 NGOs) in 
leprosy. As reported by 14 States/UTs, 965 le prosy affected persons belonging to BPL 
family have been paid incentive for undergoing RCS.  
 
8.10 The Committee is happy to note that at last such an important scheme under 
NLEP has finally seen the light of day. Ho wever, with more than three years of the 
Eleventh Plan Period having passed, the Co mmittee can only hope that the benefits 
of the scheme would accrue to more number of beneficiaries during the coming 
years. The Committee would like to add a word of caution to the Department 
regarding having an effective monitoring mechanism so as to determine the veracity 
of the beneficiaries from initial stage itself. The Committee would also like to have 
an idea about the number of beneficiaries (State-wise). 
 
 
IX NATIONAL TRACHOMA AND BLINDNESS CONTROL PROGRAMME 
 
9.1 The National Programme for Control of  Blindness (NPCB) was launched in the 
year 1976 as a 100% Centrally-Sponsored scheme with the goal to reduce the prevalence 
of blindness from 1.4% to 0.3% by 2020. Rapid Survey on Avoidable Blindness 
conducted during NPCB during 2006-07 showed reduction in the prevalence of blindness 
from 1.1% (2001-02) to 1% (2006-07).  
9.2 The Committee observes that there has been optimum utilization of allocated 
funds under the programme during the Eleventh Plan.  During 2009-10 also full 
utilization of fund allocation of Rs. 250.00 crore was reported.  The Committee is 
however surprised to note that achievement level of physical targets has not matched the 
pace of fund utilization.  Following details are self-revealing.  

 126
Component Target During       2009-
10    
(Nos.) 
Status of  
achievement  
(Nos.) 
Cataract operations (Catops) 60,00,000 32,30,948          (54%) 
School Eye Screening Programme 
(No. of spectacles distributed) 
3,00,000 2,83,895            (94%) 
No of donated eyes collected  55,000 30,658               (56%) 
 
9.3 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for low level of achievements 
in the first three quarters of 2009-10 under the various activities cited above. The 
reasons for such low achievements are only best known to the Department. 
 
9.4 The Committee is also not happy with the status reports not being received from 
states on the crucial component of strengthe ning of District Hospitals, Sub-district 
Hospitals, PHCs (vision centers).   Construction of only 5 Eye Wards and Eye Operation 
Theatres against the target of 20, clearly indicates that things are not moving inspite of 
funds being duly allocated.  
 
9.5 The Committee recommends to the Department to give utmost priority to 
properly evaluate the reasons for these undera chievements so that the weak links in 
the chain of implementation of the initiatives can be id entified. This, the Committee 
believes, would surely result in addressing implementation of various components of 
the programme effectively. The Committee feels that if the situation continues to 
remain as tardy as now then the goals set by the Department under NPCB by the 
end of Eleventh plan would remain a distant dream.  
 
9.6 In reply to a specific query regarding the monitoring mechanism under NPCB for 
monitoring of Surgical Eye Camps, the Department has informed that such eye camps are 
not permitted under NPCB. However, Screening Eye Camps are conducted by 
NGOs/private Service Providers in the States  with the approval of the concerned State 
Health authorities under their monitoring and strict supervision. The performance of 
these camps is reviewed at district, state and central level meetings. However, the above 
information is contrary to the findings reported in the latest CAG Performance Audit of 
NRHM (2009-10), as per which in 14 Stat es/UTs, 19.52 lakh cataract surgeries were 
performed in camps during the period 2005-08 which was 47 per cent of total cataract 
surgeries in these States. Position in the following States in quite alarming: 
No. of Cataract Operations in camps during the period 2005-08 

 127
     State Total In camps Percentage of 
Camp Surgeries  
Madhya Pradesh 9,00,000 4,06,000 45.11 
Haryana 3,53,274 1,00,458 28.44 
Andhra Pradesh 5,47,899 2,03,621 37.16 
Assam 1,11,484 42,617 38.22 
Uttarakhand 1,40,397 60,642 43.19 
UP 18,56,000 11,52,000 62.07 
 
9.7 The Committee is appalled to note that cataract operations in such huge 
proportions were allowed to be performed in eye camps between 2005-08, although, 
Government of India has banned eye operat i o n s  i n  c a m p s  o w i n g  t o  h i g h  r a t e  o f  
mishaps in such camps.  The Committee feel s that the issue cannot simply be done 
away with, especially in the light of the findings of the CAG. The Committee fails to 
understand as to how, insp ite of the claims made by the Department regarding 
regular monitoring of compliance to the guidelines, cataract surgeries continued to 
be performed in camps in the aforesaid states. The Committee apprehends that such 
surgeries in Camps must be continuing even at present thereby putting a large 
number of patients to risk. The Committ ee observes that merely circulating the 
guidelines to the State Governments with no means to ensure their strict compliance 
would not serve any purpose. There need s to be a component of surprise  
inspections in the existing monitoring mechanism  This, the Committee believes, 
would go a long way in ensuring compliance to the guidelines and act as a deterrent 
against violations by the defaulting agencies. 
 
9.9 One of the important initiatives under the National Programme for Control of 
Blindness is collection of eyes donated for corneal implantation. The Department has 
reported gradual improvement in the donation of eyes.  From 28,007 eyes collected 
during 2005-06, number of eyes collected during 2008-09 reached 41,780.  
 
9.10 The Committee would however, like to point out that achievement level still 
r e m a i n s  l e s s  t h a n  t h e  t a r g e t .   W h a t  i s  m o r e  d i s t u r b i n g  i s  t h a t  t h e r e  i s  a n  a c t u a l  
requirement of at least 80,000 to 1,00,000 of corneas per year in the country for 
transplantation purpose.  The Committee is  of the view that besides lack of 
awareness, other major cause for low level of eye donation/collection is that 
infrastructure required for the purpose is  simply not there at the ground level.  

 128
Committee’s apprehensions are supported by the following findings of CAG 
Performance Audit of NRHM (2009-10): 
- No Eye Bank was operational in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadweep, Manipur, Meghalaya and 
Uttarakhand (10 States/UTs) 
 
- As of March, 2008, only 346 Eye Banks were operational in 17 States/UTs 
out of which 97 were in the Government Sector and 249 in the voluntary 
sector. 
 
- a comparative analysis of performanc e in 9 States/UTs showed that the 
voluntary sector collected 76 per cent of the eyes donated. Lack of eye 
donation facilities in Government Hospitals was the reason for low 
presence and performance of Government Sector; and 
 
- almost 52 per cent of eyes collected in the Government sector had been 
either rendered unfit or were used for research as compared to 34 per 
cent in the voluntary sector.  
9.11 The Committee is also perturbed to find that there was a big gap between 
overall figures of eyes donated and utilized during 2005-2008 for 9 States/UT 
(Jharkhand, Orissa, UP, Assam, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Tamil Nadu and West 
Bengal).  Out of 13,986 eyes donated under Government Sector, number of eyes 
utilized was only 432.  Similarly, out of 44,964 eyes donated under the Voluntary 
Sector, only 9362 eyes could be utilized.   Notwithstanding the very low percentage 
of eyes donated in the country so far, th e low level of utilization of those eyes 
collected suggests that all is not well with  the existing arrangement and the system 
suffers from some grave inadequacies. The Committee’s apprehensions are 
supported by the findings on the performance of Eye Banks in the following States:        
Government Sector (2005-08) 
State No. of eyes 
donated 
Utilised Rendered Unfit Used for 
research 
Delhi 3552 1944 804 517 
Gujarat 4452 1431 --- 3021 
Tamil Nadu 3752 --- --- 1660 
West Bengal 1802 570 1 1231 
Total 13,558 3,945 805 6,429 
 
Voluntary Sector (2005-08) 
State No.of eyes 
donated 
Utilised  Rendered Unfit Used for research  
Delhi 5268 2515 1427 1039 

 129
Gujarat 14917 4910 --- 912 
Haryana 704 177 169 13 
Tamil Nadu 20284 -- --- 10317 
West Bengal 2741 1040 100 1331 
Total  43,914 8,642 1,696 13,612 
 
9.12 The fact that as many as 10 States/UTs  do not have a single operational eye 
bank is difficult for the Committee to accept.  Another point that strikes a chord is 
the number of Eye Banks in the governme nt vis-a-vis the pr ivate sector. The 
Committee notes that the ratio of eye bank s operated in the private sector is 2.5 
times the figure for the government sector.  The NPCB is into the fourth year since 
the launch of NRHM and between 2007-08 to 2009-10, nearly Rs. 650 crores have 
been spent under the programme. The Co mmittee finds that measures like non 
recurring assistance upto Rs. 15 lakh to Eye Banks, recurring assistance of Rs. 1500 
per pair of eyes towards honorarium of  Eye  Banks Staff, appointment of Eye 
donation Counsellors have also seemed to have made no impact.  
9.13 The Committee has been given to understand that it is normal that all cornea 
collected cannot be used for replantation purpose, as it needs to be assessed by 
cornea specialist for suitability and quality of cornea.  Only 30 to 40 percent corneas 
collected are suitable for optical Keratopl asty.  The Committee would like to point 
out that as per the above st ate-specific details, percentage of corneas utilized is 
much below the accepted 30 to 40 percent level.  One obvious reason for such a low 
level of utilization can be the upkeep and maintenance of Eye Banks being not as 
per the standard norms. The Committee , therefore, recommends to the Department 
to keep the activities of all the entities/institutions  involved in providing eye 
collection activities under constant scruti ny/monitoring and take urgent remedial 
steps so that the stumbling blocks in the optimum utilization of eyes collected is 
achieved by more number of beneficiaries getting back their vision. 
 The Committee would like to know as to whether the Government is aware 
of the work done by Dr. Sinha.  
 
X. NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDERS CONTROL 
PROGRAMME 
 
10.1 Deficiency of iodine can cause physical and mental retardation, cretinism, 
abortions, still-birth, deaf, mutism, squint and various types of goiter. Out of 325 districts 

 130
covering all the states and Union Territories where sample surveys were conducted, 263 
districts have been found to be endemic, where the prevelance of iodine deficiency 
disorder is more than 10 per cent and es timated 71 million people are suffering from 
Iodine Deficiency Disorders.  
10.2 The budget allocation under the Programme for 2009-10 was Rs. 40 crore which 
was reduced at the RE stage to Rs 29 crore. The Department has informed that uptill 
28.2.10, the fund utilization was to the tune of  Rs 15.32 crore.  On being asked regarding 
the drastic reduction in the allocation at RE 2009-10, the Department has informed that 
the reduced allocation was mainly due to review of the technical specifications of salt 
testing kits, and approval of Empowered Programme Committee (EPC) being under 
consideration. 
 
  10.3 The Committee is not very happy with the trends of fund utilization under 
the programme. During 2007-08 and 2008-09 against an allocation of Rs. 25.00 crore 
and Rs. 32.00 crore respectively, expenditur e reported is only Rs. 19.45 crore and 
Rs. 17.95 crore respectively.   The Committee observes that every year there 
have been substantial amount of savi ngs over the allocated funds. The Committee 
notes with disappointment that this neit her speaks of good financial management 
nor good programme implementation und er the Programme. The Committee once 
again recommends to the Department to devi se measures to overcome the obstacles 
coming in the way of proper implementation of the programme initiatives.  
10.4 The Committee hopes that the Empowered Programme Committee (EPC) 
approval must have been received by now and also the biding process on the 
technical specifications of salt testin g kits, must have been completed. The 
Committee would like to emphasise that all conceivable efforts may be made so as to 
ensure optimal and judicious allocation of funds in active coordination with state 
authority for timely achievements of the targets during 2010-11.  
 
10.5 The committee notes that as per the surveys that were conducted by the 
Directorate General of Health Services, Indian Council of Medical Research, the State 
Health Directorates and Health Institutes, ou t of 324 districts in all the 28 States and 7 
Union Territories, 263 districts are endemic. The proportion of districts endemic for 
Iodine Deficiency Disorders out of total districts surveyed so far were found to be more 
in Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand, 

 131
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Da man & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, as 
compared to other State/UTs. 
 
10.6 The Committee understands from the above  that as many as nine States/ UTs 
have been highly endemic iodine deficien cy. The Committee, however, does not find 
that any focused intervention has been initiated in the above States/ UTs to reduce 
the deficiency rate. Since, the above ob servation is a result of certain sample 
districts surveyed in the above States/ UTs the numbers would be much more if all 
the districts in these States/ UTs are co vered. Therefore, the Committee suggests 
that a special intervention needs to be made in all of the above States/UTs.  
Intensified IEC activities may also be carr ied out covering all the districts so that 
the prevalence rate comes to less than 10. The Committee would like the 
Department to furnish details of the samp le survey report concerning all the States/ 
UTs covered for its perusal.   
 
XI INTEGRATED DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME 
11.1 The objectives of the Integrated Diseas e Surveillance Programme are to establish 
a decentralized state based system of surveillance for communicable and non-
communicable diseases and to improve the efficiency of the existing surveillance 
activities of disease control programmes. Under the Programme, for 2009-10, Rs 45.50 
crore were allocated. As per the information furnished by the Ministry till 12
th March, 
2010 an expenditure of Rs 35.98 crore were incurred.  The Committee, however, notes 
that allocated funds during 2007-08 and 2008-09  have remained under-utilized.  
11.2 The Committee is disappointed at the achievements stated against the targets set 
for 2009-10. The Committee has been given to understand that 610 District surveillance 
teams (cumulative since beginning of project including 202 teams of phase – III) were to 
be trained during 2008-09 and 2009-10. The Committee finds that though 136 Dist. 
Surveillance Officers were trained in two week long FETD programme and District 
Surveillance Teams of all States/UTs covered except Bihar, Jharkhand, D& N Haveli, 
Daman & Diu & Lakshadweep were trained  during 2008-09, there is no clear 
information regarding the status during 2009-10 except that the training is underway. 
Similarly, against the 800 sites (State HQ,  District HQ, Govt. medical Colleges, 
Important Institutes) targeted to be connected through Broad band network, during 2008-
09 and 2009-10, Broad Band network was instal led across 606 districts during 2008-09, 

 132
while the only information furnished on th e progress during 2009-10 by the Ministry is 
that connectivity on Broad Band network is being established through National 
Informatics Network. Under the head of data collection and analysis, though some 
information regarding the data collected and analysed from phase I, II and III states is 
available for 2008-09, no information is available in this regard during 2009-10.  
11.3 The Committee fails to understand as to why clear information has not been 
furnished by the Ministry against the targ ets set by it for 2009-10. The Committee 
observes that concrete data is necessary for proper assessment of the targets set and 
merely stating that  training programme is in progress or connectivity on Broad 
Band is being established without quantify ing the progress made evinces ignorance 
of the most basic principles of appraisa l on the part of the Department.  The 
Committee would like the Department to furnish details of achievement during 
2009-10 regarding the targets mentioned above in the table for 2009-10 while 
furnishing its ATN and also be more circumspect while furnishing the information 
in the Outcome Budget.  
 
11.4 Regarding the query as to whether the required trained manpower is available for 
the successful implementation of this Programme, and if not the action plan in this 
regard, the Department has informed that training for PHC doctors, Lab technicians, 
other paramedical staff, etc. has been completed in Phase I and II States and is being 
undertaken in Phase III States. The Department  has also stated that a total of 766 
Technical Consultants are to be recruited (1 Epidemiologist each at State Surveillance 
Unit (SSU) and District Surveillance Unit (DSU); 1 Microbiologist each at SSU and 50 
priority District Labs; 1 Entomologist each at all SSUs), of these, 261 Epidemiologists, 
29 Microbiologists and 10 Entomologists have joined State / District Surveillance units 
for assisting the State/ District health officers. Training of these newly recruited health 
professionals has also been undertaken. The 2
nd round of recruitment of technical 
consultants for 466 remaining vacant posts will be done after getting the approval for 
restructuring and extension of IDSP.  
 
11.5 The Committee is happy to note that  the recruitment and training of the 
required manpower under IDSP is proceeding at a positive pace. The Committee 
observes that the presence of trained surveillance manpower are key to the 
prevention and control of diseases/ epidem ic in such a large country as India. 

 133
Hence, the Committee hopes that the targ ets of recruiting and training technical 
consultants for the remaining 400 vacant post would have been completed after 
due approval for restructuring and extension of IDSP were obtained. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Departme nt to furnish the details in this 
regard for its perusal. The Committee wo uld also like to be apprised of the 
progress made towards establishing video conferencing at the remaining sites and 
strengthening the remaining priority labs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 134
OBSERVATIONS/  RECOMMENDATIONS   AT A GLANCE 
 
PART-A HEALTH SECTOR 
II   BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
With this trend of allocation of f unds and utilization thereof, the Committee 
does not have much hope about optimum release of funds out of the approved outlay 
of Rs. 41092.92 crore in the remaining two years of the Eleventh Plan.  The Department 
will have to make concerted efforts so as to ensure optimum utilization of plan 
allocation of Rs. 5560.00 crore in 2010-11.  On ly then, there are chances of enhanced 
provision being made in 2011-12, the last year of the Eleventh Plan.                   (Para 2.4) 
The Committee in its 27
th Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) had 
commented on the Department’s inability to project its budgetary requirements in an 
effective way for the simple reason that the utilization of funds during the Tenth Plan 
was far from satisfactory. The Committee finds that the same trend continues in the 
Eleventh Plan period also. During 2007-08 a nd 2009-10,  keeping in view the pace of 
expenditure, allocated funds were substantiall y reduced at the RE stage. What is more 
worrisome is that the Department could not achieve optimum utilization of this 
reduced allocation during these two years.  Enhanced Plan allocation of Rs. 4450.00 in 
2009-10 failed to serve the purpose as it had to be brought down to Rs. 3825.25 crore, 
marginally lower than the 2008-09 allocation of Rs. 3650.00 crore.  Utilization status in 
2009-10 was more disappointing.  As on 28
th February, 2010, expenditure reported was 
Rs. 2559.61 crore which is less than the utilization of Rs. 3008.40 crore in the previous 
year. The Committee also takes note of th e fact that expenditure reported upto 31
st 
January 2010 under Plan head was only Rs. 2034. 06 crore. This clearly points to the fact 
that major utilization is taking place in th e last quarter of the financial year, thus 
indicating non-adherence to fiscal discipline.              (Para 2.5) 
 
 The Committee’s examination of the following major heads of account has 
revealed recurrent and persistent sub-optimal utilization of budgetary provisions 
(Plan) during the Eleventh Plan period:- 

 135
 
Sl.  
No. 
Major Heads 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
  BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Exp. Upto  
28-2-2010 
1. Hospitals and  
Dispensaries  
88.70 126.00 118.42 139.20 216.47 214.28 181.30 270.36 230.83 
2. Medical Education  
Training and 
 Research 
1016.95 891.81 872.31 1254.61 1512. 91 1175.62 2279.52 1659.03 1123.01 
3. Public Health 1829.85 1258.63 1144.09 2187. 80 1837.51 1550.99 1919.79 1806.95 1157.12 
  (Para 2.6) 
 
 The Committee is dismayed at the fact  that its continuous concerns and 
recommendations to the Department to put a proper mechanism in place for - 
presenting its case for fund requirement before the Planning Commission  in a 
realistic manner, and to arrest the trend of under utilization of funds seem to have 
failed to make any impact.  Atleast the Department needs to try some innovative 
methods to achieve optimum utilization of funds. Health is a crucial sector for the 
allround development of the nation and accordingly the Committee has been 
advocating higher allocation of funds for this sector every year.  But with the 
Department itself admitting to the slow pace of expenditure in respect of many 
schemes/programmes initiated by it, the Committee finds advocacy for additional 
funds serving no purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department 
to undertake a comprehensive analysis of th e trend of expenditure for the past three 
years with a view to identifying the underlying causes of underutilization. Such an 
exercise should enable the Department to no t only improve the utilization level of the 
budgeted funds but also to improve upon the existing system of assessing requirement 
of funds. The Committee is also of the opinion that the Department needs to take up 
with the implementing agencies as and when schemes are found not being 
implemented as per the Action Plan.                (Para 2.7) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the necessary action initiated and 
pursued by the Department to streamline the formulation of budgetary requirements 

 136
in a realistic fashion and also to expedite necessary approvals for operationalization of 
various formulated schemes/projects.                                                    (Para 2.8) 
The Committee is specially concerned with the slow pace of implementation of 
schemes like Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Sur aksha Yojna (PMSSY), Cancer Research, 
National Mental Health Programme, Assistance for Capacity Building for Trauma 
Centers, Oversight Committee, Upgradat ion/strengthening of Nursing Services, 
Strengthening/Upgradation of Pharmacy schools/colleges, Strengthening/creation of 
paramedical institutions as well as underutilization of allocated funds by some of the 
Hospitals/institutions. The Committee observes that this recurrent and persistent 
trend of underutilization is indicative of ineffectiveness of monitoring of 
implementation of schemes and utilization of funds.  The Committee therefore 
recommends to the Department to keep the activities of these schemes/institutions 
under constant scrutiny/monitoring and take urgent remedial steps so that the 
stumbling blocks in the optimum utilization of allocated/sanctioned funds are 
removed.                                       (Para 2.9) 
Committee’s attention has also been drawn by unspent balances lying with a 
number of Institutions.  As on 1
st December, 2009, maximum unspent balances 
amounting to Rs. 28.79 crore, Rs. 36.52 cror e and Rs. 80.43 crore were reported against 
the North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical Sciences, 
Shillong, LGB Regional Institute of Ment al Health, Tezpur, Assam and AIIMS New 
Delhi. Except AIIMS, the other two Institutes had unspent balances as on 1 st April, 
2009.  Reasons for availability of such a huge amount of unspent balances are not 
known to the Committee.  However, such a st ate of affairs in national level institutes 
is indeed a cause of concern for the Committ ee.  This clearly shows that some major 
activities both ongoing/proposed might be  adversely affected.  The Committee would 
appreciate if the matter is taken up with  the concerned authorities without further 
delay.                             (Para 2.10) 
The Committee takes note of the fact that the Department has taken remedial 
measures like for non-recurring grants, no fresh releases are being authorized unless 
audited Utilization Certificate for grant released in the year prior to the last year (i.e. 
with a ‘grace period’ of one year) has been received, subject to the condition that the 

 137
sanction for the earlier grant does not permit a longer period of utilization. Further, the 
provisions of the General Financial Rules, which require that in case of recurring 
grants, funds for the same purpose beyond 75% of the next year’s provision will not be 
released unless audited Utilization Certificate for the grants released in the previous 
year is received, are being strictly implemented. Impact of such measures does not 
seem to be very effective as number of pending UCs continues to remain very high.  
Not only this, such a trend also indicates that schemes are not being implemented as 
envisaged.                  (Para 2.12) 
The Committee notes that as a further effort to maximize liquidation of UCs, a 
communication has been sent by the Secr etary (Health) to the Principal Health 
Secretaries of all the States. If need be, th is exercise needs to be pursued further with 
higher authorities.                                                                        (Para 2.13) 
 
The Committee appreciates this forward movement w.r.t. audit of Autonomous 
Bodies/Societies/Grantee Institutions/Programmes receiving Grants-in-Aid from the 
Department. The Committee recommends to the Department to furnish the major 
audit findings of 2008-09 and 2009-10 and actio n taken thereon. A list of Autonomous 
Bodies/Societies/Grantee Institutions/Programmes likely to be covered during 2010-11 
may also be furnished to the Committee.                                                                 (Para 2.15) 
 
The Committee notes that the irregularities pointed out by the Internal Audit 
Wing in its audit paras concerning NVBDCP, Delhi, NIMHANS, Bangalore, ICMR, 
New Delhi and V.P. Chest Institute, Delhi University (for two paras 24 & 28) are yet to 
be settled.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the updated status in this 
regard.                                                                                                                              (Para 2.16) 
 The Committee has been keeping a clos e watch on the level of pendency of 
Audit paras contained in CAG Report on matters relating to the Department. The 
Committee observes that around 60 paras are under various stages of pendency and 
some of them date back to the period 1998-2000. Committee’s attention has been 
especially drawn by the following pending Audit paras: 
 

 138
Period of 
Report 
Para No Gist of CAG para 
2 of 1998 7.2 Loss due to expired medicine -GMSD 
2 of 2002 2 (chapter II) Working of Govt. Medical Store 
 Department, Kolkata 
3 of 2002 Chapter 1 (Section 2) All India Review on Prevention and  
Control of Diseases-National  
TB Control Programme  
3 of 2004 Entire Report National AIDS Control Programme 
3 of 2006 1.1.2 Annual Accounts of Autonomous 
 Bodies-NIMHANS/PGIMER/CNKI 
20 of 2007 Entire Report Performance Audit: Procurement of 
 medicines and medical equipment 
       
 The Committee would appreciate if matter of reconciliation of all the pending 
CAG Audit Paras is taken up with the concerned authorities on an urgent basis. The 
Committee would like to be apprised in this regard.                                             (Para 2.17) 
 
 The Committee has for long been empha sizing the Department to make all 
conceivable efforts to strengthen its intern al audit wing as also take all corrective 
measures so that the laid down procedures are adhered to in letter and spirit at the 
outset. The Committee is, however, surprised to observe that pendency of internal 
Audit Paras continues to be on the high side.  Following details are self-revealing: 
 
Year No. of Units Audited No. of Paras raised Paras Outstanding 
2007-08 68 737 448 
2008-09 73 651 478 
2009-10 44 415 396 
  
The Committee fails to understand as to why more than half of the Audit Paras 
raised during 2007-08 and 2008-09 continue to remain outstanding. The Committee 
would like to have a Status Note on the details of major units showing pendency 
alongwith instances of serious deviations from the prescribed financial norms (unit 
wise).                                                                                    (Para 2.18) 
 

 139
III CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
 
The Committee is unhappy to note the continuous underutilization of Plan 
funds during the first three financial years of the Eleventh  Plan, more so when the 
Department had sought an increase of funds during the RE stage during 2008-09 and 
2009-10 and it could not even utilize the funds provided to it at the BE stage. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that the Department has to justify the need for 
additional funds by ensuring optimum utilization thereof and be careful in 
placing/proposing its revised estimate so that funds are not unnecessarily blocked and 
go unspent.                                                                                                                        (Para 3.3) 
The Committee does not find any logic for under provisioning for CGHS under 
Materials & Supplies as also for IT activ ities Head which are bound to affect the 
quality of services available to the CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee also observes 
that total tentative pendency with regard to medical claims of pensioners as on 
January, 2010 is Rs. 200 crore, including bill s pertaining to 2008-09.  In such a scenario, 
allocation of Rs. 377.87 crore for pensioners  against the projected requirement of Rs. 
627.00 crore for 2010-11 is bound to increase th e pendency further.  The Committee is 
of the view that full allocation of required funds has to be there so that pensioners are 
not made to face uncalled for hardships.                                                                    (Para 3.5) 
 The Committee is happy to note that a number of initiatives under CGHS are 
proposed to be undertaken during 2010-11. On e such initiative is expansion of a pilot 
project for Preventive Health Check-up for pensioners and serving employees over the 
age of 40 years at CGHS dispensary, Sect or-12 and Sector-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi . 
The Committee would like the Department to share its experiences of the pilot project 
and recommends to the Department to expand the initiative to more dispensaries in a 
time-bound manner.                                                      (Para 3.6) 
 The Committee also welcomes the introd uction of a proposal under which the 
empanelled hospitals will forward the bill for the treatment of pensioner CGHS 
beneficiaries to UTI-TSL and payment of the same within 10 days.  Such an initiative 
is bound to help the pensioners in availing of healthcare without any hindrance.  
                       (Para 3.7) 

 140
The Committee views the introduction of the current proposal of the Ministry 
with serious concern. The Committee is no t convinced by Department’s categorical 
statement that it does not intend to replace the CGHS with this new insurance scheme. 
It is amply clear that the scheme would be mandatory for future employees and 
pensioners.  The Committee would like to point out that CGHS is one of the very 
important social security measures which ha s been providing health care services at 
economical rates to its beneficiaries for so many decades. The Committee fails to 
comprehend the rationale for depriving all the beneficiaries of such an essential 
service in the long run.  The Committee would like to point out that there is a well-
structured set up of CGHS dispensaries, Govt. Hospitals providing allopathic and 
AYUSH healthcare and also a number of empanelled diagnostic centres and private 
hospitals.  In the recent years a number of initiatives have also been taken for 
strengthening/revamping different comp onents under the Scheme.  A number of 
additional dispensaries are also proposed to be set up in the near future.  The existing 
CGHS scheme is part of the social responsibility of Govt. for its serving/retired 
employees. Full reimbursement as per th e prescribed norms is payable to the 
beneficiaries. There is no upper limit on annual expenditure on the treatment of a 
beneficiary.  The very idea of capping the amount of coverage to Rs. 5 lakh per family 
per year as well as the limit of coverage to only - Self, spouse, two dependent children 
and dependent parents and thereby forcing for payment of the fixed percentage of 
premium per additional dependent family member under the proposed scheme 
indicates that the Govt. intends to dilute its social obligation primarily to its 
employees. This is unacceptable to the Committee.                         (Para 3.9) 
The Committee is dismayed at the Departme nt’s approach from the very outset.  
First, it had taken the plea of a large number of private hospitals and diagnostic centres 
empanelled under the CGHS and the opposition  from the staff side to any such move. 
Then, subsequent to Committee’s recommendation that flexible timings are order of 
the day and  desirable in the interest of many of the CGHS beneficiaries who are 
unable to avail the facilities of dispensaries in the morning hours, the Department in 
its Action Taken Note on Committee’s 27
th Report had stated that the Ministry intends 
to take the matter before the Committee of Secretaries. The latest reply proves beyond 
doubt that the Department is not willing to move forward in the matter. Like in the 

 141
previous instances, the new plea taken by the Department is its inability to go ahead 
on account of its existing staff strength.  The Committee is of the opinion that if there 
is shortage of manpower, necessary action plan may be drawn up and approval sought 
for requisite manpower at appropriate level. The Committee would like to reiterate 
that the matter needs to be taken up seriou sly and in the right spirit.  The Committee 
would like to be informed of the progress made in this regard.         (Para 3.11) 
 
 The process of computerization under the CGHS which was initiated during 
2005 is continuing. The Committee notes that finally the Department has been able to 
finish the work of computerization in six cities i.e. Delhi, Kolkata, Nagpur, Pune, 
Chennai and Ranchi and it is nearing comp letion in Hyderabad, Mumbai and Patna. 
However, the Committee is constrained to no te that the Department has not been able 
to add momentum to the computerization wo rk even after the expiry of about five 
years as 15 cities still remain to be covere d. The Committee therefore recommends that 
the computerization work in the remaining cities be completed in a mission mode by 
the end of the Eleventh Plan.              (Para 3.12) 
 
 The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department to neutralize the 
teething problems afflicting the smooth implementation of the computerization. 
However, the ground realities are not much encouraging. The Committee is informed 
that there is shortage of computer operat ors and the doctors have to first see the 
patients and then feed the relevant data in the computer system leading to delays and 
the resultant long queues. This way the computerization has only been able to help 
keep a check on the inventory in the store room and save time in putting up request 
for local purchases wherever required. Howe ver, it has not been able to obviate the 
problems faced by the beneficiaries particularly the old age pensioners who have to 
stand for long hours in queue. The Committee,  therefore, recommends that adequate 
trained manpower may be made available at the earliest.                     (Para 3.14) 
 
3.16 The Committee is happy to note that after much delay the Department has 
finally been able to open a dispensary each in NOIDA and Dwarka. However, as the 
number of CGHS beneficiaries is very la rge in that area, the Committee recommends 

 142
to the Department to put all its acts togeth er to start the three dispensaries for which 
plots have been purchased in Dwarka and one dispensary at Gurgaon. 
                  (Para 3.16) 
 The Committee is given to understand that the workload on the dispensaries in 
Delhi has increased manifold. The Committee therefore recommends to the Department 
to have a realistic assessment of workload in CGHS dispensaries in Delhi with a view 
to explore opening up of new dispensaries to mitigate the problems faced by the 
beneficiaries. The Committee would recomm end to the Department to furnish a 
detailed status note on the no. of beneficiaries attached with each dispensary, zone-
wise in Delhi and the NCR and plans of the Department to open new dispensaries in 
underserved areas of Delhi and NCR. The Committee may also be briefed about the 
availability of unused land lying with CGHS in different cities covered by CGHS 
alongwith the purpose of their acquirement.            (Para 3.17) 
 
 The Committee is not very happy with the element of adhocism in such a 
crucial area. The Committee would like to point out that the number of vacancies in a 
particular grade are bound to put pressure on the existing workforce thereby 
compromising with the quality of services provided to the beneficiaries. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to urgently chalk out a strategy 
to fill up the vacant positions in all grades under CGHS in a time-bound manner.  
                  (Para 3.21) 
 
 The Committee has noticed substantial variation in approved rates of 
investigations / treatment procedures in various metro cities. The Committee does not 
find much merit in the argument of the Department that rates offered by the private 
hospitals and diagnostic centres depend upon the prevailing market rates, number and 
business volume from CGHS beneficiarie s likely to be derived by eligible 
institutions/private institutions, which vary from city to city. The Committee is of the 
opinion that substantial variation of 50 to 100 per cent in approved rates and that too in 
cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolk ata cannot be considered commensurate 
with the variation in economic dynamics. The Committee accordingly, recommends to 

 143
the Department to come up with a strategy to  counter this variation of rates by having 
minimum disparities in the rates.                        (Para 3.23) 
  
 Though the Committee appreciates Department’s initiative for ensuring quality 
service to CGHS beneficiaries and has no doubts over the professionalism of 
NABH/NABL, yet it does not find much merit in making it compulsory as a 
precondition for empanelment under C GHS. The NABL/NABH lay down certain 
norms and standards to be observed and on inspection, they provide accreditation to 
those who fulfill the said standards. There is no guarantee that once accredited, the 
Hospital/diagnostic centre will maintain those standards till the next inspection by 
NABL/NABH. Further, it has been observed that many of the reputed hospitals don’t 
go for accreditation under them. In such a scenario it may be counterproductive as the 
beneficiaries may be deprived of services  under such reputed Hospitals/diagnostic 
centres. The Committee accordingly recommends to the Department to be cautious on 
this move.                             (Para 3.25) 
 
 The Committee would also like to have  information regarding the number of 
NABH/NABL accredited Govt. hospitals/diagnostic centres as well as private 
hospitals/diagnostic centres empanelled under CGHS.                     (Para 3.26) 
 
 The Committee would like to point out that prior to 2001, all the premier 
specialized Hospitals had opted for CGHS empanelment.  The Committee wonders as 
to whether the recently empanelled Hospital of Delhi can provide the same services as 
being provided by Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Ho spital or Dharamshila Cancer Hospital.  
The Committee is also not aware about the quality status of the only empanelled 
Hospital.  The Committee reiterates that the kind of specialized services being offered 
by a particular hospital, specially for terminal diseases like cancer and not the lowest 
rates should be the basic criteria for selection of a hospital.  One must not forget that 
the main objective of CGHS is to provide qu ality health care at economical rates. Not 
only this, Government is supposed to reimbu rse only the packages rates.  Payment of 
difference in treatment expenditure is the co ncern of the beneficiary.  In Committee’s 
view, package rates need to be governed by quality service.  Nobody stops the 

 144
concerned authorities to negotiate with the applicant hospitals for arriving at mutually 
acceptable package rates. It cannot be that services offered by a small hospital can be 
considered on an equal footing with an advanced well established hospital.  The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends framing of a policy for revision of rates after 
every two years to realistically fix the ra tes of treatment. The Committee may be 
informed about the action taken by the Department in this regard.        (Para 3.28) 
 
 The Committee appreciates the number of initiatives taken by the Department 
for effective functioning of CGHS. The Committee however, feels that wide publicity 
through local and print media needs to be given in this regard.  Only then CGHS 
beneficiaries will be in a position to avail of such facilities.                     (Para 3.30)
   
IV SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHAVEER MEDICAL 
COLLEGE, NEW DELHI 
 
 The Committee notes that against projected Plan requirement of Rs. 180.60 crore 
for 2010-11 for the Hospital, allocation of Rs. 118.60 crore has been made. Given the 
fact that out of the RE plan allocation of Rs. 129.92 crore for 2009-10, the Hospital was 
able to spend Rs. 112.76 crore upto 28
th February, 2010, with every possibility of full 
utilization by the end of the year, the Committee is unable to comprehend the reasons 
behind a huge gap of Rs. 62.00 crore between the projected and budgeted funds for 
2010-11.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that additional funds be allocated for 
the Hospital at RE stage so that lack of funds should not hamper the re-developmental 
activities undertaken by the Hospital.                         (Para 4.2) 
 
 The Committee is very concerned with the vacancy position in different 
categories of posts at the Hospital. This coupled with the admission of the head of the 
Hospital itself that the sanctioned strength is far below the practical requirement, 
presents a sorry state of affairs. The Co mmittee is of the opinion that vacancies 
irrespective of any category are not only directly or indirectly bound to have an 
adverse impact on the quantity and quality of the services rendered by the Hospital 
but also result in overstressing of the existing staff. Further, the vacancies also have 
the potential to affect the quality of education imparted at the attached medical 

 145
college. The Committee is given to understand that in case of Resident Doctors, 
vacancies occur frequently and are filled regularly depending on the requirement. The 
Committee is, however, not able to comprehend as to why there is about 25% of 
vacancies at any given point of time. At least the Department can take pre-emptive 
action so that it has the next batch of Reside nt Doctors available to  step-in in place of 
the outgoing Resident Doctors. Similarly, vacancies in Group A and Group B Gazetted 
posts are far above the justifiable limits.  The Committee accordingly recommends to 
the Department to take up the issue of vacancies seriously and on priority basis. It also 
recommends a review of the requirement of manpower vis-à-vis the sanctioned 
strength of the Hospital and college. The Committee would like to be informed about 
the progress made in this regard.                         (Para 4.4) 
 Committee’s attention was also drawn towa rds acute shortage of  nursing staff at 
the Hospital. Non-availability of good accommodation for nursing staff was cited as the 
main factor responsible for such  a situation.  Existing staff qu arters at Srinivaspuri were 
considered to be too inadequate.  The Comm ittee was given to understand that another 
project was coming up at Dwarka. The Committee is of the view that provision of 
accommodation nearest to the Hospital is the basic requirement for all hospital 
employees, especially for the nurses rendering 24 hour services.  The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that provision of required accommodation facilities for 
nurses should be taken up on priority basis.  Viability of such facility at the Hospital 
premises itself under the ongoing Redevelopm ent Plan of the Hospital needs to be 
looked into.                             (Para 4.5) 
 The Committee is unhappy with the pace with which things are moving in 
respect of the Re-development Plan of the Hospital. The Committee in its 27
th Report 
had urged the Department to make wholeh earted efforts to expedite the procedural 
formalities regarding this. The Committee notes that the Department itself has now 
stated a timeline of six years for the entire work to complete. Keeping in view the 
inordinate delay already made since its inclusion in the Eleventh Plan, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to make all conceivable efforts so that the whole 
redevelopment work is completed within this period of six years. For this to happen, 
targets need to be set, resources placed  at the disposal in time and implementing 

 146
agencies need to be made accountable to  accomplish the set targets from the very 
outset.                                                     (Para 4.7) 
 The Committee is extremely disappointe d with the persisting slow progress 
made by the Department w.r.t. setting up of the Renal Transplantation Unit and IVF 
Unit. The Committee recommends to the Department to remove all bottlenecks in 
setting up of the two units at the earliest. The Committee would like to have a status 
note on the same inter-alia containing details regarding the original timeline set, 
reasons for inordinate delay, resultant cost escalation and fresh timeline set with 
special efforts taken to meet the timeline this time.                       (Para 4.10) 
 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that the allocated funds for 2009-10 
could not be utilised even after steep reduction at the RE stage. To add to this the 
Department’s reply that the reduction was due  to realistic assessment of the needs of 
the Institute, proves that the earlier estimate, at the BE stage was not proper. Moreover, 
the fact that the College could not utilize this reduced amount also makes it clear that 
there is some element of improper planning at some stage. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends to the Department to have a realistic assessment of the fund 
requirement for the College at the outset itself.                     (Para 4.12) 
 
 V DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPTIAL, NEW DELHI 
 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that inspite of a lot of developmental work 
being undertaken by the Hospital, several of the items of work like setting up of the 
Renal Transplantation Unit have gone beyond the targeted time-line.  Concerned that 
time-overruns are certain to result in cost overruns, the Committee recommends that 
the Hospital chalk out a time-bound Action Plan for such projects. The Committee 
would like to point out that the emphasis should not only be on the optimal 
utilization but also on the judicious utiliz ation of scarce funds. The Committee at the 
same time recommends to the Department to ensure that the developmental activities 
initiated by the Hospital do not get hampered due to scarcity of funds.           (Para 5.4) 
 
 The Committee welcomes the proposal to start a general maternity ward, 
construction of a New Casualty Building, multi-storey super speciality block and 

 147
setting up of Centre of Excellence for Mental Health. However, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to keep a close watch on the progress of new 
initiatives from the outset so that they are accomplished as targeted. The Committee 
also recommends to the Department to take  all necessary steps for early possession of 
land in the G point near Trauma Care Cent re. The Committee may be informed of the 
progress made w.r.t. the new initiatives.                         (Para 5.5) 
 
 At the outset the Committee places its displeasure over the mismatch in the 
figures provided to it with respect to vacant posts vis-à-vis ‘sanctioned and in-position’ 
posts.  For example, in respect of Group ‘A’ CHS posts, sanctioned and in-position 
posts are 219 and 194 (including 20 contractua l posts) respectively while vacancies 
shown are 27.  Such variations exist in respec t of some other categories of posts also.  
The Committee would like the Department to explain this mismatch. The Committee 
is constrained to find a lot of vacancies across the grades. The Hospital is already 
overburdened with patient load and in such a scenario it is really a matter of concern 
that such a large number of vacancies are allowed to continue. The Committee is of the 
opinion that in the smooth functioning of the hospital services, all the posts whether 
they are in technical side, nursing side or in the clerical side, have their part to play. 
Vacancies beyond permissible limits in an y grade affect the overall patient care 
offered by the Hospital as well as resu lt in overburdening the existing set of 
employees. Taking into account the increased patient load, the Committee 
recommends to the Department to take immediate steps for reassessment of the 
manpower requirement in the Hospital and fill up the vacant posts in the various 
grades at the earliest. The Committee may be apprised of the steps initiated by the 
Department to streamline the existing procedure of recruitment so that vacancies in 
the different grades are filled up at the earliest.                       (Para 5.7) 
 
 
VI ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS) 
  
The Committee is anguished to note that out of a total allocation of Rs. 1461 
crore for the Eleventh Plan, the Institute do es not seem to be able to utilize the 
earmarked funds for the Plan period during the first three years of the Plan period. 

 148
The Institute has been able to utilize on ly Rs. 648.00 crore (as on 28-2-2010).  The 
Committee sees little hope for optimum utiliz ation of remaining funds during the last 
two years of Eleventh Plan. As a result, the initiatives/ongoing projects are not likely 
to be executed as targeted originally. Th e Committee observes that as many as 21 
projects were envisaged to be completed dur ing the Eleventh Plan for which an outlay 
of Rs. 623.63 crore was made. The Committee is, however, dismayed to note that by the 
end of the first three years of the Plan, utilization reported is only Rs. 70.18 crore. The 
situation is worsened by the fact that work in respect of as many as 14 projects is yet to 
start. These projects include expansio n of OPD Block and New Emergency Ward, 
Burns Unit at JPN Apex Trauma Centre, Multi-level parking, Pediatrics Surgery. Out 
of total expenditure of Rs. 70.18 crore, Rs. 55.00 crore has been utilized for minor works 
in Hospital/ hostels/ residential areas of the campus. Thus, progress made in the 
remaining six projects can also be considered at the initial stage only. The Committee 
cannot remain a silent spectator to present circumstances as AIIMS is India’s premier 
Institute providing specialized health services to patients from across the country. The 
Committee is of the firm view that it is  high time that an effective monitoring 
mechanism is set in motion.                                      (Para 6.5) 
 
  The Committee takes note of the fact that AIIMS has initiated the process 
of making a composite Redevelopment Plan of its Masjid Moth, Ansari Nagar and 
A.V. Nagar campuses. The work of prepara tion of redevelopment plan of A.V. Nagar 
campus has been entrusted to CPWD. The work of Ansari Nagar and Masjid Moth 
campuses has been entrusted to HSCC by the Governing Body on 23
rd January, 2009. 
The concept Master Plan was finally a pproved by the Proj ect Implementation 
Committee on 12 th May, 2009. The revised Master Plan as presented before the 
Institute Body in December, 2009 has since been submitted to NDMC for approval. 
HSCC has also been entrusted with the co nsultancy and project management work of 
the redevelopment of old OPD Block.                                     (Para 6.7) 
 
 While appreciating the candid statement of the Health Secretary, the Committee 
fails to comprehend the basis for such a Company being allowed to be associated with 
carrying out tasks of such magnitude and of public interest. The Committee 

 149
understands that a number of projects in different areas are being handled by HSCC at 
present. The Committee recommends that a St atus Note giving all the details of the 
various projects awarded to HSCC may be furnished to it at the earliest. The 
Department should take the issue very seriously and if need be, some kind of penalty 
clause may be introduced in the agreement itself to fix liability for any delay. The 
Committee may be apprised of the development in this regard.                      (Para 6.9) 
 
 Committee’s attention has been drawn by a very disturbing trend of utilization 
of allocated funds by AIIMS. Director, AIIMS during his deposition before the 
Committee, informed that during 2008-09 and 2009-10 some Plan Funds were diverted 
to Non-plan for paying the Sixth Pay commission’s arrears and various other 
allowances to AIIMS employees. As a result,  development projects could not be taken 
up. Frequent changes in the plan projects also had a negative impact . The Committee 
would like to point out that diversion of plan funds to non-plan side is in direct 
contravention of fiscal norms. The Committee deplores such a development at the 
premier Institute of the country. It seems that this trend has been continuing since 
long. The Committee wonders about the role of Internal Audit Wing and Financial 
Adviser of the Department. The Committee is also very unhappy with the non-
provision of required non-plan funds meant for payment of arrears and allowances to 
the employees which are anticipated beforehand. The Committee would appreciate if 
fiscal management at AIIMS is brought to  order. The Committee cannot accept the 
diversion of plan funds meant for development projects to non-plan side. Urgent 
action needs to be, taken in this crucial ma tter so that this trend is not allowed to 
continue any further.                                                                                                     (Para 6.10) 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that though inordinately delayed, finally there 
is some concrete action on the recommendations of the Valiathan Committee Report. 
The Committee would, however, recommend full implementation of the 
recommendations at an early date. The Co mmittee also hopes th at the process of 
examination of recommendations requiring  statutory amendments by the High 
Powered Committee will be completed at the earliest and implemented without 
unnecessary delay.                                                  (Para 6.13) 

 150
 The Committee is unhappy with the dilly-dallying approach of the Department 
on the issue of setting up of the Burns Unit. The Committee notes with displeasure 
Department’s attitude from the outset whic h has been evident from the delay in the 
matter. ‘Avoiding duplication’ can never be  considered as a valid justification for 
dropping this project. The Committee notes th at funds to the tune of Rs. 48 crore have 
been earmarked for this purpose during the Eleventh Plan. The Committee is unaware 
whether the Department, before taking a view in the matter, has taken into account the 
patient load in the Burns Unit at the Safdarjung Hospital. Further, the Committee 
would also like to point out that availability of any service at Safdarjung Hospital 
cannot be made the criteria for not initiating the same at AIIMS. If that be so, the same 
argument can be put forth for not adding a particular service at Safdarjung Hospital 
since the same was available at the next door AIIMS.  The Committee would like to 
point out that with the ever increasing patient load, both the hospitals have been 
providing exemplary services. Any addition or expansion of service will be going to 
provide better healthcare to our people.                                                         (Para 6.15)
     
 The Committee is pained by the acute shortage of the manpower at the Institute 
and is of the opinion that the same is not justifiable in any manner. The Committee 
applauds the existing set of employees of the Institute, who inspite of the tremendous 
work pressure, have been able to uphold the high standards and reputation of the 
Institute. With large number of vacancies at Faculty level posts, it is practically 
difficult to maintain the high standards of patient care and teaching in the Institute for 
which it has been known. The Committee accordingly recommends to the Department 
to make all out efforts to fill up the vacant  posts – both faculty and non-faculty and all 
other groups in a time-bound manner.                                              (Para 6.19) 
 
 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the Department’s view. The 
Committee is aware that as per media repo rts during recent time some very prominent 
doctors of the Institute have left it citing pathetic working conditions. This coupled 
with the existing vacancies does not present a rosy picture of the Institute.  
                                        (Para 6.21) 

 151
 The Committee would also like to invite the attention of the Department to its 
concerns raised in its 27th Report on Demands for Grants of the Department wherein it 
has cited a WHO report  according to which out of 428 students of AIIMS (studying 
between 1989 and 2000), 233 (54%) are residing abroad. This presents a very disturbing 
picture that on the one hand there is acute sh ortage of staff in the Institute and on the 
other hand pass outs from this one of the best training grounds in India are turning to 
greener pastures, that too after availing highly subsidized quality education. The 
Committee therefore reiterates it’s earlier stand that the Department should seriously 
come up with some kind of bond or legislation in respect of premier institutes like 
AIIMS so that the young graduates or post graduates are made to serve in AIIMS or 
other Government Hospitals/Institutes for a certain period. The Committee wishes to 
be informed of some concrete steps in this regard.                      (Para 6.22)
 
 
VII POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION & RESEARCH 
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that durin g the first three years  of the Eleventh 
Plan, there has not been a reduction in the Pl an funds at the RE stage. This is an 
indication that the allocated funds are being fully utilized by the Institute for its 
developmental activities.                                        (Para 7.3) 
 The Committee is constrained to note that the fund allocation during the first 
four years (including the current fiscal) amounts to less than half of the 11
th Plan 
allocation.  The funds allocated for the first 3 years of the Plan have been utilized 
optimally by the Institute.  The Committ ee is not aware about any new projects 
proposed to be taken up during the remaining period of the Plan. If that is not the 
case, the Committee can only conclude that th ere is some unrealistic assessment of the 
requirements of the Institute for the current Plan period leading to excess allocation of 
funds.  It is highly impractical to make out that the Institute can spend an enormous 
amount of Rs. 330 crore left for the final year of the Plan. The Committee would like to 
be updated in this regard.                                          (Para 7.5) 
 
 The Committee notes that all the projects undertaken by the Institute during the 
Ninth and Tenth Plan are functional. The only exception  is the Advanced Trauma 

 152
Centre (Phase-I) which is stated to be complete but not functional. The Committee 
would like to have the reasons for the abnormal delay in the operationalisation of the 
Centre.                                                   (Para 7.6)  
 
 As regards the projects undertaken during the Eleventh Plan, the Committee 
finds that out of 14 projects, 6 are reported to be complete and functional.  The 
Committee has been informed that the only major project with an estimated 
expenditure of Rs. 35.92 crore is the Advanced Trauma Centre (Phase II) which is 
likely to be completed by September, 2010. The Committee would, however, like to 
point out that the Centre needs to be made functional also at the earliest.  The 
Committee is not aware about the likely date of Advanced Trauma Centre (Phase I) 
becoming functional. For a project completed in the previous Plan remaining non-
functional by the end of next Plan period  is indeed a cause of serious concern.  The 
Committee would appreciate if Advanced Trau ma Centre (Phase I) is made functional 
without any further delay. Simultaneously preparatory exercise for 
sanction/appointment of required staff and procurement of equipment for the 
Advanced Trauma Centre (Phase II) may also be initiated.                      (Para 7.7) 
 
7.9 The Committee is constrained to observe that nearly 50 percent of the vacancies 
are lying vacant at the level of Additional/Associate Professors. The Committee opines 
that the teaching standards at the Institute are being compromised with such a large 
number of vacancies. This situation can not be allowed to remain to persist any 
further. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to go for special 
recruitment drives at the earliest to fill up the vacant positions at the Institute. The 
Committee may be apprised of the efforts put in by the Department in this regard.  
                               (Para 7.9) 
 
VIII NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI  REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH 
& MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG 
 
The Committee would like to be briefed about the components of ‘further 
development plan’ of the Institute. The Committee would also like to be given an idea 

 153
whether the Institute has become fully operational and all the pending items of 
developmental work have been completed.                                     (Para 8.3) 
 The Committee is very concerned at the continuance of a very large number of  
vacant positions  in the Institute that is supposed to be developed on the pattern of  
AIIMS, New Delhi and PGIMER, Chandigarh and provide  specialized0 health care to 
the deprived regions of North East India . The Committee notes that the efforts of the 
Institute to fill up Group “B” and “C” technical posts have yielded some fruits. But the 
same is not the case w.r.t. other categories of posts.  The Committee wonders as to how 
the Institute can be considered functional when more than one-third of sanctioned 
Faculty posts are lying vacant and out of total strength of 189 posts of SRD/JRD, only 
83 are in position. Both the teaching and healthcare facilities as envisaged are simply 
not there at present in the Institute.  The Committee is of the opinion that manpower 
alongwith the infrastructure is the foremost  important ingredient which is a must for 
smooth functioning of this Institute. The infrastructure having been put in place to a 
satisfactory level needs to be backed with requisite manpower. The Committee 
accordingly recommends to the Department to approach the CAT (Guwahati Bench) or 
an appropriate authority with a sense of urgency in public interest so that the case is 
settled or at least the stay is vacated to fa cilitate an early filling up of the vacancies. 
The Department needs to keep its relentless  efforts to attract manpower by special 
incentives and special recruitment drives. The Committee may be updated on the 
issue.                                           (Para 8.6) 
 
IX CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, KANKE, RANCHI (CIP, RANCHI) 
 
 The Committee notes with displeasure that the matter of creation of additional 
posts continues to be at a proposal stage ev en after about two years of directions given 
by the Jharkhand High Court. If this is the state of affairs inspite of a High Court 
intervention, the Committee is compelled to  conclude that things are not going to 
show any marked improvement in the near future. The Committee would like to point 
out that the Department has to play a more pro-active role in improving the services in 
a national level premier institute, especially because of High Court intervention. The 
Department must be aware that the area of services where CIP used to hold a 

 154
commanding position in the earlier times is the most neglected area of our present-day 
healthcare.                                                               (Para 9.5) 
 
9.6 As regards the redevelopment plan, insp ite of the proposal being approved way 
back in 2008-09, the progress w.r.t. the redevelopment of the Institute is at snail’s pace. 
The Committee would like to have a status note on the redevelopment plan of the 
Institute inter-alia covering the components of the plan, funds earmarked and spent, 
timeline set for completion alongwith the progress made so far. The Committee 
recommends to the Department to give all requisite support – in monetary terms as 
well as in terms of expeditious bureaucrati c clearances so that the redevelopment of 
the institute is achieved in a time bound manner.                         (Para 9.6) 
 
X LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE AND SMT. SUCHETA KRIPALANI 
HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI   
 
  The Committee is disappointed that there has been considerable delay in 
achieving the target of first phase of rede velopment of the college  and its associated 
hospital. When enquired about the same, the Principal and Medical Superintendent of 
the College during his deposition before the Committee on 23
rd March, 2010 informed 
that EFC for the comprehensive redevelopment plan envisaged three years back has 
already been cleared. The same was approved by the Cabinet Committee of Economic 
Affairs in the beginning of the last year . The approved plans were subsequently 
submitted to specific authorities of the De lhi Government and other institutions and 
out of 12 such authorities, approval from the Delhi Urban Arts Commission and the 
Forest Department was yet to be received. Accordingly, construction work could not be 
started. As soon as all the NOCs are av ailable, tender would be floated for 
construction of buildings under phase -1  of Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan                    
                  (Para 10.4) 
 The Committee would appreciate if all the procedural delays coming in the way 
of Phase I of Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan of the Lady Hardinge Medical 
College and Sucheta Kriplani Hospital are removed at the earliest. The Department 
needs to play a more pro-active role in such matters.                                 (Para 10.5)
    

 155
XI COMMON RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING HOSPITALS 
 
  The Committee is concerned with the procedural hassles coming in the way of 
the developmental work in various hospitals and institutions of repute under the 
Department. Though the Committee considers the laid down procedures as means of 
systemic checks and balances, yet it finds no merit in their coming in the way of 
urgent developmental work, and that too for a project targeted at taking care of the 
health care needs of the common man of the country. The Committee is of the 
considered opinion that the imperatives of development and environmental concerns 
need to be reconciled without further loss of time to avoid further time overruns in 
respect of this project.  The Committee th erefore recommends to the Department to 
have a centralized cell under a dedicated senior officer to coordinate all such 
procedural issues with the various agencies. The Department needs to play a proactive 
role here. If required, the matter may be taken up at the senior most level to facilitate 
early sanction of requisite statutory cl earances and the concerned approving 
authorities may also be apprised of the Co mmittee’s concern over approval delays in 
this regard.  The Committee may be informed about the progress made in this regard. 
                            (Para 11.1) 
  The Committee is pained by the fact that the healthcare fraternity under the 
Department has to function under very stressful conditions.  Taking strong view of the 
enormous patient load in almost all the institutions/hospitals under the Department, 
which is in many cases manifold than envisaged, the Committee would like to make a 
general recommendation to the Departme nt.  It recommends strongly to the 
Department to have an independent reas sessment of manpower done in all the 
institutions/hospitals under it – sanctioned vis-à-vis the patient load of the hospital. 
The Committee also recommends a close mo nitoring of the vacancies in all the 
institutions/hospitals of the Department under a dedicated senior officer for 
coordination between the institutions/hospitals and the recruitment agencies so as to 
facilitate early filling up of vacant posts.                       (Para 11.2) 
XII OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE  
 The Committee views with serious concern the non-implementation of the 
recommendations of the Oversight Committee.  The matter is more serious when the 

 156
Department is apparently going for expansion only in those disciplines where seats 
can be enhanced initially with existing in frastructure with suitable augmentation of 
manpower. Funds do not seem to be a problem in the instant case as most of the 
approved outlay for the Eleventh Plan is still lying unutilized. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends to the Department to chart out a concrete strategy for 
implementing this constitutional obligation in a time bound manner and on priority 
basis. The Committee would also like the Department to explain as to how the 
expenditure figures of Rs. 16.90 crore (upto 28-2-2010) jumped to Rs. 50.00 crore in a 
matter of one month.                          (Para 12.4) 
 
XIII PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJNA (PMSSY)  
  
 Such a slow progress of implementation is bound to result in huge amount 
remaining unutilized at the end of the Plan period. The Committee had time and again 
been inviting the attention of the Department towards the urgent need to take some 
corrective measures, but it appears that the sa me has not yielded fruits atleast as of 
now.                   (Para 13.4) 
 
 After an assessment of the progress of  various components under the Scheme, 
the Committee in its 27
th Report had made its apprehensions very clear that with the 
way things were moving, it would take at least another Plan period before the six 
AIIMS like Institutions would actually start functioning. After a gap of two years, the 
Committee finds that its apprehensions have proved to be correct. It is still a distant 
dream to see these Institutions functioning . The reason is that even after the 
completion of infrastructure related work , the Department has to concentrate on a 
whole lot of issues including manpower.  The Committee would like to point out that 
this ambitious project is of critical importance for creating much required tertiary 
health care facilities in the country. Under funding of the project should not be 
allowed to come in the way of access to quality and affordable health care for all.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that higher level of funds, as required, be allocated 
under this head at RE stage during 2010-11.                       (Para 13.6) 
 

 157
 In the opinion of the Committee, the reasons cited for the delay are very flimsy 
in nature and indicative of ineffectiveness of monitoring and coordination 
mechanism.  The Committee is of the firm opinion that had  proper coordination been 
done with the concerned agencies of the St ates and if the Department had pursued the 
project vigorously towards achieving the set targets, it could have approached the 
State Governments at an appropriate high er level to thrash out State specific 
problems. The same is apparently lacking on the part  of the Department.                  
 
(Para 13.10) 
 
 The Committee has been monitoring the progress of implementation of PMSSY 
very closely.  The Committee observes th at scheduled dates of various stages of 
different components of both AIIMS like institutions alongwith their residential 
complexes and upgradation of 13 existing medical colleges have been revised time and 
again for varying reasons.  The Committee is perturbed to note that this ambitious 
programme was launched on 15
th July, 2003.  Even after a lapse of more than six years, 
the likely date for selection of contractors has been given as April, 2010, with civil 
work supposed to start in June, 2010 and date of completion projected as December, 
2012.  As per the latest information, bids  for the project are under finalization.  
Similarly, with regard to residential complexes, time-lines have been revised, 
indicating a delay of six months to one year.  The Committee apprehends that there are 
all chances of further revision of date of completion.  For example, whereas only 15 
percent and 20 percent of construction work in respect of Bhubaneswar and Bhopal 
residential complex, respectively, has been reported, their likely date of completion is 
December, 2010.                                      (Para 13.12) 
  
 Position with regard to upgradation of 13 medical colleges is also quite 
discouraging.  Here also with the exception of Trivandrum Medical College (reported 
to be complete and ready for inauguration), likely date of completion in respect of the 
remaining colleges indicates shifting 6 months to one year.  Here again in respect of 
RIMS, Ranchi 15 percent progress, and fo r Srinagar Medical College, 39 percent 
progress has been made so for.                                              (Para 13.13) 
 

 158
 The Committee appreciates the candid admission of the Secretary regarding 
errors of judgment of the Department and lack of adequate monitoring while 
implementing the Scheme. The Committee would, however, like to point out that this 
alone would not suffice. The new monitoring mechanism has to be in place 
immediately and every effort has to be made to adhere to the fresh timelines set under 
various components of the Scheme.  The Committee would also like to emphasize that 
the revised estimate of Rs. 820 crore for each AIIMS like Institution is more than two 
and half times when compared with original estimate of Rs. 332 crore.  Therefore, it is 
essential to adhere to the new time lines, otherwise there is every possibility of further 
escalation.  The Committee finds that PMSSY was conceptualized in the first year of 
the Tenth Plan.  As the things stand today, one can hope of its becoming operational 
only in the beginning of the Twelfth Plan.                                 (Para 13.14) 
 
 The Committee also recommends to the Department to start ground work in 
respect of the issues like requirement of manpower, machines and equipments etc. so 
that once the construction work is comple te, no further delay is caused in the 
operationalisation of the Institutes.            (Para 13.15) 
 
 The Committee takes a very serious view of the persistent non-compliance of an 
assurance given by the then Secretary during his presentation before the Committee 
during examination of Demand for Grants (2008- 09) of the Ministry to furnish a status 
report to the Committee regarding implemen tation of PMSSY project after every two 
months. The project is one of the landmark initiatives to enable the people of this 
country across states to have access to quality healthcare. Further, it involves enormous 
amount of precious tax payer’s money.  Therefore the Committee needs to keep a close 
watch on the progress of the Scheme. The Committee therefore reminds the 
Department to be careful and keep its assurance given before a Parliamentary 
Committee mandated to scrutinize its work.                      (Para 13.16) 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that the second phase will extend the reach of 
AIIMS like facilities to more underserved areas of the country and will help in 
upgradation of other medical college institutions. However, the Committee cautions 

 159
the Department to be careful from the outset  so that the problems that afflicted the 
first phase do not recur here. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in implementing the second phase of the Scheme.                   (Para 13.19) 
 
XIV DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES 
  
 The Committee is not happy with the abnormal delays in bureaucratic 
procedures of seeking approval. However, now that the new scheme has got the 
requisite approval of the Cabinet, the Committee would recommend to the 
Department to pursue the various components under the scheme vigorously. The 
Committee also recommends to the Departme nt to make a realistic assessment of 
funds requirement for various components and seek more funds at the RE stage.  
(Para 14.5) 
 On an analysis of various physical targets set and their achievement level 
during the first three years of the Eleven th Plan, the Committee finds a discouraging 
scenario. Achievement in the most crucial component, i.e., training of nursing 
personnel has remained much below the the targeted coverage. Against a target of 
training of 8000, 9000 and 12000 nursing personnel during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10, 
funds could be released for training of only 2400, 2880 and 2800 nursing personnel 
during these three years. It is not known as to whether the reported number of nurses 
could be eventually trained.                                              (Para 14.6)  
 
14.7 The Committee is not prepared to accept the stand of the Department that for 
both training and strengthening of institutions proposals have to come from the 
States. When the Department has started the scheme, and rightly so as per requirement 
of the profession, it has to take lead and responsibility to make it successful. It should 
motivate the nursing institutions to come up with proposals to avail the benefits under 
the scheme. Mere formal requests do not make any scheme successful. Concerted 
efforts need to be made by the Department in this regard.                                   (Para 14.7) 
 
 
14.8 Another area of concern for the Committee has been strengthening of RAK 
College of Nursing as Centre of Excellence. Even before the beginning of the Eleventh 

 160
Plan, this project is being shown as unde r progress. The Committee finds that the 
work for upgradation of RAK College of Nursing into Centre of Excellence had been 
entrusted to HSCC which has completed the work of renovation of existing building. 
However, the new construction has not ye t started due to pending clearances and 
approval of concept plan from various statut ory bodies. When asked on this specific 
issue during the meeting of the Committee on 23
rd March, 2010, the Committee was 
informed that there has been a problem due to the fact that the Department does not 
have the ownership of the land in favour of RAK College of Nursing. The matter has 
been taken up with the Department of Urban Development and the Land and 
Development Office and would be sorted out.                        (Para 14.8)  
 
 The Committee is not happy with the state of affairs of the work of upgradation 
of RAK College of Nursing into Centre of Excellence. This is the position when this 
old institution is located in Delhi itself.  The Committee wonders as to whether any 
attempt of monitoring has been made by the Department so far. The project has been 
in the pipeline for many years now. The Committee recommends to the Department to 
make sincere efforts to sort out all the outstanding issues and problem areas 
hampering in the upgradation of the College at the earliest.                               (Para 14.9) 
 
 The Committee appreciates and welcomes the aforesaid initiatives taken by the 
Department. The Committee infers that thes e measures will help in producing more 
number of nursing personnel. The Committee is happy to note that the Department 
has constructed 413 dwelling units for nurses  and the Directorate of Estate has also 
allowed accommodation for Nurses in genera l pool. However, the Committee is still 
skeptical whether this would suffice the requirements. The Committee would like to 
be enlightened about the availability of dwelling units vis-à-vis the demand.   
                                      (Para 14.12) 
 The Committee is of the considered opinion that maintaining a Live Register of 
nurses would be of great help in formulating the various policies w.r.t. the nursing 
personnel. Accordingly, the Department needs to take up the issue with all the State 
Councils with some sense of urgency. The Department may also think of some kind of 
framework whereby the State Councils are persuaded to start maintaining a live 

 161
register of nurses as also share the details with the Department to facilitate better 
policy formulation.                                    (Para 14.14) 
 
 The Committee is very concerned with the shocking findings of the  nursing 
training programmes in Bihar, Orissa, Ra jasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh 
that came into light after the  rapid assessment made by WHO, in collaboration with 
Indian Nursing Council. The picture of other states is also stated to be no better. While 
appreciating the initiative taken by the Department, the Committee recommends that a 
strategy needs to be chalked out whereb y institutions getting grants from the 
Department are brought under some kind of regular training quality assessment 
schedule. This would not only help in plugging the loopholes but also help in 
devising better strategy for achieving desired training standards.                   (Para 14.16) 
 
XV NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME (NMHP) 
 
 The Committee observes that during the first two years of the Plan period, 
utilization of allocated funds was minimal. Against an allocation of Rs. 70.00 crore in 
both the years, expenditure reported at the end of year was only Rs. 14.57 crore and Rs. 
23.26 crore, respectively. Plan allocation of Rs. 70.00 crore in 2009-10 was reduced to Rs. 
55.00 crore at the RE stage. The expenditure reported as on 28
th February 2010 is Rs. 38 
crore only.                             (Para 15.3) 
 
 The Committee finds that achievement level vis-à-vis the physical targets set 
during 2007-08 and 2008-09 was also very discouraging as indicated below: 
2007-08      
 
Physical Targets Achievement level 
Extension of Distt. Mental  
Health Programme in 30  
old/new districts 
 
Upgradation of psychiatric  
wings in 25 medical colleges   
Funds released to 15 new DMHPs and  
5 old DMHPs 
 
 
Funds released to 7 medical colleges 
 
 
 

 162
2008-09 
Physical Targets       
  
Achievement level 
Assistance to 125 new and  
100 old districts 
Upgradation of 2 existing  
Mental Hospitals to the  
level of NIMHANS     
Grants released to 7 old districts.  
For new districts, scheme is under process       
                  
                              ---- 
                 (Para 15.4) 
 
 The Committee is disappointed to note that situation has deteriorated further in 
2009-10.  Following details are self-revealing: 
 
                  Target Achievement (till date)                  Remarks 
Extension of DMHP to 50 new  
districts 
 
 
Support to 110  Old DMHPs on 
 new pattern  
 
 
Modernisation of Mental  
Hospital  : 4 
 
 
Upgradation of Psychiatric wings  
of 38 Medical Colleges/ General  
Hospitals 
 
 
Initiation of work of 11 Centers of 
Excellence and 40 PG departments 
in mental health specialties; 
 
 
 
 
NGO/PPP 
 
 
Other (Monitoring, Evaluation &  
Research): 
Nil 
 
 
 
2 DMHP on existing  
pattern 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
Upgradation of  
Psychiatric wings of 3  
Medical Colleges/ General
 
Hospitals 
 
 
Initiation of work of 6  
Centers of Excellence and  
13 PG departments in   
mental health specialties 
 at 7 institutes; 
 
 
Nil 
 
 
Completion of evaluation 
of NMHP Programme 
Expansion to new DMHP not  
approved by Government 
 
Non submission of Utilization  
Certificate led to grant of  
support to only 2 old DMHP.  
 
Non receipt of complete  
proposal from the State  
Government.  
 
Lack of receipt of adequate and  
complete proposals under the  
scheme from the States.  
 
 
 
Lack of receipt of adequate and  
complete proposals for Center  
of Excellence and PG  
departments under the scheme  
from the States.  
 
 
Scheme not yet approved by 
Government  
 
Research component of NMHP 
 not approved yet 
                 (Para 15.5) 
 
 The Committee is aware that the slow pace of the implementation during the 
Tenth Plan has already resulted in the spillover of many components of the 
Programme to the Eleventh Plan. The Comm ittee is dismayed at the persistent 
discouraging level of achievements under the parameters, viz., the financial and 
physical, set under this ambitious Programm e. The Committee has been voicing its 

 163
concern time and again in this regard and recommending to the Department to take 
immediate corrective measures to achieve th e targets set under the Programme. But no 
corrective measure seems to have been taken by the Department so far.          (Para 15.6) 
 
 The Committee is aware that active cooperation of the State Governments is key 
to the success of a Programme of vast magnitude like this. However, it cannot buy the 
argument that it is only the States who are responsible for not achieving the intended 
results under the Programme. The fact that EFC considered the proposal of NMHP 
only in July, 2008 and only after that it was placed before the CCEA for approval is 
proof of the procedural ha ssles that are hampering the Programme. Further, the 
Department needs to take a pro-active approach and try to bring all the States on board 
for effective implementation of the Programme and have regular interactions with 
them.  It is high time that the problem areas hampering the implementation of the 
Programme are identified and suitable and timely action taken accordingly. 
                 (Para 15.8) 
 As regards, the issue of shortage of manpower like trained Psychiatrists, 
Clinical Psychologists and Psychiatric social workers, the Committee shares the 
concerns of the Department. The Committee can only suggest that the requisite 
manpower needs to be attracted by offering a suitable compensation package and 
offering good working conditions. Another initiative which can be taken is to increase 
the number of seats in the field of Mental Health in the medical colleges across the 
country. The Committee would like to be briefed about the steps taken by the 
Department in this regard.                                     (Para 15.9) 
 
15.11 The Committee notes with displeasure that though the Department has 
proposed to include 200 more districts under this component during the Eleventh Plan, 
final approval is yet to be given by the competent authority. The Committee is 
informed that during 2010-11, the Department  proposes to implement DMHP on new 
pattern to only existing 123 districts.  
 
 Majority of districts in the country ha ve not still been covered under District 
Mental Health Programme, which was initiated  way back in 1996.  It has taken almost 

 164
15 years for extending the component to only 123 districts. With about 500 districts still 
remaining outside the reach of this vital aspect of the Programme, the Committee can 
only conclude that it has failed to take off so far. With the Secretary herself indicating 
a further delay, the Committee does not ha ve hope of more districts being covered 
under this component and of the Programm e in the near future. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Department to seriously take all conceivable measures to 
cover the 200 Districts under DMHP, as envisaged in the Eleventh Plan period.  
                           (Para 15.12) 
 
XVI NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME (NCCP) 
  
 The Committee has been witnessing a consistent unsatisfactory level of 
performance under the various components of  the Programme. Gap in physical targets 
and achievement level under different components of the Programme is evident in the 
Eleventh Plan period also. Neither the existing Regional Cancer Centres are being 
strengthened nor recognition being given to new Regional Centres. Shortfall is 
reported in the assistance being provide d to existing/new oncology wings of Govt. 
Medical Colleges. District Cancer Programme has also not been showing satisfactory 
progress.                             (Para 16.3) 
 Performance level of the Programme becomes all the more discouraging when it 
is noticed that there is no shortage of funds. Funds are being duly allocated every year, 
religiously reduced at the RE stage and the utilization status at the end of the year 
reported to be under-utilized. The Comm ittee notes the following figures of 
expenditure for 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 in respect of the National Cancer Control 
Programme (NCCP):- 
 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 (as on 28.2.10) 
BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals BE RE Actuals 
140 70 46.32 120 120 33.60 95.00 35.00 14.24 
 
16.5 The Committee is dismayed at the fact that the Department does not appear to 
be serious w.r.t. the implementation of this programme and the same is evident from 
the fact that the EFC for 11
th Plan is being prepared by the Department and there is no 
approved scheme for the current Plan.                          (Para 16.4) 
 

 165
 The Department itself has been admitting cancer to be one of the ten leading 
causes of death in India with nearly 7 to 9 lakh cases occurring every year. The 
Committee opines that this Programme ca n be singled out as one of the classic 
examples where inspite of ample fund alloca tion and good objectives, the Programme 
has not been able to take off in the desired manner due to apparent apathy of the 
Department.                          (Para 16.6) 
 
 The Committee is aware that the Depart ment could utilize only Rs. 252.95 crore 
during the Tenth Plan out of an approved outlay of Rs. 333 crore. The Committee notes 
that the approved outlay for the Eleventh Pl an has been increased about eight times to  
Rs. 2400  crore out of which only Rs. 94.16 crore have been utilized upto 28
th February, 
2010. This leaves Rs. 2300 crore (approx.)  remaining to be utilized during the 
remaining two financial years of the Plan. Taking into account the provision of Rs. 155 
crore during 2010-11, it still leaves behind a huge amount of funds to the tune of Rs. 
2150 crore (approx.) left for the last financial year. With the current pace of utilization, 
the Committee apprehends that it is going to show a worse performance when 
compared with the Tenth Plan track record.                       (Para 16.7) 
 
 The Committee is very concerned with the persisting underutilization of funds 
earmarked under the Programme. The Comm ittee in its earlier reports has been 
commenting on this issue and has been recommending to it to take some corrective 
steps in this regard. The Committee cannot acce pt any justification in this regard as it 
is a clear indication of poor planning and execution as well as monitoring mechanism. 
The Committee hopes that at least now, the Department would take a more pro-active 
approach in getting all the requisite approvals without further delay and try to 
implement the revised Programme vigorously in the last two financial years with a 
focused strategy.                                       (Para 16.8) 
 
 In order to identify weak links and ensure effective implementation of various 
components of the programme, the Committee had in its 27
th Report recommended to 
the Department to give utmost priority to evaluation of the National Cancer Control 
Programme by a premier agency having experience of work in such Disease Control 

 166
Programmes. However, in respect of a query in this regard, the Committee is informed 
that the programme was last evaluated in 2004 by the National Institute of Health and 
Family Welfare (NIHFW). Certain amendmen ts in the programme were incorporated 
in 2005, in the light of that assessment.  Another review has now become due. The 
process to select an independent outside agency has been initiated.                 (Para 16.9) 
 
 The Committee is unhappy to note that the Department has actually not taken 
any step further in the last two years. The Committee would like to point out here that 
it was informed during examination of the Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the 
Department that the proposal submitted by the NIHFW for second evaluation of the 
NCCP was not up to the mark. In addition ICMR also submitted the proposal for 
evaluating the NCCP. It was stated that th e Department decided to invite proposals 
from other organizations including IIM. However, no response had been received in 
the matter and hence no final decision could be taken regarding selection of the 
agency for evaluating the NCCP. Th e Committee opines that the severe 
underutilization of funds as well as the ph ysical targets under the Programme warrant 
an immediate evaluation and necessary co rrective measures. The Committee therefore 
recommends to the Department to immediately evaluate the implementation of the 
Programme so that all the loopholes and hurdles afflicting the smooth implementation 
of such an ambitious Programme are identified and corresponding corrective measures 
taken at the earliest.                         (Para 16.10) 
 
 The Committee notes that a large number of Utilization Certificates are pending 
against various colleges spread across the country. Maximum amount of pending UCs 
is against the following colleges:- 
 
Sl. No Year of release 
the grant 
State Name of the Institute Amount 
(in Rupees) 
1. 2007-08 Assam Dr. B.B. Barooah Cancer Instt. 
Guwahati under Centre of 
Excellence Scheme 
05.00 crore 
2 2007-08 Himachal Pradesh Indira Gandhi Medical College, 
Shimla under RCC Scheme 
296,48,463/- 
3. 2007-08 Madhya Pradesh 
 
Cancer Hospital & Research Instt., 
Gwalior under DCCP Scheme  
 
88.00 lakh 

 167
Sl. No Year of release 
the grant 
State Name of the Institute Amount 
(in Rupees) 
4. 2007-08 Mizoram Civil Hospital, Aizawl  for 
development of oncology wing 
01.00 crore 
5. 2007-08 Punjab Govt. Medical College, Patiala for 
development of oncology wing 
03.00 crore 
6. 2007-08 Kerala Govt. Medical College, Kottayam, 
Kerala for development of oncology 
wing  
01.00 crore 
7. 2007-08 Chhattisgarh Pt. J.N. Me dical College, Raipur 03.00 crore 
8. 2007-08 Haryana  Govt. Hospital, Bhiwani under 
development of oncology wing 
03.00 crore 
9. 2007-08 Rajasthan RNT Medical College, Udaipur for 
development of oncology wing 
1,95,87,000 
10. 2007-08 West Bengal R.G. Kar Medical College & 
Hospital, Kolkata for development 
of oncology wing 
98,66,320/- 
11. 2008-09 Nagaland Naga Hospital Authority, Kohima 
for development of oncology wing 
90.00 lakh 
12. 2008-09 Punjab Guru Govind Singh Medical 
College & Hospital, Faridkot for 
development of oncology wing  
03.00 crore 
13. 2008-09 Tripura Cancer Hospital, Agartala (Under 
new RCC Scheme) 
05.00 crore 
14. 2008-09 
 
Rajasthan S.N. Medical College, Jodhpur 
(Development of Oncology Wing) 
01.50 crore 
 
The Committee recommends to the Department to take immediate action to liquidate 
the pending Ucs . The Committee may also be informed about the efforts made by it in 
this regard along with a status of all the pending UCs under the Programme. 
                 (Para 16.11) 
 
XVII NATIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME (NTCP) 
 
 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that in 2007-08 and 2009-10 BE funds 
had to be revised downwards substantially at the RE stage keeping in view the pace of 
expenditure under the Programme. Against an  allocation of Rs. 40.00 crore and 30.00 
crore in 2007-08 and 2009-10 respectively, an expenditure of only Rs. 13.98 crore and Rs. 
16.60 crore has been reported.The Committee opines that time and again the 
Department brings the rhetoric of scarcity of funds and here it is not utilizing the 
available resources persistently. The Commi ttee may be informed of the measures 
taken by the Department to optimally utilize the available resources under this 
Programme.                                                   (Para 17.2) 

 168
 
 The Committee observes that launched as a pilot project in 12 districts of 6 
States in 2007-08, by the end of 2009-10, Programme has been extended to only 42 
districts of 21 States.  It would not be wrong to conclude that the Programme continues 
to be run on a pilot basis even after three year  of its launch.  This is the position when 
the target was to extend the coverage to 100 districts by the end of 2008-09. 
                  (Para 17.3) 
 The Committee would like to remind the Department that subsequent to its 
examination of Demands for Grants of  the Ministry for 2008-09, in its 27
th Report, it 
had taken a strong view of the fact that despite the ‘in principle’ approval of the 
Planning Commission for setting up of the National Regulatory Authority and 
Referral Labs for testing Tar and Nicotine content and initiation of the process for 
seeking approval of the competent authority, no progress had been made for quite 
some time.  Accordingly, the Committee had called for concerted efforts of the 
Department to achieve the approval of th e competent authority for setting up of the 
National Regulatory Authority. However,  as per information available with the 
Committee now, there has been ‘no’ improvem ent on this front even after a period of 
two years. The Committee is dismayed at the Department’s attitude in this regard.  
National Tobacco regulatory Authority is supposed to be pivotal to the whole 
Programme to help in effective implementation of Tobacco free initiatives. Even the 
progress w.r.t. setting up of tobacco testing labs has not seen any improvement. To 
aggravate the matter further, the Depart ment has not been able to expand the 
Programme in more districts of the country as scheduled. Even the first Adult Tobacco 
Survey has been lingering on for quite some time. The Committee is upset with the 
way things are being managed under the Programme. Fixing realistic targets on paper 
is only the first step towards achieving a goal and the Committee does find the targets 
set to be realistic and achievable. Therefore,  it is not able to comprehend itself with 
the reasons for the delay in achieving the targets. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend some urgent and concrete action plan in achieving the targets set under 
the Programme in a time bound manner.                        (Para 17.5)  
 
 

 169
 The Committee is happy to note that the Department is focusing on Mass 
Media/ IEC campaign to generate awareness among the common people about the 
harmful effects of tobacco products. Awareness among the common masses, especially 
the younger generation, is the key to success of the whole Programme. The Committee 
would recommend that events like coming Commonwealth Games, venues of cricket 
and other matches being played in India, public gathering like the kumbh melas etc. 
may also be utilized to generate awareness among people with Mass Media/ IEC 
campaign at the sites.                                     (Para 17.7) 
 
 The Committee notes that though the Department has been able to come up 
with a law for restricting use and sale of the Tobacco products, the ground realities 
have not changed much. The various provisions of the Act are not being implemented 
in letter and spirit even in metro cities in India. Situation in respect of small towns 
and rural areas can well be imagined. The Department cannot remain a silent 
spectator on such vital issues. A proper pro-active strategy should be developed 
whereby all the States are roped in to work sincerely in this regard.
                 (Para 17.9)
  
XVIII            MEDICAL EDUCATION 
 The Committee is concerned with the fact that as many as 10 colleges are being 
considered for withdrawal of recognition and 15 more being issued show cause 
notices. From the large number of colleges caught compromising the standards while 
being scrutinized, it is clear that all is not well. This clubbed with the fact that these 
colleges are those which have come under scheduled scrutiny and there may be many 
which keep on functioning until they come under inspection scrutiny, makes the 
matter more serious.  The Committee would lik e to have a brief about the status of 
inspection of all the medical colleges inter-alia containing – the selection procedure 
vide which the colleges are selected for inspection, the date of establishment of 
college, date of inspection/s, shortcomings noticed and action taken during the last 5 
years. The Committee may also be informed of the details w.r.t. the progress made for 
withdrawal of recognition of 10 colleges, show cause notice to 15 colleges and the court 
cases in respect of the 4 colleges.              (Para 18.2) 
 

 170
 The Committee is not inclined to agree with the Department’s view that all is 
well with the existing procedure for reco gnition of MBBS degree colleges. The 
Department cannot escape from its responsibility by citing that it is the responsibility 
of the individual colleges to seek re cognition. The Committee opines that the 
Department needs to have into consideration the psychological impact of such a 
situation on the final year students who in its opinion would be more anxious to see 
their college getting recognit ion rather than taking their examinations seriously. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the whole procedure of recognition should 
be complete well before the final year  students take their examinations. The 
Committee therefore recommends to the Depa rtment to revisit its stand on the issue 
and come up with some concrete steps. A status note on the issue of recognition to 15 
medical colleges where the first batches of MBBS students have appeared for final 
examination in the academic year 2010 may be furnished.           (Para 18.4) 
 
 The Committee is in full agreement with the initiatives proposed by the DCI 
especially in view of the fact that so many seats are lying vacant year after year. 
Further, the Committee is of the firm opinion that education and accordingly the 
number of seats should be need based an d keeping in view the demand and supply 
scenario. Here, by the figures available with the Committee, it is amply clear that there 
is an urgent need for intervention to ba lance the same. In view of the above, the 
Committee recommends to the Department to take some urgent steps in consultation 
with the DCI and the various State Governments, so that this unwanted trend is 
arrested at the earliest and precious resource s are utilized purposefully in other areas 
of medical education. The Committee also recommends to the Department to actively 
consider the proposals submitted to it by the DCI regarding making norms of opening 
new college more stringent.                                               (Para 18.7) 
 
XIX VACANCIES IN CHS CADRE 
 The Committee notes with serious concern that apart from marginal 
improvement in GDMO sub-cadre, that too far too below any satisfactory level, there 
is seemingly no improvement in the filling up of the vacant positions across all the 
sub-cadres inspite of the sanctioned strength increasing in the three sub-cadres other 

 171
than GDMO. The Committee is not convinced with the Department’s efforts because 
had the Department made sincere efforts there would have been some kind of forward 
movement in filling up the vacancies over the years. The Committee cannot make out 
the delay in making recruitments by UPSC. Promotion vacancies can be filled up by 
convening DPCs. Further, the Committee is unable to understand the delay in 
notifying the revised CHS rules especially when there is urgency involved in the 
matter. Temporary and contractual measures can never be a solution in the long run.  
    (Para 19.4) 
 
19.5 The Committee would like to be apprised about the details of 
contractual/temporary appointments made under CHS for the past one year. The 
Committee would also like to be furnished a detailed note in respect of the posts 
under each sub-cadre, inter- alia covering issues like when it approached the UPSC for 
making direct recruitments, holding of DPCs, reasons for delay in notifying CHS rules 
and the efforts made by the Department for early filling up of the vacancies. 
(Para 19.5) 
19.7 The Committee is happy to note that fina lly there is some respite in the offing 
to General Duty Medical Officers with PG qualification. The Committee recommends 
to the Department to pursue the matter sincerely so that the amendments are approved 
without further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised about the progress 
made in this regard. The Committee would also like to have the details of the DACP 
scheme.                  (Para 19.7) 
 
XX NEW INITIATIVES/PROGRAMMES 
 A number of new initiatives/programmes were proposed to be launched during 
the Eleventh Plan, preparator y exercise for some of which started even before the 
beginning of the Plan period.  The Committ ee is constrained to observe that against 
the approved outlay of Rs. 12609.63 crore for the Eleventh Plan, very meagre allocation 
has been made for the first three years which has also remained almost unutilized.  
Status by the end of 2009-10 in respect of these initiatives/programmes clearly 
indicates that there is little hope of their ta king off in the real sense by the end of 
Eleventh Plan, i.e. 2011-12.  Following details are self-revealing: 
 

 172
NEW INITIATIVES/PROGRAMMES 
 
STATUS BY THE END OF 2009-10
E-Health including Telemedicine  Detailed  EFC under preparation 
National Programme for Prevention and  
Control of Diabetes, Cardio-vascular  
Diseases and Stroke 
EFC under process for approval 
National Organ Transplant Programme  Proposal is under Process  
Oral Health Scheme yet to be launched  
National Programme for Healthcare for Elderly Under process for approval 
National Centre for Disease Control  Under process for approval 
Setting up of Para-medical Institutions  Under process for approval 
Strengthening/upgradation of pharmacy  
Schools 
Under process for approval 
Upgradation/strengthening of Nursing  
Services 
Under process for approval 
    (Para 20.1) 
 Besides that, programmes on Control of Human Rabies and Prevention and 
Control of Flurosis are still being run on pilot project basis.  So far only utilization of 
allocated fund has been very nominal.  The Committee therefore recommends that 
process of approval for all these initiatives/programmes needs to be expedited so that 
substantial allocation proposed for 2010-11 is put to use for the targeted beneficiaries. 
                             (Para 20.2) 
XXI    MISCELLANEOUS 
 
 The Committee opines that seven years is a long period and during this period 
several drugs would have become necessary fo r inclusion or deletion as per practical 
requirements. It is not happy with the delay in the revision of the List. It recommends 
an early updation of the List. The Committee may also be informed when did the 
updation process of NEDL started and whethe r there is a set time gap prescribed for 
initiating revision of the List. The Committ ee may also be informed of the progress 
made in this regard.                 (Para 21.2) 
 

 173
 The Committee is happy with the introduction of such a policy tendering 
monetary award to informers providing in formation about the spurious drugs. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the policy along with any 
achievement made so far under the policy.            (Para 21.4) 
 The Committee is pained by the fact that  the poor patients have to pay for the 
branded name of the medicines.  This state of affairs is leading the poor patients to huge 
financial debts.  Besides, procurement of  the branded/generic branded medicines for 
Govt. hospitals, dispensaries and CGHS leads to heavy burden on the Exchequer 
comprising of precious taxpayer’s money.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to make it mandatory for the Go vt. hospitals and CGHS to procure only 
generic medicines so that their procuremen t cost is reduced substantially without 
compromising on the quality and efficacy of such medicines.  The Committee further 
recommends the Department to initiate some measures so that generic medicines are not 
marketed and sold as generic branded medi cines leading to exorbitant prices by the 
profiteering companies so that such medici nes are available to the common man at 
reasonable prices.  The Committee also recommends that it should be made mandatory 
for the Government Doctors to prescribe on ly generic medicines. The Committee may 
be informed of the action taken by the Department in this regard.            (Para 21.7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 174
PART – B 
 
NATIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION (NRHM) 
 
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
 
The allocation for Health Sector has been substantially enhanced from Rs. 
36378.00 crore in the Tenth Plan to Rs. 1,31,650.92 crore in the Eleventh Plan. Approved 
outlay for NRHM for the Eleventh plan is Rs. 90558.00 crore. The Committee observes 
that plan allocation during the first four years of the plan period shows a gradual increase. 
However, substantial plan allocation still remains to be released. Out of total approved 
outlay of Rs. 90558.00 crore for NRHM, total allocation for the first four years of the 
eleventh Plan amounts to Rs. 52,190.00 crore with a balance of Rs. 38368.00 crore 
remaining with only one year of the plan period left. The Committee is constrained to 
observe that shortfall has been reported every year in the utilization of the allocated 
funds. Utilization status has simply failed to keep pace with the upward trend in the 
allocation as indicated below:-     
(Rs in crores) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 
Approved 
outlay 
Expenditure Approved 
outlay 
Expenditure Approved 
outlay 
Expenditure 
(upto 
January, 
2010) 
10890.00 10380.40 11930.00 11260.18 13930.00 10013.91 
 
What is more worrisome is that this di scouraging trend is noticed under all the 
major sectors of NRHM, the only exception being Flexible Pool for State PIPs. The 
following details are self revealing:- 
(Rs in crores) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 Scheme 
Allocati
on 
Expenditur
e 
Allocatio
n 
Expenditur
e 
Allocatio
n 
Expenditur
e (upto 
31.01.2010) 
Disease 
Control 
Programme 
10575.00 10160.45 11580.00 11117.85 13580.00 9898.07 
Family 
Welfare 
9418.00 9022.28 10193.43 10035.26 12178.93 9015.48 
Routine 
Immunisation  
317.00 236.64 615.00 166.52 414.21 247.77 
          (Para 2.1) 

 175
 
The Committee has been informed that against the projected demand for Rs. 
19,989.00 crore for NRHM, the Planning Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 
15440.00 crore for 2010-11. The lower approved outlay as compared to proposed outlay 
is likely to affect implementation of a number of ongoing schemes under NRHM like 
Mission Flexible Pool, RCH Flexible Pool, In frastructure Maintenance, National Vector 
Borne Disease Control Programme, Revised National TB Programme, Management 
Information System and Routine Immunization. The Committee would, however, like 
to point out that under all such programmes which are going to be adversely 
affected due to non-allocation of requi red funds, funds allocated so far have 
remained underutilized during 2009-10, as indicated below:-                                  
(Para 2.2) 
 
(Rs in crores) 
2009-10  
Schemes Allocation Expenditure (upto 
30.01.2010) 
Vector borne Disease Control 
Programme 
442.00 227.73 
National T.B.Control 
Programme 
312.25 259.60 
Infrastructure Maintenance 3087.68 2642.60 
RCH Flexible Pool 3545.00 2641.84 
Mission Flexible Pool 3567.27 2479.17 
IEC 186.31 75.95 
Routine Immunization 414.21 247.77 
 
Not only this, with the exception of Mission and RCH Flexible Pool in other 
programmes, position has been more or  less the same during 2007-08 and 2008-09 
also. Committee’s attention has also been drawn by the fact that provisions for all 
these programmes have been made at an enhanced level in 2010-11 when compared 
with 2009-10 allocations. The Committee wo uld, therefore, appreciate if concerted 
efforts are made by all concerns for opti mum and judicious utilization of allocated 
funds. If required, at the time of mid-ye ar assessment, the Department can pursue 
for additional funds with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.                                 
(Para 2.3) 
 

 176
The Committee views with serious concern the trend of allocation of funds 
and utilization thereof in some other crucial programmes such as National 
Programme for Control of Blindness, Io dine Deficiency Disorder Control 
Programme, Procurement of Drugs and Equipments under RCH, Information 
Education and Communication (Both RCH  & Non-RCH) and Area Projects are 
some of the other programmes under which performance level during the Eleventh 
Plan so far has also been far from satisf actory. The Committee has been repeatedly 
cautioning the Department to take remedial measures to ensure optimum utilization 
of funds year after year. However, no si gnificant improvement has been noticed so 
far. The case for Procurement of Drugs and Equipments under RCH remains a 
classic example, where, during 2008-09 Rs. 300 crore were allocated and no 
expenditure was made.  Again, in 2009-10 an initial outlay of Rs. 100 crore were 
made under the same head which was revised upwards to Rs. 150 crore and no 
expenditure is reported to be there up till January, 2010. Approved outlay of Rs. 
1500 crore for the Eleventh Plan has thus remained unspent in spite of three years 
of the Plan period being over.                                         (Para 2.4) 
  
The Committee strongly feel that poor planning and execution on the part of 
the Department regarding the various on-going schemes have been responsible for 
such a discouraging scenario. The Committee is well aware of the fact that in a vast 
country like ours, with healthcare facilities specially in the rural areas showing a 
negligible presence, need for additional fu nd will also be there.  The Committee has 
also been strongly advocating the case fo r enhanced allocation of funds for NRHM 
but the trend of under-utilization/ unutilis ation weakens the justification for higher 
provision of funds. The Committee is also aware of the fact that Union Government 
alone cannot achieve the targeted goals. It has to carry out the implementation with 
the active support of State Governments. The Committee, therefore, once again 
recommends the Department to make its monitoring mechanism more effective so 
that such large amount of funds do not lapse/remain unutilized. The Committee also 
suggests the Department to undertake a comprehensive self-assessment study on the 
means and methods used to improve financ ial accountability under the Mission so 
far, and based on the findings, to devise  a mechanism whereby funds utilization for 
the rest of the Mission period could be in a better state. Taking note of significant 
and persistent shortfall in utilization of the budgeted funds, the Committee would 

 177
like the Department to exercise greater prudence in their budget formulation and 
make their estimates only after proper assessment and planning.                 (Para 2.5) 
                                                                                    
  NRHM is targeted to provide accessible, affordable and equitable health care 
services for people living in rural areas of the country with focus on under-served 
population and marginalized groups. Therefore, it is the considered view of the 
Committee that  under-funding should not be allowed to come in the way of delivery 
of essential and quality health care to the most vulnerable sections of our society. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that  additional funds be allocated under 
NRHM wherever required.            (Para 2.6) 
 
 The Committee observes that 2083 numbe r of pending UCs amounting to Rs. 
7785.00 crore is too large to be comfortable with. The Committee notes that the 
biggest defaulters in terms of amount involved in pending UCs are Uttar Pradesh 
(Rs. 1097.39 crore), Karnataka  (Rs. 596.08 crore), Bihar (Rs. 537.74 crore) and 
Assam (437.11 crore) and unreconciled amou nt is to the tune of Rs. 707.40 crore 
involved in 31 UCs. The Committee is also astonished to find that the pendency of 
UCs has been continuing year after year, esp ecially in case of the High Focus States,  
EAG States and NE Region, although well ov er two-thirds of the time period of 
NRHM( 2005- 2010) is over. What is more astonishing is that  Union Territories like 
Delhi, Chandigarh, Puduchery and A&N Islands also figure in the list.  
(Para 2.10) 
 
 The Committee would like to point out that mere advisories/ DOs to States 
for liquidation of pending UCs is not a tenable solution for expeditious liquidation 
of pending UCs. The Committee is of the view that monitoring of pending UCs 
needs to be further strengthened. The Co mmittee also recommends that a senior 
officer be assigned the task of laising wi th the States and monitor the progress in 
this regard on a quarterly basis. The Co mmittee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken to revamp the monitoring of pending UCs. The Committee is also of the 
view that the Department take up the matter with the States showing maximum 
pendency of UCs at the highest level impressing upon them the imperative of 
furnishing the UCs timely and exercising fiscal discipline. 
 (Para 2.11) 

 178
 
Not only this percentage of utilization in respect of States/ UTs like A&N Islands, 
Haryana, J&K, Lakshadweep, Meghalaya and Uttrakhand was between 45% to 50%. The 
very fact that the level of expenditure of Rs. 3254.29 crore as on 31.03.2009 is even less 
than the opening balance of Rs. 4150.07 crore as on 01.04.2008 available with States, 
compels the Committee to conclude that States are simply not able to take the full benefit 
of Central funds. A number of reasons ha ve been cited by the Department being 
responsible for low capacity of States.  The Committee is not prepared to accept the 
Department’s contention that delay in ta king up execution of civil works due to 
State healthcare departments being dependent on PWD and other State agencies, as 
the main factor behind such a scenario. The other reasons like requirement of 
opening of Back Account at each level and lack of proper planning for under-served 
areas are also equally unconvincing. The Co mmittee strongly feels that these are all 
such matters which should have been reso lved in the initial one or two years of 
NRHM. The Committee would also like to point out that monitoring and joint 
review missions of NRHM need to be followed by resolving of major constraints like 
shortage of qualified and trained manpower and lack of infrastructural facilities. 
Otherwise allocated funds will contin ue to remain under-utilized every year 
defeating the very purpose of launching of NRHM in a mission mode.      (Para 2.13) 
                                                                                                                     
 The Committee is surprised to note that under RCH Flexible Pool also 
Opening Balance amounting to Rs. 1157.46 crore was available as on 01.04.2008 
with different States. Assam with availability of Rs. 126.67 crore, Maharashtra with 
Rs. 209.69 crore, Tamil Nady with Rs. 97.73 crore, U.P with Rs. 192.33 crore and 
West Bengal with Rs. 101.59 crore can be considered slow perf orming States. Not 
only this, States like Goa, Meghalaya and Tr ipura failed to utilise even the opening 
balance during the course of the year. Perc entage of utilization of total allocated 
funds (opening balance + Release) was very low in respect of A&N Islands (44%), 
Assam (53%), Goa(23%), Haryana (52%), Himachal Pradesh (53%), J&K (40%), 
Manipur (54%), Meghalaya  (26%), Nagaland (45%), Tamil Nadu (40%), Tripura 
(33%) and West Bengal (40%). The Committee is very disappointed with such a 
utilization status, specially because under RCH Flexible Pool, States/ UTs have the 
flexibility to plan on a need basis without being bound by rigid normative 
prescriptions. The Committee, therefore, feel s that with more than two-third of the 

 179
mission period already being over, it is high  time that the Department identifies the 
problem areas in the implementation of var ious components of RCH Flexible Pool 
and takes measures for resolving the same. A beginning can be made by 
approaching the states lagging behind on a priority basis.                           (Para 2.14) 
                                                                                         
III INFRASTUCTURE STRENGTHENING 
 
Healthcare Units  
 
 
 The Committee while taking note of progress made in strengthening the 
primary health infrastructure after the la unch of NRHM would like to point out 
that considerable gap still continues to pe rsist. In this connection, Committee’s 
attention has been drawn by Performance Audit of NRHM by CAG (Report No. 8 
of 2009-10) there was a shortfall of 43987 Sub-Centres (27%) in 22 States/ UTs, 8613 
PHCs (31%) in 21 States/ UTs and 4200 CHCs (55%) in 23 States./ UTs which were 
required to be created during the NRHM period (2005-12). Target of creation of 
30% of new infrastructure by 2007, i.e. 13196 sub-centres, 2585 PHCs and 1261 
CHCs could not be fulfilled. According to the CAG Report, as many as 14 States/ 
UTs failed to take any initiative for bridging the gap. Out of the target of 43987 sub-
centres 8613 PHCs and 4200 CHCs only 2562 Sub-centres, 685 PHCs and 138 CHCs 
could be set-up. The Committee only hopes that 935 Sub-Centres, 178 PHCs and 67 
CHCs reported to be under construction during CAG Audit must have been 
completed and become fully functional by  now. The Committee would like to point 
out that even as per the target of 2007, there was a shortfall of 9749 sub-centres, also 
1722 PHCs and 1056 CHCs. Against this backdrop, bridging the gap of 43987 sub-
centres, 8613 PHCs and 4200 CHCs by the end of mission period i.e. 2012 seems to 
be an uphill task. The Committee would like to be point out that the targets set up 
under NRHM were as per the population norms of 2001. The shortfall of 
infrastructure is bound to increase manifold once 2011 census is over and 
population norms revise. The Committee has also taken note of the fact that only 
very few states like Assam, Chhatisgarh,  Rajasthan, Uttarkhand and Lakshadweep 
had made an attempt to achieve the target of 2007, while the remaining states 
reported nil achievement. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department has to pursue vigorously with all the non-performing states, otherwise 

 180
even the basic objective of NRHM of havi ng the minimum required infrastructure 
would also remain unfulfilled.                                                                           (Para 3.2) 
 
 The Committee is perturbed to find that out of 1,46,036 Sub-Centres, as 
many as 67233 Centre are functioning from rented buildings. From the details 
furnished by the Department, the Committe e finds that a large number of States 
have simply failed to ta ke benefit from Central funds being provided for 
construction/ upgradation of sub-centre bu ildings. In States/UTs like Himachal 
Pradesh, J&K, Tamil Nadu, A&N Islands, D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu, 
Chandigarh, Lakshadweep, Puducherry no co nstruction activity has been initated 
so far. In States which have taken some initiative in this regard, percentage of sub-
centres being strengthened/ upgraded is very low.                                        (Para 3.4) 
                              
The Committee is not convinced by the clarification given by the Department 
that in some States, sub-cen tres are working in other Go vernment buildings/ spaces 
provided by Panchayats etc. The Committee also apprehends that condition of PHC 
and CHC buildings would also be no better. The fact remains that there is an urgent 
need for undertaking a review of present condition of all the Sub-centre/ PHC/ CHC 
buildings across the country and undertak e the required construction under a time-
bound Action Plan.                                           (Para 3.5) 
 
 The Committee’s attention is also drawn by the damaging report given by 
the CAG in its latest report on this cr ucial aspect. As per CAG report, among 
audited units, 216 sub-centres (16%) of 10 States and 19 PHCs (3% of 4 states, were 
operating without buildings 435 sub-centres (32%) of 28 states/ UTs and 102 PHCs 
(15%) of 17 States and 7 CHCs of 4 Stat es were operating in a rented building/ 
Panchayat Bhawan/ Others. 217 Sub-cent res (16%) of 16 States/ UTs, 86 PHCs 
(13%) of 16 States/ UTs and 23 CHCs (7%) of 5 States/ UTs were functioning in 
dilapidated buildings.                                                                                         (Para 3.6) 
 
Another cause of serious concern for the Committee is the lack of basic 
infrastructural facilities noticed by the test checks carried out by the CAG. 
Following details are self-revealing:- 
 

 181
Sub-Centres PHCs CHCs  
Infrastructural 
Deficiences States No. of 
SCs 
%age States No of 
PHCs 
%age States  No. of 
CHCs 
%age 
Lack of 
seParate utilities 
for men and 
women 
28 1108 81 26 431 63 22 102 32 
No arrangement 
for water supply 
27 529 39 18 120 17 27 529 39 
No 
infrastructure 
for water 
storage 
28 1008 74 24 287 42 28 1008 74 
No sewage 
disposal facility 
18 668 49 23 241 35 18 668 49 
 
The Committee would like to point out that  Performance Audit by CAG covered all 
the 33 States/ UTs with 123 districts cove ring 2369 health Centres.  These 123 
districts were selected from all the States. In each selected district-3 CHCs, 6 PHCs 
and 12 Sub-Centres were audited. The Committee, taking note of CAG findings, in 
these 123 districts, apprehends that position  would be more or less the same in the 
remaining districts of the country.                (Para 3.7) 
 
 The Committee would like to point out that one of the key objectives of 
NRHM is to provide improved health care services through creation of adequate 
number of SCs, PHCs and CHCs. However, this basic goal of NRHM has failed to 
show the desired results. This has been  amply proved in the latest Performance 
Audit of NRHM conducted by the CAG. The Committee has also been expressing 
grave concern regarding lack of adequate rural health infrastructure, especially in 
High Focus States from time to time. Even though NRHM has completed its 5
th year 
since commencement, much remains to be accomplished so far as infrastructure 
development is concerned. With two more ye ars of the Mission period remaining, 
the Committee wonders if the targets to  overcome the shortfall of Health Care 
Infrastructure would be met in the real sense. The Committee, therefore, once again 
urges the Department to quicken the pace of  implementation so that it does not 
remain very far off from the targeted goals.                                                    (Para 3.8)                                   
 
 

 182
RURAL HEALTH FUNCTIONARIES 
The Committee is also quite disappointed with the progress made over the 
past four years regarding filling up the vacant posts of the various healthcare 
functionaries under NRHM. The Committe e observes that one of the most 
important objective with which the Mission was launched at the outset was to 
ensure the availability of the various healthcare functionaries, i.e. ANMs/ MPWs(M) 
/LHVs/ Lab Technicians, doctors and speci alists at Sub-Centres, PHCs and CHCs 
at the right places.  Realizing that thei r presence is essential for the smooth 
functioning of health centres and hence, important for the success of the Mission, 
the Committee has been recommending to the Department year after year to take 
up the issue of non-filling up of the vaca ncies with the States/UTs. However, there 
seems to be no significant improvement in the situation.  The Committee feels that 
four years of focused attention, and cons iderable infusion of funds under NRHM, 
aimed to create a brigade of healthcare is  a long enough time for the situation to 
have improved. Neither the flow of funds  nor the efforts of the Department are 
found wanting. The only conclusion the Committee can draw is that required 
manpower for the Health Centres is simply not available in majority of the States.                                      
(Para 3.18) 
 
 The Committee also notes with dismay that the latest data about healthcare 
functionaries is not available with the Department.  The Committee would like to 
emphasize  that building up of capacity at the grass roots level is an essential part of 
a proper planning process and improvements in this regard can only be noticed if 
the planned measures are put to implementation. One must not forget that these key 
functionaries are also pivotal in the collec tion and dissemination of health related 
information from the field levels. The Comm ittee would, therefore, appreciate if 
updated data is got collected by the Department in coordination with the States/ 
UTs. Only then it would be possible to  make a proper assessment of the ground 
realities and plan for augmentation of both the extant and future capacity of 
manpower in the States.                                                                                   (Para 3.19) 
 
 
3.20 Another area of concern for the Committee is the number of contractual 
appointments being made under the Mission to fill up the various vacant posts. The 

 183
Committee observes that out of total 1,53,568 ANMs in-position in health centres 
across the country, 46,315 ANMs are on contract basis. The Committee is 
constrained to note that such ANMS are co ncentrated in a few states as indicated 
below:- 
States ANMs in-position Contractual ANMs 
Bihar 9127 5896 
Jharkhand 5011 3204 
Assam 8289 4575 
Andhra Pradesh 12541 9505 
Haryana 2592 2465 
Maharashtra 12027 6250 
 
Similarly, out of 4279 Specialists in-position, as many as 2426 are on contract basis.  
(Para 3.20) 
 
The Committee feels that for effective delivery of public health services, it is 
essential that service personnel are present continuously in their place of postings. 
However, with more and more number of  contractual manpower being recruited 
under NRHM, the Committee fears that the accountability mechanism under the 
programme would get diluted, thereby affect ing the delivery of quality services to 
the masses. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to the Department that an 
All India level drive for filling up of the vacant posts, first against the sanctioned 
strength and thereafter against the required strength needs to be  undertaken in a 
mission mode so that by the end of NRHM significant improvement is more than 
evident.                                                                                                              (Para 3.21) 
 
IV       MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL 
 
 The Committee is anguished to note the huge shortfall in utilization of the 
budgeted funds and also the substantial variation between the projected demand for 
funds and the sanctioned provisions.  The Committee observes that at a time when 
equitable access to health facilities across the social and geographical expanse of the 
country is the declared policy of the Govern ment such inefficiencies in utilization of 
funds can prove to be a potent deterrent. The Committee would like the Department 

 184
to impress upon all concerned including the State Governments the imperative need 
to review their existing mechanism for assessment of requirement of funds and take 
corrective action to overcome the deficiencies in the existing system so that the 
possibility of surrendering unspent/under-utilized funds is obviated.                                                              
(Para 4.4) 
Upgradation of PHCs/ CHCs 
 
 The Committee observes that while Tamil Nadu has been able to 
operationalise all its PHCs 24x7, no other state has been able to achieve such a feat. 
The Committee observes that the status of PHCs running 24x7 in some of the States 
need to be revisited. States indicated above  need to double up their efforts so as to 
achieve the targets of making all the PHCs operational 24x7. The Committee fails to 
understand as to what could be the hindrance, specially when funds are available 
for the purpose. The Committee recommends the Department to take up the matter 
of increasing the number of PHCs operating  24x7 as well as upgradation of PHCs/ 
CHCs to FRUs with all the States/ UTs so that a critical service like Health Care is 
available to the targeted beneficiaries wherever required.                            (Para 4.6) 
 
 
Another initiative under NRHM was to upgrade all CHCs to IPHS standards 
by 2010 in a phased manner in all the States/UTs. From the latest information 
furnished to it the Committee finds that in States/ UTs like Bihar, Chattisgarh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, Lakshawdeep, Delhi, inspite of CHCs being selected for upgradation 
to IPHS, no progress has been reported so far.            (Para 4.7) 
 
The Committee also notes that the status of percentage of physical 
upgradation of CHCs in States like J&K (26%), Orissa (13%), MP (4%), Tripura 
(33%), Kerala (29%), West Bengal (9 %) and A&N Island (25%) is far from 
satisfactory. The Committee fails to understand as to what could be the inherent 
constraints being faced by these States in upgrading their CHCs inspite of required 
funds being made available by the Centre. The Committee would like to impress 
upon the Department that the very ob jective of NRHM was to provide quality 
health care facilities which were not available earlier and therefore, the Department 
had embarked upon upgrading the facilities into IPHS. With such low level of 

 185
achievements it cannot be said that the St ates are doing well in the progress of the 
work. This is all the more disturbing wh en there is a considerable gap between the 
required and existing CHCs. The Committee is constrained to note that the 
Department is perhaps not persuing the ma tter with the State Government for the 
need to focus their attention so that the targets are met within their prescribed time-
lines. With only 1255 CHCs taken up for renovation so far, the target of upgrading 
all CHCs to IPHS standards by 2010 is likely to remain unaccomplished.                                                      
(Para 4.8) 
 
 The Committee, however, notes that only 22 States/UTs have furnished 
IDHAPs fully, while, even by the end of March 2010, as many as 12 States/UTs are 
yet to furnish the IDHAPs 100 percent. Goa, D&N Haveli and Lakshadweep have 
not been able to submit a single IDHAP, while Rajasthan has been able to furnish 
only 26 out of the 33 IDHAPs. This is the position when timeline to complete the 
submission of IDHAPs by the States/UTs was by the end of 2008. The Committee 
fails to understand what could be the possible reasons for such inordinate delays in 
the submission of IDHAPs.  The Committee would like to emphasise that Integrated 
District Health Action Plans are the very basis for improving the availability of 
health care facilities in a district.  In the absence of a concrete plan of action drawn 
by the districts, proper health care facilit ies for people residing in such districts 
cannot be developed optimally.  The Committee therefore, impresses upon the 
Department to vigorously pursue this issue with concerned States/UTs to furnish the 
same as early as possible.                                    (Para 4.10) 
 
Rogi Kalyan Samitis 
The Committee would emphasis that there is an urgent need for monitoring 
of the functioning of RKS at ground level. Merely obtaining quarterly/ annual 
reports about funds allocated/ utilized will not serve the purpose. A beginning needs 
to be made by taking up follow-up action with all the States/ UTs where 
performance of RKS has not been found satisfactory by CAG.         (Para 4.12) 
 
 
 
 
 

 186
Grants to State Training Institutions 
  
The success of Family Welfare Programme depends to a large extent, upon the 
availability of qualified, trained and dedi cated healthcare functionaries. Training at 
various level is imparted through the network of Training Centres and Schools. Approved 
outlay of Rs. 669.58 crore has been kept under Eleventh Plan for grants to State Training 
Institutions. The Committee notes that out of this allocation, major funding of Rs. 
520.48 crore is meant for basic training for ANMs/ LHVs and Rs. 56.09 crore for 
basic training for MPWs (Male). The Comm ittee notes that out of Rs. 520.48 crore 
kept for training of ANMs/ LHVs, only Rs . 218.04 crore have been released during 
the first three years of the Eleventh Plan. With Rs. 85.18 crore proposed for 2010-
11, more than Rs. 200.00 crore would be left for the last year of the plan period. Not 
only this, during 2008-09 and 2009-10, the allocated funds have remained under-
utilised. The Committee finds that funds meant for basic training for MPWs (Male) 
also could not be put to optimum use during the Eleventh Plan period so far.                  
(Para 4.13) 
 
4.14 While trying to analyse the reasons for such a state of affairs under the most 
crucial component i.e., training of key functionaries positioned at Sub-Centres and PHCs, 
the Committee finds that limited capacity of ANM schools poses problems in availability 
of ANMs. In other words, the lack of training school for ANMs is also indirectly 
responsible for shortage of ANMs. The Committee was given to understand that States 
have the option to use NRHM resources to restart/ open new ANM training schools. The 
Committee also notes that Lady Health Visitors, a promotional post for ANMs, are 
required to undergo 6 months training in LHV training schools. However, due to LHV 
training schools being closed down in many States, required training was not being 
imparted to LHVs. Situation is more grim w ith respect to training of MPWs (Male) as 
States have simply stopped recruitment of MPWs (Male) for many years due to closing 
down of training schools. The Committee is not aware about the reasons for lack of 
interest on the part of State Government s for creating/ strengthening the training 
schools meant for key Health functionaries with the support of Central Funds. The 
Committee strongly feels that it is high  time for the Department to make an 
assessment of this crucial area in consultation with all the States/ UTs and bring 

 187
about all round improvement. One must not forget that a fully trained and qualified 
health worker alone can handle his job responsibilities effectively.       
(Para 4.14)                                 
 
Training of ASHAs 
 
The Committee views with serious concer n the gap in meeting the targets of 
ASHA training upto IV th Module in most of the States. The Committee is not 
convinced by the reason furnished by the Department that the delay is only confined 
to the 4th Module training in ASHAs in some of  the States. Keeping in view the key 
role ASHA plays in achievement of various NRHM objectives, these gaps need to be 
addressed with a sense of urgency. The Committee observes that given the low level 
of availability of health care services in th e rural areas of high focused States, they 
cannot afford to be off-target in such a crucial area as training to ASHA. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to impress upon all the 
States/UTs, particularly those lagging behind, to take immediate corrective steps to 
meet the targets fixed in this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the state-wise updated status of progress made towards bridging the gaps in the   
IV
th Module training of ASHA.                                           (Para 4.18)                                  
 
Drug Kits for ASHAs
  
 
 The Committee genuinely believes that unless all the eligible ASHAs are 
provided with drug kits, the initial health activities/ work bestowed upon her would 
be hampered. The Committee would like the Department to furnish state-wise 
updated details of drug kits distribute d to the ASHAs. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that along with all the selected ASHAs being fully trained, equipping 
them with drug kits also needs to be monitored. Gaps, wherever noticed, have to be 
removed without any further delay. At the same time the Department should take 
up with all the States where discrepancies have been noticed in the distribution of 
drug kits.                                                                                   (Para 4.21) 
 
Role of ASHA 
 

 188
The Committee notes that from the interim findings of the National Health 
System Resource Centre (NHSRC) note made available to the Committee that 
NHSRC has identified five areas for strengthening the ASHA programme:- 
- Role Clarity 
- Payment mechanism 
- Training strategies and focus 
- Supervision and Support 
- Financing package. 
 
The initial findings of the NHSRC note, among other recommendations, 
confirm the Committee’s apprehensions regarding role clarity of ASHA and 
reinforces the Committee’s view point that ‘a clear set of measurable health 
outcomes on priority goals’  may be determined for ASHAs with a ‘provision of a 
limited range of services’. The Committee understands that by now the NHSRC 
Report on the review of job responsibilities and role clarity of ANM and AWW 
would have been submitted to the Depa rtment. The Committee recommends to the 
Department to take due cognizance of the observations of NHSRC and to take 
immediate measures to implement the same right from the first quarter of 2010-11 
so that positive results in this regards become visible by the year-end. The 
Committee also recommends that in the meanwhile, a minimum amount per month 
as allowance as recommended by the Mission Steering Group, apart from the 
incentives per programme as currently done, may be given to ASHA as 
remuneration.                                                   (Para 4.25) 
 
Mobile Medical Units 
 
4.29 The Committee is not very convinced by the Department’s replies regarding 
procurement and provision of MMUs. The Department has informed that States, 
based on their need and the resources pu t forth their demands for MMUs in the 
state PIPs. However, the Committee feels th at the Department should take active 
interest in promoting and providing MMUs to the uncovered/ under-covered 
districts of the country. The Committee  notes that States/ UTs like U.P, 
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh are some of the States where the health care 
indices are already on slippery ground. However, with not even a single MMU 
available in any of the district in the afo resaid States one can imagine the status of 
accessibility of healthcare services in under-served/ unserved areas. Non-

 189
operationalisation/ inadequate functioning of MMUs aggravated the problem 
further. The Committee observ es that the Department would have to devise other 
means and methods beyond mere pursuance with the States, to impress the need for 
the presence of MMUs at the district level so that some emergency medical services 
can be made available to needy. 
(Para 4.29) 
 Of the 354 MMUs operational in the country, the fact as to how many 
of them are actually functional is unclear. Moreover, it is also unclear as to whether 
any assessment has been made to find out that the MMUs purchased till date 
confirm to the standards. CAG findings in its latest report are quite alarming. The 
Committee notes that MMUs procured in Manipur remained unutilized as of 
October, 2008 for want of technical know-how and Specialist doctors. Similarly, 
MMUs were duly procured by Tripura but remained unutilized. Expression of 
interest was floated in May, 2008 in viting interested NGOs/ Charitable 
Organisations for operationalising the MMUs.                                         (Para 4.30) 
 
The Committee can well imagine that there may be any number of similar 
cases in other States also. In such a scen ario, the Committee strongly feels that the 
Ministry needs to undertake a country-w ide review about functional status of 
MMUs. Thereafter, constant monitoring at regular intervals has to be carried out so 
as to ensure the accessibility of healthcare facilities to the general masses                                                      
(Para 4.31) 
 V. RCH FLEXIBLE POOL 
Another disturbing trend noticed by the Committee was that in respect of 
many States, Central funds released during th e year were higher than the proposed 
allocation. While trying to understand the reasons therefor, the Committee came to 
know that all the States/ UTs were having unspent balances at the beginning of the 
year. As per the details made available to the Committee, as on 01.04.2008, opening 
balance amounting to Rs. 1157.46 crore was available with Assam (Rs. 126.67 
crore), Maharashtra (Rs. 209.69 crore), Orissa (Rs. 60.99 crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs. 
97.73 crore), U.P. (Rs. 192.33 crore) and West Bengal (Rs. 101.59 crore) reporting 
the maximum.                                                                        (Para 5.5) 
 

 190
This clearly shows that States have generally failed to take the full benefit of 
various Central interventions inspite of their having the discretion to spend money 
as per their requirements. The Committee, ther efore, strongly feels that if despite 
the availability of funds the states are unable  to utilize them, and thus is a cause for 
a  thorough review of strategies. The low utilization of funds has seriously hampered 
Government’s initiatives for bringing down IMR, MMR and TFR. Seriously 
concerned with this state of affair s, the Committee recommends that the 
Department, in consultation with the St ates/ UTs, should devise alternative 
strategies so that the funds allocated are utilized optimally so that the poor and 
weaker sections of the society are not b ereft of the benefits of various on-going 
health care initiatives.                                                                                         (Para 5.6)                                  
The Committee desires to know whet her the PIPs of the States under 
reference has started reflecting the deficient areas as flagged off by the Department, 
and asking for funds to overcome them.                                                          (Para 5.9)                                   
 
ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION 
 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is yet another case of inept 
handling of budgeted funds by the Department. The Committee finds to its dismay 
that despite the efficacy and relevance of  Pentavalent Vaccine being in question, a 
substantive amount of Rs. 205.30 crore was allocated for the same out of which Rs. 
184.14 crore remained unutilised and had to be surrendered. The Committee would 
like the Department to exercise greater ca ution in future and not allow repeat of 
such fiscal imprudence.        (Para 5.13) 
  
From a perusal of the information made available, the Committee would like 
to state here that significant progress un der the Immunisation Programme has not 
been noticed in many of the States. This fa ct holds true both for the high focus and 
EAG States and also the non-high focus States .  In some instances like that of Tamil 
Nadu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, the immu nization coverage has infact dropped 
below the DLHS II rate. The Committee observes that a low coverage rate in some 
of the very densely populated States like Bihar and Uttar Pradesh means that a very 
large number of children remain exposed to the vagaries of diseases resulting in 
high incidence of IMR in the country. The Committee observes that unless proper 
execution of the plans are made by the programme authorities, visible impact on the 

 191
immunization coverage would remain a distant dream. It, therefore, urges the 
Department to take up the issue with th e respective State Mission Directors during 
the next Common Review Mission, who need to be impressed upon to achieve the 
required quarterly/ annual targets.                                                                 (Para 5.16)                                  
 
Cold chain maintenance is the most  crucial component for effective 
implementation of the Immunisation  Programme. The Committee, however, 
observes that so far this has proved to be the weakest link under the programme. 
Committee’s apprehensions have been confirmed by the assessment of cold chain 
maintenance arrangement made under the Performance Audit of CAG. As per the 
CAG Audit, none of the cold chain equipment was available in any of the 124 test 
checked PHCs in Haryana, Meghalaya, Madhya Pradesh, Puducherry and West 
Bengal. Besides, in Bihar, Lakshadweep and Uttar Pradesh, 31 to 68 per cent of cold 
chain equipment was found non-functional.                                                 (Para 5.17) 
 
 The Committee is more disturbed by the fact that Government of India 
budgetary support for maintenance of cold chain equipments, supply of spare parts, 
provision of alternate power supply has prove d to be of no avail. The States have 
simply confirmed their inability to abso rb the funds for envisaged purposes. The 
Committee is of the view that the absence of cold chain management has indirectly 
resulted in adverse impact on the UIP, a high priority area under the Mission.                                             
(Para 5.18) 
PULSE POLIO PROGRAMME 
 
The Committee is happy to note that the Department has been diligently 
pressing forward with various measures to contain the spread of WPV-1 and WPV-
3 types, especially entrenched in Biha r and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee hopes 
that the introduction of the bivalent vaccine (P1& P3) during 2010 would go a long 
way in eradicating polio from the country.  Though the Department has cited that 
the absolute numbers of polio cases have been reducing over the years, given the 
massive scale on which the programme is being implemented with NIDs, SNIDs and 
mop-up rounds reported polio cases have shown no significant improvement during 
the past three years. The Committee woul d like to reckon here that as per the 
findings of DLHS III (2007-08) survey, th e all India figures of polio immunization 

 192
stand at 66.2% only, with Bihar (53.1%), UP (44.4%), Madhya Pradesh (55.1%), 
Mehghalaya (46.5%), Jharkhand (64.4%), Ra jasthan (63.9%)  and most of the NE 
States performing less than the all India average. Given the above levels of PPI 
coverage in various states, the Committee would like the Department to explain us 
as to how the goal of zero transmission can be achieved at the earliest.                                                         
(Para 5.23) 
 
JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA 
The Committee views with serious concern the high level of pregnant women 
registered for institutional delivery not op ting for the same. This clearly indicates 
that various interventions made under JS Y so as to make aware the targeted 
population about the positive impact of institutional delivery both on the mother 
and child have not proved to be very effective. Situation becomes more worrisome 
by the fact that high focus States where need was the most have been showing such a 
trend. The Committee fails to understand the reasons behind ground level 
functionaries not monitoring the trimeste r check-up of the registered pregnant 
women. The Committee would like to point out that the achievement of 47 per cent 
of institutional deliveries (DLHS-III 2007- 08) from 37 percent (DLHS-I  1998-99) 
although indicates a slow but steady increas e, however, one must not forget that 53 
per cent women still continue to remain de prived of the benefits of institutional 
deliveries. The Committee is of the view that the role of ASHA/ ANM under the JSY 
seems to be limited to payment of cash incentives only. Consistent tracking of 
expectant mother for antenatal and post-partum check-up and deliveries needed 
more focused attention. For this, regular monitoring and surprise inspections need 
to be included as an essential component of JSY.                      (Para 5.23) 
 The Committee has also been informed that an Evaluation Study of JSY is 
being conducted by an Expert Group led by the Executive Director, National Health 
Systems Resource Centre (NHSRC) with inter-alia the following objectives: 
 
(d) Procedure for random verification of beneficiaries; 
(e) Fund Flow mechanism for administering JSY scheme and mechanism 
adopted for ensuring timely payment to the beneficiaries; and 
(f) Impact of JSY services on maternal mortality ratio and infant mortality rate. 
 

 193
The Committee would like to be informed ab out the latest status  in this regard. 
                                            (Para 5.28) 
 
The Committee observes that the goal of reducing MMR to 100 per lakh like 
births by 2012 is very difficult to achieve at the present rate of decline. The goal can 
be achieved only if there is rapid expa nsion of Skilled Birth Attendants and 
Emergency Obstetric Care (EmOC) . It is in this context th at deficiencies in EmOC 
and Skilled Birth Attendance are very worrisome.                    (Para 5.32)                                  
 
The Committee is of the view that in the absence of required ground-level 
health functionaries who have to be qual ified, trained and semi-skilled personnel, 
the outreach of JSY and ot her specific interventions wi ll remain confined to the 
barest minimum. Number of ambitious schemes with high objectives and 
availability of massive funding will not succeed in reaching the targeted 
beneficiaries. Close monitori ng, not on paper but at the ground level, in the real 
sense alone can strengthen the effective implementation of all the initiatives taken so 
far.                                                                                                                      (Para 5.33) 
 
VI. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME                                  
(NVBDCP) 
 
 
The Committee notes that against an allocation of Rs. 442.00 crore in 2009-
10, expenditure reported as on 28.02. 2010 was only Rs. 278.61 crore. The 
Committee observes that this trend of under-utilisation of allocated fund is also 
there in the first two years of the Eleventh  Plan. Against the provision of Rs. 399.50 
crore and Rs. 472.25 crore in 2007-08 a nd 2008-09, expenditure was only Rs. 383.66 
crore and Rs.  299.38 crore respectively. Th e Committee is constrained to observe 
that against the total Plan outlay of Rs. 3190.00 crore for the Eleventh Plan, less 
than half of the funds were released and that too remained under-utilised. 
Committee’s repeated attempts for optimum utilization of allocated funds under 
NVBDCP has failed to make any impact.                      (Para 6.3)                                   
 
The Committee has always been responsive to the genuine demands of the 
Department. The Committee would, however, also like the Department to focus on 

 194
better utilization of the scarce resource s. The Committee, once again, recommends 
that the Department need to focus on analyzing the reasons for reduced utilization 
of the allocated funds and take corrective action accordingly.  
 
The Committee would also like to know whether any commitment charges 
are to be paid by the Department in case of shortfall in utilization of EAP 
component and if so, the charges paid during the last three years.               (Para 6.4)                                   
 
MALARIA 
 
The Committee notes that the number of cases reported is already on the rise 
in many of the States, especially the No rth-Eastern States, where the problem is 
acute. Under the GFATM project all the 77 district in 7 NE States, 7 districts of 
Jharkhand, 6 districts of West Bengal and 16  districts of Orissa are covered.  The 
Committee is not fully convinced by the Departments, contention that due to remote 
and inaccessible areas with poor access to malaria diagnosis and treatment facilities, 
NE states continue to remain a major cha llenge.  The Committee would like to state 
here that the programme has been these for considerable period and with 100 
percent central funding and also Internatio nal assistance, these challenges, should 
have been significantly lessened. The Comm ittee also finds that major interventions 
like introduction of Rapid diagnostic kits , for the field workers, introduction of 
specialized therapy for Pf cases and long lasting insecticidal nets have all been made 
for North East States.  However, inspite of such huge funding under the programme 
significant progress is not visible. The Committee can only conclude that 
supervision and monitoring, which is one of the main strategies adopted for effective 
control of malaria, is perhaps not being implemented to the desired levels, especially 
in NE region and Orissa.                                  (Para 6.7) 
 
The Committee would however, like to draw the attention of the Department 
to the status of some key functionaries under Malaria control programme. The 
Committee is astonished to find that inspit e of special attention being given to the 
NE States important functionaries are simply not there as indicated below: 
- Vector borne Disease Control (DVBOC) Consultant is not there in any of 
the                 NE States and Sikkim.  

 195
- Only 522 PHC-MOs are posted in Arunachal Pradesh. Remaining States 
do not have this functionary. 
- Assam does not have a Lab-Technician/ Lab-Technician(Contractual)  
- Both Assam and Nagaland do not have a Health Supervisor (M) 
- No Health Supervisor (F) is post ed in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. 
- Multi-Purpose Worker (M) is not there in Arunachal Pradesh and Assam. 
- Only Nagaland has 28 Malaria Inspectors 
- Surveillance Staff (307) is there only in Meghalaya. 
- Only Meghalaya has 54 Spray Squads. 
- In Sikkim and Tripura Malaria Tec hnical Supervisors (Contractual) are 
not  there  
- n Arunachal Pradesh and Assam there are no regular MPW (M) at all  
(Para 6.9) 
 
 The fact that these functionaries play a vital role in disease detection and 
surveillance cannot be set aside. By not appointing these functionaries, the States 
leave a large gap in the field-level disease surveillance and treatment. The 
Committee can only conclude from the above that it would be impractical to expect 
noticeable improvements in malaria control with key functionaries missing, that too, 
in the malaria endemic States.   Hence, the Committee advises the Department that, 
apart from allocating sufficient funds to these States/ UTs, it should also pursue 
with State Governments to fill up the vacancies without delay so that  the targets set 
to control malaria could be met within a realistic time-frame. The Committee would 
like the Department to furnish details of various measures adopted by the States 
Governments in the past year to fill up these vacancies.                               (Para 6.10)                        
 
KALA-AZAR 
 
 The Committee observes that though the National Health Policy (2002) had 
set the goal of elimination of Kala-azar by 2010, the above target is yet to be 
realized. This is evident from the fact th at 2534 reported cases of Kala-azar from 
the States of Bihar, West Bengal and Utta r Pradesh have been reported during the 
first two months of the year 2010. It is in  this context that two rounds of door-to-
door search which were to be undertaken  for elimination of Kala-azar, assume 
added significance. However, the Committee fails to understand as to why Kala-
azar fortnights could not be observed in  the most endemic States of Bihar and 
Jharkhand during the past year.  Inspit e of the Committee’s repeated comments on 
carrying on intensive door-to-door surveill ance and monitoring by the Department 

 196
the situation so far has been far from encouraging.  The Committee would like to be 
enlightened about the reasons behind not undertaking the door-to-door search in 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh. The Committee recommends that effective surveillance, 
timely treatment and compliance of treatmen t regimens in all PHCs in the affected 
districts need to be continued without any let-up.                                         (Para 6.13)                                  
 
 
 The Committee would like the Department to apprise it in clear terms the 
number of PHCs in the endemic districts that have been provided with anti-Kala 
azar drugs, the number of household/ population covered district-wise under the 
door-to-door surveillance activities, and the physical outcomes of such initiatives. 
The Committee would also like to be  apprised about the number of NGOs/ 
FBOs/PRIs involved in Kala-azar eliminatio n activities in the above States, the 
funds provided to them during the last th ree years, the cases treated by them and 
the initiatives taken by them to ensure treatment compliance of the patients.  
(Para 6.14) 
JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS 
 
 The Committee is dismayed to note that  more than four years have elapsed 
since the vaccination programme was launched in 2006, yet the all India coverage of 
JE vaccination campaign is only 46.62% uptill 2009 as against the targeted 85% 
coverage. What is more worrisome is that JE vaccination coverage in four districts 
of Andhra Pradesh, one district of Assam and two districts of Tamil Nadu is nil, 
which paints a very grim picture, especially  in the context of there being no specific 
anti-viral drug for JE. The Committee feels that if such gaps are not addressed 
immediately, efforts to contain JE outbreaks will stand jeopardized. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that th e Department should, in coordination 
with the State Government concerned, chal k out an action plan to achieve the 
targeted coverage of JE vaccination and also apprise the Committee of the progress 
made in this regard. Similar efforts for vacc ine coverage of the affected districts of 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam and Tamil Nadu are also required.                       (Para 6.18)                                 
 
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made towards 
establishing sentinel sites for regular surveillance and Apex Referral Laboratories 
for advanced diagnosis, circulation of stan dard guidelines, capacity building and 

 197
intensive IEC campaign and vaccination with single dose under Universal 
Immunization Programme. Keeping in view th e fact that Uttar Pradesh is the most 
endemic State which contributes 80% of JE cases, the Committee recommends that 
the Government must quickly take a decision on conducting a special JE 
vaccination campaign for left out children in the seven most sensitive districts of 
Uttar Pradesh along with the affected di stricts of Andhra Pradesh, Assam and 
Tamil Nadu. The quarterly progress made in this regard may be communicated to 
the Committee.                                                    (Para 6.19)                                     
 
The Committee is happy to note that finally some action to check aggravation of 
non-JE viruses in Eastern UP have been initiated by the Central Government. It can 
only hope that the situation would improve  this year during the outbreak season. 
The Committee hopes that the manpower required to make the sentinel sites, 
referral labs operational and the Diagnostic kits provided free of cost by National 
Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, are in position.                 (Para 6.21)                                     
 
VII NATIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME  
 
 To tackle HIV/TB co-infection, TB + HIV collaborative activities with NACP, 
initiated in 2001, have been scaled up acr oss the country. The Committee notes that 
intensified TB/HIV package of services have  been started in nine HIV high prevalence 
States (Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Pondicherry and Tamil Nadu) in 2008 and has been extended to nine additional States 
(Delhi, Gujarat, Punjab, Rajasthan, Kerala, Assam, West Bengal, Orissa and Chandigarh) 
in 2009-10 with a vision to cover the entire nation by 2012. Monitoring of co-infected 
patients was started from 4
th quarter of 2008, and out of a total of 31047 such cases, 5171 
cases were treated with a 75 per cent success rate. The Committee is happy to note that 
the Department has been pursuing its conc erns diligently to identify and provide 
treatment to HIV/T.B co-infected patients.            (Para 7.2)                                  
  
The Committee observes that the emergence of multi-drug resistant TB has 
increased the severity and magnitude of th e problem in terms of cost, longer and 
difficult treatment regimen. In this contex t, the Committee welc omes the initiative 
of establishing a network of 43 Laboratories for diagnosis and follow-up of MDRTB 

 198
patients. The Committee hopes that such Laboratories will be set up across the 
country in such a way that people from all parts of the country have equity in access 
to such facilities. The Committee would like to have an idea of the location of such 
Laboratories and also of the structure of charges, if any, proposed to levied for 
availing of the facilities therefrom.              (Para 7.4) 
                           
 The Committee observes that it is a matter of serious concern that a huge 
amount to the tune of Rs. 79.19 crore was left unspent with the States, and that too, 
the scare resources allocated to counter one of the deadliest diseases. The 
Committee is not aware about any specific measure to check this negative trend. 
The Committee would, therefore, like th e Department to at least outline the 
roadmap for reducing, if not entirely wiping out, the extent of unspent balances.                                         
(Para 7.6) 
 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that out of a total outlay of Rs. 1156 
crore for the Programme, Rs. 756.00 crore is the credit from World Bank. The 
Committee would like to be enlightened if the credit from World Bank has any 
financial implications by way of debt or commitment charges and if so, the extent of 
financial liability involved so far.                       (Para 7.7) 
 
 
 As per the information furnished by the Department 2524 NGOs, 19202 
Private Practitioners, 268 Medical Colleges and 150 Corporate Hospitals are 
involved under RNTCP. The Committee would like to be apprised of the extent of 
financial assistance extended to the NGOs, the amount utilized, the number of 
pending UCs from them and the amount involved therein.                            (Para 7.8)                                  
 
 
To the Committee’s query regarding the latest status on the new drug for treating 
patient with MDR-TB being developed by M/s Johnson and Johnson, the Department has 
informed that the new molecule (TMC 207) is currently undergoing Phase II clinical 
trials to evaluate its efficacy, safety and tolerability in patients suffering from MDR-TB. 
Tuberculosis Research Centre, Chennai and Al l India Institute of Medical Sciences are 
participating in this trial which is being unde rtaken in 17 countries across the world. The 

 199
details on the cost, affordability, efficacy etc. will be available only after successful 
completion of the clinical trials and once the drug is approved for marketing by the 
regulatory authorities. The Committee would like the Department to furnish the latest 
status on the Phase II clinical trials and its findings.          (Para 7.9) 
 
 The Committee would like the Department to share with it the state-wise 
details of the Survey Reports while submitti ng its action taken note. The Committee  
has been given to understand that a ba seline social assessment study at the 
beginning of the RNTCP II project had b een undertaken to assess some of the 
predisposing factors contributing to the spread of the disease, and that another such 
survey is being planned to be made in 2010-11 which will also include  evaluation of 
the predisposing factors for spread of TB.  The findings of the baseline survey may 
be shared with the Committee.                                                                        (Para 7.11) 
 
 
VIII. NATIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME 
 
 While appreciating the steady progress in the elimination of leprosy from the 
endemic states, the Committee would like the Department to closely monitor the 
efficacy of the measures taken and intro duce suitable interven tions for elimination 
disease leprosy in D&N Haveli.                                                 (Para 8.4) 
                  
 Committee’s attention is especially drawn to the utilisation status shown 
against Bihar. The Committee notes that ne arly Rs. 2.67 crore were lying unspent 
with the state uptill March, 2008. However,  inspite of non release of funds during 
2008-09 and 2009-10 to the State, the unspent balances had to be carried forward 
from March, 2008 and could not be exhausted completely during the next two years 
with Rs. 1.34 crore still remaining by     31
st December, 2009. Similarly, in case of 
Orissa, Uttarachal, Jharkhand, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, West Bengal and 
Maharashtra large sums of money have been carried forward unspent from the 
previous year. The Committee feels that given the trend over the past couple of 
years, this year too, substantial amount of funds would lie under utilised/ unutilised.     
                          (Para 8.7) 
 
 

 200
 The Committee is of the considered view that judicious utilization of funds is 
indispensable for sound financial administrati on without which it would be difficult 
for the Department to obtain the targeted results under NLEP. The Committee is 
compelled to conclude that much needs to be done especially in the endemic States 
of Bihar, Jharkand and the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli. The Committee, 
therefore, urges the Department to take up the matter of fund utilisation on an 
emphatic note with the State Programme Officers during its quarterly review 
meetings. The Committee would like the De partment to find out the underlying 
causes of underutilization of funds and take corrective action accordingly. 
       (Para 8.8) 
 
The Committee is happy to note that at last such an important scheme under 
NLEP has finally seen the light of day. Ho wever, with more than three years of the 
Eleventh Plan Period having passed, the Co mmittee can only hope that the benefits 
of the scheme would accrue to more number of beneficiaries during the coming 
years. The Committee would like to add a word of caution to the Department 
regarding having an effective monitoring mechanism so as to determine the veracity 
of the beneficiaries from initial stage itself. The Committee would also like to have 
an idea about the number of beneficiaries (State-wise).                  (Para 8.10) 
                                                                                                          
 
IX NATIONAL TRACHOMA AND BLINDNESS CONTROL PROGRAMME 
 
 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for low level of achievements 
in the first three quarters of 2009-10 under the various activities cited above. The 
reasons for such low achievements are only best known to the Department.    
(Para 9.3)                                  
 
 The Committee recommends to the Department to give utmost priority to 
properly evaluate the reasons for these undera chievements so that the weak links in 
the chain of implementation of the initiatives can be id entified. This, the Committee 
believes, would surely result in addressing implementation of various components of 
the programme effectively. The Committee fe els that if the situation continues to 
remain as tardy as now then the goals set by the Department under NPCB by the 
end of Eleventh plan would remain a distant dream.                                   (Para 9.5)
        

 201
The Committee is appalled to note th at cataract operations in such huge 
proportions were allowed to be performed in eye camps between 2005-08, although, 
Government of India has banned eye operat i o n s  i n  c a m p s  o w i n g  t o  h i g h  r a t e  o f  
mishaps in such camps.  The Committee feel s that the issue cannot simply be done 
away with, especially in the light of the findings of the CAG. The Committee fails to 
understand as to how, insp ite of the claims made by the Department regarding 
regular monitoring of compliance to the guidelines, cataract surgeries continued to 
be performed in camps in the aforesaid states. The Committee apprehends that such 
surgeries in Camps must be continuing even at present thereby putting a large 
number of patients to risk. The Committ ee observes that merely circulating the 
guidelines to the State Governments with no means to ensure their strict compliance 
would not serve any purpose. There need s to be a component of surprise  
inspections in the existing monitoring mechanism  This, the Committee believes, 
would go a long way in ensuring compliance to the guidelines and act as a deterrent 
against violations by the defaulting agencies.                      (Para 9.7)
                
 
The Committee would however, like to point out that achievement level still 
r e m a i n s  l e s s  t h a n  t h e  t a r g e t .   W h a t  i s  m o r e  d i s t u r b i n g  i s  t h a t  t h e r e  i s  a n  a c t u a l  
requirement of at least 80,000 to 1,00,000 of corneas per year in the country for 
transplantation purpose.  The Committee is  of the view that besides lack of 
awareness, other major cause for low level of eye donation/collection is that 
infrastructure required for the purpose is  simply not there at the ground level.  
Committee’s apprehensions are supported by the following findings of CAG 
Performance Audit of NRHM (2009-10): 
- No Eye Bank was operational in Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Lakshadweep, Manipur, Meghalaya and 
Uttarakhand (10 States/UTs) 
 
- As of March, 2008, only 346 Eye Banks were operational in 17 States/UTs 
out of which 97 were in the Government Sector and 249 in the voluntary 
sector. 
 
- a comParative analysis of performan ce in 9 States/UTs showed that the 
voluntary sector collected 76 per cent of the eyes donated. Lack of eye 
donation facilities in Government Hospitals was the reason for low 
presence and performance of Government Sector; and 

 202
 
- almost 52 per cent of eyes collected in the Government sector had been 
either rendered unfit or were used for research as compared to 34 per 
cent in the voluntary sector.      
 
      (Para 9.10) 
 
 
 The Committee is also perturbed to fi nd that there was a big gap between 
overall figures of eyes donated and utilized during 2005-2008 for 9 States/UT 
(Jharkhand, Orissa, UP, Assam, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Tamil Nadu and West 
Bengal).  Out of 13,986 eyes donated under Government Sector, number of eyes 
utilized was only 432.  Similarly, out of 44,964 eyes donated under the Voluntary 
Sector, only 9362 eyes could be utilized.   Notwithstanding the very low percentage 
of eyes donated in the country so far, th e low level of utilization of those eyes 
collected suggests that all is not well with  the existing arrangement and the system 
suffers from some grave inadequacies. The Committee’s apprehensions are 
supported by the findings on the performance of Eye Banks in the following States:        
Government Sector (2005-08) 
State No. of eyes 
donated 
Utilised Rendered Unfit Used for 
research 
Delhi 3552 1944 804 517 
Gujarat 4452 1431 --- 3021 
Tamil Nadu 3752 --- --- 1660 
West Bengal 1802 570 1 1231 
Total 13,558 3,945 805 6,429 
 
Voluntary Sector (2005-08) 
State No.of eyes 
donated 
Utilised  Rendered Unfit Used for research  
Delhi 5268 2515 1427 1039 
Gujarat 14917 4910 --- 912 
Haryana 704 177 169 13 
Tamil Nadu 20284 -- --- 10317 
West Bengal 2741 1040 100 1331 
Total  43,914 8,642 1,696 13,612 
          
        (Para 9.11) 
 
 The fact that as many as 10 States/UTs  do not have a single operational eye 
bank is difficult for the Committee to accept.  Another point that strikes a chord is 

 203
the number of Eye Banks in the governme nt vis-a-vis the pr ivate sector. The 
Committee notes that the ratio of eye bank s operated in the private sector is 2.5 
times the figure for the government sector.  The NPCB is into the fourth year since 
the launch of NRHM and between 2007-08 to 2009-10, nearly Rs. 650 crores have 
been spent under the programme. The Co mmittee finds that measures like non 
recurring assistance upto Rs. 15 lakh to Eye Banks, recurring assistance of Rs. 1500 
per pair of eyes towards honorarium of Eye  Banks Staff, appointment of Eye 
donation Counsellors have also seemed to have made no impact.        
(Para 9.12)                         
 
 The Committee has been given to understand that it is normal that all cornea 
collected cannot be used for replantation purpose, as it needs to be assessed by 
cornea specialist for suitability and quality of cornea.  Only 30 to 40 percent corneas 
collected are suitable for optical Keratopl asty.  The Committee would like to point 
out that as per the above st ate-specific details, percentage of corneas utilized is 
much below the accepted 30 to 40 percent level.  One obvious reason for such a low 
level of utilization can be the upkeep and maintenance of Eye Banks being not as 
per the standard norms. The Committee , therefore, recommends to the Department 
to keep the activities of all the entities/institutions  involved in providing eye 
collection activities under constant scruti ny/monitoring and take urgent remedial 
steps so that the stumbling blocks in the optimum utilization of eyes collected is 
achieved by more number of beneficiaries getting back their vision.                          
 The Committee would like to know as to whether the Government is aware 
of the work done by Dr. Sinha.                                   (Para 9.13) 
 
X. NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDERS CONTROL 
PROGRAMME 
 
 
 The Committee is not very happy with  the trends of fund utilization under 
the programme. During 2007-08 and 2008-09 against an allocation of Rs. 25.00 crore 
and Rs. 32.00 crore respectively, expenditur e reported is only Rs. 19.45 crore and 
Rs. 17.95 crore respectively.  The Committee observes that every year there have 
been substantial amount of savings over the allocated funds. The Committee notes 
with disappointment that this neither speaks of good financial management nor 

 204
good programme implementation under the Programme. The Committee once 
again recommends to the Department to devi se measures to overcome the obstacles 
coming in the way of proper implementation of the programme initiatives.   
(Para 10.3)                                  
 
The Committee hopes that the Empowered Programme Committee (EPC) 
approval must have been received by now and also the biding process on the 
technical specifications of salt testin g kits, must have been completed. The 
Committee would like to emphasise that all conceivable efforts may be made so as to 
ensure optimal and judicious allocation of funds in active coordination with state 
authority for timely achievements of the targets during  2010-11.       (Para 10.4) 
 
 The Committee understands from the above  that as many as nine States/ UTs 
have been highly endemic iodine deficien cy. The Committee, however, does not find 
that any focused intervention has been initiated in the above States/ UTs to reduce 
the deficiency rate. Since, the above ob servation is a result of certain sample 
districts surveyed in the above States/ UTs the numbers would be much more if all 
the districts in these States/ UTs are co vered. Therefore, the Committee suggests 
that a special intervention needs to be made in all of the above States/UTs.  
Intensified IEC activities may also be carr ied out covering all the districts so that 
the prevalence rate comes to less than 10. The Committee would like the 
Department to furnish details of the samp le survey report concerning all the States/ 
UTs covered for its perusal.                             (Para 10.6) 
 
XI INTEGRATED DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME 
 The Committee fails to understand as to why clear information has not been 
furnished by the Ministry against the targ ets set by it for 2009-10. The Committee 
observes that concrete data is necessary for proper assessment of the targets set and 
merely stating that  training programme is in progress or connectivity on Broad 
Band is being established without quantify ing the progress made evinces ignorance 
of the most basic principles of appraisa l on the part of the Department.  The 
Committee would like the Department to furnish details of achievement during 
2009-10 regarding the targets mentioned above in the table for 2009-10 while 

 205
furnishing its ATN and also be more circumspect while furnishing the information 
in the Outcome Budget.                         (Para 11.3) 
 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that  the recruitment and training of the 
required manpower under IDSP is proceeding at a positive pace. The Committee 
observes that the presence of trained surveillance manpower are key to the 
prevention and control of diseases/ epidem ic in such a large country as India. 
Hence, the Committee hopes that the targ ets of recruiting and training technical 
consultants for the remaining 400 vacant post would have been completed after 
due approval for restructuring and extension of IDSP were obtained. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Departme nt to furnish the details in this 
regard for its perusal. The Committee wo uld also like to be apprised of the 
progress made towards establishing video conferencing at the remaining sites and 
strengthening the remaining priority labs.                           (Para 11.5)                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 