 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (SAKA) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
115 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH REPORT 
On 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE 
BILL, 2019 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  27 November,  2019) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 November, 2019) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2019/ Agrahayana, 1941 (SAKA) 
 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH REPORT 
On 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF 
MEDICINE BILL, 2019 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  27 November, 2019) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 November, 2019) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) - (ii) 
2.  PREFACE 
 
(iii) - (iv) 
3.  ACRONYMS 
 
(v) 
4.  REPORT 
           
Chapter-  I      Introduction  
Chapter- II     Views of the   Ministry of AYUSH 
 
Chapter - III   Views of Organizations/ Associations/ 
Institutions/ Experts 
Chapter - IV  Clause-by-clause consideration to the Bill 
Chapter - V  General Recommendations 
 
 
 
 
1 - 10 
11 - 25 
26 - 36 
37 - 81 
82 - 84 
5.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A 
GLANCE 
 
 
6.  MINUTES 
 
 
7.  ANNEXURES 
   (i) Bill 
   (ii) List of Witnesses 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
2.  Dr. R. Lakshmanan  
3.  Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
4.  Shri Jairam Ramesh  
5.  Dr. Santanu Sen 
6.  Shri Ashok  Siddharth 
7.  Shri K. Somaprasad 
8.  Dr. C. P. Thakur 
9.  Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA  
 
11.  Shri Thangso Baite 
12.  Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan    
13.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
14.  Shri C. P. Joshi  
15.  Dr. K. Kamaraj 
 16.  Shri Arjunlal Meena 
17.  Shri Anoop Mishra 
18.  Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee 
19.  Dr. Mahendra Nath Pandey 
20.  Shri Chirag Paswan 
21.  Shri C. R. Patil 
22.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
23.  Shri Janak Ram 
24.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
25.  Shri Gyan Singh 
26.  Shri Bharat Singh 
27.  Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
28.  Shrimati Rita Tarai 
29.  Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
*30.  Shri Manohar Utawal 
31.  Shri Akshay Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu       Secretary 
2. Shri J. Sundriyal Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
3. Shri Rakesh Naithani  Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar              Additional Director 
5. Shrimati Harshita Shankar    Under Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal  Assistant Committee Officer 
8. Shri Parth Gupta   Assistant Research Officer 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- 
*ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 21 st December, 2018 
(i)  

 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND 
FAMILY WELFARE (2019-20) 
 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.K. Antony 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
8. Shri K. Somaprasad  
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Vacant 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
14. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
15. Shrimati Malothu Kavitha 
16. Shri P. K. Kunhalikutty 
17. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
18. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
19. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
20. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
21. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
22. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
27. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary  
2. Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
6. Ms. Monika Garbyal, Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Shri Parth Gupta, Assistant Research Officer 
(ii) 
                                                           
 Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle, Member resigned from the membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f 14 th 
September, 2019. 

 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this One Hundred Fifteenth Report of the Committee on the National Commission for 
Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019. 
2. In  pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules  of Procedure and Conduct of  Business in the 
Council of States relating  to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing  Committees, the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred* the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 
2019 (Annexure I) on the 14th  January, 201 9 as introduced  in the Rajya Sabha on the 7th 
January, 2019 for examination and report  by  30th January, 2 019. However, the previous 
Committee could not consider the Bill and present its Report and requested for extension of time.  
Subsequently, Hon'ble Chairman , Rajya Sabha  granted exten sion of time for presentation of 
Report on the Bill upto 29th April, 2019.  However, the deliberations on the said Bill could not be 
concluded due to preoccupation of the Members of the previous Committee in the General 
Elections for the 17th Lok Sabha and subsequent dissolution of the Committee.   
3. The previous Committee  started the e xamination of the Bill and held 24th January, 2019 
sitting where it heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH on the Bill . The Committee 
also issued a Press Release inviting memoranda/views from individuals and other stakeholders. 
In response thereto, a number of memoranda from different organization/association and 
individuals were received.  
4.  The re-constituted Committee held 4 sittings during the course of examination of the Bill, 
i.e., on 21st, 22 nd October, 7th and 15 th November 2019. The list of witnesses heard by the 
Committee is at Annexure-II. 
5. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 15th November, 
2019. 
6. The Committee relied on the following documents in finalizing its Report:- 
(i) The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019; 
(ii) Background Note on the Bill received from the Ministry of AYUSH; 
(iii) Presentation, clarifications and Oral evidence of Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH; 
(iv) Memoranda received on the Bill from various 
institutes/bodies/associations/organizations/experts and replies of the Ministry on 
the memoranda selected by the Committee for examination; 
__________________________________(iii)_________________________________________ 

 
 
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.58476, dated 14 th  January, 2019. 
 
 
(v) Oral evidence and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts on the 
Bill; and 
(vi) Replies received from the Ministry of AYUSH  to the questions/queries  raised by 
Members during the meetings on the Bill 
7. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made 
by those who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their valuable suggestions 
to the Committee through their written submissions.  
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
15  November, 2019 
3, Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)                                        
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
Chairman,  
Department-related Parliamentary Standing                                                                   
Committee on Health and Family Welfare,                                                                                                                                
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
(iv) 
 
ACRONYMS 
AIPGET All India Post Graduate Entrance Test 
ATS Association of Teaching Staff 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation  
CCH Central Council of Homoeopathy 
CCIM Central Council for Indian Medicine 
CCMP Certificate course in modern pharmacology 
CCRA Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
CCRH Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme 
CRRI Compulsory Residential Rotatory Internship in various Departments 
DFG Demands for Grants 
EWS Economically Weaker Section 
HCC Homoeopathy Central Council 
IIHP Indian Institute of Homeopathic Physicians 
IIPH Indian Institute of Public Health 
IMCC Indian Medicine Central Council 
MARBH Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homeopathy 
MCI Medical Council of India 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MQT Minimum Qualifying Test 
NCDs Non-communicable diseases 
NCH National Commission for Homoeopathy  
NCHRH National Commission for Human Resources in Health 
NCISM National Commission for Indian System of Medicine 
NEET National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test 
NEIAH North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy 
NEP National Education Policy 
NET National Entrance Test  
NEXT National Exit Test 
NRHM National Rural Health Mission 
NOVOD National Oilseeds and Vegetable Development 
NTET National Teachers Eligibility Test 
OBC Other Backward Class 
PGNET Post Graduate National Exit Exam 
PH Physical Handicapped 
PHC Primary Health Care 
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
RBSK Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SOR Statement of Objects and Reasons 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
UT Union Territory 
WHO World Health Organisation  
 

 
 
(v)

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER - I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Mission Statement of the Bill 
1.1.1 According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the National Commission for Indian 
System of Medicine Bill, 2019 seeks to provide for constitution of a National Commission for 
Indian System of Medicine for development and regulation of all aspects relat ing to education, 
medical profession and medical institutions of Indian System of Medicine and an Advisory 
Council to advise and make recommendations to the Commission to achieve the mission 
objectives of the Bill as enshrined in its Preamble.  
1.1.2 The P reamble to the Bill aims to provide a medical education system that improves 
access to quality and affordable medical education and to ensure availability of adequate and 
high quality medical professionals of Indian System of Medicine in all parts of the c ountry.  The 
Bill also seeks to promote equitable and universal healthcare that encourages community health 
perspective and makes services of such medical professionals accessible to all the citizens. In 
order to achieve the national health goals, the Bill  encourages such medical professionals to 
adopt latest medical research in their work and to contribute to research.  It envisages a system 
that has an objective, periodic and transparent assessment of medical institutions. The Bill 
facilitates maintenance of a medical register of Indian System of Medicine for India and enforces 
high ethical standards in all aspects of medical services. 
1.1.3 Broadly speaking, the Bill is a replica of National Medical Commission Bill, 2019  (Now 
an Act ( No. 30 of  2019) the G azette of India, Part II, Section -1, 8 th August, 2019) . It entails 
constitution of Autonomous Boards, holding of NEET, NEXT, National Entrance Test and 
National Teachers Eligibility Test and strives to adapt to the changing needs and keep pace with 
the time and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
1.2 Objectives of the Bill  
1.2.1 The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine, Bill 2019, inter alia, seeks to 
provide for—  
(a) constitution of a National Commission for Indian System of Medicine for development and 
regulation of all aspects relating to education, medical profession and medical institutions of 
Indian System of Medicine and an Advisory Council to advise and make recommendations 
to the Commission; 
(b)  constitution of four Autonomous Boards, namely:  
(i) the Board of Ayurveda to regulate Ayurveda education at undergraduate and 
postgraduate levels and to determine standards thereof;  

2 
 
(ii) the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa to regulate education at undergraduate 
and postgraduate levels and to determine standards thereof; 
(iii) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine to carry 
out inspections and to assess and rate the medical institutions; and 
(iv) the Board of Ethics and  Registration for Indian System of Medicine to regulate 
professional conduct and promote medical ethics amongst practitioners and professionals 
of Indian Medicine and to maintain a national register of all licensed practitioners of 
Indian Medicine; 
(c) holding of a uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to undergraduate 
medical education; 
(d) holding of a National Exit Test for granting licence to practice as medical practitioner of 
Indian System of Medicine; 
(e) holding of a uniform Post-Graduate National Entrance Test for postgraduate courses; 
(f) holding of National Teachers' Eligibility Test for Indian System of Medicine for appointment 
as teachers thereto; 
(g) the manner of seeking permission for establishment of new medical institution; 
(h) the manner of maintaining National Register and State Register of Indian System of 
Medicine; 
(i)  recognition of medical qualification granted by Universities and medical institutions in India 
and outside India and withdrawal of recognition or de-recognition of qualification; 
(j) holding of joint sitting of the Commissions of other medical education to enhance interface 
between Indian System of Medicine, Homoeopathy and modern system of medicine; 
(k) the repeal of the Indian Medicine Central Council, Act, 1970 and for dissolution of the 
Central Council of Indian Medicine constituted thereunder with certain conditions. 
1.3 Background and Necessity of the Bill  
1.3.1 According to Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR) of the Bill, the Indian Med icine 
Central Council (IMCC) Act, 1970 (48 of 1970) was enacted to provide a solid foundation for 
the growth of medical education of Indian Systems of Medicine, namely, Ayurveda, Unani, 
Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa and to provide for constitution of the Central C ouncil of Indian 
Medicine for regulation of the educational standards of Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Sowa -
Rigpa systems of medicine, maintenance of the Central Register of practitioners and for matters 
connected therewith. The said Act has not kept pace w ith time. Various bottlenecks viz. (i) 

3 
 
irregularities in regulation of AYUSH medical institutions, (ii) ineffective role of members and 
Executive Committee, (iii) lack of standard curriculum and education,  (iv) absence of ethics in 
practice of Indian Syste m of Medicine, (v) failure to provide transparent system of inspection 
and (vi) alleged irregularities in grant of recognition & de -recognition of education system have 
crept into the system with serious detrimental effects on medical education and by implication on 
delivery of quality health services. 
1.3.2 The SOR of the Bill further stipulates that in order to streamline the functioning of the 
Central Council of Indian Medicine, to bring transparency in the mechanism for grant of 
permission to medical in stitutions and to improve the standards of medical education in Indian 
Systems of Medicine, the Central Government had introduced the Indian Medicine Central 
Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 in Rajya Sabha which is still pending. In 2016, the Central 
Government constituted a Committee chaired by Vice -Chairman, NITI Aayog to review the 
Indian Medicine Central Council Act and the said Committee recommended for enactment of the 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2018 on the same lines as tha t of the 
National Medical Commission Bill, 2018. 
1.3.3 Replying to the Committee’s query about the details of the factors that hindered the 
effective implementation of the provisions of the Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) 
Act, 1970, the Ministry of AYUSH pointed out the following lacunae in the Act:-  
Absence of effective provisions in IMCC Act rel ating to constitution of council, membership to 
have transparent selection of members and their tenure; no provision in the Act for taking action 
against the college for non -compliance of standards, non –conduction of fair inspections and  
recommendation by the Council; no conditions for removal of members from the Council or for 
superseding the Council on account of any untoward incident or act.  
1.3.4 The Committee desired to know the reasons that have led to the failure of Central 
Council of Indian Medicine  (CCIM) in  monitoring the  higher education in Indian systems of 
medicine, including  Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani and the main problems/hindrances/obstac les 
being faced by CCIM in regulating the practice of the Indian Systems of Medicine.   
1.3.5 In reply to this query, t he Ministry submitted that t he Indian Medicine Central Council 
(IMCC) Act, 1970 was enacted for constitution of a Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM); 
for regulation of education and practic e of Indian Systems of Medicine;  for maintenance of 
Central Register and for matters connected therewith.  The lack of effective provisions in the Act 
to address the issues relating to Membersh ip, conditions for removal of Members/President in 
case of non-performance or otherwise, lack of power of Central Government to make regulations 
or supersede the Council and lack of penalizing provisions on institutes for non -compliance of 
prescribed standards were some of the lacking provisions in the Act which also led to  members 
continuing beyond 5 years tenure.  
1.3.6 The Ministry further submitted that t he Inspection of colleges being conducted by the 
Council has been observed to be unfair. The Council  had not implemented the suggestions of 
Government like Aadhar based geo -location enabled attendance system for teachers, Hospital 

4 
 
staff and PG students, NEET, and Teachers eligibility test. The Council failed to ensure 
standards in colleges and no steps h ave been taken to improve the teaching and training skills of 
teachers. The Council could not unfold the hidden potentialities of the Indian systems of 
medicine.” 
1.3.7 The 9 th Report of the Planning Commission, Government of India noted that under the 
Indian System of Medicine “training Institutes lack well qualified teachers and the quality of 
training was not of requisite standard.” The National Policy on Indian System of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy, 2002 also mentioned that “Medical education in Indian Sys tem of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy has been a cause of concern . The numbers of Indian System of Medicine and 
Homoeopathy Colleges has increased phenomenally to 404 (729 colleges at present). The 
Central Councils have implemented various educational regulation s to ensure minimum 
standards of education. Despite this, there has been a mushrooming of sub -standard colleges 
causing erosion to the standards of education and harm to medical training and practice. 
Liberal permission by the State Governments, loopholes in the existing Acts and weakness in the 
enforcement of standards of education have contributed to this state of affairs.”   
1.3.8 It was, therefore, felt by the Committee that there is a need to amend some of the 
provisions of the IMCC Act, 1970 and CCIM with respect to establishment of new medical 
colleges, increasing seats and granting permission to existing medical colleges. 
1.3.9 The Government of India took some steps to meet the challenges Central Council of 
Indian Medicine (CCIM) and to resolve these bottlenecks. 
1.4 The Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment Bill)-2005 
1.4.1 The Central Council of Indian Medicine was initially constituted through nomination of 
members in 1971. Subsequently, elections to the said Council were conducted. Though the 
tenure of all the members of the said Council elected in 1994 -95 had expired in 2000, it could 
not be reconstituted even after a lapse of more than four years because the election process had 
been completed only in 7 States out of 18 States that mainta ined the State Register of Indian 
Medicine. In fact the State Register of Indian Medicine was not updated, at the instance of sitting 
members which is a pre-requisite for conducting elections in time. Sometimes, the elections were 
delayed due to litigation  and stay orders from court. To ensure timely election to the Central 
Council of Indian Medicine and to streamline its functioning, the following provisions  were 
made in the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill  2005.  
(i) To nominate ex-officio members 
(ii) To have fix tenure of elected or nominated members 
(iii) To remove the President, Vice -president and members on grounds of misconduct or 
incapacity; 
(iv) To dissolve any committee of the Central Council if it persistently defaults or abuses 
its powers; and 
(v) To give directions to the Council in the public interest. 

5 
 
1.5 Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
1.5.1 Before the IMCC Amendment Bill, 2010, Indian Medicine Central Council comprised of 
members elected from amongst the practitioners of Ayur veda, Siddha and Unani whose names 
were enrolled in the State Registers from Universities having the faculty or Department of 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani and members nominated by the Central Government from amongst 
the persons having special knowledge or pr actical experience in respect of Indian Systems of 
Medicine. The “Sowa Rigpa” system of medicine practiced in the Sub –Himalayan region was 
included as a system within the definition of “Indian Medicine” and the practitioners of the Sowa 
Rigpa system were enrolled in the Register so as to develop the system and its practices within a 
legal framework. Sowa Rigpa was given formal recognition as part of ISM in 2010. With time, 
the number of colleges imparting training and education in ISM had been increasing bu t many 
colleges failed on quality and standard parameter. To monitor this rapid proliferation of poor 
quality colleges, the IMCC Act was amended and some provisions were inserted in the Act. 
1.6 The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 
1.6.1 While considering the observations and recommendations of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the proposal of Department of Health 
for establishing an overarching body namely, “National Commission for H uman Resources in 
Health (NCHRH)” was introduced. Accordingly, the Ministry conceived a similar proposal for 
establishing an overarching body namely National Commission for Human Resources in 
AYUSH (NCHRA), which was modeled on the National Commission for Human Resources in 
Health (NCHRH). The Department of Health and Family Welfare did not pursue the proposed 
Bill. Therefore, the Ministry of AYUSH dropped the idea of setting up of National Commission 
for Human Resources in AYUSH. 
1.7 The Committee under the Chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI AAYOG 
1.7.1 In the process of streamlining and reforming the functioning of Central Council of Indian 
Medicine (CCIM) and Central Council of Homeopathy (CCH) and their legislations, the Central 
Government vide its OM No. 4(3)/2016 -H&FW dated 04.08.2016 had set up a Co mmittee under 
the Chairmanship of Vice -Chairman, NITI Aayog, with Additional Principal Secretary to PM, 
CEO, NITI Ayog and Secretary, AYUSH as members. This Committee was tasked to examine 
Homoeopathy Central Council (HCC) Act, 1973 and Indian Medicine Cen tral Council (IMCC) 
Act, 1970 and to suggest necessary reforms for improving education in the Indian Systems of 
Medicine and Homoeopathy in India. 
1.7.2 The Committee sought views and suggestions of various experts including eminent 
Indian Systems of Medic ine and Homoeopathy practitioners; representatives of renowned 
institutes for Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy Education and Research; former 
Secretaries to the Government of India, Department of AYUSH; modern medicine practitioners; 
President/Vice-President and other Members of the CCIM and CCH. Representations were also 
received from common citizens as well as experts.  

6 
 
1.7.3 NITI AYOG  in its Preliminary Report stated that Central Council of Indian Medicine 
CCIM has failed to:- 
(i) Bring in competen t and qualified persons based on merit for regulating AYUSH 
medical education; the nominated members of CCIM (30%) have not succeeded 
in making an effective impact over the elected members.  
(ii) Create standard curricula that can produce quality doctors in Ind ian Systems of 
Medicine. 
(iii) Maintain uniform standards of medical education at the under -graduate and post -
graduate levels.  
(iv) Ensure ethics in the practice of Indian Systems of Medicine. 
(v) Ensure quality enforcement mechanisms.  
(vi) Create a transparent system of in spection and grant of recognition or de -
recognition of institutions pertaining to Indian Systems of Medicine. 
(vii) Produce skilled and professionally competent medical graduates and post -
graduates  
(viii) Place emphasis on substantial evaluation of quality of teaching , training and 
imparting of skills, in addition to assessment of infrastructure and availability of 
human resources in the institutions during inspections.  
 
1.7.4 On 20 th March, 2017, the Committee had drafted the National Commission for Indian 
Systems of Medicine (NCISM) Bill, 2017 and National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) 
bill, 2017 on the lines of National Medical Commission Bill, 2016. The said Bills along with 
Preliminary Report of the Committee were uploaded on the website of NITI Aayog on 20 th 
March, 2017 inviting comments from the public. Around 21,987 mails were received from public 
experts (including those who were invited by the Committee) advocacy groups, CC H/CCIM and 
State.  
1.8 The Government of India meanwhile undertook a landmark step on the Modern Medicine 
front and introduced the National Medical Commission Bill, 2016 to revamp the Indian Medial 
Council Act, 1956. The said Bill included several far -reaching changes for strengthening the 
regulation of the medical education in the country. Given the fact that a number of issues 
plaguing MCI were also the ones affecting the CCIM, the NITI Ayog Committee recommended 
for enactment of the National Commission f or Indian System of Medicine on the same lines as 
that of the National Medical Commission Bill, 2016. 
1.9 The Government of India introduced the National Medical Commission Bill, 2017 on the 
29th December, 2017 and referred to the Committee on Health and F amily Welfare on the 4 th 
January, 2018. The Committee presented its 109 th Report on the said Bill on 28 th March, 2018 
containing a total of 56 recommendations.  The Government has accepted a total of 40 
recommendations of the DRSC on Health and Family Welf are, 7 were partially accepted and 9 
recommendations were not accepted.  The National Medical Commission is in place now after 

7 
 
enactment of the National Commission Act, 2019 (No. 30 of 2019 with effect from 8 th August, 
2019). As the NMC Act replaced the IM C Act, 1956, on the same lines the Ministry of AYUSH 
has proposed to supersede the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 vide the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019.  The National Commission for Indian 
System of Medicine, Bill 2019 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 2 nd January, 2019 and 
referred to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare on the 14th January, 2019 for examination and report.    
1.10 Salient Features of the Natio nal Commission for Indian System of Medicine, Bill 
2019. 
 The salient features of the National Commission for Indian Systems of Medicine 
(NCISM) Bill, 2019 may be enumerated as under:- 
1.10.1  Institutional Framework for Regulation of Medical Education 
 The Bill proposes constitution of a Commission, in the form of a National Commission 
for Indian System of Medicine, an Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine and four 
Autonomous Boards for regulating all aspects relating to standard of medical educat ion, 
professionals and institutions in the Indian System of Medicine. 
1.10.2  Composition and Structure of National Commission for Indian Systems of 
Medicine (NCISM) Bill, 2019  
(i) The National Medical Commission comprises of a Chairperson, twelve ex -officio 
members and sixteen part-time members.  
(ii) Of the sixteen part-time members, four Members will be appointed from amongst 
persons of ability, integrity and standing, who have sp ecial knowledge and 
professional experience in any of the disciplines of Indian System of Medicine, 
Sanskrit, Management, Law, Health Research, Science and Technology and 
Economics. Six Members will be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the 
nominees of the States and Union territories in the Advisory Council for Indian 
System of Medicine for a term of two years. Three Members will be elected by 
the registered medical practitioners of Ayurveda, and one member each to be 
elected by the respective regi stered medical practitioners of Siddha, Unani and 
Sowa-Rigpa, of the Indian System of Medicine, from amongst themselves, from 
such regional constituencies and in such manner, as may be prescribed.  
(iii) The Central Government is empowered to appoint the Chairperson, three part -
time members and the Secretary of the Commission, on the recommendation of a 
Search Committee. The Bill also provides for the qualifications for appointment 
of Chairperson, part -term members and Secretary along with the manner of th eir 
appointment. 

8 
 
1.10.3  Autonomous Boards under the National Commission for Indian Systems of 
Medicine: 
 Under the overall supervision of the Commission, four Autonomous Boards will be 
constituted. The Central Government will appoint the President and Mem bers of these 
Autonomous Boards on the basis of the recommendations made by a Search Committee. Every 
Autonomous Board shall meet at least once a month at such time and place as it may appoi nt. 
The brief outline of the composition, powers and functions of these Boards is as follows:- 
(i)  The Board of Ayurveda 
The Board of Ayurveda will consist of a President and four Members from the Ayurveda 
discipline of Indian System of Medicine. The Board will determine the standards of education 
and frame guidelines for setting up of medical institutions at the undergraduate, postgraduate and 
super-speciality levels in Ayurveda discipline.  
(ii)  The Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa 
The Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa shall consist of a President and two 
Members from each of the Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa disciplines of Indian System of 
Medicine. The Board will determine the standards of education and frame guidelines for setting 
up of medical institutions at the undergraduate, postgraduate and super -speciality levels in 
Unani, Siddha and Sow-Rigpa discipline.  
(iii)  The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine 
The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall consist 
of a President and eight Members, provided that the President and six out of eight Members shall 
be chosen from the Ayurveda, Siddha, Sowa -Rigpa and Unani disciplines of Indian System of 
Medicine in such manner that at least one Member represents each such discipline separately, 
and the remaini ng two Members be chosen from any of the disciplines of management, quality 
assurance, law or science and technology. 
 The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall perform 
the following functions, namely:––  
(a) determine the procedure for assessment and rating of medical institutions on the 
basis of their compliance with the standards laid down by the Board of Ayurveda 
or, as the case may be, the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, in 
accordance with the regulations made under this Act; 
(b)  grant permission for establishment of a new medical institution in accordance 
with the provisions of section 29;  
(c)  carry out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such 
institutions in accordance with the regulations made under this Act: 

9 
 
(d)  conduct, or where it deems necessary, empanel independent rating agencies to 
conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions, within such period of their 
opening, and every year thereafter, at such time, and in such manne r, as may be 
specified by regulations;  
(e)  make available on its website or in public domain, the assessment and ratings of 
medical institutions at regular intervals, in accordance with the regulations made 
under this Act;  
(f)  take such measures, inclu ding issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, 
reducing intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the Commission 
for withdrawal of recognition, against a medical institution for its failure to 
maintain the minimum essential standards specified by the Board of Ayurveda or, 
as the case may be, the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, in accordance 
with the regulations made under this Act. 
(iv)  The Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine  
The Board shall consist of a  President and eight Members: Provided that the President 
and six out of eight Members shall be chosen from the Ayurveda, Siddha, Sowa -Rigpa and 
Unani disciplines of Indian System of Medicine. The Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian 
System of Medicine shall perform the following functions, namely:––  
(a) maintain a National Register of all licensed practitioners of Indian System of 
Medicine in accordance with the provisions of section 31; 
(b)  regulate professional conduct and promote medical ethics in accordance with the 
regulations made under this Act: Provided that the Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Indian System of Medicine shall ensure compliance with the code 
of professional and ethi cal conduct through the State Medical Council, in a case 
where such State Medical Council has been conferred power to take disciplinary 
actions in respect of professional or ethical misconduct by medical practitioners 
under respective State Acts.  
(c)  develop mechanisms to have continuous interaction with State Medical Councils 
of Indian System of Medicine to effectively promote and regulate the conduct of 
medical practitioners of Indian System of Medicine; 
1.11 National Level Examinations  
The Bill seeks to provide for a statutory basis for the following examinations: 
(i) National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test: The Commission will conduct a common National 
Eligibility cum Entrance Test for admission to the under -graduate courses in each of the 
disciplines of the Indian System of Medicine  
(ii) National Exit Test:  The Commission shall conduct a common final year undergraduate 
medical examination, to be known as the National Exit Test, for granting licence to practice as 

10 
 
medical practitioner of respective disciplines of Indian System of Medicine and for enrolment in 
the State Register or National Register. 
(iii) Post-Graduate National Entrance Test:  The Commission shall conduct a uniform Post -
Graduate National Entrance Test for admission to postgraduate course s in each discipline of the 
Indian System of Medicine in all medical institutions governed under this Act. 
(iv) National Teachers Eligibility Test for Indian System of Medicine: The Commission shall 
conduct a National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for the pos tgraduates of each discipline of Indian 
System of Medicine who desire to take up teaching profession in that discipline. 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER - II 
VIEWS OF MINISTRY OF AYUSH  
 
2.1 PRESENTATION OF THE MINISTRY  
 
2.1.1 The Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH made a presentati on on the NCIM Bill, 2019 before 
the Committee on 24 th January, 2019 and highlighted the objective and the background of the 
Bill. The Secretary deposed that the review of IMCC Act, 1970 was entrusted to a Committee 
chaired by Vice Chairman, NITI AYOG on 1 st August, 2016. This Committee drafted the 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCIM) Bill, 2017 and forwarded the Bill 
to the Ministry of AYUSH. The Ministry further examined the Bill in consultation with NITI 
AYOG and after extensive delib erations and concurrence; new proposals were incorporated in 
the Bill. The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCIM) Bill was finally 
introduced in Rajya Sabha on 7th January, 2019. 
2.1.2 The Secretary in his presentation before the Committe e in its meeting held on 21 st 
October, 2019 explained the salient features of the Bill including the proposed institutional 
structure, powers and functions, and the composition of the National Commission for Indian 
System of Medicine (NCIM) bill. Four auto nomous Boards viz The Board of Ayurveda, The 
Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian 
System of Medicine and The Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine 
will be constituted under the C ommission. The Committee was also informed that the 
Chairperson of the Commission and President of the Boards will be selected by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of a Search Committee under the Chairmanship of Cabinet 
Secretary. The other memb ers of the Commission and the Boards will be selected by a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary  AYUSH. An Advisory Council consisting of 
representatives of State/UT Governments will also be constituted to advise the Commission and 
enhance equitabl e access to medical education and help the Commissions in shaping overall 
agenda, policy and action relating to education, training and research. The Secretary also 
elaborated on the other important provisions of the Bill pertaining to the National Eligibi lity-
cum-Entrance Test for admissions into colleges for UG and PG courses, National Exit 
Examination for registration and licence to practice, National Teacher’s Eligibility Test for 
teachers before appointment as teachers and Joint sitting amongst Nationa l Commission for 
Indian System of Medicine (NCIM), National Commission for Homeopathy (NCH) and National 
Medical Commission (NMC) – a provision to enhance interface between Homoeopathy, Indian 
System of Medicine and Allopathy system of medicine. 
2.1.3 The Committee was also apprised that at present, there are about 8 lakh AYUSH doctors 
in the country. There are 729 [Ayurveda -413, Unani -55, Siddha -13, Sowarigpa -03 and 
Homeopathy-245] colleges with an annual intake of 47,323 UG seats and 6,172 PG seats. The 
doctors of AYUSH are being utilized by the State Governments in various National Health 
Programs and centrally sponsored scheme of National AYUSH Mission. 

12 
 
2.1.4 The Secretary also drew a comparison between the existing Central Council of Indian 
Medicine (CC IM) and the proposed National Commission for Indian System of  Medicine 
(Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa) as reflected in the following table:- 
Comparison of existing CCIM and the proposed NCIM  
Sr. 
No
. 
Subject Existing Central Council of 
Indian Medicine (CCIM) 
Proposed National 
Commission for Indian 
System of  Medicine  
(NCISM) 
1 Members- mode 
of selection. 
(1) Elected members 
amongst the 
practitioners from the 
States.  
(2) Representatives of the 
Universities by 
election.  
(3) 30% Nomination of  
(1) and (2) for CCIM. 
 
All members are 
nominated by Central 
Govt. on the 
recommendation of 
Search Committee, 
except for elected part -
time members. 
 
2 Tenure  
 
Tenure of members is five 
years or till his successor is 
elected 
Fixed tenure of four 
years and no re-
appointment 
3 Inspections & 
Permissions 
Conducted by inspectors and 
visitors. Mostly by Members  
 
By a separate Board 
which can hire any 
agency.  
4 Structure Executive committee is the 
main functioning body  
 
Separate Boards for 
education, assessment 
and  Rating; Ethics and 
Registration so as to have 
proper focus 
5. Permission for 
setting up of a 
medical college 
Application to Central 
Government and permission 
by CG on recommendation of 
Councils.  
Application and 
permission by 
Assessment and Rating 
Boards 
6 Permission for 
UG courses 
Establishment; renewal; 
recognition; increase of 
intake.  
 
Only Establishment and 
Recognition; automatic 
increase of intake 
allowed by fulfilling the 
required norms; 
recognition by Boards 
7 Removal of 
President/ 
Members 
Not Available  
 
Conditions for removal 
has been proposed and 
Members to be public 
servants.  
8 Penalising 
provisions for 
non-compliance 
of standard 
Not Available  
 
Provisions for imposition 
of monetary penalty, 
reducing intake or 
stoppage of admissions 

13 
 
and recommending to the 
Commission for 
withdrawal of 
recognition, against a 
medical institution for its 
failure to maintain the 
minimum essential 
standards.(section 28)  
9 Exit test/ test for 
licensing 
No test is required before 
registration. The Degree of 
the University entitles for 
registration and practice.  
 
Common final year 
undergraduate 
examination shall be held 
by the Commission for 
granting license to 
practice as  practitioner 
and for enrolment in the 
Register. 
Proposed to be started 
within 3yrs of enactment. 
10 Teachers 
eligibility Test 
Not available  
 
National Teachers’ 
Eligibility Test shall be 
conducted separately for 
the postgraduates who 
desire to take up teaching 
profession in that 
discipline. Proposed to be 
operational within 3yrs 
of enactment 
11 Provision to 
supersede 
Not Available Available. Proposed for 
superseding the 
Commission for a period 
not exceeding one year. 
(Section 50) 
 
2.1.5   The Ministry informed the Committee that the proposed National Commission for 
Indian System of Medicine is expected to assess the requirements in healthcare including human 
resources for health and healthcare infrastructure and develop a roadmap and to lay down 
policies for meeting such requirements.  
2.1.6   Further, the Commission provides for the following:- 
(a) Conducting a common National Eligibility -Cum-Entrance Test and common counselling 
by the designated authority(Central and State) for admission to all the medical institutions 
so as to ensure quality and transparency in admissions.  
(b) Conducting a National Exit Test for granting licence to practice as medical practitioner of 
respective disciplines of Indian System of Medicine and for enrolment in the State 
Register or National Register. 

14 
 
(c) Uniform Post -Graduate National Entrance Test shall be conducted separately for 
admission to postgraduate courses in each discipline of the Indian System of Medicine in 
all medical institutions. 
(d) Conducting National Teachers Eligibility Test fo r appointment of all teachers in Indian 
System of Medicine institutions before their appointment to ensure quality of teachers.  
2.1.7   The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine through its autonomous 
Board, namely, the Board of Ethics and Reg istration for Indian System of Medicine shall ensure 
that the practice in Indian System of Medicine is allowed only by the licensed practitioners so as 
to promote equitable and universal Healthcare through ISM mode of treatment. The Board also 
regulates pr ofessional conduct and promotes medical ethics through State Medical Councils. 
Under the Act, the practice of Indian System of Medicine shall be regulated uniformly across the 
country. 
2.1.8   The Ministry  has classified that the State Governments play an important role in 
implementation of the code of professional and ethical conduct through the State Medical 
Council, in a case where such State Medical Council has been conferred power to take 
disciplinary actions in respect of professional or ethical misco nduct by medical practitioners 
under respective State Acts. 
2.2 Comments of the Ministry 
2.2.1 The Committee Secretariat prepared detailed questionnaire on the various issues and 
clause specific queries upon which the Ministry of Ayush furnished written su bmission for the 
consideration of the Committee.  The Ministry also furnished its comments to the queries raised 
by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.  The comments/response of the Ministry of 
Ayush on the issues/questions raised by the Members of the Committee on various provisions of 
the Bill are enumerated below:- 
The Committee sought to know whether the National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine Bill 2019 in its present form is designed to improve the overall regulatory mechanism 
of Indian System of Medicine(ISM), medicine education and practice in the country.  In response 
to that the Ministry replied that the proposed National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine Bill, 2019 is expected to bring quality education and healthcare s ervices to the public 
at large. The proposed Bill is having separate independent Autonomous Boards for (i)Ayurveda 
education, (ii) Siddha, Unani and Sowarigpa Education Board, (iii) Assessment and Rating 
Board for granting permissions to colleges and (iv) Ethics and Registration Board for 
maintenance of National Register. This mechanism, unlike the present structure of CCIM, will 
likely help to have proper focus for development of Indian Systems of Medicine by the 
independent Boards for the development and promotion of Indian System of Medical education, 
Research training & development. 
2.2.2 As regards the query about the mechanism/strategy that can be adopted to improve access 
to quality and affordable medical education in the field of Indian System of Med icine (ISM) 
across the country, especially the rural areas, to achieve the set objectives/mission as enshrined 

15 
 
in the Preamble to the Bill, the Ministry informed that the proposed National Commission for 
Indian System of Medicine is expected to assess the requirements in healthcare including human 
resources for health and healthcare infrastructure and develop a roadmap and to lay down 
policies for meeting such requirements. It is also expected that the Advisory Council consisting 
of State/UT representatives  shall advise the Commission in shaping the overall agenda, policy 
and action relating to medical education in the field of Indian System of Medicine across the 
country. 
 
2.2.3 Pertaining to the questions about the measures that have been taken till date b y the 
Ministry and that can further be taken for evenly distribution of medical colleges/institutions in 
all parts of the country alongwith the steps envisaged for giving encouragement to open ISM 
Colleges and Institution in rural urban slum & tribal areas , the Ministry replied that as per the 
existing provisions of the Section 13A of the Indian Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act, 
1970, any person intending to establish a new college has to apply to the Central Government for 
seeking permission.  At presen t there are 484 (ISM) Colleges spread across 26 States. The 
concerned State Governments as per their requirement of medical professionals may establish 
Colleges of Indian System of Medicine. Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme, namely -
‘National AYUSH Miss ion, there is a provision for funding to such State Governments where 
there is no AYUSH college.  As regards the steps taken by the Central Government to persuade 
the State Governments to encourage interested private investors to open ISM Colleges and 
Institutions in the rural areas, the Ministry explained that  as per the existing provisions of the 
Indian Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act, 1970, any person intending to establish a new 
college has to apply to the Central Government for seeking permission.  The State Governments 
have to issue no objection certificate for establishing new ISM colleges after assessing the 
population and existing colleges and requirement of doctors for the concerned State.  The 
Ministry further added that in order to ensure qua lity and affordable medical education under 
PPP model to achieve the mission objectives of the Bill, the State Governments may come up 
with the proposals for establishing medical colleges under PPP model to ensure better quality 
and affordable medical education.  
 
2.2.4 As regards the question about provisions in the Bill that especially aims to promote 
equitable and universal Healthcare through ISM mode of treatment and the  measures that can be 
taken for implementation of these provisions at the ground le vel especially in the rural , urban 
slums and tribal areas, the Ministry stated that  the National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine through its autonomous Board, namely, the Board of ethics and registration for Indian 
System of Medicine shall ensure  that the practice in Indian System of Medicine is allowed only 
by the licensed practitioners so as to promote equitable and universal Healthcare through ISM 
mode of treatment. The Board also regulates professional conduct and promotes medical ethics 
through State Medical Councils. Under the Act, the practice of Indian System of Medicine shall 
be regulated uniformly across the country.  It was also added that the community health 
perspective can be improved in rural, urban slums and tribal areas of the coun try in the ISM 
field.  In fact, the function of the Ayurveda Board, and  Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa 
is to develop a competency based dynamic curriculum at all levels in such manner that it 

16 
 
develops appropriate skill, knowledge, attitude, values and ethics among the postgraduate and 
superspeciality students and enables them to provide quality healthcare as per the needs of the 
country. It is expected that the curriculum addresses the Community Health perspectives. 
 
2.2.5 The Committee was also app rised of the measures/strategy that can be adopted for 
proliferation and popularization of ISM mode of treatment in various parts of the country, 
especially in rural urban slums & tribal areas.  The Ministry informed that the ISM mode of 
treatment is quite popular in various parts of the country. There are 484 (ISM) Colleges spread in 
26 States which are also having attached hospitals with inpatient and outpatient services. Apart 
from the educational institutions, the ISM facilities like dispensaries are es tablished by the 
concerned State Governments where ISM treatment is available for the citizens. Further, the 
Ministry of AYUSH under the flagship scheme of National AYUSH Mission is funding the State 
/ Union Territory Governments for development of AYUSH t reatment centers like establishment 
of dispensaries and hospitals. 
 
2.2.6 The Committee sought to know specific provisions in the Bill, intending to achieve the 
National health goals and the common meeting ground of the National Health goals and 
objective mission of the Bill alongwith the strategy for execution of the mission and objective of 
the Bill on the ground level.  The Ministry highlighted that the proposed National Commission 
for Indian System of Medicine is expected to assess the requirements in h ealthcare including 
human resources for health and healthcare infrastructure and develop a roadmap and  to lay 
down policies  for achieving the national health goals. It is also expected that the Advisory 
Council consisting of State/UT representatives shal l advise the Commission in shaping the 
overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education in the field of Indian System of 
Medicine across the country. The State Governments are expected to take necessary measures to 
enhance the capacity of th e healthcare professionals for the purposes of addressing or promoting 
healthcare in rural areas. 
 
2.2.7 Pertaining to the proficiency of ISM Research Institutions in the country and manner 
they have contributed in promoting ISM and how the ISM Research in stitutions can be 
transformed into a 'C entre in Excellence' in its mission objective and be made outcome centric 
rather than an input centric.  The Ministry replied that there are separate apex research institution 
for Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani for condu cting specific research in fundamental and clinical 
areas. The studies conducted by the research institutes are being utilized in healthcare services. 
In order to further utilize the work done by the research institutes into the healthcare, the 
Ministry has upgraded the Central Research Institute of Unani at Hyderabad into postgraduate 
teaching institute. As regards the roadmap of the Government for meeting the requirement of 
Healthcare infrastructure and Human Resource Management so that it gets tuned as ' outcome-
centric' instead of 'Input -focused', T he Ministry maintained that the proposed National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine is expected to develop a roadmap and to lay down 
policies for requirement of Healthcare infrastructure and Human Resource Management. Besides 
the Advisory Council shall advise the Commission in shaping the overall agenda, policy and 
action relating to medical education in the field of Indian System of Medicine across the country.  

17 
 
In response to a question on  the prospects of the ISM research work in curing the illness in more 
précised and proficient manner and how the research work can be encouraged through PPP 
model, the Ministry stated that under the aegis of the Ministry of AYUSH, there are separate 
autonomous Central research institutions for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani. The activities are 
carried out through its Institutes/Centres/Units located all over India and also through 
collaborative studies with various Universities, Hospitals and Institutes. The research activi ties 
of the Councils include Medicinal Plant Research (Medico -Ethno Botanical Survey, 
Pharmacognosy and Tissue Culture), Drug Standardization, Pharmacological Research, Clinical 
Research, Literary Research & Documentation and Tribal Health Care Research Programmes. 
2.2.8 Pertaining to  the vision for laying down policies for regulating medical institutions, 
medical researches and medical profession and  how medical research can be promoted for 
effective outcome, the Committee was informed by the Ministry th at the proposed National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine will assess the requirements in healthcare including 
human resources for health and  healthcare infrastructure and develop a roadmap and  to lay 
down policies  for regulating quality medical  education, medical researches and medical 
profession. The research component shall be appropriately included and inked with the education 
to bring out effective outcome of healthcare through Indian System of Medicine. 
2.2.9  Regarding the precautionary me asure that can be taken for implementing the 
provisions of the Bill pertaining to high ethical standards in all aspects of ISM medical services 
in the country, the Ministry stated that maintenance of a National Register by Ethics and 
Registration Board shall contain the name, address and all recognised qualifications possessed by 
licensed medical practitioners of Indian System of Medicine. Every State Medical Council shall 
maintain a State Register. The registers will be maintained in such forms including e lectronic 
form as may be specified. The State Councils are empowered to take disciplinary actions in 
respect of any professional or ethical misconduct by a registered practitioner of Indian System of 
Medicine and shall act in accordance with the regulations prescribed under the Commission. 
 
2.2.10  The Committee wanted to know as how the global growth and development in the 
field of ISM can be tapped / adopted by Indian System of Medicine professionals.  The 
Committee was informed that the proposed National Commission for Indian System of Medicine 
provides that a foreign expert of India n System of Medicine who is qualified as per the 
registrations laws of that country may be permitted with temporary registration in India. The said 
provision is intended to tap the global growth and development in the field of ISM. 
 
2.2.11   About the lacunae in the existing grievances redressal mechanism and to what 
extent the provisions enshrined in the Bill would eliminate the same and improve upon its 
functioning, the Minis try apprised the Committee that as per the existing Indian Medicine 
Central Council Act, 1970 , the Central Council for Indian System of Medicine (CCIM ) was 
constituted for regulation of education and practice of Indian Systems of medicine. The CCIM is 
conducting inspections of the colleges and furnishing recommendations to the Central 
Government for taking further necessary action. The Central Government after examining the 

18 
 
same vis -à-vis with the norms specified in relevant regulations shall be granting/ denying 
permission to the colleges. It was also added that in the proposed Bill, the Assessment and rating 
Board grants permission to start new Colleges and if it is disapproved, the applicant may prefer a 
first appeal to the Commission and later may prefe r an appeal to the Central Government.  
Similarly, for the ethical or professional misconduct a practitioner who is aggrieved by the order 
passed by the State medical Council may prefer an appeal to the Board of Ethics and Registration 
and subsequently to the Commission and to the Central Government. 
 
 
2.2.12  The Committee desired to assess the perception of the Ministry on the ‘Bridge 
course’ for AYUSH doctors.  The Ministry capitulated as under : 
 
“As per the provisions of Indian Medicine Central Council  Act, 1970, only the 
persons registered in the concerned State Register of Indian System of medicine are 
entitled to practice the respective system of medicine only. To enhance interface 
with other medical systems, the joint sittings with the Commissions o f other systems 
have been proposed. “ 
 
2.2.13 In response to a question on the proposed mechanism that has been envisioned to 
ensure co-operative co-ordination amongst the autonomous boards, the Ministry replied that the 
proposed Bill is having separate in dependent autonomous Boards for (i)Ayurveda education, (ii) 
Siddha, Unani and Sowarigpa Education Board, (iii) Assessment and Rating Board for granting 
permissions to colleges and (iv) Ethics and Registration Board for maintenance of National 
Register. The Ministry added that the roles of each autonomous Board have been specified in the 
Bill. The National Commission ensures coordination amongst the autonomous Boards and 
exercises appellate jurisdiction with respect to the decisions of the Autonomous Boards. 
2.2.14 The Committee asked the Ministry to explain as to why  there is no representation 
from different civil societies and other charitable institutes working for patient rights in the 
Commission and whether there is any plan to include them.  The Minist ry clarified that  the 
Advisory Council consist of one member to represent each State, who is the Vice-Chancellor of a 
University in that State, to be nominated by that State Government, and one member to represent 
each Union territory, who is the Vice-Chancellor of a University in that Union territory, to be 
nominated by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India.  The Ministry added 
that the intention is that the Vice -Chancellors being heads of the University shall have overall 
idea about the requirements of Colleges, students, patients and public. The members of the States 
may take the views of the students patients and perspectives of the citizens and present the same 
before the Advisory Council for consideration. 
2.2.15  The Committee pointed out that in India out of the 8 lakh practicing practioners, 
only 10 percent possess post graduate degree. In ISM system, for teaching purpose, post graduate 
degree was made compulsory only in 1989. In the NCISM Bill, post graduate degree has now  
been made compulsory for election to the post of the Chairman and members of the Commission. 

19 
 
There have been widespread apprehensions that a post graduate eligibility criterion will be unfair 
to those senior experienced practitioners who have been working  since a long time but do not 
possess post graduate degrees. The Committee desired to know as to how the Ministry will 
ensure that the Commission benefits from the experience of such practitioners also. The Ministry 
commented that the requirement of postgr aduate was made mandatory since 1989 for teaching 
profession and it is almost thirty years since then. There are about 4800 PG graduates coming out 
every year. It is expected that the post graduates have sufficient exposure and knowledge about 
medical education and research to achieve the objectives of the Commission.  
 
2.2.16   In response to a question as to why  there  is no provision for standardization of 
education and practice of paramedical courses in Ayurveda like nursing, therapists training etc in  
the NCISM Bill and apprehended how these paramedical courses in Ayurveda will be regulated.  
The Ministry merely maintained that   at present there is no Central regulation for paramedical 
courses in Ayurveda. However, certain States are conducting parame dical courses in Ayurveda 
and such professionals are utilized in various organizations/ institutes.   The Committee further 
pointed out that in modern medicine the pharmacy education and practices are controlled by the 
pharmacy council and sought to know a bout the nodal body for regulating the pharmacy domain 
of Ayurveda or there is any provision for creation of a separate Board for Ayurveda pharmacy or 
the pharmacy domain will be included in the Board of Ayurveda.  The Ministry clarified that the 
Ministry of AYUSH is in the process of bringing a separate Bill, namely, ‘the Pharmacy Council 
of Indian Medicine and Homeopathy Bill’ to regulate the pharmacy education and practices 
 
2.2.17   The Committee also wanted to know as to how the Ministry aim to counter  the 
false and fabricated ligations raised against ayurvedic practices as unsafe medical system or  
there is any provision of periodic evaluations on public litigations in ayurvedic domain.  The 
Ministry stated that at present, the Central Council of India n Medicine (CCIM) is entrusted with 
the task of regulating practice of Indian Systems of Medicine. The CCIM has prescribed the  
“Practitioners of Indian Medicine (Standards of Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Code of 
Ethics) Regulations, 1982”. The Stat e Councils of Indian System of Medicine are dealing with 
the Ayurveda practice related issues and taking necessary action. 
 
2.2.18    The Committee wanted to know as to why the students of (i) Pre -tib for Bachelor of 
Unani Medicine and Surgery; (BUMS) and (ii) Pre -Ayurveda for Bachelor of Ayurvedic 
Medicine and Surgery (BAMS)  have been exempted from National Eligibility -cum-Entrance 
Test.  The Ministry clarified that the said course is at present conducted in certain specific 
institutes in which the studen ts are being acquainted with bas ic knowledge of Unani from the 
Senior Secondary level. Similar course for Pre-Ayurveda may be started by the Commission.  
 
2.2.19    The Ministry further clarified that the syllabus optimization shall be regulated by the 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine across the country. 
 

20 
 
2.2.20  The Committee sought to know whether Yoga and Naturopathy is not a part of 
ISM and also about the institutional & functional structure for promotion of Yoga & 
Naturopathy.  The Min istry replied that Yoga and  Naturopathy is a drugless system  and the 
rights and responsibilities of ISM&H doctors are different from Yoga and Naturopathy 
practitioners. Therefore, it is not considered as a ‘Medicine’.  It was added that there are 26 
Naturopathy Colleges in India. Out of which 6 are in the Government sector. Under the Ministry 
of AYUSH, there is one National Institute, namely, ‘Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga, 
New Delhi’,  and National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune.  There is no Central legislation to 
regulate the education and practice of Yoga and Naturopathy.  The Committee impressed upon 
the Ministry that Yoga& Naturopathy may continue with its own philosophy and drugless system 
that is its manner of treatment and nothing more to do with administrative mechanism or the 
controlling Authority, therefore, be brought under the ambit of proposed National Commission. 
In response to that, the Ministry informed the Committee that the Ministry  has decided to 
withhold the proposal for ha ving separate Bill for Yoga and Naturopathy for time being and to 
empower the existing mechanism of National Board for Promotion and Development of Yoga 
and Naturopathy under Ministry of AYUSH to strengthen the aspects of regulating education and 
practice of Yoga and Naturopathy.  The Committee pointed out  that the National Board for 
promotion and development of Yoga and Naturopathy may be empowered even while remaining 
under overall supervision of proposed commission. In response to the Committee’s view th at the 
proposed commission would strength the regulation of education and practice of Yoga and 
naturopathy, the Ministry continued to maintain that unlike other Ayush systems, Yoga and  
Naturopathy is a drugless system and not only the rights and responsib ilities of ISM&H doctors 
are different from Yoga and Naturopathy practitioners, but the Philosophy is also different from 
ASU&H systems. Hence, Yoga and Naturopathy was excluded from the Indian System of 
Medicine Bill. 
2.2.21   The Committee pointed out th at Clause 6(7) prevents the Chairman or Members to 
accept, for a period of two years from the date of demitting such office, any employment in any 
private Medical Institution of ISM.  However, proviso to Clause 6(7) and 6(8) allow the 
Chairman/Members to a ccept employment.  Explaining the rationale for these proviso and 
exception, the Ministry stated that the Chairperson or member cannot join any employment in 
any private medical institution, whose matter has been dealt with by them for a period of two 
years after demitting the office. The exemption is provided so that the Central Government can 
permit them to join after assuring that there was no conflict of interest involved while dealing the 
matter of the concerned institute. 
2.2.22   In response to the q uery that It would have been better that the Secretariat for the 
Commission be headed by persons with a ISM background, the Ministry stated that the nature of 
duty of Secretary includes more of administrative in nature. However, the qualifications and 
experience shall be proposed in the rules to be made after enactment of the Bill.  
2.2.23   As regards the measures that  can be adopted for assured enforcement of the provision 
of the Bill for maintaining a high quality and high standards in education of ISM and  the criteria 
and parameter of 'high quality' and 'high standards, the Ministry highlighted that the National 

21 
 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine is expected to develop a roadmap and to lay down 
policies for requirement of Healthcare infrastructure and Human Resource Management and also 
to maintain a high quality and high standards in education. The Advisory Council shall advise 
the Commission in shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education . 
The Commission may adopt a ny new advancement in other countries for improving the quality 
of teaching and practice standards.  As regards the  measures  that can be stipulated for better 
compliance by the State Medical councils of ISM of the guidelines framed and regulation made 
under the proposed legislation for its effective functioning, the Ministry replied that the 
Commission is expected to ensure that the State Medical Councils shall comply with the 
guidelines/ regulations framed under the Act for effective functioning. The Com mission may 
constitute sub-committees and delegate such of its powers to enable them to accomplish specific 
tasks. 
2.2.24   Clause 11 deals with Constitution and Composition of Advisory Council for Indian 
System of Medicine. The Committee signalled that th e Advisory Council lacks representation 
from the Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical Industry, Ayurveda Services Industry and Ayurveda 
Research. In response to the Committee’s query why the representatives of these sectors  have 
not been represented in the Advisory C ouncil,  the Ministry argued that Advisory Council 
consists of one member to represent each State, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a University in 
that State, to be nominated by that State Government, and one member to represent each Union 
territory, who is the Vice-Chancellor of a University in that Union territory, to be nominated by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India. Further, all members of the 
Commission shall be ex-officio members of the Council. There is no special provision for dr ug 
manufacturer but the persons by virtue of having special knowledge and professional 
experience in any of the disciplines of Indian System of Medicine or registered medical 
practitioners of Indian System of Medicine can become members of the Commission. The 
Director-General of Research Councils of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unaniare also Members of the 
Commission which in turn shall be members of the Council. 
2.2.25    As regards  a question as how the Ministry plan to ensure integrative research between 
the In dian System of Medicine and Modern Medicine without any representation from other 
medical research bodies like ICMR in the advisory council, the Ministry replied that the 
Advisory Council also consists of four members to be nominated by the Central Governm ent 
from amongst persons holding the post of Director in the Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian 
Institutes of Management and the Indian Institute of Science.  
2.2.26   The Committee impressed upon the Ministry that the Board of Ethics and Registration 
should be independent of NCISM in order to maintain its autonomy.   The Ministry, however, 
stated that the Board of Ethics and Registration is an autonomous Board to main tain National 
Register for all licensed practitioners of Indian System of Medicine and to regulate professional 
conduct and promote medical ethics. In the process of exercising its functions, the Board may 
make such recommendations to the Commission for achieving overall objectives of the Act. 

22 
 
2.2.27    Deliberating upon the guiding principles of delegation of power from the 
Commission to Autonomous Boards and  the extent, nature and mechanism for delegation of 
such power so as to enable such Board to funct ion effectively and efficiently, the Ministry 
mentioned that t he Commission may delegate all or any of its administrative and financial 
powers to the President of each Autonomous Board to enable such Board to function smoothly 
and efficiently. The delegation of such power is the prerogative of the Commission. 
2.2.28 Regarding the status of demand supply of faculty and staff in various ISM 
Colleges/Institutions at UG, PG and super -specialty levels and the measures to bridge the gap so 
that the healthcare facilities and services can be ensured at super -specialty level, the Ministry 
maintained that at present there are 477 ASU colleges imparting UG courses and 154 ASU  
colleges imparting PG courses with intake capacity of 30,030 UG seats and 4844 PG seats. The 
Commission shall further assess the requirements in healthcare, including human resources for 
health and healthcare infrastructure and develop a road map for meeting the requirements. 
2.2.29    The Committee raised the query that the terms 'minimum requirement and 
standards for used in clause 26(i) (a) need to be defi ned and explained either in the provision to 
clause or in Section 2 of the Bill, itself.  The Committee also sought the Ministry to explain the 
criteria and parameter of the minimum requirement and standards for conducting of courses and 
examination in med ical Institution, under Clause 26 (1) (d), the Ministry explained that the 
criteria and parameter of the minimum requirement and standards for conducting of courses and 
examination in medical Institution shall be prescribed in the regulations under the Act . Further, 
the Medical standards, requirements and other provisions of the Indian Medicine Central 
Council, Act, 1970 and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall continue to be in force 
and operate till new standards or requirements are specified under the proposed NCIM Act or the 
rules and regulations made thereunder.  The Committee also sought to know as to what  type of 
training modules /course are being intended in the Clause -26 (1) (g) and to what extent the same 
can be re-oriented to global standard and keeping in view fast charging needs of Indian society as 
well.  The Ministry replied that the development and training of faculty members including re -
orientation to the global standards and other latest technologies shall also be facilitated by the 
Board.  The Committee further desired to know as to what measures can be taken to facilitate 
research programme in ISM research Institutes as envisioned in clause 26 (1) (h) and  how the 
research Institutes in ISM can be made a centre of excellence in the field of ISM research and 
development as intended  under the clause -26 (1) (h), the Ministry responded that the medical 
research shall be included appropriately in the curriculum of undergraduate and postgraduate 
courses and the studies/ results conduc ted by the students/faculty may be further taken ahead by 
the research institutes of Indian System of Medicine to a logical use in the healthcare.  The 
Committee also wanted to be apprised about the minimum criteria or parameter  that has been 
contemplated by the Ministry of AYUSH to grant recognition to medical qualifications of ISM at 
all levels as mentioned   in clause 26(1) (i).  The Ministry impressed upon the Committee that the 
undergraduate and postgraduate medical courses of Indian System of medicin e prescribed by the 
NCIM shall be the recognized Courses. The recognition shall be granted to the qualifications 
awarded to such candidates after successful completion of the courses. 

23 
 
2.2.30    Clause 28 deals with powers and functions of Medical Assessmen t and Rating Board 
for ISM.  The Committee posed a question on the quantitative and qualitative parameters for 
hiring third party agency and how it will be ensured that such third party agency is giving rating 
as per rules & regulations and whether the leg al responsibilities of these agencies will be fixed. 
The Committee further desired to know the criteria for empanelment of independent rating 
agencies to conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions and the steps that can be taken for 
fair and transparent inspection of the ISM Institution.  The Committee was impressed upon  that 
the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall empanel 
independent rating agencies to conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions, within suc h 
period of their opening, and every year thereafter, at such time, and in such manner, as may be 
specified by regulations to be framed under the Act. Adequate provisions to conduct fair and 
transparent inspection of the ISM Institutions  shall be incorpora ted in the regulation to be 
prescribed under the Act.  In response to the query as to how the Ministry will rate the different 
AYUSH RESEARCH institutions/bodies and the quality of the work done by these institutions 
and which body will act as the rating a gency for the AYUSH research sector, it was stated that   
the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall rate the teaching 
institutions governed under the NCIM only. The research component is a part of the teaching 
institutions.  
2.2.31  NCISM Bill, 2019 does not have the provision of prescribing fees,  however NMC Bill 
has the provision for regulation fees regulation. The Committee wanted to know the mechanism 
for regulation of fee and also wanted to know whether the recommenda tions of the Committee 
given in NMC report have been taken into consideration while drafting the BILL.  In response to 
that the Ministry pointed out that currently, fixation of fees is being done by the respective State 
Governments after taking into the ac count of local factors, reservation quota and other issues 
prevailing in the concerned State. The structure of fee also varies from State to State according to 
the MoUs signed by private medical colleges. In most States, fees of seats in deemed universitie s 
are not regulated by State Governments. Hence no provision has been prescribed for fee 
regulation. 
2.2.32  Clause 49 states that "No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under this Act except upon a complaint in writing made in this behal f by an officer authorised by 
the Commission or the Ethic and Registration Board or a State Medical Council, as the case may 
be."   The Committee wanted to know the type of offences punishable under the Bill and pointed 
out that the Bill itself does not pr ovide for the nature of punishment, quantum of punishment, 
quantum of penalty and tenure of imprisonment under the Bill and whether it will be a civil or 
criminal offence.  The Ministry responded that  the non-compliance of the provisions of the 
norms presc ribed under the Act shall be the offences and action shall be taken as per the 
procedure laid down in the Act. If the offences are of serious in nature and the punishment is not 
defined in the Act, then the matter shall be treated under the IPC.   The Comm ittee also wanted 
to know whether the patient or his legal heir can also be as an aggrieved party.  The Ministry 
replied that the patients or his legal heir can complain against any registered practitioner in 

24 
 
respect of any professional or ethical miscondu ct to the State Medical Council and the State 
Medical Council shall take action in accordance with the regulations. 
2.2.33   As regards the right of AYUSH practitioners of Indian Medicine to practice any 
scientific system of medicine is included under Clau se 33(b) of NCISM Bill 2019, the Ministry 
informed the Committee that the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019 
deals with the education and practice of Indian System of Medicine only. The regulation of 
practice of Indian System of M edicine is regulated by the State Medical Council for Indian 
System of Medicine and the regulation of practice of allopathy is governed by the State Medical 
Council.  The Committee sought to know as to  how many States in the country have given such 
privileges to the AYUSH practitioners under Section 17(3) (b) of the IMCC Act, 1970 and the 
scope of modern treatment given by such AYUSH practitioners defined in each of these States 
and at present, how are the AYUSH doctors practicing modern medicine regulated  in all these 
States so that medical quackery is avoided and whether such practitioners are given a specialized 
training or course in these States that makes them qualified to practice modern medicine.  The 
Ministry maintained that in order to allow AYUSH doctors to practice modern medicine, the 
States willing to do so have to consider taking up amendments in the relevant Sate Medical 
Practitioner Act to empower AYSUH doctors for the purpose of limited practice of modern 
medicine.  It was also added by the Ministry that few states have already allowed AYUSH 
doctors appointed in Primary Health Centres in rural areas to practice allopathy during 
'emergencies' after undergoing a brief training of modern medicine practice. Presently, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tami l Nadu, Gujarat, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Assam, and 
Uttarakhand have allowed. 
2.2.34   Clause 51 deals with the Joint Sittings of the National Commission of Indian System of 
Medicine, National Commission for Homoeopathy and National Medical Commissio n but no 
details have been provided regarding the selection of the chairperson for these meetings and the 
procedure thereof.  The Ministry, however, clarified that t here shall be a joint sitting of the 
Commission, the National Commission for Homoeopathy an d the National Medical 
Commission, at least once a year, at such time and place as they mutually appoint, to enhance the 
interface between Indian System of Medicine, Homoeopathy and modern system of medicine. 
Agenda for the joint sitting may be placed with mutual agreement by the Chairpersons of the 
Commissions concerned.  One of the objectives of joint sittings is to promote 'Medical 
Pluralism'.   The Committee sought to know whether the Government intends to promote 
'Medical Pluralism', if yes, to what extent and what would be the scope of outlook of 'Medical 
Pluralism' in the country and the steps that would be required on the part of Government for 
promoting the 'Medical Pluralism'.   The other objective of the Clause is to approve specific 
educational and Medical module on programme that could be introduced i n UG and PG course 
across medical system.  The Committee sought to clarify whether the Government intends to 
promote crosspathy.  The Committee further pointed out that the decision to be in the joint sitting 
would require an affirmative vote of all Member s present and voting, and thereupon desired to 
know whether it would be practically feasible to have the consent of all Members present and 
voting to arrive at a decision.  Responding to the queries, the Ministry apprised the Committee 

25 
 
that agenda for the joint sittings shall be placed with mutual agreement by the Chairpersons of 
the Commissions concerned. There is a provision for having joint sittings of the Commissions of 
various other systems of medicine to have interface meetings and to exchange the kno wledge of 
development of science and technology in the field of medicine. After the consent, specific 
educational and medical modules or programs in the under -graduate and post -graduate courses 
across medical systems, and promote medical pluralism shall be introduced. 
2.2.35    The Committee desired to know as to  how the spirit of co -operative federalism can be 
protected in view of preponderance of powers of Central Government as enshrined in the 
provision for giving direction to State Government.  The Mini stry mentioned that the Medical 
Education is a concurrent subject under Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Therefore, the 
Centre and the States needs better coordination in that matter. The directions would be limited to 
the provisions of NCIM Act. In o rder to maintain uniformity of education and practice of Indian 
System of Medicine across the country, the preponderance of Central Government over State 
Government is required.  The Committee pointed out that powers of Central Government to give 
direction to the Commission and Autonomous Board also restricts the autonomy and independent 
functioning of the Commission, therefore,  what sorts of safeguards can be spelt out to prevent 
the power of Central Government from becoming authoritative, arbitrative and autocratic so as to 
ensure autonomy and independent functioning of the Commission and autonomous Boards.  The 
Ministry assured the Committee  that the powers of the Central Government to give directions to 
the NCIM and the Boards will be limited to policy  matters to achieve the objectives of the Act.  
Moreover, the Committee pointed out that the Central Government can supersede the 
commission upto one year that can be further extended upto a period of six months. During that 
period the Central Government u ndertakes all function of the Commission.  The Committee 
wanted to know whether the prolonged period of one and half year can be  rationalized and 
shortened.  In response to that the Ministry clarified that the power to supersede the Commission 
for a period of one year and subsequently for another half year has been proposed in the Bill so 
that sufficient time will be available to the Central Government to make necessary reforms and 
reconstitute the Commission. 
 
2.2.36   As regards the future outlook of Ind ian System of Medicine and  steps that can be taken 
for international promotion of ISM,  the Ministry postulated that the Indian Systems of Medicine 
have gained much popularity across the globe. The Ministry of AYUSH is having Country to 
Country MoUs for c ooperation in the field of Traditional Medicine in about 20 countries and 
Institute to Institute MoUs for Research/ Academic Collaboration in areas of mutual interest in 
about 17 institutes. Further, strengthening of Indian Systems in India will enable the Government 
to promote internationally in other countries also.  
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER 3 
 
VIEWS OF ORGANISATIONS/INSTITUTIONS/ASSOCIATIONS/ EXPERTS 
 
3.1 The views of Organizations/Associations/Experts/Individuals who submitted their written 
views in response to the Press Release and during their oral evidence before the Committee are 
as given below:- 
3.2 National Integrated Medical Association (NIMA) 
3.2.1 National Integrated Medical Association (NIMA) is a 70 years old and largest 
countrywide registered organization of integrated doctors.   NIMA submitted that most of the 
members of Indian System of Medicine are working as family physicians in rural and re mote 
areas and catering the medical services to economically poor and down trodden masses since 
pre-independence period.  Apart from private practices, ISM doctors are also serving in NRHM -
National Rural Health Mission, RBSK -Rashtriya Bal Suraksha Karyakra m, 108 ambulance 
service etc. In Maharashtra, because of  their involvement in emergency 108 ambulance service, 
doctors of ISM have saved many lives of accidental injured patients, pregnant women, new born 
babies and other acute emergencies.  Besides, ISM d octors are also actively participating in 
various National and State Health Programs like Pulse Polio, DOTS, Vaccination, Malaria, 
Leprosy and Family Programs etc.  
3.2.2 NIMA submitted that according to the provisions of Sec 2(1)(e) and Sec 17 (3)(b) of 
IMCC Act, 1970 , rights of person and various notifications issued time to time by Central 
Council of Indian Medicine, the institutionally qualified practitioners of Ayurved, Siddha, Unani 
-Tibb are eligible to practice their respective systems with Modern S cientific System of 
Medicine.  Many State Governments have made necessary provisions to enable ISM doctors to 
use Modern Scientific Medicine which is known as Allopathic system of Medicine.  The 
Supreme Court as well as High Courts have legally permitted I SM doctors to practice modern 
medicine. Since 2014, the practice of various State legislatures conferring Statutory Rights to 
practise Modern Scientific System of Medicine by doctors of ISM was challenged by IMA in 
various High Courts like Mumbai, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. All three High Courts have not 
passed any order against ISM . The reason given are syllabus and training imparted to ISM 
doctors, State's right to legislate and need of these doctors in rendering healthcare services in 
rural and urban areas. IMA had preferred a Special Leave Petition against order of Bombay High 
Court (WP (C) No 7846 of 2014)  in Supreme Court, but Supreme Court dismissed the petition 
in lemine.  This indicates that judiciary has upheld the efforts made by the States to in clude ISM 
doctors in healthcare system for its effective implementation of health policies. 
3.2.3 NIMA has, therefore, submitted that in the proposed NCISM Bill that is set to replace 
IMCC Act 1970, there is no express provision regarding the Rights of ISM  to practice their 
respective systems with modern scientific medicine.  NIMA is of the view that the proposed Bill 
will jeopardize the effectiveness of the entire medical fraternity of the country and will weaken 
the medical profession and health system of the country.  

27 
 
 
3.3 Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, Member, Central Council of Indian Medicine 
(CCIM) 
3.3.1 Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, Member, CCIM  in his representation has submitted that 
the Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) was constituted in 1971 under IMCC Act, 1970 
in order to regulate educational and registration of practitioners from Ayurved, Unani, Siddha 
and Sowa -Rigpa system of medicine.  This Act allowed national representati ons of Members 
from education and registered practitioners to represent their system and its problems. CCIM 
constituted under IMCC Act, 1970 by the Indian Parliament is purely democratic body acting 
independently since 1971 for betterment of Indian System of medicine.   
3.3.2 Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma also emphasized that after the constitution of CCIM, Indian 
System started flourishing and now it has achieved global recognition. Earlier, there was no 
uniformity in syllabus but after constitution of CCIM, u niformity was established by introducing 
single syllabus country wide.  
3.3.3 He further stated that CCIM which is a democratic  body constituted by the Indian 
Parliament is now being dissolved by introducing National Commission for Indian Medicine 
System (NCISM)  Bill 2019.  Through this Commission, there will neither be State wise 
representation of members nor Universities' representation.  This Commission will be 
represented by 95 % members nominated by Central Government.  The democratic system 
adopted in CCIM which had State wise elected members and University representation of 
registered practitioners was able to rule out problems associated with ISM system but after 
NCISM, this democracy will come to end. 
3.3.4 Emphasizing upon the lack of medical fac ility especially in rural areas he apprised the 
Committee that up to 80 percent services in rural area are provided by ISM doctors. Under 
IMCC Act 1970 section 2 (e) and 17(3)(b) and Drug and Cosmetic Act 1945 rule 2 (ee) (iii) 
many States have allowed ISM  practitioners to use life saving drugs in order to deliver health 
services to society at large.  The NCISM Bill has no such clause which will close all doors for 
ISM to use life saving drugs in rural areas.  This will not only affect many practitioners 
appointed in various States but also affect people of rural area on a large scale.  It may also be 
noted that Ministry of AYUSH while introducing NCISM Bill has not taken the views of ISM 
educational institutes, Universities, teachers, practitioners and State Government offices which is 
the biggest lacuna while introducing any such Bill in the Parliament.  He was of the view that 
before introducing this Bill, a common view of ISM colleges/institutes/Universities, teachers, 
registered practitioners and State government should have been taken and considered.  
3.3.5 He also highlighted that as per the Section 57 of the proposed NCISM Bill, all 30 to 35 
regular/permanent staff of CCIM will be terminated and only 3 months salary will be provided.  
This is really inhumane as the staff has been working since 25 to 35 years and many have grown 
old. At this stage, it will be difficult for them to look for new job opportunities and support their 
families.   Also, it should be noted that after the commencement of the Bill , there will be 

28 
 
requirement of human resources which will be greater than the present CCIM staff. A thought 
should be given on how the Commission was going to work and accordingly changes should be 
done. 
3.4 Dr. P. Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member, Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) 
3.4.1 Dr. P. Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member, Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) 
submitted that the idea of reforming the Medical Councils viz, Medical Council of India (MCI), 
Central Council of India(CCIM) and Central Council of Homeopathy (CCH) is a wonderful 
constructive thought of the Union Government. The vision was to replace the MCI/CCM/CCH 
with an overarching National Commission for Human Resources for Health and provide 
platforms for cross consultation and coordination bet ween the disciplines and medical and non -
medical personnel but the idea of reform is not  on the agenda of the Government but to destroy 
the federal principles and democratic structure.  He, further highlighted the potential risks with 
the proposed NCISM Bi ll which inter-alia include :-  (i) the States' autonomy and potential 
violation of federal principles; (ii) excessive bureaucratization and centralization in the provision 
of the NCISM Bill 2019 and (iii) faulty selection & procedure of regulators, providi ng scope for 
abuse. 
3.4.2 He further submitted that despite confab ulating, the NCISM Bill -2019 contain  the 
potential of having outcomes worse than the IMCC Act 1970. The major endangering issues in 
the Bill, which may have impact on the independence of the Commission, are as follows:- 
● Faulty Preamble and intentions thereof: The basic argument that only those 
selected and nominated can govern or regulate is clearly indicative of the intention 
of a totalitarian Government to subjugate professionals;  
● Over Cen tralization of the NCISM and the near control over it by the Central 
government ranging from holding powers of appointing almost all the members of 
various bodies; 
● being an appellate for a variety of routine & technical matters rejected by the 
colleges even after the rejection of the competent Board in NCISM; 
● holding the power of granting permission to set up colleges even after the rejection 
of the competent Board in NCISM; 
● holding the power of approving courses; 
● setting aside any punishment declared by Ethics Board against a doctor found 
negligent; 
● recognizing degrees and qualifications; and  
● finally having powers to issue directions to State governments and the NCISM to 
comply with any orders it seeks to issue. 
 
3.4.3 He has, therefore, also submitted that such wide-ranging powers that will be exercised by 
the Central Government will rob not just the federal nature of the law but also reduce the 
National Commission for Indian system of Medicine (NCISM) to an advisory role.  

29 
 
3.4.4 Hence, he suggested that the NCISM Bill, 2019 may be withdrawn and a Committee may 
be constituted to advise suitable amendments in the existing IMCC Act, 1970 and if the Central 
Government wants to go with the new NCISM Bill then the NCISM Bill 2019 may be sent to the 
AYUSH Ministry and the Councils to get larger consensus and deliberations with stakeholders. 
3.5 All India Ayurvedic Congress (AIAC) 
3.5.1 Vaidya Devender Triguna, President, All India Ayurveda Congress has submitted that 
since the last 115 years, AIAC is the represe ntative body of the Ayurvedic profession therefore, 
at least three persons may be nominated from AIAC in the proposed Board of Ayurveda.  The 
practitioners of Ayurveda in the country are the backbone of Ayurveda in India & the world and 
promote Ayurveda to  give disease free society and cost effective health to the mankind.  
Ayurveda being the largest component may be given prominence and the Chairperson of the 
Committee should be from Ayurveda discipline. Therefore, Ayurveda practitioners should be 
given more representation in the form of nominated members in the Commission.  The number 
of Ayurvedic experts (Physicians) should be more in the Commission, Board and Councils so 
that it does not reflect that it is a bureaucratic board.  It is also suggested that  a separate 
Commission for Ayurveda and a separate Commission for remaining smaller systems of 
medicine can also be considered, if necessary. 
3.6 Maharashtra Council of Indian Medicine (MCIM) 
3.6.1 Dr. Ashutosh Gupta, President, Maharashtra Council of Indi an Medicine (MCIM)  
submitted that the provisions of proposed NCISM Bill 2019 may harm the large section of 
practitioners of ISM who practice modern medicine legally in various States since more than 50 
years.  The syllabus of graduate and post graduate lev el for these practitioners is framed by 
CCIM and implemented after prior approval of Central Government and is published in official 
gazette of Government of India. This syllabus covers vast portion of modern medicine with 
adequate teaching and hands on tr aining in Government as well as College hospitals in the State 
of Maharashtra.  
3.6.2 As per the Maharashtra Medical Practitioners Act 1961 Section 25 (4) & (5) 
(Amendment 2014) Government of Maharashtra permitted the practitioners registered under 
Schedule A, A1, B, D in this Council to practice Modern System of Medicine (Allopathy).  As 
per Drug and Cosmetic Act 1940, Rules 1945 Section 2 (ee) (iii) Maharashtra Government also 
issued G.R. in 1992 and Notification in 1999 to allow the practice of Modern Sy stem of 
Medicine along with their own system. 
3.6.3 It has further been stated that many doctors of Indian System of Medicine (Ayurved & 
Unani) are working in National Health Programs in the State of Maharashtra.  Postgraduate 
practitioners of Indian Syste m of Medicine (Ayurved) are also providing their services as per 
their specialty like Gynaecology, Paediatrics, Ophthalmology, ENT, Medicine, Surgery etc. 
These ISM practitioners are also employed by State Government at various PHC and rural 
hospitals and the large sector of government infrastructure is dependent on these practitioners.  
Various schemes such as National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), Rashtri ya Bal Swasthya 

30 
 
Karyakram (RBSK), 108 ambulance service is also catered by these doctors.  80% of rural 
population is served at various private sectors by ISM practitioners.   
3.6.4 Majority of the provisions in the proposed NCISM Bill are in favour of pro tecting State 
Government rights with regard to practise of any medicine by ISM doctors. However, there 
remains some ambiguity by the use of words modern advances (section 2 h), any system of 
medicine (33 -3 B), rural health (section 52), which have created confusion among medical 
professionals of the society and unnecessary agitation in health sector in Maharashtra and other 
parts of India.  These facts have been submitted by Govt of Maharashtra in the various cases and 
the Bombay High Court in W/P No 7846 o f 2014.  In the said matter, the High Court and 
Supreme Court had denied stay for the above mentioned enactment as well as the notification of 
the State Government and allowed ISM practitioners to practice modern medicine in respective 
States. 
3.7 Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) 
3.7.1 Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) submitted that the number of ISM graduates are 
more than 7,50,000 nationwide.  Presently, CCIM, a statutory body constituted under IMCC Act, 
1970 is in existence for the regulation a nd control and practice of Indian System of Medicine.  
IMCC Act 1970 which has been amended from time to time is a unique Act and has been proved 
a milestone having a roadmap design for many years. Highlighting the acute shortage of MBBS 
doctors in the public health services as well as in private sector in rural, remote, tribal and urban 
slums of the country, the Association has submitted that according to WHO, the ideal doctor: 
patient ratio should be 1: 400 whereas in our country it is around 1:1700, when  only MBBS 
doctors are considered. This ratio is still worse in rural, hilly and tribal areas. The rural health 
system in India is largely dependent on the doctors of the Indian systems of medicine.   In the 
tribal and hilly remote parts of India, these do ctors are the mainstay of health services. Primary 
Health Care Centres and secondary level hospitals as well as ambulance services are run by these 
professionals with integrated approach in many States.  92% of general practitioners are ISM 
graduates and a re keeping alive the concept of family physician. The role of ISM graduates in 
the success of NRHM, Emergency Medical Services, Primary Health Centres and rural hospitals 
cannot be ignored.  This has significantly reduced homebirths as well as maternal, ch ild and 
general mortality and morbidity in many States. 70% of secondary level hospitals which cater to 
patients in an affordable way of hospitalization are run by ISM post graduates. Central Council 
of Indian Medicine, the statutory body itself has been f raming the syllabus and curriculum for 
Graduate and Post graduate courses in ISM for more than 45 years.  This syllabus covers 
substantial components of modern medicine which are included with the approval of the 
Government of India and are published in th e official gazette from time to time.  ISM graduates 
and post graduates are well trained in practice of modern medicine with hands on training. 
3.7.2 Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) also  emphasized the need for integration of 
ancient and modern medic inal Sciences. Certain diseases such as paralysis, hepatitis, skin 
diseases, chronic joint problems, chronic gastritis, irritable bowel syndrome, piles, fistulas, drug 
abuse, mental illness, cancer etc seek the best of modern and ancient medicinal sciences . 

31 
 
Emergency Medical Services are to be delivered within the golden hour concept where 
myocardial infarction, childbirth, convulsions, accidental injuries, strokes, poisoning are neither 
ancient nor modern but only demand life saving treatments.  Technologi cal advances such as 
stethoscopes, microscopes , ultrasounds, MRI, CT,  laparoscopes and other diagnostic techniques 
are development of Physics, Chemistry and Biology which do not pertain to  the ancient or 
modern systems of medicine. As such, their use fo r diagnostic purpose in pathology cannot be 
restricted to practitioners of a particular stream of medicine as it will create hindrance in 
providing a proper health care delivery system to the ailing masses.  
 
3.7.3 It has also been argued that countries li ke Russia, China, Vietnam, Japan and Germany 
have successfully implemented the integrated system of healthcare in recent times to achieve the 
desired goals in the field of health.  But India is still far behind the goal of “Health for All” 
because of the l ack of desire to implement the integrated medical services throughout the 
country.  While surgery is a technique invented by the ancient Indians during the Vedic era of 
Sushruta; its monopoly by Western medical professionals should be condemned because sur gery 
cannot be performed by ISM practitioners without anesthesia which is available only in the 
modern medicine as the other systems could not develop their own analgesics and anesthesia due 
to inadequate facilities and lack of funds for Research & Development in these systems.  
 
3.7.4 Integrated Medical Association (AYUS), further, submitted that a lthough the majority 
health systems are dominated by MCI and MBBS professionals, almost all the political and 
democratic systems including the Indian Parliament and State Assemblies have supported the 
cause of integration by framing various legislations fr om time to time.  The provision under 
Section 17(3)(b) of IMCC Act 1970 was inserted with the sole purpose of recognizing and 
protecting the rights of the practitioners of integrated medicine to practice and prescribe modern 
medicine.  The provision was in serted after a long debate that took place in Rajya Sabha with 
respect to Section 17(3)(b) of the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970, wherein it 
becomes further evident that the intent and purpose of Section 17(3)(b) is to protect the rights of 
integrated medicine practitioners to practice and prescribe modern medicine. 
3.7.5 The legislative intent and objective behind framing of Rule 2(eel) (iii) of Drugs & 
Cosmetic Rules 1945 and Section 17(3)(b) of IMCC Act 1970, is to confer rights upon the 
respective State Governments in order to enact provisions to protect the privileges of ISM 
practitioners to practise modern system of medicine commonly known as Allopathy. The above 
proposition of law is evident by observing Parliamentary discussions while amen ding the same. 
It is pertinent to note that Section 17 (3) (b) of IMCC Act 1970 was introduced to overrule 
Section 15 2 (B) of IMC Act 1956 to protect and safeguard the rights of ISM practitioners to 
practice any system of medicine. 
 
3.7.6 Also, various Court decisions including the Supreme Court of India in its famous case of 
Mukhtiar Chand vs. State of Punjab (SCC 579 of 1998) and Subhashish Bakshi vs. State of West 
Bengal 2004, have upheld the rights of State Governments to enact upon med ical education and 

32 
 
public health. The State Governments have been empowered to enact legislations  about public 
health, as Public Health is included in List II (State list) of Seventh Schedule.  
 
3.7.7 In some States (Maharashtra, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Pu njab, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu, Chattisgarh and many others), the State Governments have taken initiatives for 
mainstreaming of these doctors and have been successful in meeting the needs of the public 
health by allowing the ISM practitioners to practi ce modern medicine (Allopathy) to the extent 
they have acquired knowledge and skill .  In many parts of India including the above mentioned 
States, this concept of integrated practice has been working for hundreds of years and is 
continued under various leg islations even after independence.  For example, the Government of 
Maharashtra has issued order on 25 th November 1992 under the proviso to Section 33 of the 
Maharashtra Medical Practitioners Act, 1961, (“MMP Act” for short) and the notification dated  
23.02.1999  issued under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules 1945, by which the registered 
practitioners of Ayurveda and Unani have been permitted to practice the modern system of 
medicine in the State of Maharashtra.  With a view to incorporate such provisions for the 
practitioners of Ayurveda and Unani, explicitly, the Government of Maharashtra has amended 
Maharashtra Medical Practitioners Act  in 2014 and sub -clauses (iv) and (v) have been inserted 
in Section 25. Similar orders have been issued by various State Governments like Haryana, U.P.  
3.7.8 The Association is of the view that there is an acute shortage of qualified professionals in 
the country to perform the medical termination of pregnancies (MTP) as per the prevailing laws.   
Every two hours a woman loses  her life in the country due to unsafe abortions.   As per a report 
of the Population Council released in 2012, AYUSH practitioners are trained to conduct MTPs 
as safe and effective as their counterparts from the modern scientific system of medicines. The 
ISM doctors are duly trained and qualified in both the systems of medicine(ISM and Modern 
Scientific System of Medicine) and already serving the ailing masses of the country. Therefore, 
the  right of ISM doctors to practice modern medicine should be protec ted in the best interest of 
the people at large as well as to achieve the goal of “Health for All” in the near future. 
 
3.8 Ayurved Vyaspeeth 
 
3.8.1 Vaidya Santosh Nevpurkar, President, Ayurved Vyaspeeth in his representation 
submitted that  NCISM Bill will surely bring back the glory of Ayurveda by making much 
needed revolutionary changes in the field of education and also in the field of Ethics based 
clinical practice in the various disciplines of the Indian System of Medicine.  The Commissi on 
along with the Advisory Boards will bring transparency and accountability in the entire system.  
The provision of the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test for admission to undergraduate and 
post graduate courses in each of the disciplines of the India n System of medicine and the 
proposed National Exit Test for granting license to practice as medical practitioner will ensure 
availability of adequate and high quality medical professionals of Indian System of Medicine.  
The National Teachers Eligibility Test for Indian System of medicine is a very welcome move to 

33 
 
bring in very dynamic, motivated teachers who will radically change the current academic 
scenario.  
 
3.8.2 The four proposed Autonomous Boards have a very separate and distinct function, which 
will complement each other. In the current scenario, the CCIM, as a single body was responsible 
for determining minimum standards of education, developing dynamic curriculum,  granting 
permissions for new medical institutions and carrying out inspections of t he medical institutions.  
This led to a conflict of interest in some cases,  which will now be totally avoided with the four 
new Proposed Autonomous Boards.   The Medical Assessment and Rating Board of Indian 
System of Medicine and the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine will 
be helpful in the assessment and rating of the medical institutions on the basis of their 
compliance with the standards and also regulate the professional conduct and promote medical 
ethics, which is the need  of the hour.  The NCISM Bill, 2019 has rightly proposed to develop 
mechanisms to have continuous interaction with the State Medical Councils and also to maintain 
a National Register of all the licensed practitioners of Indian System of Medicine.  
 
3.8.3 Vaidya Santosh Nevpurkar was also of the view that the electronic synchronization of the 
National Register with the State Register is a very positive step forward towards the goal of a 
Digital India.  The Clause to keep away people involved in the managemen t and ownership of 
institutions from the membership of the Autonomous Boards and the Advisory Councils will go 
a long way in eliminating conflict of interest and subsequently result in better academic 
institutions of merit.  The provision of having few mem bers to the elected by the registered 
medical practitioners, as part time members of the Commissioner, will give some representation 
from the practitioners and graduates of Indian System of Medicine.  
    
3.9 The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Ltd  
 
3.9.1 The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Ltd in their written submission have 
elaborately dealt with specific sections of the Bill and given their suggestions. Dr. P. R. 
Krishnakumar, Managing Director of  The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited h as 
stressed upon the need to ensure adherence to the core principles of Ayurveda and its 
recommended methods of knowledge transmission.  He has acknowledged the fact that till now 
attempts have been made to ape the allopathic medical model and thus failing  miserably in 
uploading the principles of Ayurveda education and propagation.   He has stressed upon the fact 
that industry representation from both manufacturers of medicines and also healthcare services 
seemed glaringly neglected which could create a gap  in industry and academia as usual.  He has 
also expressed his surprise to see Yoga and Naturopathy missing from the proposed Bill.  
 
3.10 National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangalore 
3.10.1 Prof. Abdul Wadud, Director, NIUM Bangalore deposed before the  Committee that for 
ASU systems, integration should be continued in the interest of the primary healthcare of citizens 
of India because in most place, primary healthcare is given by AYUSH doctors. Prof. Abdul 

34 
 
Wadud also submitted that qualified ASU(ISM) do ctors may be included in the definition of 
Registered Medical Practitioners in the interest of health care of citizens of the country, i.e. by 
allowing the qualified AYUSH doctors to register in the State register maintained by National 
Medical Commission.  He also submitted that all National Institutes run hospitals under ISM 
should be declared as referral hospitals for all Central Government/State 
Government/Autonomous Body/PSU etc. so as to popularize the system of medicine. He also 
submitted that Directo r Generals of Research Councils may also be included as ex -officio 
members in the Commission. 
3.11 National Institute of Siddha (NIS), Chennai 
3.11.1 Prof. N.J. Muthukumar, Director, NIS submitted that a separate Board for Siddha 
Medicine should be constit uted to represent the Siddha System of Medicine and strengthen the 
system in terms of academic, clinical and research field. He further submitted that the 
Chairperson of the Commission should be appointed on a rotational basis from each system; only 
then the Commission will represent all the systems in the coming years. 
3.12 Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS), Chennai  
3.12.1 Prof. Dr. K. Kanakavalli,  Director General, CCRS deposed before the Committee that  a 
separate of Board for Siddha system of Medicine consisting of a President and four members 
from the Siddha discipline of Indian system of Medicine should be created. She further 
submitted that Siddha practice is done by institutionally qualified and registered graduates. There 
are over 7000 institutionally qualified Siddha physicians practicing across the southern States of 
India and in Sri Lanka. In toto, around 1600 Siddha Wings are functioning in Tamil Nadu, 
Puducherry and Kerala. Apart from these wings, under the Ministry of AYUSH, Siddha  
Institutes/Units are located in Delhi, Karnataka, Andra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. In addition, 11 
Siddha institutions are imparti ng Siddha Education along with two  UG and PG Government 
Colleges and one National Institute of Siddha. 
3.13 Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), New Delhi 
3.13.1 Dr. Zaki Ahmad, Research Officer, CCRUM submitted before the Committee that there 
should be a separate Board for Unani system of Medicine. He was of the view that the Director 
Generals of the Research Co uncils of different disciplines of Indian System of Medicine should 
also be appointed as ex -officio members of the Commission. He further submitted that the 
budget of Research should also be increased. 
3.14 National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur 
3.14.1 Prof. Sanjeev Sharma, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur submitted before the 
Committee that the Director Generals of the Research Councils of different disciplines of Indian 
System of Medicine should also be appointed as ex -officio members of the C ommission. He 
further emphasized on the need of integration of modern medicine with the different disciplines 
of Indian System of Medicine. 

35 
 
3.15 Indian Naturopathy and Yoga Graduates Medical Association (INYGMA) 
3.15.1 Indian Naturopathy and Yoga Graduates  Medical Association (INYGMA), in their 
written submission, apprised the Committee that NITI AAYOG while considering the regulatory 
framework for the entire gamut of AYUSH, had released a draft NCISM Bill in February, 2017, 
which had included Yoga & Naturo pathy regulation with a separate Board of Yoga & 
Naturopathy. For reasons unknown to ‘Yoga & Naturopathy’ stakeholders, Ministry of AYUSH 
has not included ‘Yoga & Naturopathy’ Medical Education & Clinical Practice in the purview of 
NCISM Bill - 2018. There  has also been a long term demand and aspiration of ‘Yoga & 
Naturopathy system of Medicine’, to have the same ‘Statutory Central Regulation’, as prevalent 
in Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa and Homeopathic systems of Medicine. INYGMA also 
submitted that the Central regulations are provided even for the regionally practiced system of 
medicine where as Yoga and Naturopathy is being practiced all over India and worldwide.  
3.15.2   INYGMA further submitted that the Bachelor of Naturopathy and Yogic Science s 
(BNYS), is a Medical Degree representing ’Yoga & Naturopathy’ System of Medicine in the 
country, a fact which has been acknowledged and reiterated by Ministry of AYUSH, in response 
to questions raised by Members of Parliament on several occasions. Centra l Council of Indian 
Medicine (CCIM), the current regulatory body covering Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa 
Rigpa systems of Medicine has on several occasions passed resolutions to bring ‘Yoga & 
Naturopathy’ system of Medicine under its purview. Fourteen (1 4) States and Union Territories 
in the country so far have recognized BNYS as a primary medical qualification to practice ‘Yoga 
& Naturopathy System of Medicine. BNYS Medical graduates are being registered as ‘Yoga & 
Naturopathy’ Medical Practitioners through ‘Acts’ passed in the respective State Assemblies of - 
Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Assam and Jammu & 
Kashmir. BNYS medical graduates are being registered in the States of Telangana, Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamilnadu, Kerala,  Manipur, Puducherry & Andaman & Nicobar Islands through 
Gazette Notifications. Currently, there are 32 Yoga & Naturopathy Medical Colleges in the 
country imparting BNYS, in the States of Uttar Pradesh (4), Karnataka (7), Tamil Nadu (7), 
Rajasthan (4), Madhya Pradesh (2), Chhattisgarh (1), Gujarat (2), Andhra Pradesh (3), Telangana 
(1), Uttarakhand (1). Three out of thirty two, one each in the States of Telangana, Karnataka & 
Tamil Nadu are being run by the respective State Governments. Post Graduate (MD) c ourses - in 
Clinical Yoga, Clinical Naturopathy, Clinical Nutrition and Acupuncture & Energy Medicine - 
are being offered by four (4) Yoga & Naturopathy Medical Colleges. Most of these Medical 
Colleges are affiliated under the Universities exclusively mean t for Medical/ Health or AYUSH 
medical education in their respective States. 
3.15.3 It was also submitted that Government of India through an Executive Order tasked the 
work of Central Registration for BNYS Medical Graduates in 2017 to Central Council for 
Research in Yoga & Naturopathy (CCRYN), an autonomous body under Ministry of AYUSH. 
INYGMA is of the view that it is unfair to the system of “Yoga & Naturopathy’ to deny it a 
Statutory Regulation and has requested the inclusion of "Yoga and Naturopathy" medical 
education and clinical practice within the NCISM Bill as proposed by NITI AYOG . The absence 
of a central regulation with statutory cover would allow the mushrooming of a number of quack 

36 
 
practitioners with the growing demand for ‘Yoga & Naturopathy’ clinical practice, putting public 
at-large to the risk of malpractice and bad health.  
3.16 Government of Maharashtra 
3.16.1 The Directorate of AYUSH, Government of Maharashtra  submitted that the approved 
syllabus of Undergraduate and Post Graduate Courses of Indian Systems of Medicine namely 
Ayurveda and Unani already contain relevant por tion of modern medicine and hence the 
definition of Ashtang Ayurveda and Unani in the Indian System of Medicine in the proposed Bill 
should also include modern medicine as specified by syllabus.  
3.16.2 The Directorate of AYUSH, Government of Maharashtra further submitted that inclusion 
of Director of AYUSH from State Governments as ex -officio members of the Commission will 
enable representation from all the States in the Commission. It further submitted that the 
recruitment and selection of teachers in Gov ernment Ayurved Colleges is done by the State 
Public Service Commission or the Divisional Selection Board constituted by the State 
Government. Also their promotion is done by the State Government through the State Public 
Service Commission or the Departmen tal Promotion Committee constituted by the State 
Government. Hence teachers of Government Ayurved colleges should be exempted from 
appearing for the proposed AYUSH National Teachers Eligibility Test.  
  

37 
 
CHAPTER 4 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL 
4.1 During the course of the examination of the Bill, the Committee received a number of 
memoranda in response to its Press Release.  The memoranda were forwarded to the Ministry of 
AYUSH for its response. The written views of all the State Governments/UTs  were sought on 
the Bill.  However, only the Maharashtra Government responded in time for its views to be 
included in the Report. The Committee’s observations and recommendations contained in the 
Report reflect an extensive scrutiny of submissions and all the viewpoints put forth before it by 
various organizations/experts/State Governments. Upon scrutiny of the replies received from the 
Ministry, the Committee is of the view that certain provisions of the Bill need to be recast to 
serve the intended purpose  of the Bill better. The Committee in its meeting held on 7 th 
November, 2019 took up clause -by-clause consideration of the Bill. Various amendments to the 
Bill have been suggested by the Committee on clauses of the Bill which are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.  
CLAUSE 2 
4.2.1 Clause 2(h) deals with the definition of Indian System of Medicine  
4.2.2 Clause 2(h) reads as under: 
Indian System of Medicine” means the Ashtang Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and 
Sowa-Rigpa Systems of Medicine whether supplemented  or not by such modern 
advances as the Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, 
declareby notification from time to time; 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.2.3 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
i. National Integrated Medical submitted that the ISM doctors are duly trained and qualified 
in ISM as well as modern scientific medicine, therefore modern medicine should be 
included in the definition of Indian System of Medicine in clause 2(h) which should be 
amended as follows:  
Indian Medicine known as Ashtang Ayurved, Siddha, Unani supplemented 
with modern medicine and modern advances as specified by the syllabus and 
curriculum.  
ii. Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) has also submitted that many States have 
taken initiatives for  mainstreaming of ISM doctors and the concept of integrated 
practice is continuing under various legislations. IMA (AYUS) has also suggested 
that the definition of Indian Systems of Medicine should be amended as follows:  

38 
 
Indian Medicine known as Ashtang A yurveda, Siddha, Unani -Tibb, or Sowa -
Rigpa supplemented with modern scientific system of medicine and modern advances as 
specified in the syllabus and curriculum. 
iii. Maharashtra Council of Indian Medicine, Mumbai has submitted that " modern system of 
medicine" should be included in the definition of Indian System of medicine in the clause 
2(h) 
 
iv. Ayurved Vyaspeeth has suggested that  whether and or not should be removed from the 
definition of Indian System of Medicine.   
 
v. Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, Member, CCIM  submitted that the name of Unani 
Medicine should be deleted from the definition of Indian Medicine Sysem and Yoga and 
Naturopathy system should be added. Like Homeopathy, a separate Commission should 
be formed for Unani to help Unani System to develop and flourish like Homeopathy. 
 
vi. The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited has suggested that the term ‘Ashtang’ 
may be dropped from ‘Ashtang Ayurveda’ as it is not a necessary adjective. The 
adjective may in future lead to unnecessary interpretations legally. 
 
vii. The State Government of Maharashtra submitted that the definition of Ashtang Ayurveda 
and Unani in the Indian System of Medicine should also include modern medicine as 
specified by syllabus.   
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.2.4 On the issue of allowing the practitioners of Indian Systems of Medicine to practice 
modern medicine, the Ministry submitted that the intention of the Bill is to regulate the education 
and practice of Indian Systems of Medicine. As per the provisions of existing IMCC Act, 1970 
and the proposed NCIM Bill, 2019, the persons having recognized qualifications in India 
Systems of Medicine are entitled to practice Indian Systems of Medicine only. 
4.2.5 The Ministry further submitted that in order to allow AYUSH doctors to practice modern 
medicine, the States willing to do so have to consider taking up amendments in the relevant Sate 
Medical Practitioner Act to empower AYSUH doctors for the purpose of limited practice of 
modern medicine.  
4.2.6 Few States have already allowed AYUSH doctors appointed in Primary Health Centres in 
rural areas to practice allopathy during 'emergencies' after undergoing a brief training of modern 
medicine practice. Presently, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Punjab, Uttar 
Pradesh, Bihar, Assam, and Uttarakhand have allowed.  
4.2.7 On inclusion of Ashtang Ayurveda in the ISM definition, the Ministry submitted that the 
definition of Indian medicine in the IMCC Act, 1970 also mentions the word ‘ashtang 
Ayurveda’. Hence, the same was retained in the propos ed Commission. The classical texts of 

39 
 
Ayurveda have documented the following eight branches namely, - (a)Kayachikitsa, (b) 
Balaroga, (c) Grahachikitsa, (d) Shalakya, (e) Shalya (f) Vishachikitsa, (f) Rasayana, and (h) 
Vajikarana. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.2.8 The Committee notes that there is a n acute shortage of doctors and health 
workforce in the country especially in rural/remote and tribal areas of the country. 
Allopathy or the modern system of medicine has emerged as the most commonly used and 
the more popular system of medicine all around the world. With the advent of the scientific 
age and lifestyle changes, the burden of chronic, systemic and non -communicable diseases 
(NCDs) has been increasing. According to WHO, non -communicable diseases such as  
cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases have been collectively responsible for 70% of 
all deaths worldwide. The Committee is of the view that in the wake of this global health 
crisis, the traditional Indian System of Medicine (ISM) which largely foc uses on holistic 
view of health and well being can be utilized as an affordable means to tackle various 
illness including NCDs. The Committee also recognizes the constant efforts of the 
Government to mainstream the Indian System of Medicine and integrate I SM in the health 
delivery system. The Committee strongly believes, with the multitude of health issues that 
the country is facing today, adoption of an inclusive and integrated health care policy has 
become more important. The Committee, time and again, ha s recommended for an 
interface of ISM with modern medicine as both systems have their own strengths in the 
treatment of various illnesses. Modern medicine and Indian System of Medicine are two 
different streams of knowledge and there have been efforts on t he part of the Government 
to mainstream the AYUSH services in the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM).  The 
Committee also recognizes the services of AYUSH doctors in providing the first line of 
treatment especially in the rural areas. The service provided  by AYUSH doctors has 
certainly helped in alleviating the existing gap in the health sector.  
4.2.9 The Committee, therefore, recommends integration of Indian Systems of Medicine  
with the modern scientific advances that will be fundamental in providing acc essible, 
affordable and quality health care. The Committee in its 109 th Report on the NMC Bill, 
2017 had recognized the need to build capacity of existing human resource in the 
healthcare sector to address the shortage of healthcare professionals.  The Committee, at 
the same time ,  cannot overlook the possible risk of non -qualified and untrained doctors 
prescribing modern medicine and inducing irreparable damage to the patients and 
reiterates its recommendation , as in its 109 th Report, that healthcare professional 
practicing without requisite qualification anywhere in the country may attract penal 
provision. The Committee had also recognized specific healthcare issues and challenges of 
every State. The Committee, therefore, reiterates i ts recommendation  that State 
Governments may implement measures to enhance the capacity of existing health care 
professionals including practitioners of Indian Systems of Medicine to address State 
specific primary health care issues/challenges.  The Committ ee also recommends that the 

40 
 
States and UTs while formulating laws to integrate the best of these two Systems should 
keep in mind the National Health Goals.  
4.2.10 The Committee also believes that there is an urgent need to promote and integrate 
Indian systems of medicine with the scientific modern advances to increase its acceptability 
as a scientific and reliable alternate system of medicine. The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommends adoption of science based approaches in the Indian System of Medicine  for its 
seamless integration with the National Level health care delivery infrastructure. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 2(h) should be amended as follows:  
Indian System of Medicine” means the Ashtang Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and 
Sowa-Rigpa Systems of Medicine supplemented by such modern advances, 
scientific and technological development as the Commission may, in consultation 
with the Central Government, declare by notification from time to time; 
4.2.11 The Committee is also of the view  that since the proposed Bill is an attempt to 
improve access to quality and affordable medical education and treatment in the field of 
Indian System of Medicine and promote medical ethics, it is therefore pertinent to define 
the terms "Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” in the Bill appropriately so 
that there are no ambiguities in the proposed legislation. This will help in the protection of 
interest and rights of the patients or their legal heirs visiting any Indian System of 
Medicine clini c/professional. The patients and their legal heirs who have suffered due to 
Professional and Ethical Misconduct of the ISM professional should be able to appeal 
against their misconduct. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definitions of the 
terms "Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” should be incorporated in the 
definition clause of the Bill and the same may be borrowed from the Indian Medical 
Council (Professional Conduct Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002.  However, at the 
same time, necessary safeguard should be put in place to protect the rights of practitioner 
and they should not be subject to unnecessary harassment.  
4.2.12 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 4 
4.3.1  Clause 4 deals with composition of the Commission. Clause 4(2) reads as under: 
The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven 
administrative capacity and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in any of the 
disciplines of Indian System of Medicine from a ecognized University and having 
experience of not less than twenty years in any field of Indian System of Medicine, 
out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of healthcare delivery, 
growth and development of Indian System of Medicine or its education. 
(For the purpose of this section and section 19, the term “leader” means the Head of a 
Department or the Head of an Organisation.) 
 

41 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.3.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) All India Ayurvedic Congress and Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, Member, CCIM 
have submitted that the requirement of PG degree for appointment as the Chairperson 
should be removed. The PG degree does not necessarily reflect the expertise for the 
reason that most of the PG degree holders are from private colleges having no 
exposure and expertise to the system.  
(ii) All India Ayurvedic Congress has drawn attention to  Clause 4(2) wherein, a head of 
any subject/ department of any small institute is e quated with the heads of large 
organizations.  Moreover, what is to be understood by the word 'organization' is also 
not clear. If the organization is interpreted as an institute, in that case, only those in 
service would be eligible restricting the possib ility of practitioners to be the 
Chairman.  Thus, the definition of leader is ambiguous and therefore this part of the 
section should be deleted.  
(iii) Dr. P.Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member, CCIM submitted that the appointment of 
Chairperson needs to be on rotatory bas is among all the disciplines of ISM in 2:1 
ratio amongst the (Ayurveda: Unani) systems. It would lead to fair chance to two 
major systems which are having its Teaching, Research & Hospitals across India. 
 
(iv) Prof. Dr. N. J. Muthukumar, Director, National Inst itute of Siddha, Chennai has 
submitted that Chairperson of the Commission may be appointed from each system of 
AYUSH medicine on a rotation basis. This will help in obtaining representation from 
each system of Medicine and also ensure integration among the  AYUSH systems of 
medicine and strengthen the individual AYUSH Systems. 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.3.3 Ministry submitted that the PG degree has been made mandatory for all teaching staff of 
Ayurveda. Most of the teaching staff and experts have PG qualification. It has been mentioned in 
the NCIM Bill that the meaning of leader means the head of the Department or the head of an 
Organisation. The merit of the leadership shall be assessed by the Search Committee. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.4 The Committee believes that the Post Graduation eligibility criteria for appointment 
as Chairperson of any national level agency is justified considering the specialized 
functions and responsibilities the Chairperson is bound to perform. The Committee 
therefore, is of the view, that Post Graduation degree in the Indian System of Medicine is a 
valid condition for appointment as Chairperson as the multifaceted duties of the 
Chairperson demands deep knowledge and experience in the Indian System of Medicine. 
4.3.5 The Committee is of the view that all the disciplines of the Indian System of 
Medicine have been represented in the Commission and the Advisory Council for Indian 

42 
 
System of Medicine. Therefore, the apprehensions of non -representation when the 
Chairperson is from a particular discipline of ISM are not justified.  
4.3.6 Subject to the above observation, the clause is adopted without any change. 
4.3.7 Clause 4(3) reads as under: 
The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as ex-officio 
Members of the Commission, namely:— 
(a) the President of the Board of Ayurveda; 
(b) the President of the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa; 
(c) the President of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System 
of Medicine; 
(d) the President of the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of 
Medicine; 
(e) Advisor (Ayurveda) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India in-charge 
of Ayurveda and Advisor (Unani) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
in-charge of Unani, in the Ministry of AYUSH; 
(f) the Director, All India Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi; 
(g) the Director, National Institute of Siddha, Chennai; 
(h) the Director, National Institute of Unani, Bengaluru; 
(i) the Director, North Eastern Institute on Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, Shillong; 
(j) the Director, Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar; and 
(k) the Director, National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.3.8 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause:- 
(i) The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited has suggested that among the ex -
offico members, the South Indian school of thought of Ayurveda have not been 
represented (unless until any of the following  the 1)Directors of AIIA - New Delhi, 
2)AEIAH - Shillong, 3) IPGTRA - Jamnagar or NIA - Jaipur is from South Indian 
School). The current criteria will not guarantee representation of Caraka, Sushrta and 
Vagbhata school of thoughts but would also result in inappropriate representation of 
regional pluralism of the system. Further, the organization submitted that the industry 
representation from both manufacturers of medicine and also healthcare services 
seems glaringly neglected. This could create a gap in Industry and Academia as usual. 
 
(ii) Shri Vaiday Devendra Trigu na, President, All India Ayurvedic Congress has 
suggested that Clause 4 (3)(e) that reads as:  
 
Advisor (Ayurveda) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of 
Ayurveda and Advisor (Unani) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India in -
charge of Unani, in the Ministry of AYUSH;  

43 
 
should be amended as follows: 
 
A technical Officer not less than the level of Advisor (Ayurveda) and Advisor 
(Unani) (JS Rank) in the Ministry of AYUSH 
 
(iii) Director, National Institute of Unani Medicine submitted that i n clause 4(3)(h), The 
Director, National Institute of Unani, Bengalaru has to be read as National Institute of 
Unani Medicine, Bengalaru.  
 
(iv) Dr. Manoj.R, Scientific Officer, Traditional Knowledge Innovation, Kerala suggested 
that two more officers should be  included among the ex -officio members of the 
Commission namely, Director of Ayurveda Medical Education, Kerala and Director 
of International Institute of Research in Ayurveda, Kerala. 
 
(v) National Institute of Siddha, Chennai submitted that a fter constitutin g a Siddha 
Board, a separate Advisor (Siddha) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India in -
charge for Siddha in the Ministry of AYUSH should also be appointed for the Siddha 
Board. 
 
(vi) Regarding ex -officio members, Director General, Central Council for Re search in 
Siddha submitted that Director General, Central Council for Research in Siddha 
(CCRS) should be included as the ex-officio member for Siddha System of Medicine.   
 
(vii) The State Government of Maharashtra also submitted that Directors of AYUSH, State 
Government, three from any of the States on rotational basis should be included as 
ex-officio members of the Commission.  
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE:  
4.3.9 With respect to suggestion to propose option only for Adviser (Unani) and to make 
Adviser (Ay.) as a Membe r of the Commission, the Ministry of AYUSH submitted that the 
provision in the Bill allows the Joint Secretary to be as Member in absence of Advisers of 
Ayurveda or Unani. It shall be decided by the Central Government while nominating the ex 
officio members. 
4.3.10 With respect to suggestion to include two more officers among the ex -officio members of 
the Commission, the Ministry submitted that the Bill also provides for appointing 04 members 
by the Central Government as part -time members. Therefore, the Central Government may 
consider such institutes while appointing part time members. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.11 The Committee observes that under clause 19, a Board of Ayurveda will be 
constituted consisting of four members from the Ayurveda discip line of Indian System of 
Medicine. The Committee recommends that the South Indian School of thought of 

44 
 
Ayurveda along with other disciplines of Ayurveda should get adequate representation in 
this Board so that regional variations in the system are accommodated and promoted.  
4.3.12 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry while appointing four part time 
members of the Commission should prioritize such Institutes/disciplines/school of thoughts 
which do not have adequate representation in the Commission.   
4.3.13 The Committee also recommends that the Director, National Institute of Unani, 
Bengalaru should be read as National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bengalaru.  
4.3.14 The Committee observes that there is no representation from the Research Councils  
of the different disciplines of Indian System of Medicine. The Committee is disappointed at 
the non -representation from the research field in the Commission given the fact that 
research is fundamental for promotion and progress of the Indian System of Med icine. The 
Committee notes that in the National Homeopathy Bill, 2019, the Director-General, Central 
Council for Research in Homoeopathy, New Delhi is the ex -officio member of the National 
Commission for Homoeopathy  on the lines of National Medical Commis sion Act where the 
Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research is an ex-officio member of the NMC. 
The Committee therefore, on the lines of NMC Act and NCH Bill recommends the 
inclusion of Director Generals of Central Council of Research in differ ent disciplines of 
Indian System of Medicine, viz, Central Council of Research in Ayurveda (CCRA), Central 
Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) and Central Council for Research in Unani 
Medicine (CCRUM) in the National Commission of Indian System of Medicine.  
4.3.15 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that Yoga and Naturopathy 
have not been included in this Bill. The Committee is of the considered view that the age 
old practice of Yoga and Naturopathy which focuses on holistic health is an integral part of 
Indian culture and AYUSH system. The Committee recommends their inclusion in the said 
Bill. It has also recommended that a Board of Yoga and Naturopathy should also be 
constituted under clause 18 in the Bill. The Committee also notes that the Government with 
an aim to popularize the effectiveness of Yoga and Naturopathy established Central 
Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN) for enhancing focused research 
in the field. The Committee, therefore, also recommends that the Director General, Central 
Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN) should also be an ex -officio 
member of the Commission.   
4.3.16 Including Yoga & Naturopathy in the Bill would ensure that their adequate 
representation in the Commission since the National Institutes from the field of Yoga and 
Naturopathy have not been represented in the Commission . The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Director of Morarji Desai National Institu te of Yoga and Director, 
National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune should also be included in the Commission. 
4.3.17 The Committee has also proposed a Board of Research under clause 18 to promote 
multidisciplinary research collaborations among Research Counc ils of all the disciplines of 
Indian System of Medicine. The Presidents of these two proposed Boards, viz Board of 

45 
 
Yoga and Naturopathy and Board of Research will also be the ex -officio members of the 
Commission.  
4.3.18 In view of the above recommendation s , the number of ex -officio members will 
increase from 12 to 20 with an increase of 8 ex-officio Members which are as follows: 
(i) the President of the Board of Yoga and Naturopathy 
(ii) the President of the Board of Research  
(iii) the Director, Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga,  
(iv) the Director, National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune 
(v) Director General, Central Council of Research in Ayurveda (CCRA) 
(vi) Director General, Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS)  
(vii) Director General , Central Council for Research in U nani Medicine 
(CCRUM) 
(viii) Director General, Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy 
(CCRYN) 
4.3.19 Clause 4(4) reads as under: 
The following persons shall be appointed by the Central  Government as part -time 
Members of the Commission, namely:— 
(a) four Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity and 
standing, who have special knowledge and professional experience in any of the 
disciplines of Indian System of Medicine, Sanskrit, management, law, health research, 
science and technology and economics; 
(b) six Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the nominees of the 
States and Union territories in the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine for a 
term of two years in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(c) three Members, to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of Ayurveda, and 
one member each to be elected by the respective registered medical practitioners of 
Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa, of the Indian System of Medicine, from amongst 
themselves, from such regional constituencies, and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that no Member shall either himself or through any of his family members, 
directly or indirectly, own or be associated with or have any dealings with the managing bod y of 
a private or non-government medical institution which is regulated under this Act. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.3.20 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 4(4)(a): 
(i) The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited has submitted that in the clause 
4(4)(a), the term who have ‘special knowledge’ should be replaced by a qualifying 
term very specific to avoid any ambiguity in future.   

46 
 
(ii) National Institute of Unani Medicin e, Bengaluru submitted that in Clause 4(4)(a) 
against 4 members, appointment of 5 th member with sound knowledge of Urdu 
may be considered in the interest of the Bill.  
(iii) Director, National Institute of Siddha submitted that under clause 4(4)(a) four 
members should be selected from each of the discipline of Indian systems of 
medicine i.e. Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Sowa Rigpa to ensure the representation 
from each discipline. The director also suggested that one MD (Siddha) Ph.D who 
has proficiency in Tam il may also be appointed as one of the experts as all the 
original Siddha literatures are available only in Tamil language.  
(iv) Director General, Central Council for Research in Siddha also submitted that 
Tamil language expert along with the disciplines of Indian system of Medicine, 
Sanskrit, Management, Law, Health Research, Science and Technology and 
Economics should be included in clause 4(4)(a). 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.3.21 On query regarding the term "special knowledge", the Ministry submitted that t he part-
time members under Clause 4(4)(a) includes persons from the following fields namely, (a) 
disciplines of Indian System of Medicine, (b)Sanskrit, (c)management, (d)law, (e) health 
research, (f) science and technology and (g) economics. Hence, the spe cial knowledge in any of 
the fields is a requirement to become a part time member. Further, the Commission may 
prescribe the guidelines in this regard to make it clearer. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.22 The Committee is of the view that since Urdu and Tamil are fundamental to Unani 
and Siddha system of Medicine respectively, therefore, these be included under clause 
4(4)(a). The Committee accordingly recommends that clause 4(4)(a) wherein the requisite 
qualifications for appointment as a part time membe r of the Commission are prescribed, 
may be amended as follows:- 
The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as part -time 
Members of the Commission, namely:— 
(a) four Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity and 
standing, who have special knowledge and professional experience in any of the 
disciplines of Indian System of Medicine, Sanskrit, Tamil, Urdu, management, law, 
health research, science and technology and economics; 
4.3.23 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 4(4)(b): 
(i) All India Ayurvedic Congress has submitted that the provision of only 6 members 
on the rotational basis all over India is far inadequate taking into consideration 
that there are around 400,000 practitioners i n the country spread over 37 
States/UTs. Therefore, representation of practitioners should be proportionate to 
the numbers of registered practitioners in the State.   

47 
 
(ii) Director, National Institute of Siddha, Chennai submitted that under clause 
4(4)(b) in th e Bill, there is no mention about individual allotment or earmarking 
of members of  which System of AYUSH should the member belong to, hence in 
order to ensure the presence of representatives from all ASU systems such 
earmarking may be included. 
 
(iii) Dr. P.Md.  Hasan Ahmed, Member, CCIM submitted that each State with a 
minimum of 1000 practitioners in any system shall be given to nominate one 
person from each system. 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.3.24 The proposed Bill intends to select the members of the Commission by  a Search 
Committee unlike the present mode of Elections. The proposed composition of the Commission 
is also well balanced having 29 members, out of which 6 Part -time members are elected 
registered medical practitioners. Out of the remaining 23 members, 13  members represent ISM 
and 6 members represent State/UT Universities. Therefore, there shall be 19 members including 
Chairman from ISM. The provision specifying conditions for removal of members is also an 
important proposal which shall ensure a rationale functioning of the Members and Commission. 
Further, there shall be Autonomous Boards separately for Education, Rating & assessment and 
for Ethics and Registration so as to have proper focus on each aspect. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.25 The Committee believes that representation of six part time members on rotational 
basis from amongst the nominees of the States and Union territories in the Advisory 
Council for a term of two years is highly inadequate. The present structure will not ensure 
effective p articipation of all the States/UTs in the Commission and will leave many 
States/UTs unrepresented for many years. Health being a State subject demands a focused 
approach from not only the Centre but also the States. A collaborative approach between 
the Center and the States is necessary for mainstreaming AYUSH in the overall healthcare 
system. The Committee strongly believes that until and unless the States are made an active 
partner, the desired integration towards the spirit of cooperative -federalism cannot be 
achieved. 
4.3.26 The Committee is also surprised to note that though the NCISM Bill has been 
drafted on the lines of NMC Bill but the Ministry of AYUSH has ignored the 
recommendation of the Committee with respect to the composition of the National Me dical 
Commission in its 109th Report on the NMC Bill. The Committee would also like to 
emphasize the fact that Ministry of Health & Family Welfare had accepted the 
recommendation of the Committee in it 109 th Report and increased the representation of 
the States in the NMC Act from 6 to 10. 

48 
 
4.3.27 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the representation of States and UTs 
must be increased from 6 to 10 for ensuring cooperative federalism between the Centre and 
the States so that the Commission acts as a c ommon interface that works together for 
strengthening of Indian System of medicine in the country. 
4.3.28 The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 4(4)(b) wherein the requisite 
qualifications for appointment as a part time member of the Commission are prescribed, 
may be amended as follows:- 
The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as part -time 
Members of the Commission, namely:— 
(b) ten Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the nominees of the 
States and Union territories in the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine for 
a term of two years in such manner as may be prescribed; 
4.3.29 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 4(4)(c): 
(i) All India Ayurvedic Congress submitted that in clause 4(4)(c) the manner of 
election is not clear how 3 members from Ayurveda will be elected from all over 
India 
(ii) Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, Member CCIM submitted that only three seats are 
fixed for election for registered practitioners from 29 St ates which is shocking and 
hilarious. Instead of 3 members, 1 member should be fixed for each State so that all 
States have their representation. CCIM members from each State can be allowed to 
continue as member till the time election in the Commission is not conducted.  
(iii) Vaidya Jayant Yeshwant Deopujari, President, CCIM has submitted that the proviso 
4(c) to include elected members in the Commission is a welcome move but the 
proportion/number of such members has to be increased at least upto the ratio of 1 
member from among 25,000 practitioners (currently the ratio is 1:1,00,000). 
(iv) Prof. Dr. N. J. Muthukumar, Director, National Institute of Siddha, Chennai  
submitted that under clause 4 (4)(c), four members may be elected from each 
system of Medicine - Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Sowa Rigpa by the Registered 
Medical Practitioners of the respected AYUSH systems to ensure representation 
from all ASU systems of medicine. 
(v) Dr. P.Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member, CCIM submitted that each State with a 
minimum of 1000 practition ers in any system shall be given to elect as part time 
member among the practitioners (one Member) from each system. A provision shall 
be enacted to continue the present elected Members from the category of 
practitioners, who got elected under the provisions of   (3)(1)(a) of IMCC Act,1970. 
(vi) Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) has submitted that India is a democratic 
country and all the statutory bodies are formed by proving sufficient representation 
to the practitioners by way of election. But there is no  representation of elected 
representatives from ISM fraternity in the Commission, Council or Boards. The 
Association has strongly recommended that at least 50% representation should be 
given to members elected from amongst the practitioners in the formatio n of the 

49 
 
Commission, Councils and Boards under this Bill. There has been a clear and 
sufficient representation of elected members in the prevailing CCIM Act which is 
more than 50% 0f the nominated members. 
(vii) Ayurved Vyaspeeth has submitted that the number of  members through election 
should be increased at least 50% may be the ratio.   
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.3.30 The Ministry of AYUSH submitted that all members are nominated by Central 
Government on the recommendation of Search Committee, except for elected pa rt-time 
members. Most of the nominated members are ex-officio members, persons with ability, integrity 
and having professional experience from nominees of States/UTs with experience in the field of 
AYUSH education and practice which shall be highly useful. 
4.3.31 The composition of the NCIM is 29 [ Chairman-1, Ex-officio-12,Part-time-16(6 elected)] 
. Unlike the present mode of elections, the proposed Bill intends to select the members of the 
Commission by a Search Committee. The proposed composition of the C ommission seems to be 
well balanced unlike the present structure of CCIM.  
4.3.32 Clause 4(4)(c) of the proposed Commission provides for  electing six Members from 
amongst the practitioners of Indian systems of medicine. The procedure for election of three  
members from Ayurveda shall be prescribed in rules to be framed by the Commission. 
4.3.33 The Ministry also submitted the proposed composition of the Commission seems to be 
well balanced unlike the present structure of CCIM. The suggestion to increase 50%  of members 
from election does not seem to be appropriate as the existing CCIM has 70% of elected Members 
and its functioning is not satisfactory. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.34 The Committee observes as on 1.1.2018, there were 799879 registered AYUSH 
doctors/ practitioners in India. Out of these registered AYUSH practitioners, 443704 
(55.5%) belong to Ayurveda, 51110 (6.4%) belong to Unani Systems while only 9125 (1.1%) 
and 2425 (0.3%) doctors belong to Siddha and Naturopathy Systems respectively . As per 
the present structure in the NCISM Bill, 3 members will be elected from Ayurveda and one 
each from Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa. This implies that there will be 1 representative 
for 1,47,901 Ayurveda practitioners, 1 representative for 51110 Unani  practitioners and 1 
representative for 9125 Siddha practitioners. The Committee is strongly in favor of 
proportional representation of practitioners in the Commission as their voice is 
instrumental in the successful implementation of the provisions of the  proposed legislation. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends increasing the representation from 3 to 6 members 
who are to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of Ayurveda and one member 
each to be elected by the respective registered medical pr actitioners of Siddha, Unani and 
Sowa-Rigpa. This would ensure sufficient representation to the practitioners in the 

50 
 
Commission by way of election thus keeping intact the democratic structure of the 
Commission. 
4.3.35 The Committee, therefore, recommends t hat clause 4(4)(c) wherein the requisite 
qualifications for appointment as a part time member of the Commission are prescribed, 
may be amended as follows:- 
The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as part -time 
Members of the Commission, namely:— 
(c) six Members, to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of Ayurveda, and 
one member each to be elected by the respective registered medical practitioners of 
Siddha, Unani and Sowa -Rigpa, of the Indian System of Medicine, from  amongst 
themselves, from such regional constituencies, and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed 
4.3.36 In view of the above recommendations of the Committee with respect to clause 4, 
the new composition of the part -time members of National Commission for Indian System 
of Medicine will increase from 16 to 23 with an increase of 7 members as follows: 
(i)  Increase in part time members from six to ten to be appointed on rotational basis 
from amongst the nominees of the States and Union territories in the Advi sory 
Council for Indian System of Medicine and (ii) Increase in part time members from 
three to six to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of Ayurveda. 
4.3.37 Accordingly, the new composition of the National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine will increase from 29 to 44; i.e. (a) a chairperson; (b) 20 ex -officio members; (c) 
23 part-time members. 
4.3.38 With respect to the proviso of the clause 4, the Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) 
Limited submitted that the proviso to the clause is intended to make the Commission unbiased 
but there is a high possibility that the elected members by registered medical practitioner may be 
either directly or indirectly related to the managing body of a private or non -government medical 
institutions which may lead to legal complications. The Association has submitted that it would 
be appropriate that all members submit a declaration of ‘conflict of interest’ after appointment 
and abstain from decisions that may be related to his/her interest areas as benef iciary of the 
decision. The declaration must be published in the website of the Commission. 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.3.39 On a query regarding the proviso to the clause, the Ministry submitted that the proviso 
will ensure that such registered medical practit ioners are not allowed to contest the elections. 
Necessary provisions shall be incorporated in the rules to be prescribed by the Commission for 
the said purpose. 
 
 

51 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.3.40 The Committee agrees wit h the view of the Ministry, this proviso is important so 
that such registered medical practitioners who are either directly or indirectly related to 
the managing body of a private or non -government medical institutions are not elected as 
members of the Commission. This is fundamental in ensuring that instances of conflict of 
interest and corruption are avoided. The Committee strongly recommends that such 
practitioners who are elected to the Commission should have no ties with any medical 
institutions so that they do justice to their newly  found responsibility as members of 
Commission. The Committee  hopes the same is reflected in the rules to be prescribed by 
the Commission.  
4.3.41 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 5 
4.4.1 Clause 5 deals with Search Committee for appointment of Chairperson and 
Members. 
5. (1) The Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson, referred to in section 4 and the 
President of the Autonomous Board referred to in section 20 on the recommendation of a Search 
Committee consisting of — 
(a) the Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson; 
(b) two experts, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not less than twenty -five 
years in any of the fields of Indian System of Medicine, to be nominated by the Central 
Government—Members; 
(c) one expert, from amongst the Members referred in clause (c) of sub -section (4) of section 4, 
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed—Member; 
(d) one person, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of  not less than twenty-five 
years in the field of Sanskrit, health research, management, law, economics or science and 
technology, to be nominated by the Central Government— Member; 
(e) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of A YUSH, to be the 
Convenor—Member: 
Provided that for selection of part -time members of the Commission referred to in clause (a) of 
sub-section (4) of section 4, the Secretary referred to section 8 and other Members of the Boards 
referred to in section 20, th e Search Committee shall consist of members specified in the clause 
(b) to (d) and Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of AYUSH as Convenor-
Member and chaired by Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry of 
AYUSH.  

52 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.4.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the clause 5: 
(i) Dr. P.Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member, CCIM submitted that in clause 5(1)(b) instead of 
two experts, Four experts – one expert from each system (Ayurveda, Unani , Siddha 
&Sowa-Rigpa) may be appointed as members of the Search Committee.  
(ii) Director, National Institute of Unani Medicine submitted that in clause 5(1)(d)  
appointment of one person possessing outstanding qualification in Urdu may also be 
considered.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.4.3 The Committee observes that in Clause 5(1)(c), one expert from amongst the part 
time members referred to in Clause 4(4)(c) will also be a Member of the Search Committee. 
The Committee under Clause 4(4)(c) has recommended to increase the strength of part 
time members from 6 to 9. Since the membership has been increased from 6 to 9, the 
Committee feels that it would be appropriate to have one more representation from the 
part-time members in the Search Committee. The Committee, therefor e, recommends to 
increase the strength of experts under clause 5(1)(c) from 1 to 2.  
 
4.4.5 The Committee also recommends inclusion of Urdu and Tamil under clause 5(1)(d) 
in line with the Committee's recommendation in Clause 4(4)(a). 
 
4.4.6 The Committee recommends that clause 5(1) (c) and clause 5(1)(d) which deals with 
the membership of the Search Committee may be amended as follows:- 
(c) two expert, from amongst the Members referred in clause (c) of sub -section (4) of 
section 4, to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed—Member; 
d) one person, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not less than 
twenty-five years in the field of Sanskrit, Urdu, Tamil, health research, management, 
law, economics or scie nce and technology, to be nominated by the Central 
Government— Member; 
4.4.7 The Committee notes that since the Search Committee plays a critical role in the 
selection of the Chairperson and members of the Commission, a proper and streamlined 
procedure should be evolved where the appointment of the Chairperson and Members be 
done within a stipulated time period by the Central Government so as to avoid unwanted 
litigations against the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
pay due a ttention on the timely appointment of the Chairperson and members of the 
Commission. 
 
4.4.8 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 

53 
 
 
CLAUSE 6 
4.5.1   Clause 6 deals with the Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and 
Members. Clause 6 (1) reads as under: 
The Chairperson and Members (other than ex officio Members) and Members appointed 
under clause (b) of sub- section (4) of section 4 shall hold office for a term not exceeding 
four years and shall not be eligible for any extension or re-appointment: 
Provided that such person shall cease to hold office after attaining the age of seventy 
years 
 Clause 6 (2) reads as under: 
(2) The term of office of an ex officio Member shall continue as long as he holds the 
office by virtue of which he is such Member. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.5.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the clause 6(1) and clause 6(2): 
(i) Shri Vaiday Devendra Triguna, President, All India Ayurvedic Congress  has 
submitted that the Chairman or the Member should be eligible for the extension or 
reappointment. The age limit should be extended to 75 years instead of 70 years 
as proposed in the Bill.  
(ii) Prof. Abdul Wadud, Director, National Institute of Unani Medicine submitted that 
in clause 6(1) considering seco nd term for another four years in case suitable 
member is not available is required by enhancing age limit upto 75 years.  
(iii) Dr. P.Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member, CCIM submitted that in clause 6(2) the term 
of office of an Ex -Officio Member -shall be limited to a maximum of FIVE 
YEARS 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.5.3 The Bill bars the Chairman or Member for extension or re -appointment so as to 
discourage the existing mechanism of long continuation of Chairman/Members of CCIM who 
had continued for long time there by creating nexus with the Institutes resulting in compro mise 
of quality education.  
4.5.4 The upper age limit of 70 years has been proposed keeping in view of the permitted age 
limit in various Government organizations for consultants. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.5.5 The Committee is in agreement with the vi ew of the Ministry and discourages the 
long continuation of Chairman/Members of CCIM. A Commission of such stature should 
continuously evolve and innovate to establish AYUSH as a reliable and alternative system 
of medicine. The Committee is of the opinion that four years tenure is sufficient for the 

54 
 
Chairperson and the members to implement their ideas and bring about a transformation 
in the Indian System of Medicine. The Committee also believes that new leadership will not 
only bring rejuvenated zeal and en thusiasm in the organization but also prevent the 
possible nexus between the Institutes and the Commission.  With regards to the upper age 
limit, the Committee is of the opinion that 70 years upper age limit is suitable for the 
members and the Chairperson.  
4.5.6 Clause 6 (7) reads as under: 
(7) The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not accept, for a 
period of two years from the date of demitting such office, any employment, in any 
capacity, 
including as a consultant or an exper t, in any private Medical institution of Indian 
System of 
Medicine or, whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson or Member, directly 
or 
indirectly: 
Provided that nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing such person 
from accepting an employment in a body or institution including Medical institution of 
Indian System of Medicine, controlled or maintained by the Central Government or a 
State Government. 
 
4.5.7 Clause 6 (8) reads as under: 
(8) Nothing in sub -section (7) shall prevent the Central Government from permitting the 
Chairperson or a Member to accept any employment in any capacity, including as a 
consultant or an expert, in any private Medical institution of Indian System of Medicine, 
whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson or Member. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.5.8 The Committee notes that clause 6(7) forbids the Chairperson and Members 
Commission for accepting any employment in any capacity including as a consultant or 
expert in any private medical education.  However, clause 6(8) of the Bill allows the 
Chairperson and Members to accept the same with the prior permission of the Central 
Government. The Committee is of the view that giving the Central Government this 
discretion will only provide opportunities for corrupt practices as clause 6(8) gives scope to 
bias and favoritism. The Committee, therefore, recommends, the Clause 6(8) empowering 
the Central Government to relax this condition, be deleted. 
 
4.5.9 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
 
 

55 
 
CLAUSE 7 
4.6.1 Clause 7 provides for Removal of Chairperson and Members of Commission. Clause 
7 reads as under: 
 
7. (1) The Central Government may by order, remove from office the Chairperson or 
any other Member, who— 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or a 
Member; or 
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions as a Member; or 
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to 
public interest; or 
(2) No Member shall be removed under clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (1) unless he 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.6.2 The Committee observes that this clause is on similar lines with the clause dealing 
with removal of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission as in NMC Act, 2019. 
These are certainly standard conditions for removal as approved by Ministry of Law & 
Justice. The Committee, however, is of the view that the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 2016 should be kept in mind while removing such persons on physical or mental 
grounds as the Bill should not discriminate persons with disabilities.   
4.6.3 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 9 
4.7.1 Clause 9 provides for Meetings of Commission. Clause 9(6) reads as under: 
(6) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Commission may prefer an appeal 
to the Central Government against such decision within thirty days of the communication 
of such decision. 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
 
4.7.2 On a specific query regarding the proposal of a common Medical Appellate Tribunal, the 
Secretary deposed before the Committee that  the final appellate authority will be the Central 

56 
 
Government after the Commission.  The Secretary, further, submitted that making a separate 
body is very expensive, time taking and judiciary is available if somebody is aggrieved by the 
appellate authority.   So, a separate medical appellate tribunal will not be feasible.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.7.3 The Committee is of the view that giving the appellate jurisdiction to the Central 
Government with respect to the decisions of the Commission does not f it into the 
constitutional provision for separation of powers. The Committee, therefore, on the same 
lines as its recommendations as made in 109 th Report on NMC Bill  strongly recommends 
constitution of a common Medical Appellate Tribunal for Indian Systems  of Medicine 
including Homeopathy which will consist of a Chairperson, who should be a sitting or 
retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of a High Court, and four other 
Members. This tribunal will have an appellate jurisdiction over the deci sions taken by the 
Commission. One of the Members should have special knowledge and experience in 
medical profession/medical education; one should have special knowledge and experience 
in the field of Indian system of medicine and one in homeopathy and fin ally the last 
member with an experience in the field of health administration at the level of Secretary to 
Government of India. Consequent changes for replacing the Central Government with the 
said Tribunal may be reflected in all the subsequent clauses vi z. clause 29(6), clause 
30(4)(b), clause 34(7), clause 35(3) or any other related clause of the Bill. 
 
4.7.4 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 10 
4.8.1 Clause 10 deals with Power and Functions of Commission.  Clause 10 (1) reads as 
under:- 
 The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) lay down policies for maintaining a high quality and high standards in education of 
Indian System of Medicine and make necessary regulations in this behalf; 
(b) lay down policies for regulating medical institutions, medical researches and medical 
professionals and make necessary regulations in this behalf; 
(c) assess the requirements in healthcare, including human resources for health and 
healthcare infrastructure and develop a road map for meeting such requirements; 
(d) frame guidelines and lay down policies by making such regulations as may be 
necessary for the proper functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards and the 
State Medical Councils of Indian System of Medicine; 
(e) ensure coordination among the Autonomous Boards; 
(f) take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure compliance by the State Medical 
Councils of Indian System of Medicine of the guidelines framed and regulations made 
under this Act for their effective functioning under this Act; 
(g) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to decisions of the Autonomous Boards; 

57 
 
(h) ensure observance of professional ethics in Medical profession and to promote ethical 
conduct during the provision of care by medical practitioners; 
(i) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be prescribed. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.8.2 The following are the suggestions of The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited 
on the clause 10:- 
(i) Periodic evaluations on public litigations in ayurvedic domain, provide road map for 
the mitigation of root causes of litigations,and publish document of facts in  public 
interest as related to safe practises of ayurveda - To counter the false and fabricated 
ligations raised against ayurvedic practices to showcase it as an unsafe medical system 
.The statement of facts when provided by the commission would  also be an official 
document. 
(ii) Board of Ayurveda /Board of Unani, Siddha, Sowa -rigpa: In addition to determine the 
standards of education at the undergraduate ,postgraduate  and super specialty levels, 
the standards of education and practise of paramedical courses in Ayurveda like 
nursing ,therapists training  need to be scientifically defined and standardised across 
the country. Similarly in modern medicine, the pharmacy education and practises are 
controlled by the Pharmacy Council . Either the pharmacy domain need to be in the 
Board of Ayurveda or a separate Board for Ayurveda pharmacy need to be created to 
include the branch of pharmacy also . 
(iii) Under Power and Functions, curriculum reformation is to be included. The standards 
that are to be ensured should be for a quality content that is created. The current 
curriculum produces neither fully qualified Ayurveda vaidyas nor ful ly qualified 
Allopathy Doctors. 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
 
4.8.3 On provision for standardization and regulation of education and practice of paramedical 
courses in Ayurveda, the Ministry submitted that at present there is no Central regulation for 
paramedical courses in Ayurveda. However, certain States are conducting paramedical courses in 
Ayurveda and such professionals are utilized in various organizations/ institutes.  
 
4.8.4 In reply to a query regarding regulation of pharmacy domain of Ayurveda, the Minis try 
submitted that the Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy Pharmacy Bill -2005, was proposed to 
constitute a Central Pharmacy Council to regulate the education and practice of Pharmacy in 
Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy. The proposal was then introdu ced in the Rajya 
Sabha on 23rd August 2005. The Bill was referred to the Department -Related Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare and the Committee presented its 18th Report, dated 
28th July, 2006 on the Bill and recommended amendments/ modificat ions. This Bill shall be 
withdrawn and a fresh Bill namely, the Pharmacy Council of Indian Medicine and Homeopathy 
Bill, shall be introduced. The necessary steps are being taken by the Ministry. 

58 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.8.5 The Committee notes that the suggestion of the stakeholder, namely, the periodic 
evaluations on public litigations in Ayurvedic domain; providing road map for the 
mitigation of root causes of litigations should be incorporated as functions of the common 
Medical Appellate Tribunal for AYUSH that has already been recommended under clause 
9. This Medical Appellate Tribunal should carry out periodic evaluations on public 
litigations in the AYUSH domain.  
 
4.8.6 The Committee agrees with the suggestion that documents regarding safe prac tices 
of Indian System of Medicine should also be published. Separate documents regarding safe 
practices of Ayurveda and Unani, Siddha & Sowa -Rigpa should be prepared by the Board 
of Ayurveda and Board of Unani, Siddha & Sowa-Rigpa respectively.  
 
4.8.7 The Committee is also of the view that there is a need for standardization of 
education and practice of Paramedical Courses like nursing, therapists training etc in 
Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
development and regulation of paramedical courses in different disciplines of Indian 
System of Medicine should also be mentioned as one of the function of the National 
Commission of Indian System of Medicine so that these courses are recognized and a 
uniform curri culum can be developed. The Committee also desires that the regulatory 
functions of the Committee may incorporate development activities necessary for 
promotion and proliferation of Indian System of Medicine with greater impetus so that 
objective and mission of task-shifting and Ayushman Bharat are achieved. 
 
4.8.8 For this purpose, the Committee recommends the word " development and " should 
be added after the phrase "lay down policies for" and before the phrase " maintaining a 
high.. ". The clause 10(1)(a) may be amended as follows: 
(a) Lay down policies for development and maintaining a high quality and high 
standards in education of Indian System of Medicine and make necessary regulations 
in this behalf. 
 
4.8.9 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to expedite the introduction of the 
Pharmacy Council of Indian Medicine and Homeopathy Bill so that the education and 
practice of Pharmacy in Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy can be regulated 
with a development approach. The Ministry while drafti ng the Bill should also consult the 
Pharmacy Council of India and take note of the recommendations contained in the 18 th 
Report of the Committee on the Indian Medicine and Homeopathy Pharmacy Bill-2005.  
 
4.8.10 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 

59 
 
CLAUSE 11 
 
4.9.1 Clause 11 deals with Constitution and Composition of Advisory Council for Indian 
System of Medicine. Clause 11 reads as under: 
 
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute an advisory body to 
be known as the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine. 
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and the following members, namely:— 
(a) the Chairperson of the Commission shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Council; 
(b) every Member of the Commission shall be ex officio member of the Council; 
(c) one member, to represent each State, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a University in 
that State, to be nominated by that State Government, and one member to represent each 
Union territory, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a University in that Union territory, to be 
nominated by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India: 
Provided that the State Government or the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of 
India, as the case may be, shall nominate  the Vice-Chancellor of the University in that 
State or Union territory which has the largest number of colleges for Indian System of 
Medicine affiliated to it; 
(d) four members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons 
holding the pos t of Director in the Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian Institutes of 
Management and the Indian Institute of Science. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.9.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the clause 11:- 
(i) Dr. P.Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member, CCIM subm itted that the proposed advisory 
Council is only advisory in nature and it has no role in reviewing the functioning 
of the NCISM. He has strongly suggested that the council should be given the 
right to review the functioning of the NCISM. With respect to c lause 11(2) (c), he 
has submitted that one Member from each system (with a Minimum of 1000 
Registered Practitioners) from each State should be nominated by the State 
Government in the Council. It is to note that in many States AYUSH/ISM 
Systems are under t he Administrative control of Health Universities which deal 
with Allopathic, Homeopathic as well as ISM systems. The Vice -Chancellors of 
the said Universities are from allopathic fraternities or others. Hence State 
Government shall nominate a person with P ost Graduation and a minimum of ten 
years’ experience in teaching or practitioners or research experience. 
(ii) The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited has submitted that Vice 
Chancellors, even of Medical Universities have no Ayurveda background. Hence 
the suggestion is to prefer either Director of Ayurveda Medical Education or the 
Director of ISM from each State. He further submitted that with respect to clause 
11(2)(c), there is ambiguity in representation of State which does not have a 

60 
 
separate AYUSH Un iversity. The Advisory Council lacks representation from a) 
Ayurveda Pharmaceutical Industry b) Ayurveda Services Industry and c) 
Ayurveda Research These are the major stakeholders of the sector and would be 
concern of the skills and quality attained by th e human resources that undergo the 
medical programs.  
(iii) With respect to clause 11(2)(d), the Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited 
submitted that the  representation of apex body in medical research like ICMR 
should also be made mandatory to facilitate th e integrative research. "Political 
appointees” and “elected appointees” should be avoided from the membership of 
the Commission and Councils and Advisory Board. Merit should be made a more 
important criterion. 
(iv) With respect to the composition of the Advisor y Council for Indian System of 
Medicine, Director, National Institute of Siddha, Chennai submitted that in the 
Advisory Council, members from each Research Council of Siddha (CCRS), 
Ayurveda (CCRAS) & Unani (CCRUM) may also be nominated in addition to the 
representatives of IIT, IIM and IIS.  
(v) Dr. Manoj R, Scientific Officer, Traditional Knowledge innovation, Kerala has 
suggested that the Advisory Council should include the Vice Chancellor of 
National University of Legal studies as the fourth member. 
 
MINISTRY' RESPONSE: 
4.9.3 In reply to a suggestion to include Vice chancellor of National University of Legal 
studies as the fourth member of Advisory Council, the Ministry of AYUSH submitted that the 
role of Advisory Council is to advise the Commission in perfo rming its functions related to 
Indian System of Medicine 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.9.4 The Committee first of all notes that the representation from State Medical Councils 
is missing in the Advisory Council as mentioned in clause 4(4)(b) of the Bill i ndicating a 
major lacunae in the drafting of the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
provision for the representation of members (6 which should be increased to 10) from the 
State/UTs from amongst elected members of the State Medical Counci l should be added in 
the clause, on the lines of NMC Act.  
 
4.9.5 The Committee notes that "University" definition in the clause 2 includes a Health 
University. The Committee recommends that under clause 11(2) (c), the Vice -Chancellor 
that is to be nominat ed by the State Government should preferably be from the Indian 
System of Medicine background. The Committee strongly believes that since this Advisory 
Council is mandated to shape the overall agenda and policy related to ISM education, 
training and research, therefore, it should have experts who are adequately experienced in 
the field of Indian System of Medicine. The Committee strongly recommends that in States 

61 
 
where Vice-chancellors with ISM background are not present, experts/professors with wide 
experience in ISM research and education field should be nominated.  
 
4.9.6 The Committee has recommended the inclusion of Director Generals from each 
Research Council of Siddha (CCRS), Ayurveda (CCRAS), Unani (CCRUM) and Yoga and 
Naturopathy (CCRYN) in the Commission. Inclusion of  these R esearch Councils in the 
Commission will be helpful in obtaining technical information from each system of AYUSH 
medicine particularly in policy making and research field. Therefore, the Committee is of 
the view that since the Director Generals will be the ex-officio members of the Commission, 
therefore they are omitted from the Advisory Council. 
 
4.9.7 The Committee also recommends that one member should be nominated from 
various sectors of the Indian System of Medicine Indus try for giving representation to this 
industry for the invaluable connect between academic and industry and help the industry 
to voice their concerns and seek redressal of their grievances.  
 
4.9.8 The Committee also notes that the representation of the Ch airman, University 
Grants Commission and the Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council is 
missing in the NCISM Bill, 2019, as given in NMC Act, 2019. The Committee would like to 
reiterate that the since Bill is based on the lines of NMC Act, therefore, representation of 
the Chairman, University Grants Commission and the Director, National Assessment and 
Accreditation Council should also be there in the Advisory Council in the NCH Bill. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to add s imilar provision for their 
representation in the Advisory Council for Indian Systems of Medicine. 
 
4.9.9 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
 
CLAUSE 12 
 
4.10 Clause 12 deals with Functions of Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine. 
Clause 12(1) reads as under: 
 The Council shall be the primary platform through which the States and Union 
territories may put forth their views and concerns before the Commission and help in 
shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education, training and 
research. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.10.1 Dr. P.R. Krishnakumar, Managing Director, the Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) 
Limited has suggested that Syllabus optimisation be included as one of the main functions of the 
Council. 
 

62 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.10.2 The Committee recommends inclusion of Syllabus optimization as one of the main 
functions of the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine to have desired level of 
standard and uniformity in the ISM curriculum. Since  medical education, research and 
development, training are interrelated, the word "development" may also be added with 
the word research in the last word of the clause 12(1) and clause 12(2).  Accordingly, the 
clause 12(1) and 12 (2) may be amended as follows: 
 
"12. (1) The Council shall be the primary platform through which the States and 
Union territories may put forth their views and concerns before the Commission and 
help in shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education, 
training, research and development. 
(2) The Council shall advise the Commission on measures to determine and maintain, 
and to coordinate maintenance of, the minimum standards in all matters relating to 
medical education, training, research and development." 
 
4.10.3 Subject to the above recommendation, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 14 
 
4.11.1 Clause 14 deals with National Eligibility-Cum-Entrance Test  
4.11.2 Clause 14 (1) reads as under: 
There shall be a uniform National Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test for admission to the 
undergraduate courses in each of the disciplines of the Indian System of Medicine in all 
medical institutions governed under this Act: 
Provided that National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test shall be exempted for students 
who have taken admission in–– 
(i) Pre-tib for Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery; and 
(ii) Pre-Ayurveda for Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.11.3 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on clause 14: 
(i) The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited has submitted that the body regulating 
this course and structure is not clear whether it will be regulated by State Councils of 
Education or National Commission for Indian system of Medicine. Further, the 
Association has submitted that the s election based on the score obtained in the objective 
type exam containing multiple choice questions on subjects of modern science, rather 
than those needed as fundamental to become Ayurveda doctors is a flawed mechanism. 

63 
 
Hence, it has suggested that the exam should be combined with suitable aptitude tests and 
appropriate objective instruments for same need to be developed.   
 
(ii) Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, Member CCIM submitted that the provision for courses of 
Pri-Tibb and Pre - Ayurveda should be deleted. He further submitted that the percentage 
of seats reserved for State and Central Government should be specified in the Bill to 
prevent unnecessary legal complications.  
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.11.4 The Ministry submitted that the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine 
will provide for conducting a common National Eligibility -Cum-Entrance Test and common 
counseling by the designated authority (Central and State) for admission to all the med ical 
institutions so as to ensure quality and transparency in admissions.  
4.11.5 In response to the query regarding Pri -Tibb and Pre - Ayurveda course, the Ministry 
submitted that the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test has been proposed for exemption f or 
students taking admission in Pre-Tib for BUMS course. The provision is already available in the 
existing regulations of CCIM. Further, the Ministry submitted that this course is at present 
conducted in certain specific institutes in which the students a re being acquainted with basic 
knowledge of Unani from the senior secondary level. Similar course for Pre -Ayurveda may be 
started by the Commission. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.11.6 The Committee is of the view that the Bill provides for National Eligibility -Cum-
Entrance Test for admission in ISM colleges which is a step in the right direction in 
improving the quality of students that enroll in ISM colleges.  The Committee, however, 
believes that the Commission should also regulate admission to Pre -Tib and Pre- Ayurveda 
courses and assess the quality and enhance the standard of such courses. The one duration 
Pre-Tib or Pre -Ayurveda courses should not be promoted as an easy alternative to 
admission in ISM courses and students passing such courses should also be evaluated on 
some parameters. The Committee believes that to maintain the standard and quality of 
students pursuing ISM courses, regulation of these Pre -Tib and Pre -Ayurveda courses is 
also essential. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should eventually phase out 
such programs in three to five year so that the quality and competency of ISM 
professionals is maintained. It also recommends that till the time such Pre -Tib or Pr e-
Ayurveda Courses are being offered, a certain percentage i.e not more than 5% of total 
seats should be reserved for such courses. The Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry should introduce specific induction programs for newly enrolled ISM students  
who clear NEET exam and join ISM courses.  
 
4.11.7 The Committee is also of the view that the Bill must contain express provision 
regarding the definite percentage of seats with respect to common counselling process and 

64 
 
the State counselling process to avoid any confusion. The Committee, also recommends that 
the designated authority of the Central Government, as proposed in the Bill shall conduct 
the common counselling for All India seats and the designated authority of the State 
Government shall conduct the common counselling for the seats at the State Level.  
 
4.11.8 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 15 
4.12.1 Clause 15 deals with National Exit Test. Clause 15 (1) reads as under: 
 
A common final year undergraduate medica l examination, to be known as the National 
Exit Test, shall be held for granting licence to practice as medical practitioner of 
respective disciplines of Indian System of Medicine and for enrolment in the State 
Register or National Register, as the case may be. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.12.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 15(1):- 
i. The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited submitted that the National Exit 
Test need not commence 3 years from the date of commissioning, but only for those 
who “entered” reaches that mark after the Bill comes alive. This test should be skill 
oriented than knowledge oriented and thus be different from the other exams, 
especially that of the final year. Further, it also submitted that this should be 
something like practical exam of United States Medical Licensing Examination 
(USMLE) Step 2 - Clinical Knowledge.  
 
ii. INTEGRATED MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (AYUS) does not agree with proposed 
National Exit Test for granting license to practice and enrolment in the State Register. 
The Association submitted that this will only devaluate the prevailing examination 
system. 
 
iii. Dr. P.Md. Hasan Ahmed is also of the view that National Exit Test is still not 
necessary for Indian System of Medicine. This should be withdrawn and the clause 
may be deleted.  The National Exit Test shall be limited to those who pursued ISM 
Graduation in countries outside India. 
  
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.12.3 In response to the provision of EXIT Test in NCIM Bill, the Ministry submitted that the 
common final year UG exam known as National Exit Exam has been proposed to assess the 
quality of students before their registration. The National Exit Test shall be ope rational within 

65 
 
three years from the date on which the Act comes into force. The NCIM will take a call on the 
format and design of the Exit test and frame regulations after appropriate consultation. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.12.4 The Committee is of t he view that conducting a common final year undergraduate 
examination known as National Exit Test for graduates of ISM is an effective way to 
reform Indian system of medicine education. The NEXT exam will not only serve as an 
instrument of quality assuranc e but also standardize the quality and competency  of 
medical practitioners of different disciplines of Indian System of medicine. The Committee 
welcomes this uniform nationwide assessment system and recommends the Ministry to 
devise its exam pattern in  a manner that encourages concept based skill learning practices 
rather than rote learning. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to study the 
format of medical licensing exams of other countries and give due weightage to clinical & 
practical application of ISM knowledge in the NEXT exam. The Committee is of the view 
that this common final year exam that will also serve as the licensing exam must lay 
emphasis on not only the cognitive domain but also the assessment of skills by having 
practical problems/c ase study types of questions as a major component, with a strong 
propensity towards primary healthcare requirements. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to conduct the test in a transparent manner so that the Test can act as the 
final step in produc ing competent and accountable practitioners. The Ministry can also 
take into account the practice of conducting licensing exams in different stages like other 
countries. 
 
4.12.5 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 16 
4.13.1 Clause 16 deals with Post graduation National Entrance Test.  
4.13.2 Clause 16 reads as under: 
 
16. (1) A uniform Post -Graduate National Entrance Test shall be conducted separately 
for admission to postgraduate courses in each discipline of the Indian System of 
Medicine in all medical institutions governed under this Act. 
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Entrance Test for admission to 
postgraduate courses in English and in such other languages, through such designated 
authority and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations. 
(3) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common 
counselling by the designated authority for admission to the postgraduate seats in all 
medical institutions governed under this Act. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.13.3 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 16: 

66 
 
(i) Dr. P. Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member, CCIM submitted that PG entrance Test should be 
made separate. Hence there is absolutely No need of EXIT TEST. 
 
(ii) Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, member, CCIM has suggested that Section 16 should be 
deleted and admission in Post graduate degree courses should be based on National Exit 
Test in accordance with the NMC Act. 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.13.4 The Ministry submitted that as per NCISM Bill, separate post graduate entrance test has 
been proposed for PG admissions apart from the National Exit Test. The Ministry would like to 
adopt the similar provision of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 by making the 
National Exit Test as entrance test for admission to Post graduate courses. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.13.5 In the light of the suggestion of the stakeholders, where the National Exit Test has 
been proposed to serve as an instrument for post -graduate entrance, the Committee 
believes that combining the PG entrance and Licentiate examination will have its own 
repercussions. If the format of the Exam is based on the age old concept of theoretical 
knowledge, then, there will be a general tendency among the students to concentrate only  
on performing well in the entrance examination rather than enhancing their practical 
clinical knowledge. The Committee strongly believes that expert advice and study is needed 
for formulating the structure of such a uniform integrated exam. The Committee,  
therefore, recommends that the PG NEET for admission to PG courses may continue as of 
now and it may serve as an interim management until a mechanism is evolved within three 
to five years for conducting a common final year examination/Exit Test/PG NEET. T he 
Committee recommends the Ministry of AYUSH to contemplate on the idea and work on 
the adequate structure of the exam.  
 
4.13.6 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 17 
4.14.1 Clause 17 deals with National Teachers Eligibili ty Test for Indian System of 
Medicine. Clause 17(1) reads as under: 
 
A National Teachers’ Eligibility Test shall be conducted separately for the postgraduates 
of each discipline of Indian System of Medicine who desire to take up teaching profession 
in that discipline. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.14.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 17: 

67 
 
i. The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Limited  has suggested that adequate training 
opportunities should be provided for those who desire teaching career before insisting on 
National Teachers' Eligibility Test. 
 
ii. National Institute of Unani Medicine is of the view that the National Teachers Eligibility 
Test should be conducted at entry level only. It Is not clear in the Bill that the same will 
be applicable of higher post also.  
 
iii. The State Government of Maharashtra submitted that the teachers of Government 
Ayurveda and Unani Colleges should be exempted from appearing for the National 
Teacher's Eligibility Test.  
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE 
4.14.3 It has been suggested to provide adequate training opportunities for those who desire 
teaching career before insisting on National Teachers' Eligibility Test. The test shall come into 
force within three years from the date of enforcement of the Act. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.14.4 The Committee appreciates the idea of National Teachers Eligibility Test as it is the 
best way to tap qualified persons into the teaching profession.  The Committee is aware of 
the fact that one of the major challenges i n promotion of ISM education is poor 
infrastructure and inadequate faculty. Such a merit based examination will certainly 
improve the education being imparted to students studying Indian System of Medicine as 
well as improve the quality of health care services.  
 
4.14.5 The Committee, therefore, is in full agreement with the concept of an eligibility test 
so that qualified and competent persons enter the domain of teaching which is highly 
needed to improve the quality of education imparted to the students o f ISM. However, the 
Committee also takes cognizance of the difficulty which will be faced by students wanting 
to appear for a new exam. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that before the 
commencement of National Teachers' eligibility Test, adequate tra ining and teaching 
programs should be provided to postgraduates of each discipline of Indian System of 
Medicine. 
 
4.14.6 The Committee is also of the considered view that pay parity, pay structure, 
gratuity and pension plans are important motivational fact ors for ISM medical/teaching 
professionals across the country. Improving the motivation and incentives of teachers will 
certainly improve the overall quality of the education system. This will result in 
augmenting a sense of equality among the ISM professi ons and will, further, encourage 
more and more people to take up ISM as a career. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Ministry to take these issues of pay parity, pay structure, gratuity, pension plans and 

68 
 
other related incentives for AYUSH doctors wi th the State Governments so that ISM 
professionals get similar incentives as that of a MBBS doctor.  
 
4.14.7 The Committee, further, observes that section 17 provides that nothing contained in 
this section shall apply to the teachers appointed prior to the  date notified under sub 
section (3).  The Committee notes that there are many teachers in the system who do not 
hold a post-graduate degree and are part of the education system. They are likely to remain 
in the system for quite a long period of time. For such teaching professionals, it would not 
be easy to clear the National Teachers' Eligibility Test . Therefore, there must be a 
provision for a training or refreshers course for them followed by Minimum Qualifying 
Test (MQT) so that their knowledge base is widened as well as updated and they are better 
equipped to teach efficiently. 
 
4.14.8 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 18 
4.15.1 Clause 18 deals with Constitution of Autonomous Boards. Clause 18 reads as under: 
The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute the following 
Autonomous Boards, under the overall supervision of the Commission, to perform the 
functions assigned to such Boards under this Act, namely:— 
(a) the Board of Ayurveda; 
(b) the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa; 
(c) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine; 
and 
(d) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine. 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.15.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 18: 
(i) Dr. P. MD. Hasan Ahmed has submitted that there should be a separate Board for 
Unani system. The Board for Unani shall be made a separate entity and Sowa -Rigpa 
and Siddha shall be made a Joint Board. 
 
(ii) National Institute of Siddha, Chennai has su bmitted that since Siddha system has its 
own uniqueness in various therapeutic approaches like Varmam, 32 external therapies 
and preventive medicine, a separate board for Siddha should be constituted to 
represent Siddha system of medicine. 
 
(iii) Indian Naturopa thy and Yoga Graduates Medical Association (INYGMA) is of the 
view that it is unfair to the system of “Yoga & Naturopathy’ to deny it a Statutory 

69 
 
Regulation and has requested the inclusion of "Yoga and Naturopathy" medical 
education and clinical practice w ithin the NCISM Bill as proposed by NITI AYOG. 
The absence of a central regulation with statutory cover would allow the mushrooming 
of a number of quack practitioners with the growing demand for ‘Yoga & 
Naturopathy’ clinical practice, putting public at -large to the risk of malpractice and 
bad health. 
 
(iv) Dr. Manoj.R, Scientific Officer, Traditional Knowledge Innovation, Kerala  submitted 
that ‘Yoga and Naturopathy’ is not included in the Indian Systems of Medicine. There 
should be government control over the pr actice of Yoga therapy and Naturopathy as 
there are recognized BNYS and different Yoga courses in the country.   
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.15.3 On exclusion of Yoga and Naturopathy from the NCISM Bill, the Ministry submitted that 
unlike other AYUSH systems, Yoga and Naturopathy is a drugless system. The rights and 
responsibilities of ISM&H doctors are different from Yoga and Naturopathy practitioners. The 
Philosophy is also different from ASU&H systems. Hence, Yoga and Naturopathy was excluded 
from the Indian System of Medicine Bill.  
4.15.4 The Ministry further submitted that it has been decided to withhold the proposal for 
having separate Bill for Yoga and Naturopathy for time being and to empower the existing 
mechanism of National Board for Promotion and De velopment of Yoga and Naturopathy under 
Ministry of AYUSH to strengthen the aspects of regulating education and practice of Yoga and 
Naturopathy. 
4.15.5 On the proposal for constitution of a Board of Research, Ministry of AYUSH submitted 
that there is a pr ovision under Section 26(1) to facilitate Research Programmes. Research is also 
part of training but this Bill is primarily to regulate education, and not research.  For research, 
there is a separate mechanism in the Ministry.  Research Councils for differ ent disciplines of 
Indian System of Medicine are in place. There will be dual regulation or dual mechanism to look 
at research aspect, which will not be helpful. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.15.6 The Committee is not at all convinced by the reasons given by the Ministry to 
exclude Yoga and Naturopathy from the purview of the Bill.  The Committee wonders 
about the role and achievement of the National Board for Promotion and Development of 
Yoga and N aturopathy under the Ministry of AYUSH.  The Committee is also quite 
disappointed to know that a separate Bill for Yoga and Naturopathy has been withheld for 
no apparent reason.     
4.15.7 The Committee notes that presently there is no central regulatory b ody for 
registration of Yoga and Naturopathy practitioners and standardisation & recognition of 

70 
 
different courses of Yoga and Naturopathy. Absence of a central regulatory body, at a time 
when Yoga is being considered as a panacea for a meaningful life and living, may result in 
proliferation of poor standard institutes and unchecked practices by unqualified 
practitioners. There has been a global surge in the popularity of Yoga and Naturopathy 
that has resulted in worldwide growth of teaching schools. India b eing the land of origin of 
these practices has to responsibly contribute in its evolution.  
4.15.8 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the drugless system of Yoga 
and Naturopathy should be regulated under a separate Board of Yoga and Naturop athy 
under clause 18 of the Bill under consideration. The Board of Yoga and Naturopathy shall 
consist of a President and two members from Yoga and two members from Naturopathy 
field. 
4.15.9 Board of Yoga and Naturopathy for ISM shall perform the following functions:- 
(a) responsible for standardising the standards of education of Yoga and 
Naturopathy courses; (b) developing a competency based dynamic curriculum; 
(c) framing guidelines on setting up of medical institutions for imparting 
undergraduate, postgr aduate and super -speciality courses in Yoga and 
Naturopathy; (d) determining standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and 
quality of education and research ; (e) facilitating development and training of 
faculty members; (f) granting recognition to m edical qualifications at all levels etc; 
and (g) any other relevant and incidental functions to propagate and promote Yoga 
and Naturopathy within the country or outside under the overall supervision of the 
Commission. 
4.15.10 The Committee is also of the c onsidered view that introduction of a new Bill 
and constitution of a C ommission for regulating Yoga and Naturopathy will have its own 
financial implications. The Committee also notes that the number of registered 
Naturopathy practitioners as on 1.1.2018 as  per Ministry of AYUSH'S Report "Ayush in 
India" is 2485. The said Report makes no mention of Yoga Practitioners. The Committee 
therefore is of the view that bringing a new Bill for regulating Yoga and Naturopathy 
where practitioners are yet to be identifi ed, is absurd. The Committee is of the considered 
view that Yoga and Naturopathy should be included in the NCISM Bill instead of a new 
Bill.  
4.15.11 The Committee notes that along with mainstreaming of AYUSH services in 
the country, there has been a globa l keen interest in the Indian Traditional systems of 
medicine. The Committee, therefore believes that multidisciplinary research collaborations 
among Research Councils of all the disciplines of Indian System of Medicine is not only 
fundamental for progress  of ISM as a healthcare delivery system but also essential for 
global validation. There is a strong need to strengthen R&D in all disciplines of ISM and 
encourage independent as well as private research in the field. The Committee also 
recognizes the importance of laying down guidelines and parameters to be considered with 
respect to clinical methodologies, drug standardization etc. in the Indian System of 
Medicine. 

71 
 
4.15.12 The Committee also observes that to enhance the acceptability of Indian 
System of Medicine within the country and abroad, the quality control and standardization 
is of prime importance. The Committee also notes that quality control and standardization 
of ISM drugs which are mainly herbal/herbo -mineral preparations, is very complex and 
different from synthetic molecules of the allopathic system which are produced under 
controlled laboratory conditions.  
4.15.13 The Committee also emphasizes that scientific studies on the efficacy of 
formulations of Indian System of Medicine is essential to translate them into AYUSH drugs 
and improve its application in clinical practice. The Committee also believes that there is a 
urgent need to support AYUSH research programmes and foster collaborative and inter -
disciplinary AYUSH research. The Committee the refore, is of the considered view that 
scientific validation of Indian System of Medicine's fundamental and therapeutic principles 
is essential to strengthen its position as a global health care system. 
4.15.14 In the view of the above observations, the Co mmittee strongly proposes 
constitution of a Board of Research which would facilitate research programmes in Indian 
System of Medicine, Yoga & Naturopathy and enrich its scientific base. The Board of 
Research will consist of a President and one member from research field of each discipline 
of the Indian System of Medicine including Yoga & Naturopathy and one member from 
research councils of each discipline of Indian System of Medicine and Yoga & 
Naturopathy.  
4.15.15 The Presidents of these two proposed Boar ds shall be the ex -officio members 
of the Commission under clause 4(3).  
4.15.16 The Committee is not convinced by the response of the Ministry of AYUSH 
and believes this Bill should not focus only on education as research is an intrinsic part of 
academics. The Committee is of the view that rather than treating education and Research 
as two water -tight compartments, the Ministry should devise a single mechanism to 
promote research orientation among the undergraduate and postgraduate students 
pursuing ISM ed ucation. The Committee, however, believes that research in Indian 
Systems of Medicine is of immense importance and should be promoted with adequate 
resources. The Committee also emphasizes that the proposed Board of Research will have 
representation from Research Councils of each discipline of Indian System of Medicine and 
Yoga & Naturopathy. This Board will not only facilitate multidisciplinary research 
collaborations but also bridge the existing gap between academics and research. The 
Committee, therefore , strongly reiterates that the Ministry should constitute an 
autonomous Board of Research under Clause 18. 
4.15.17 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 19 
4.16.1 Clause 19 deals with the Composition of Autonomous Boards. Cla use 19 reads as 
under: 

72 
 
(1) The composition of the Autonomous Boards shall be as under, namely:–– 
(a) the Board of Ayurveda shall consist of a President and four Members from the 
Ayurveda discipline of Indian System of Medicine; 
(b) the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa shall consist of a President and two 
Members from each of the Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa disciplines of Indian System of 
Medicine; 
(c) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall consist 
of a President and eight Members: 
Provided that the President and six out of eight Members shall be chosen from the 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Sowa -Rigpa and Unani disciplines of Indian System of Medicine in 
such manner that at least one Member represent seach such discipline s eparately, and 
the remaining two Members shall be chosen from any of the disciplines of management, 
quality assurance, law or science and technology; 
(d) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine shall consist of a 
President and eight Members: 
Provided that the President and six out of eight Members shall be chosen from the 
Ayurveda, Siddha, Sowa -Rigpa and Unani disciplines of Indian System of Medicine in 
such manner that at least one Member represents each such discipline separat ely, and 
the remaining two Members shall be chosen from any of the disciplines of quality 
assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.16.2 The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 19: 
(i) The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy ( Coimbatore) Limited submitted that t he composition of 
Board of Ayurveda does not ensure representation of various schools and 
specialisations, this has to be revisited. The representation from Ayurveda domain 
should be larger in number considering the stat us and volume of its presence.  In the 
Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine, more representation 
from various disciplines par to the regulation laid by CDSCO is required to include 
basic medical scientists, legal experts, social scientists, philosopher, ethicist, lay 
person from community etc. 
 
(ii) Director, National Institute of Unani Medicine submitted that under clause 19(1)(b) a 
separate board of Unani under this clause should be considered to popularize the 
Unani System of Medicine 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE 
 
4.16.3 The composition of the NCIM is 29 [Chairman -1, Ex-officio-12,Part-time-16(6 elected)] 
Since the enactment of IMCC Act, 1970,  Indian Systems of Medicine namely, Ayurevda, Unain, 
Siddha and Sowa -rigpa are governed under the I MCC Act, 1970. Accordingly, it has been 

73 
 
proposed under one Commission. The Ministry, further,  submitted that separate Boards for 
Siddha, Unani & Sowarigpa have not been proposed, as the number of colleges for these systems 
are less when compared with Ayurveda, (Ayurveda-400, Unani-55, Siddha-11). 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.16.4  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should devise such an 
selection criteria for constituting an Autonomous Board of Ayurveda  so that the South 
Indian School of thought of Ayurveda along with other disciplines of Ayurveda get 
adequate representation in this Board so that regional variations in the system are 
accommodated and promoted.  With regards to the composition of the Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Indian Syst em of Medicine, the Committee is of the view that 
representation from any of the disciplines of quality assurance, public health, law or 
patient advocacy is sufficient.  The Committee also opines that rather than separate Boards 
for Unani and Siddha, a sin gle Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa should be 
constituted. Each system should get adequate representation to review concerns of that 
specific system in order to profess, proliferate and popularize the system in the interest of 
Public Health Care. The  composition of Board of Yoga and Naturopathy should also be 
added under the clause. 
4.16.5 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 28 
4.17.1 Clause 28 deals with Powers and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating Board 
for Indian System of Medicine. Clause 28 reads as under: 
28. (1) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall 
perform the following functions, namely:–– 
(a) determine the procedure for assessment and rating of medical institutions on the basis 
of their compliance with the standards laid down by the Board of Ayurveda or, as the 
case may be, the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa, in accordance with 
the regulations made under this Act; 
(b) grant permission for establishment of a new medical institution in accordance with 
the provisions of section 29; 
(c) carry out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such institutions 
in accordance with the regulations made under this Act: 
Provided that the Medical Assessme nt and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine 
may, if it deems necessary, hire and authorise any other third party agency or persons for 
carrying out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such institutions: 
Provided further that where inspection of medical institutions is carried out by such third 
party agency or persons authorised by the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for 
Indian System of Medicine, it shall be obligatory on such institutions to provide access to 
such agency or person; 

74 
 
(d) conduct, or where it deems necessary, empanel independent rating agencies to 
conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions, within such period of their opening, 
and every year thereafter, at such time, and in such manner, as may be speci fied by 
regulations; 
(e) make available on its website or in public domain, the assessment and ratings of 
medical institutions at regular intervals, in accordance with the regulations made under 
this Act; 
(f) take such measures, including issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, 
reducing intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the Commission for 
withdrawal of recognition, against a medical institution for its failure to maintain the 
minimum essential standards specified by the Board of Ayurveda or, as the case may be, 
the Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa, in accordance with the regulations made 
under this Act. 
(2) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine may, in the 
discharge of its functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, 
the Commission, as it deems necessary. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.17.2  The Committee would like to point out that one of the targeted mission of the 
proposed legislation is to have an objective periodic and transparent assessment of Medical 
institutions. In this regard, ratings has been set up to facilitate the institutions to assess 
their performance vis -a-vis set parameters through introspection that helps the institution 
to know its strengths,  weaknesses, and opportunities through an informed review process 
ratings also helps in identification of internal areas of planning and resource allocation and 
inculcate new sense of direction and identity for institutions. It, thus, plays a pivotal role in 
the development of the institutions.  
 
4.17.3  The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the quantitative and 
qualitative parameters for hiring and empanelling third party agency should be made more 
explicit in the Bill to avoid any confu sion or conflict in the future.  The Committee also 
believes that the methodology for conducting inspection by the third party agency must be 
made clear so that these agencies follow common guidelines and do not engage in corrupt 
practices. The Committee also recommends that necessary safeguards and precaution may 
be specified to ensure that these rating agencies do not give any unwanted leverage to any 
institute that may improve their rating. 
 
4.17.4  Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
 
 

75 
 
CLAUSE 33 
4.18.1  Clause 33 provides for Rights of persons to practice.  
4.18.2  Clause 33(3) (b) reads as under: 
Nothing contained in this section shall affect–– 
(b) the privileges, including the right to practice any system of medicine, conferred 
by or under any law for the time being in force in a State on the practitioners of 
Indian System of Medicine enrolled in the State register of that State; 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.18.3  The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 33(3)(b): 
(i) Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma submitted that this clause should be deleted as it will 
open the door to quack in AYUSH System. 
(ii) Maharashtra Council of Indian Medicine, Mumbai has submitted that the right to 
practice modern system of medicine should be included in the clause 33(3)(b).  
(iii) Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) has also demanded not to make any change in 
Section 33(3)(b) of the NCISM Bill which empowers a State Government to enact 
legislation to provide statutory rights to practitioners of ISM  to use modern medicine 
along with their own systems of medicine.  
(iv) NIMA has also made the following suggestion with respect to clause 33(3) (b) :  
Nothing contained in this section shall affect–– 
(b) the privileges, including the right to practice any syst em of medicine 
(Indian System of Medicine along with Modern System of Medicine), 
conferred by or under any law relating to registration of practitioners of 
Indian Medicine for the time being in force in any State on a practitioner of 
Indian Medicine enrolled on a State register of Indian Medicine; 
 
(v) The State Government of Maharashtra also submitted that the privileges should also 
include the right to practice any system of medicine (Indian System of Medicine along with 
Modern System of Medicine)  
 
MINISTRY' RESPONSE: 
4.18.4  The Ministry submitted that the proposed NCIM Bill, 2019 is to regulate 
education and practice of Indian System of Medicine only. 
 
 
 

76 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.18.5  The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation a s given for 
Clause 2(h) which emphasizes its recommendations given in 109 th Report on the NMC Bill, 
2017. 
 
4.18.6  The clause is adopted without changes. 
CLAUSE 51 
4.19.1  Clause 51 deals with the Joint Sittings of Commission, National Commission 
for Homoeopathy and National Medical Commission. Clause 51(1) reads as under: 
There shall be a joint sitting of the Commission, the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy, and the National Medical Commission, at least once a year, at such time 
and place as they m utually appoint, to enhance the interface between Indian System of 
Medicine, Homoeopathy, Yoga and Naturopathy and modern system of medicine. 
 
SUGGESTION: 
4.19.2  Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) has sub mitted that though under Sec 
51(1) it has been p roposed to hold joint meetings and to enhance the interface between 
Homoeopathy, Indian Systems of Medicines and modern systems of medicines but no details 
have been given thereof. The concept needs to be elaborated clearly giving details of the concept.  
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.19.3  The Ministry submitted that t here shall be a joint sitting of the Commission, the 
National Commission for Homoeopathy and the National Medical Commission, at least once a 
year, at such time and place as they mutually appoint, t o enhance the interface between Indian 
System of Medicine, Homoeopathy and modern system of medicine. Agenda for the joint sitting 
may be placed with mutual agreement by the Chairpersons of the Commissions concerned. 
4.19.4 The Ministry further submitted t hat after the consent, specific educational and medical 
modules or programs in the under-graduate and post-graduate courses across medical systems, to 
promote medical pluralism shall be introduced. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.19.5  The Committee is of the view that this effort towards creating a rational and 
sustainable interface between the various systems between Indian System of Medicine 
(ISM), Homoeopathy and Modern Medicine is a laudable objective. The Committee has 
highlighted the need for such a positive interface often in its previous reports. Joint sittings 
of the Commissions can provide a platform for building on this idea and reduce the 
incidence of diseases and to keep the public health in good stead in the country. The 
Committee also recommends that there should be express provision in the Bill with respect 

77 
 
to the procedure for selecting the Chairperson for the joint sitting, preferably on rotation 
basis so that all the Chairpersons of the three Commissions get an opportun ity to chair the 
joint sittings. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to prepare 
specific guidelines, statement of procedure and agenda for these joint sittings. 
4.19.6  The Committee also desires that the opportunity of the joint sit tings can also 
be utilized as a platform for self performance appraisal of the Commission and explore the 
scope for further improvement in functioning of the Commission for better furtherance of 
public health care. 
4.19.7  Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
CLAUSE 52 
4.20.1  Clause 52 deals with State Government to promote primary healthcare in 
rural areas. Clause 52 reads as under: 
Every State Government may, for the purposes of addressing or promoting healthcare in 
rural area, take necessary measures to enhance the capacity of the healthcare 
professionals. 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.20.2  The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on Clause 52: 
(i) Ayurved Vyaspeeth has suggested that the words primary healthcare can be substituted 
by healthcare and the rural area can be substituted by rural and urban area, so that the 
State Government can take necessary measures to enhance the capacity of the 
healthcare professionals across the State and across the entire spectrum of healthcare 
and not limited only to primary healthcare.  
(ii) Maharashtra Council of Indian Medicine has submitted that "promoting healthcare in 
rural areas" should be replaced by "promoting public health".  
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE 
4.20.3  The section 52 allows the State Governments to take necessary measures to 
enhance the capacity of healthcare professionals for the purposes of addressing or promoting 
healthcare in rural areas. The necessary measures shall be taken by the concerned State 
Governments as per their requirement. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.20.4  The Committee is of the view that presently the health infrastructure of the 
country especially the public health services delivery system in the  rural, tribal and urban 
slum areas of the country   are highly inadeq uate. People from rural areas have to travel 
miles for availing primary health care to get the first line of treatment. Such an 
environment  that lacks   basic health care needs a focused approach and mandating the 

78 
 
States to take necessary measures to enhance the health professionals in the rural areas is a 
step in the right direction. Such a state of affairs is also quite common in slums in urban 
areas. The Committee, therefore, also feels that the services of AYUSH doctors should not 
be just limited only to rural areas but be promoted and encouraged at pan India level.  
 
4.20.5  The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 52 may be amended as 
follows:  
Every State Government may, for the purposes of addressing or promoting 
public health care especially  in rural, tribal and urban slum areas, take necessary 
measures to enhance the capacity of the healthcare professionals. 
 
4.20.6  Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
CLAUSE 57 
 
4.21.1  Clause 57 deals with Repeal and saving. Clause 57 (3) reads as: 
On the dissolution of the Central Council of Indian Medicine, the person appointed as the 
Chairman of that Council and every other person appointed as the Member and any 
officer and other employees of the Council and holding office as such immediately before 
such dissolution shall vacate their respective offices and such Chairman and other 
Members shall be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three months’ pay and 
allowances for the premature termination of term of their offi ce or of any contract of 
service 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.21.2  The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the Clause 57: 
(i) Dr. P. MD. Hasan Ahmed is of the view that the premature termination of tenure is 
objectionable. The existing members of the CCIM  and officers, employees of 
CCIM should be continued till the expiry of their membership and officers should 
be continued till they reach the age of superannuation.  
(ii) The employees of CCIM submitted that th e above stated provision of NCISM Bill 
2019 is against the interest of employees (Regular & Contractual), who have been 
working in CCIM since a long time . Further, the employees submitted that a  new 
provision should be included in the NCISM Bill to retain or to shift the existing 
Regular & Contractual empl oyees of the CCIM in other departments of the 
Government.  
(iii) Vaidya Jayant Yeshwant Deopujari, President, CCIM submitted that Section 57(3) 
has to be removed / amended in such a way to retain the employees or to shift them 
to other Departments of the Government in view of the following reasons:- 
The said provision had not been found mentioned in the original NCISM 
draft bill circulated by the NITI Aayog in 2017 so that, the employees 

79 
 
could not defend themselves by giving representations to the concerned 
authorities as the said provision has been found introduced all of a sudden 
in the Bill. 
Abruptly removing the employees from the office will badly affect the 
future of the employees and their dependents despite of the fact that the 
employees don't even know wh y they are being terminated from their 
services which would go against the spirit of natural justice and the 
constitution of India. 
 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE 
4.21.3  Clause 57 provides for dissolution of the Central Council of Indian Medicine 
including the Chairperson, Members and other employees of the Council.  It has been proposed 
in Clause 5 of the NCIM Bill, 2019, that the Members of the Commission shall be nomina ted by 
Search Committee.  
4.21.4  In view of the past legacy of CCIM, the employees have been proposed for 
discontinuing. Further, the employees of the Council shall be entitled to claim compensation not 
exceeding three months’ pay and allowances for the premature termination of term of their office 
or any contract of service. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.21.5  The Committee is of the view that premature termination of the employees of 
CCIM after its dissolution appears to be very harsh and unfair. The provision is against 
the principle of natural justice and, further, violates the Article 21 of the Indian 
Constitution by depriving employees their means of life and a life with dignity and Right to 
Livelihood. The Committee wishes to highlight that right to livelihood is a fundamental 
right that cannot be taken away. The Committee has found that there are only 24 regular 
employees working at the CCIM and the sudden termination of their service at this critical 
age when the responsibility of the bread earne r of the family multiplies,  may lead to great 
hardship for them and the members of their family. 
 
4.21.6  The Committee, further, believes that the compensation that amounts to 
three month’s pay and allowances for the premature termination of their employ ment is 
not at all adequate and cannot be compared to years of pay and allowance that they will be 
deprived of due to premature termination. 
4.21.7  The Committee, therefore, does not agree with the decision of the Ministry 
for termination of services of the staff of CCIM in the new Commission after the enactment 
of the Bill. The Committee is of the considered view that the employees of CCIM can be 
accommodated either in the new Commission or in the different Departments of the 
Ministry in any part of the c ountry. They can be placed under Surplus Staff Establishment 

80 
 
in the Ministry for their redeployment so that they are available for placement in other 
organizations/offices/divisions of the Ministry of AYUSH.  
4.21.8  The Committee, therefore, recommends th e Ministry that instead of 
termination of their services, the employees of the Council may be suitably absorbed on 
compassionate and humanitarian grounds either in the Commission or in any Department 
of the Government so as to protect the right of livelihood of these employees.  
4.21.9 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
4.22.1  PREAMBLE 
 
SUGGESTIONS: 
4.22.2  The following are the suggestions of the stakeholders on the SOR and Preamble:-  
(i) Dr. Manoj R, Scientific Officer, Traditional Knowledge Innovation, Kerala submitted 
that in the introduction para of the Bill (Objective), there exists no clause as 
mentioned in Statement of object and reasons (pg no 27, para 5 (j) i.e. To enhance the 
interface between ISM, Homoeopathy and modern s ystems of medicine. This clause 
may be included in first para of page no 1.   He further submitted that in the preamble, 
encouragement of Research is mentioned as one of the objective of the Bill. 
Unfortunately, this objective is neither addressed anywhere  in the Bill nor is found to 
be placed in the ‘Statement of Objects and Reasons’. 
 
(ii) Dr. P. Md. Hasan Ahmed, Member CCIM has also pointed out that the proposed Bill 
has the danger of having outcomes worse than IMCC Act, 1970 as there are major 
endangering is sues in the Act which may have impact on the independence of the 
Commission. He has highlighted that the Preamble of the Bill and the intentions 
thereof are faulty. The basic argument that only those selected and nominated can 
govern or regulate is clearly  indicative of desire of a totalitarian Government to 
subjugate professionals.  
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
4.22.3  Ministry of AYUSH in its reply stated that it has been suggested to add the 
provision of joint sittings of regulators of other systems of medicine to have interface between 
the systems in the preamble. The Preamble need not reflect the clause wise details. Further, the 
Ministry submitted that Research has been mentioned as functions of Commission, Advisory 
Council and Boards to conduct medical research. 
 
 

81 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
4.22.4  The Committee is of the considered view that the Preamble rightly explains 
the Bill's purpose and to implement its underlying philosophy, the Committee has made 
many recommendations in the previous paragraphs. The Committee through its 
recommendations in t he composition of the Commission has ensured that the concerns of 
the professionals are addressed and the Commission does not end up being a nominated 
body. Considering the importance of a ffordability of health care , the Committee 
recommends inserting the term "affordable" before "to all the citizens" . The Committee 
also observes that clause 26 mentions the Powers and Functions of different Autonomous 
Boards and "facilitating research programmes" has been mentioned as one of the functions 
of the Boards. The  Committee has also recommended a separate Autonomous Board for 
Research so as to emphasize upon the importance of research activities. 
4.22.5  Further, the Committee notes that clause 51 provides for joint sittings of 
National Commission of Indian System of Medicine, National Commission for 
Homoeopathy and the National Medical Commission. The Committee would also like to 
point out that even though the Preamble need not reflect clause -wise details, it should 
certainly reflect the spirit and essence of the Bill.  
4.22.6  The Preamble is adopted without any change. 
4.22.7 The Committee also recommends for all consequential changes to be carried 
out in the relevant clauses of the Bill keeping in view the Committee's observations and 
recommendations contained in the report. 
4.22.8 The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any changes. 
The Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed incorporating the suggestions 
made by it.  
  

82 
 
CHAPTER-V 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS  
5.1 FEE REGULATIONS 
SUGGESTIONS:  
5.1.1  The Stakeholders have submitted that the  NCISM Bill has no provision 
for determination of fees   in private medical institutions, whereas NMC Act 2019 has such 
provision mentioned under Clause 10(1)(i) which reads as follows: 
frame guidelines for determination of fees and all other charges in respect of fifty per 
cent. of seats in private medical institutions and deemed to be universities which are 
governed under the provisions of this Act; 
MINISTRY'S RESPONSE: 
5.1.2  The Ministry submitted that currently, fixation of fees is being done by the 
respective State Governments after taking into the account of local factors, reservation quota and 
other issues prevailing in the concerned State. The structure of fee also varies from State t o State 
according to the MoUs signed by private medical colleges. In most States, fees of seats in 
deemed universities are not regulated by State Governments. Hence no provision has been 
prescribed for fee regulation. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
5.1.3  The Committee notes that there is no provision to regulate fees of ISM 
colleges in the proposed Bill, unlike the NMC Act that empowers the Commission to 
regulate fees and all other charges in respect of fifty percent of seats in private medical 
institutions and Deemed to be Universities which are governed under the provisions of 
NMC Act. The absence of provision for regulation of fees may result in charging of high 
fees by the private medical institutions and universities. The Committee believes that 
regulation of fees would certainly ensure protection of the interests of students from 
exploitation and encourage students from any strata of society to study in such medical 
institution. High fees will discourage the students from taking up Indian System of 
Medicine as a career. 
5.1.4  The Committee believes that this may deprive large number of meritorious 
students who due to the financial constraints will not be able to pursue ISM medical 
education. Given the problem of shortage of doctors in the country especia lly in rural 
areas, the Committee feels that there is a need to encourage alternative system of medicine 
like Indian System of Medicine and Homeopathy. 
5.1.5  The Committee, further, believes that medical education must be treated as a 
public good.  It sho uld not be a profit maximization venture because such policies would 
only encourage and incentivize commercialization of medical education instead of 

83 
 
tempering it down. Because of the above reasons , the education of Traditional Systems of 
Medicine needs to  be given utmost support and resources by the State. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends that fees for 50% of private Institutions including Deemed to be 
University must be fixed on the lines of the NMC Act. 
5.2  NOMINATION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
5.2.1 Given the rising importance and popularity of the Indian System of Medicines in the 
country, the Committee is of the view that representation of Members of Parliament in the 
Governing Body/Executive Council of ISM Universities and Institutions of nat ional 
importance should be given as given in AIIMS, Delhi and other AIIMS in different parts of 
the country. 
5.2.2  The representatives of the people come across the grievances of the common 
masses. Their representation in the management of the Universitie s and Institutions will 
form the voice of the people spelling out the ground realities. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that three Members of Parliament (two from Lok Sabha and One from Rajya 
Sabha) should be nominated in the Governing Bodies of all  the ISM Universities and 
Institution of National Importance in the country.  
5.3  EDUCATION 
5.3.1 The Committee understands the importance of Sanskrit, Tamil and Urdu in the 
teachings of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani. The Committee also notes that many students 
who wish to apply for ISM medical courses may not have knowledge of these languages. 
The conditionality that one needs to be expert in these languages to pursue ISM courses 
leads to only a specified group of students enrolling in these courses. The Committee 
believes that to encourage students from all over the country to pursue ISM education, it is  
important to address this apprehension. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
that ISM Institutes should also carry out language crash courses in Sanskrit, Tamil and 
Urdu so that language does not serve as a hurdle for meritorious students who may  not 
have any knowledge of these languages.  
5.3.2 The Committee also notes that there is an urgent need to establish Indian System of 
Medicine as a preferred choice of career among the students. The present poor health 
infrastructure in the country demands more trained healthcare providers from the modern 
as well as Indian System of Medicine. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that 
different disciplines of Indian System of Medicine should also be introduced in the School 
curriculum. Small chapters on  each discipline of ISM will help in  dissemination of 
information on these traditional systems of medicine  with the intention of propagation and 
popularization of ISM . The Committee also notes that the National Education Policy 2019 
has emphasized on refor ms at all levels of education from school to higher education. The 
NEP 2019 also lays down that the school curriculum should be integrated and flexible with 
equal emphasis on all subjects and fields. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that, on 
the sa me lines of National Education Policy, the Curriculum should also be designed 
according to the changing dynamics with regards to quality education and population 

84 
 
requirement. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to take 
necessary init iatives to make students from early childhood aware of the concept of 
mindfulness and holistic health that the AYUSH system is based on.  
5.4  REGISTRATION OF COMPLAINTS 
5.4.1 Attention of the Committee has been brought to the instances when a person is pr acticing 
in one State but a case is registered against him in another State. The practitioner in such a 
scenario has to fight the case in the area where the case has been registered. This leads to 
unwarranted harassment of the doctor and loss of time and money.   
5.4.2 The Committee is of the view that the registration of complaints filed against the 
AYUSH practitioners should be restricted to the area where the doctor is practicing. The 
Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry may consider making pr ovision, either in 
the Bill itself or regulations, restricting the place of registration of complaints at the place 
of medical practice rather than the residential place of complainant. 
 
5.5  FUTURE OUTLOOK: 
5.5.1  The Committee notes that since recent tim es there has been an increase in 
the Government's initiatives to mainstream AYUSH services. AYUSH doctors are being 
utilized in various Governments' National Programs and are fundamental to achieve all the 
National Health Goals. The Committee is of the vie w that the Ministry should adopt a 
focused approach for propagation of AYUSH and set specific plans and objectives for 
achieving the same. With an increase in non -communicable diseases and chronic ailments, 
there has been a shift towards adopting lifestyle  changes and growing emphasis on 
alternative systems of medicine. In such a scenario, India has the potential to emerge as a 
global hub for medical tourism in AYUSH. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should also address and focus on pr omotion of medical tourism in AYUSH in 
its policy and aim to develop better AYUSH infrastructure in partnership with the Private 
Sector.  
 
  

85 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE CONSIDERATION 
Clause - 2 
 
 The Committee notes that there is a n acute shortage of doctors and health 
workforce in the country especially in rural/remote and tribal areas of the country. 
Allopathy or the modern system of medicine has emerged as the most commonly used and 
the more popular system of medicine all around the world. With the advent of the scientific 
age and lifestyle changes, the burden of chronic, systemic and non -communicable diseases 
(NCDs) has been increasing. According to WHO, non -communicable diseases such as 
cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases have been collectively responsible for 70% of 
all deaths worldwide. The Committee is of the view that in the wake of this global health 
crisis, the traditional Indian System of Medicine (ISM) which largely focuses on holistic 
view of health a nd well being can be utilized as an affordable means to tackle various 
illness including NCDs. The Committee also recognizes the constant efforts of the 
Government to mainstream the Indian System of Medicine and integrate ISM in the health 
delivery system. The Committee strongly believes, with the multitude of health issues that 
the country is facing today, adoption of an inclusive and integrated health care policy has 
become more important. The Committee, time and again, has recommended for an 
interface of  ISM with modern medicine as both systems have their own strengths in the 
treatment of various illnesses. Modern medicine and Indian System of Medicine are two 
different streams of knowledge and there have been efforts on the part of the Government 
to main stream the AYUSH services in the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM).  The 
Committee also recognizes the services of AYUSH doctors in providing the first line of 
treatment especially in the rural areas. The service provided by AYUSH doctors has 
certainly helped in alleviating the existing gap in the health sector.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommends integration of Indian Systems of Medicine  
with the modern scientific advances that will be fundamental in providing accessible, 
affordable and quality health  care. The Committee in its 109 th Report on the NMC Bill, 
2017 had recognized the need to build capacity of existing human resource in the 
healthcare sector to address the shortage of healthcare professionals.  The Committee, at 
the same time ,  cannot overlook the possible risk of non -qualified and untrained doctors 
prescribing modern medicine and inducing irreparable damage to the patients and 
reiterates its recommendation , as in its 109 th Report, that healthcare professional 
practicing without  requisite qualification anywhere in the country may attract penal 
provision. The Committee had also recognized specific healthcare issues and challenges of 
every State. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation  that State 
Governments may imp lement measures to enhance the capacity of existing health care 
professionals including practitioners of Indian Systems of Medicine to address State 
specific primary health care issues/challenges.  The Committee also recommends that the 

86 
 
States and UTs while  formulating laws to integrate the best of these two Systems should 
keep in mind the National Health Goals.  
 The Committee also believes that there is an urgent need to promote and integrate 
Indian systems of medicine with the scientific modern advances t o increase its acceptability 
as a scientific and reliable alternate system of medicine. The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommends adoption of science based approaches in the Indian System of Medicine for its 
seamless integration with the National Level health care delivery infrastructure. The 
Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 2(h) should be amended as follows:  
Indian System of Medicine” means the Ashtang Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and 
Sowa-Rigpa Systems of Medicine supplemented by such modern advances, 
scientific and technological development as the Commission may, in consultation 
with the Central Government, declare by notification from time to time; 
 The Committee is also of the view that since the proposed Bill is an attempt to 
improve access to quality and affordable medical education and treatment in the field of 
Indian System of Medicine and promote medical ethics, it is therefore pertinent to define 
the terms "Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” in the Bill appropriately so 
that there are no ambiguities in the proposed legislation. This will help in the protection of 
interest and rights of the patients or their legal heirs visiting any Indian System of 
Medicine clinic/professional. The patients and their legal heirs who have suffered due to 
Professional and Ethical Misconduct of the ISM professional should be able to appeal 
against their misconduct. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definitions of the 
terms "Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” sh ould be incorporated in the 
definition clause of the Bill and the same may be borrowed from the Indian Medical 
Council (Professional Conduct Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002.  However, at the 
same time, necessary safeguard should be put in place to p rotect the rights of practitioner 
and they should not be subject to unnecessary harassment.  
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.2.8, 4.2.9, 4.2.10, 42.11 and 4.2.12 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 4 
 The Committee believes that the Post Graduation eligibility criteria for appointment 
as Chairperson of any national level agency is justified considering the specialized 
functions and responsibilities the Chairperson is bound to perform. The Committee 
therefore, is of the view, that Post Graduation degree in the Indian System of Medicine is a 
valid condition for appointment as Chairperson as the multifaceted duties of the 
Chairperson demands deep knowledge and experience in the Indian System of Medicine. 
 The Committee is of the view that all the disciplines of the Indian System of 
Medicine have been represented in the Commission and the Advisory Council for Indian 

87 
 
System of Medicine. Therefore, the apprehensions of non -representation when the 
Chairperson is from a particular discipline of ISM are not justified.  
 Subject to the above observation, the clause is adopted without any change. 
 
 The Committee observes that under clause 19, a Board of Ayurveda will be 
constituted consisting of four members from the  Ayurveda discipline of Indian System of 
Medicine. The Committee recommends that the South Indian School of thought of 
Ayurveda along with other disciplines of Ayurveda should get adequate representation in 
this Board so that regional variations in the system are accommodated and promoted.  
 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry while appointing four part time 
members of the Commission should prioritize such Institutes/disciplines/school of thoughts 
which do not have adequate representation in the Commission.   
 The Committee also recommends that the Director, National Institute of Unani, 
Bengalaru should be read as National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bengalaru.  
 The Committee observes that there is no representation from the Research Councils 
of the different disciplines of Indian System of Medicine. The Committee is disappointed at 
the non -representation from the research field in the Commission given the fact that 
research is fundamental for promotion and progress of the Indian System of Medic ine. The 
Committee notes that in the National Homeopathy Bill, 2019, the Director-General, Central 
Council for Research in Homoeopathy, New Delhi is the ex -officio member of the National 
Commission for Homoeopathy  on the lines of National Medical Commissi on Act where the 
Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research is an ex-officio member of the NMC. 
The Committee therefore, on the lines of NMC Act and NCH Bill recommends the 
inclusion of Director Generals of Central Council of Research in differen t disciplines of 
Indian System of Medicine, viz, Central Council of Research in Ayurveda (CCRA), Central 
Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) and Central Council for Research in Unani 
Medicine (CCRUM) in the National Commission of Indian System of Medicine.  
 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the fact that Yoga and Naturopathy 
have not been included in this Bill. The Committee is of the considered view that the age 
old practice of Yoga and Naturopathy which focuses on holistic health is an integral part of 
Indian culture and AYUSH system. The Committee recommends their inclusion in the said 
Bill. It has also recommended that a Board of Yoga and Naturopathy should also be 
constituted under clause 18 in the Bill. The Committee also notes that the Government with 
an aim to popularize the effectiveness of Yoga and Naturopathy established Central 
Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN) for enhancing focused research 
in the field. The Committee, therefore, also recommends that the Director General, Central 
Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN) should also be an ex -officio 
member of the Commission.   

88 
 
 Including Yoga & Naturopathy in the Bill would ensure that their adequate 
representation in the Commission since the National Institutes from the field of Yoga and 
Naturopathy have not been represented in the Commission . The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Director of Morarji Desai National Institu te of Yoga and Director, 
National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune should also be included in the Commission. 
 The Committee has also proposed a Board of Research under clause 18 to promote 
multidisciplinary research collaborations among Research Councils of  all the disciplines of 
Indian System of Medicine. The Presidents of these two proposed Boards, viz Board of 
Yoga and Naturopathy and Board of Research will also be the ex -officio members of the 
Commission.  
 In view of the above recommendations , the numb er of ex -officio members will 
increase from 12 to 20 with an increase of 8 ex-officio Members which are as follows: 
(i) the President of the Board of Yoga and Naturopathy 
(ii) the President of the Board of Research  
(iii) the Director, Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga,  
(iv) the Director, National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune 
(v) Director General, Central Council of Research in Ayurveda (CCRA) 
(vi) Director General, Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS)  
(vii) Director General , Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 
(CCRUM) 
(viii) Director General, Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy 
(CCRYN) 
 The Committee is of the view that since Urdu and Tamil are fundamental to Unani 
and Siddha system of Medicine respectively, therefore, these be included under clause 
4(4)(a). The Committee accordingly recommends that clause 4(4)(a) wherein the requisite 
qualifications for appointment as a part time member of the Commission are prescribed, 
may be amended as follows:- 
The following persons shall be appointed by th e Central Government as part -time 
Members of the Commission, namely:— 
(a) four Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity and 
standing, who have special knowledge and professional experience in any of the 
disciplines of Indian Syste m of Medicine, Sanskrit, Tamil, Urdu, management, law, 
health research, science and technology and economics; 
 
 The Committee believes that representation of six part time members on rotational 
basis from amongst the nominees of the States and Union territ ories in the Advisory 
Council for a term of two years is highly inadequate. The present structure will not ensure 
effective participation of all the States/UTs in the Commission and will leave many 
States/UTs unrepresented for many years. Health being a St ate subject demands a focused 

89 
 
approach from not only the Centre but also the States. A collaborative approach between 
the Center and the States is necessary for mainstreaming AYUSH in the overall healthcare 
system. The Committee strongly believes that until and unless the States are made an active 
partner, the desired integration towards the spirit of cooperative -federalism cannot be 
achieved. 
 The Committee is also surprised to note that though the NCISM Bill has been 
drafted on the lines of NMC Bill but t he Ministry of AYUSH has ignored the 
recommendation of the Committee with respect to the composition of the National Medical 
Commission in its 109th Report on the NMC Bill. The Committee would also like to 
emphasize the fact that Ministry of Health & Famil y Welfare had accepted the 
recommendation of the Committee in it 109 th Report and increased the representation of 
the States in the NMC Act from 6 to 10. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the representation of States and UTs 
must be increased from 6 to 10 for ensuring cooperative federalism between the Centre and 
the States so that the Commission acts as a common interface that works together for 
strengthening of Indian System of medicine in the country. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that c lause 4(4)(b) wherein the requisite 
qualifications for appointment as a part time member of the Commission are prescribed, 
may be amended as follows:- 
The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as part -time 
Members of the Commission, namely:— 
(b) ten Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the nominees of the 
States and Union territories in the Advisory Council for Indian System of Medicine for 
a term of two years in such manner as may be prescribed; 
 The Committee o bserves as on 1.1.2018, there were 799879 registered AYUSH 
doctors/ practitioners in India. Out of these registered AYUSH practitioners, 443704 
(55.5%) belong to Ayurveda, 51110 (6.4%) belong to Unani Systems while only 9125 (1.1%) 
and 2425 (0.3%) doctors belong to Siddha and Naturopathy Systems respectively. As per 
the present structure in the NCISM Bill, 3 members will be elected from Ayurveda and one 
each from Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa. This implies that there will be 1 representative 
for 1,47,901 Ayu rveda practitioners, 1 representative for 51110 Unani practitioners and 1 
representative for 9125 Siddha practitioners. The Committee is strongly in favor of 
proportional representation of practitioners in the Commission as their voice is 
instrumental in the successful implementation of the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends increasing the representation from 3 to 6 members 
who are to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of Ayurveda and one member 
each to be elected by the respective registered medical practitioners of Siddha, Unani and 
Sowa-Rigpa. This would ensure sufficient representation to the practitioners in the 
Commission by way of election thus keeping intact the democratic structure of the 
Commission. 

90 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 4(4)(c) wherein the requisite 
qualifications for appointment as a part time member of the Commission are prescribed, 
may be amended as follows:- 
The following persons shall be appointed by the Centr al Government as part -time 
Members of the Commission, namely:— 
(c) six Members, to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of Ayurveda, and 
one member each to be elected by the respective registered medical practitioners of 
Siddha, Unani and Sow a-Rigpa, of the Indian System of Medicine, from amongst 
themselves, from such regional constituencies, and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed 
 In view of the above recommendations of the Committee with respect to clause 4, 
the new composition of the part -time members of National Commission for Indian System 
of Medicine will increase from 16 to 23 with an increase of 7 members as follows: 
(i)  Increase in part time members from six to ten to be appointed on rotational basis 
from amongst the nominees of the  States and Union territories in the Advisory 
Council for Indian System of Medicine and (ii) Increase in part time members from 
three to six to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of Ayurveda. 
 Accordingly, the new composition of the Nationa l Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine will increase from 29 to 44; i.e. (a) a chairperson; (b) 20 ex -officio members; (c) 
23 part-time members. 
 The Committee agrees wit h the view of the Ministry, this proviso is important so 
that such registered medical practitioners who are either directly or indirectly related to 
the managing body of a private or non -government medical institutions are not elected as 
members of the Commission. This is fundamental  in ensuring that instances of conflict of 
interest and corruption are avoided. The Committee strongly recommends that such 
practitioners who are elected to the Commission should have no ties with any medical 
institutions so that they do justice to their n ewly found responsibility as members of 
Commission. The Committee  hopes the same is reflected in the rules to be prescribed by 
the Commission.  
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.3.4, 4.3.5, 4.3.6, 4.3.11, 4.3.12, 4.3.13, 4.3.14, 4.3.15, 4.3.16, 4.3.17, 4.3.18, 4.3.22, 
4.3.25, 4.3.26, 4.3.27, 4.3.28, 4.3.34, 4.3.35, 4.3.36, 4.3.37, 4.3.40  of 115th Report) 
 
Clause- 5 
 
 The Committee observes that in Clause 5(1)(c), one expert from amongst the part 
time members referred to in Clause 4(4)(c) will also be a Member of the Search Committee. 

91 
 
The Committee under Clause 4(4)(c) has recommended to increase the strength of part 
time members from 6 to 9. Since the membership has been increased from 6 to 9, the 
Committee feels that it would be appropriate to have one more representation from the 
part-time members in the Search Committee. The Committee, therefore, recommends to 
increase the strength of experts under clause 5(1)(c) from 1 to 2.  
 
 The Committee also recommends inclusion of Urdu and Tamil under clause 5(1)(d) 
in line with the Committee's recommendation in Clause 4(4)(a). 
 
 The Committee recommends that clause 5(1) (c) an d clause 5(1)(d) which deals with 
the membership of the Search Committee may be amended as follows:- 
(c) two expert, from amongst the Members referred in clause (c) of sub -section (4) of 
section 4, to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner a s may be 
prescribed—Member; 
d) one person, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not less than 
twenty-five years in the field of Sanskrit, Urdu, Tamil, health research, management, 
law, economics or science and technology, to be nominated  by the Central 
Government— Member; 
 The Committee notes that since the Search Committee plays a critical role in the 
selection of the Chairperson and members of the Commission, a proper and streamlined 
procedure should be evolved where the appointment of the Chairperson and Members be 
done within a stipulated time period by the Central Government so as to avoid unwanted 
litigations against the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
pay due attention on the timely appointment of th e Chairperson and members of the 
Commission. 
 
Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.4.3, 4.4.5, 4.4.6, 4.4.7 and 4.4.8 of 115th Report) 
 
Clause- 6 
 
 The Committee is in agreement with the view of the Ministry and discourages the 
long continuation of Chairman/Members of CCIM. A Commission of such stature should 
continuously evolve and innovate to establish AYUSH as a reliable and alternative system 
of medicine. The Committee is of the opinion that four years tenure is sufficient for the 
Chairperson and the members to implement their ideas and bring about a transformation 
in the Indian System of Medicine. The Committee also believes that new leadership will not 
only bring rejuvenated zeal and enthusiasm in the organization but also prevent the 
possible nexus between the Institutes and the Commission.  With regards to the upper age 

92 
 
limit, the Committee is of the opinion that 70 years upper age limit is suit able for the 
members and the Chairperson.  
 
 The Committee notes that clause 6(7) forbids the Chairperson and Members 
Commission for accepting any employment in any capacity including as a consultant or 
expert in any private medical education. However, clause 6(8) of the Bill allows the 
Chairperson and Members to accept the same with the prior permission of the Central 
Government. The Committee is of the view that giving the Central Government this 
discretion will only provide opportunities for corrupt p ractices as clause 6(8) gives scope to 
bias and favoritism. The Committee, therefore, recommends, the Clause 6(8) empowering 
the Central Government to relax this condition, be deleted. 
 
Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.5.5, 4.5.8 and 4.5.9 of 115th Report) 
 
 
 
Clause- 7 
 The Committee observes that this clause is on similar lines with the clause dealing 
with removal of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission as in NMC Act, 2019. 
These are certainly standard conditio ns for removal as approved by Ministry of Law & 
Justice. The Committee, however, is of the view that the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 2016 should be kept in mind while removing such persons on physical or mental 
grounds as the Bill should not discriminate persons with disabilities.   
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.6.2 and 4.6.3 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 9 
 The Committee is of the view that giving the appellate jurisdiction to the Central 
Government with respect to the decisions of the Commission does not fit into the 
constitutional provision for separation of powers. The Committee, therefore, on the same 
lines as its recommendations as made in 109 th Report on NMC Bill  strongly recommends 
constitution of a common Medical Appellate Tribunal for Indian Systems of Medicine 
including Homeopathy which will consist of a Chairperson, who should be a sitting or 
retired Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of a High Court, and four other 
Members. This tribunal will have an appellate jurisdiction over the decisions taken by the 
Commission. One of the Members should have special knowledge and experience in 
medical profession/medical education; one should have special knowledge and experience 

93 
 
in the field of Indian system of medicine and one in homeopathy and finally the last 
member with an experience in the field of health administration at the level of Secretary to 
Government of India. Consequent changes for replacing the Central Government with the 
said Tribunal may be reflected in all the subsequent clauses viz. clause 29(6), clause 
30(4)(b), clause 34(7), clause 35(3) or any other related clause of the Bill. 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.7.3 and 4.7.4 of 115th Report) 
Clause-10 
The Committee notes that the suggestion of the stakeholder, namely, the periodic 
evaluations on public litigations in Ayurvedic domain; providing  road map for the 
mitigation of root causes of litigations should be incorporated as functions of the common 
Medical Appellate Tribunal for AYUSH that has already been recommended under clause 
9. This Medical Appellate Tribunal should carry out periodic ev aluations on public 
litigations in the AYUSH domain.  
 
 The Committee agrees with the suggestion that documents regarding safe practices 
of Indian System of Medicine should also be published. Separate documents regarding safe 
practices of Ayurveda and Unan i, Siddha & Sowa -Rigpa should be prepared by the Board 
of Ayurveda and Board of Unani, Siddha & Sowa-Rigpa respectively.  
 
 The Committee is also of the view that there is a need for standardization of 
education and practice of Paramedical Courses like nur sing, therapists training etc in 
Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
development and regulation of paramedical courses in different disciplines of Indian 
System of Medicine should also be mentioned as one of t he function of the National 
Commission of Indian System of Medicine so that these courses are recognized and a 
uniform curriculum can be developed. The Committee also desires that the regulatory 
functions of the Committee may incorporate development activi ties necessary for 
promotion and proliferation of Indian System of Medicine with greater impetus so that 
objective and mission of task-shifting and Ayushman Bharat are achieved. 
 
 For this purpose, the Committee recommends the word " development and " shou ld 
be added after the phrase "lay down policies for" and before the phrase " maintaining a 
high.. ". The clause 10(1)(a) may be amended as follows: 
(a) Lay down policies for development and maintaining a high quality and high 
standards in education of Indian System of Medicine and make necessary regulations 
in this behalf. 
 

94 
 
 The Committee also recommends the Ministry to expedite the introduction of the 
Pharmacy Council of Indian Medicine and Homeopathy Bill so that the education and 
practice of Pharmacy  in Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy can be regulated 
with a development approach. The Ministry while drafting the Bill should also consult the 
Pharmacy Council of India and take note of the recommendations contained in the 18 th 
Report of the Committee on the Indian Medicine and Homeopathy Pharmacy Bill-2005.  
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.8.5, 4.8.6, 4.8.7, 4.8.8, 4.8.9 and 4.8.10 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 11 
 
 The Committee first of all notes that the representation from State Medical Councils 
is missing in the Advisory Council as mentioned in clause 4(4)(b) of the Bill indicating a 
major lacunae in the drafting of the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
provision for the representation of members (6 which should be increased to 10) from the 
State/UTs from amongst elected members of the State Medical Council should be added in 
the clause, on the lines of NMC Act.  
 
 The Committee notes that "University" definition in the clause 2 includes a Health 
University. The Committee recommends that under clause 11(2) (c), the Vice -Chancellor 
that is to be nominated by the State Government should preferably be from the Indian 
System of Medicine background. The Committee strongly believes that since this Advisory 
Council is mandated to shape the overall agenda and policy related to ISM education, 
training and research, therefore, it should have experts who are adequately experienc ed in 
the field of Indian System of Medicine. The Committee strongly recommends that in States 
where Vice-chancellors with ISM background are not present, experts/professors with wide 
experience in ISM research and education field should be nominated.  
 
 The Committee has recommended the inclusion of Director Generals from each 
Research Council of Siddha (CCRS), Ayurveda (CCRAS), Unani (CCRUM) and Yoga and 
Naturopathy (CCRYN) in the Commission. Inclusion of  these R esearch Councils in the 
Commission will be helpful in obtaining technical information from each system of AYUSH 
medicine particularly in policy making and research field. Therefore, the Committee is of 
the view that since the Director Generals will be the ex-officio members of the Commission, 
therefore they are omitted from the Advisory Council. 
 
 The Committee also recommends that one member should be nominated from 
various sectors of the Indian System of Medicine Industry for giving representation to this 
industry for the invaluable connect betwee n academic and industry and help the industry 
to voice their concerns and seek redressal of their grievances.  
 

95 
 
 The Committee also notes that the representation of the Chairman, University 
Grants Commission and the Director, National Assessment and Accred itation Council is 
missing in the NCISM Bill, 2019, as given in NMC Act, 2019. The Committee would like to 
reiterate that the since Bill is based on the lines of NMC Act, therefore, representation of 
the Chairman, University Grants Commission and the Direc tor, National Assessment and 
Accreditation Council should also be there in the Advisory Council in the NCH Bill. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to add similar provision for their 
representation in the Advisory Council for Indian Systems of Medicine. 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
(Paras 4.9.4, 4.9.5, 4.9.6, 4.9.7, 4.9.8 and 4.9.9 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 12 
 
 The Committee recommends inclusion of Syllabus optimization as one of the main 
functions of the Ad visory Council for Indian System of Medicine to have desired level of 
standard and uniformity in the ISM curriculum. Since medical education, research and 
development, training are interrelated, the word "development" may also be added with 
the word resear ch in the last word of the clause 12(1) and clause 12(2).  Accordingly, the 
clause 12(1) and 12 (2) may be amended as follows: 
 
"12. (1) The Council shall be the primary platform through which the States and 
Union territories may put forth their views and concerns before the Commission and 
help in shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education, 
training, research and development. 
(2) The Council shall advise the Commission on measures to determine and maintain, 
and to coordinate  maintenance of, the minimum standards in all matters relating to 
medical education, training, research and development." 
 
(Paras 4.10.2 and 4.10.3 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 14 
 
 The Committee is of the view that the Bill provides for National Eligibility -Cum-
Entrance Test for admission in ISM colleges which is a step in the right direction in 
improving the quality of students that enroll in ISM colleges.  The Committee, however, 
believes that the Commission should also regulate admission to Pre -Tib and Pre- Ayurveda 
courses and assess the quality and enhance the standard of such courses. The one duration 
Pre-Tib or Pre -Ayurveda courses should not be promoted as an easy alternative to 
admission in ISM courses and students passing such courses should also be evaluated on 
some parameters. The Committee believes that to maintain the standard and quality of 

96 
 
students pursuing ISM courses, regulation of these Pre -Tib and Pre -Ayurveda courses is 
also essential. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should eventually phase out 
such programs in three to five year so that the quality and competency of ISM 
professionals is maintained. It also recommends that till the time such Pre -Tib or Pr e-
Ayurveda Courses are being offered, a certain percentage i.e not more than 5% of total 
seats should be reserved for such courses. The Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry should introduce specific induction programs for newly enrolled ISM students  
who clear NEET exam and join ISM courses.  
 
 The Committee is also of the view that the Bill must contain express provision 
regarding the definite percentage of seats with respect to common counselling process and 
the State counselling process to avoid any confusion. The Committee, also recommends that 
the designated authority of the Central Government, as proposed in the Bill shall conduct 
the common counselling for All India seats and the designated authority of the State 
Government shall conduct the common counselling for the seats at the State Level.  
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.11.6, 4.11.7 and 4.11.8 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 15 
 The Committee is of the view that conducting a common final year undergraduate 
examination known as National Exit Test for graduates of ISM is an effective way to 
reform Indian system of medicine education. The NEXT exam will not only serve as an 
instrument of quality assurance but also standardize the quality and competency  of 
medical practitioners of different disciplines of Indian System of medicine. The Committee 
welcomes this uniform nationwide assessment system and recommends the Ministry to 
devise its exam pattern in  a manner that encourages concept based skill learning practic es 
rather than rote learning. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to study the 
format of medical licensing exams of other countries and give due weightage to clinical & 
practical application of ISM knowledge in the NEXT exam. The Committee is of the  view 
that this common final year exam that will also serve as the licensing exam must lay 
emphasis on not only the cognitive domain but also the assessment of skills by having 
practical problems/case study types of questions as a major component, with a s trong 
propensity towards primary healthcare requirements. The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to conduct the test in a transparent manner so that the Test can act as the 
final step in producing competent and accountable practitioners. The Ministry c an also 
take into account the practice of conducting licensing exams in different stages like other 
countries. 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.12.4 and 4.12.5 of 115th Report) 

97 
 
Clause- 16 
 
 In the light of the suggest ion of the stakeholders, where the National Exit Test has 
been proposed to serve as an instrument for post -graduate entrance, the Committee 
believes that combining the PG entrance and Licentiate examination will have its own 
repercussions. If the format of  the Exam is based on the age old concept of theoretical 
knowledge, then, there will be a general tendency among the students to concentrate only 
on performing well in the entrance examination rather than enhancing their practical 
clinical knowledge. The Committee strongly believes that expert advice and study is needed 
for formulating the structure of such a uniform integrated exam. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the PG NEET for admission to PG courses may continue as of 
now and it may serve as an interim management until a mechanism is evolved within three 
to five years for conducting a common final year examination/Exit Test/PG NEET. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry of AYUSH to contemplate on the idea and work on 
the adequate structure of the exam.  
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.13.5 and 4.13.6 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 17 
 The Committee appreciates the idea of National Teachers Eligibility Test as it is the 
best way to tap qualified persons into the teaching profession.  The Committee is aware of 
the fact that one of the major challenges in promotion of ISM education is poor  
infrastructure and inadequate faculty. Such a merit based examination will certainly 
improve the education being imparted to students studying Indian System of Medicine as 
well as improve the quality of health care services.  
 
 The Committee, therefore, i s in full agreement with the concept of an eligibility test 
so that qualified and competent persons enter the domain of teaching which is highly 
needed to improve the quality of education imparted to the students of ISM. However, the 
Committee also takes c ognizance of the difficulty which will be faced by students wanting 
to appear for a new exam. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that before the 
commencement of National Teachers' eligibility Test, adequate training and teaching 
programs should be prov ided to postgraduates of each discipline of Indian System of 
Medicine. 
 
 The Committee is also of the considered view that pay parity, pay structure, 
gratuity and pension plans are important motivational factors for ISM medical/teaching 
professionals across the country. Improving the motivation and incentives of teachers will 
certainly improve the overall quality of the education system. This will result in 
augmenting a sense of equality among the ISM professions and will, further, encourage 
more and more people to take up ISM as a career. The Committee, therefore, recommends 

98 
 
the Ministry to take these issues of pay parity, pay structure, gratuity, pension plans and 
other related incentives for AYUSH doctors with the State Governments so that ISM 
professionals get similar incentives as that of a MBBS doctor.  
 
 The Committee, further, observes that section 17 provides that nothing contained in 
this section shall apply to the teachers appointed prior to the date notified under sub 
section (3).  The Committee notes that there are many teachers in the system who do not 
hold a post-graduate degree and are part of the education system. They are likely to remain 
in the system for quite a long period of time. For such teaching professionals, it would not 
be easy to clear the National Teachers' Eligibility Test . Therefore, there must be a 
provision for a training or refreshers course for them followed by Minimum Qualifying 
Test (MQT) so that their knowledge base is widened as well as updated and they are better 
equipped to teach efficiently. 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.14.4, 4.14.5, 4.14.6, 4.14.7 and 4.14.8 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 18 
 The Committee is not at all convinced by the reasons given by the Ministry to 
exclude Yoga and Naturopathy from the purview of the Bill.  The Committee wonders 
about the role and achievement of the National Board for Promotion and Development of 
Yoga and Naturopathy under the Ministry of AYUSH.  The Committee is also quite 
disappointed to know that a separate Bill for Yoga and Naturopathy has been withheld for 
no apparent reason.     
 The Committee notes that presently there is no central regulatory body for 
registration of Yoga and Naturopathy practitioners and standardisation & recognition of 
different courses of Yoga and Naturopathy. Absence of a central regulatory  body, at a time 
when Yoga is being considered as a panacea for a meaningful life and living, may result in 
proliferation of poor standard institutes and unchecked practices by unqualified 
practitioners. There has been a global surge in the popularity of Y oga and Naturopathy 
that has resulted in worldwide growth of teaching schools. India being the land of origin of 
these practices has to responsibly contribute in its evolution.  
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the drugless system of Yog a 
and Naturopathy should be regulated under a separate Board of Yoga and Naturopathy 
under clause 18 of the Bill under consideration. The Board of Yoga and Naturopathy shall 
consist of a President and two members from Yoga and two members from Naturopathy 
field. 
 Board of Yoga and Naturopathy for ISM shall perform the following functions:- 
(a) responsible for standardising the standards of education of Yoga and 
Naturopathy courses; (b) developing a competency based dynamic curriculum; 

99 
 
(c) framing guidelines  on setting up of medical institutions for imparting 
undergraduate, postgraduate and super -speciality courses in Yoga and 
Naturopathy; (d) determining standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and 
quality of education and research ; (e) facilitating development and training of 
faculty members; (f) granting recognition to medical qualifications at all levels etc; 
and (g) any other relevant and incidental functions to propagate and promote Yoga 
and Naturopathy within the country or outside under the ove rall supervision of the 
Commission. 
 The Committee is also of the considered view that introduction of a new Bill and 
constitution of a C ommission for regulating Yoga and Naturopathy will have its own 
financial implications. The Committee also notes that t he number of registered 
Naturopathy practitioners as on 1.1.2018 as per Ministry of AYUSH'S Report "Ayush in 
India" is 2485. The said Report makes no mention of Yoga Practitioners. The Committee 
therefore is of the view that bringing a new Bill for regulat ing Yoga and Naturopathy 
where practitioners are yet to be identified, is absurd. The Committee is of the considered 
view that Yoga and Naturopathy should be included in the NCISM Bill instead of a new 
Bill.  
 The Committee notes that along with mainstreaming of AYUSH services in the 
country, there has been a global keen interest in the Indian Traditional systems of 
medicine. The Committee, therefore believes that multidisciplinary research collaborations 
among Research Councils of all the discipl ines of Indian System of Medicine is not only 
fundamental for progress of ISM as a healthcare delivery system but also essential for 
global validation. There is a strong need to strengthen R&D in all disciplines of ISM and 
encourage independent as well as private research in the field. The Committee also 
recognizes the importance of laying down guidelines and parameters to be considered with 
respect to clinical methodologies, drug standardization etc. in the Indian System of 
Medicine. 
 The Committee also ob serves that to enhance the acceptability of Indian System of 
Medicine within the country and abroad, the quality control and standardization is of 
prime importance. The Committee also notes that quality control and standardization of 
ISM drugs which are ma inly herbal/herbo -mineral preparations, is very complex and 
different from synthetic molecules of the allopathic system which are produced under 
controlled laboratory conditions.  
 The Committee also emphasizes that scientific studies on the efficacy of 
formulations of Indian System of Medicine is essential to translate them into AYUSH drugs 
and improve its application in clinical practice. The Committee also believes that there is a 
urgent need to support AYUSH research programmes and foster collaborative and inter-
disciplinary AYUSH research. The Committee therefore, is of the considered view that 
scientific validation of Indian System of Medicine's fundamental and therapeutic principles 
is essential to strengthen its position as a global health care system. 

100 
 
 In the view of the above observations, the Committee strongly proposes constitution 
of a Board of Research which would facilitate research programmes in Indian System of 
Medicine, Yoga & Naturopathy and enrich its scientific base. The Board of Research  will 
consist of a President and one member from research field of each discipline of the Indian 
System of Medicine including Yoga & Naturopathy and one member from research 
councils of each discipline of Indian System of Medicine and Yoga & Naturopathy.  
 The Presidents of these two proposed Boards shall be the ex -officio members of the 
Commission under clause 4(3).  
 The Committee is not convinced by the response of the Ministry of AYUSH and 
believes this Bill should not focus only on education as researc h is an intrinsic part of 
academics. The Committee is of the view that rather than treating education and Research 
as two water -tight compartments, the Ministry should devise a single mechanism to 
promote research orientation among the undergraduate and po stgraduate students 
pursuing ISM education. The Committee, however, believes that research in Indian 
Systems of Medicine is of immense importance and should be promoted with adequate 
resources. The Committee also emphasizes that the proposed Board of Resea rch will have 
representation from Research Councils of each discipline of Indian System of Medicine and 
Yoga & Naturopathy. This Board will not only facilitate multidisciplinary research 
collaborations but also bridge the existing gap between academics and  research. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates that the Ministry should constitute an 
autonomous Board of Research under Clause 18. 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.15.6, 4.15.7, 4.15.8, 4.15.9, 4.15.10, 4.15.11, 4.15.12, 4.15.13, 4.15.14, 4.15.15, 
4.15.16 and 4.15.17 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 19 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should devise such an selection 
criteria for constituting an Autonomous Board of Ayurveda  so that the South Indian 
School of thought of Ayurveda along with other disciplines of Ayurveda get adequate 
representation in this Board so that regional variations in the system are accommodated 
and promoted.  With regards to the composition of the Board o f Ethics and Registration 
for Indian System of Medicine, the Committee is of the view that representation from any 
of the disciplines of quality assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy is sufficient.  
The Committee also opines that rather than se parate Boards for Unani and Siddha, a 
single Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa -Rigpa should be constituted. Each system should 
get adequate representation to review concerns of that specific system in order to profess, 
proliferate and popularize the system i n the interest of Public Health Care. The 
composition of Board of Yoga and Naturopathy should also be added under the clause. 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.16.4 and 4.16.5 of 115th Report) 

101 
 
 
Clause- 28 
 The Committee would like  to point out that one of the targeted mission of the 
proposed legislation is to have an objective periodic and transparent assessment of Medical 
institutions. In this regard, ratings has been set up to facilitate the institutions t o assess 
their performance vis -a-vis set parameters through introspection that helps the institution 
to know its strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities through an informed review process 
ratings also helps in identification of internal areas of planning and resource allocation and 
inculcate new sense of direction and identity for institutions. It, thus, plays a pivotal role in 
the development of the institutions.  
 
 The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the quantitative and 
qualitative parameters for hiring and empanelling third party agency should be made more 
explicit in the Bill to avoid any confusion or conflict in the future.  The Committee also 
believes that the methodology for conducting inspection by the third party agency must b e 
made clear so that these agencies follow common guidelines and do not engage in corrupt 
practices. The Committee also recommends that necessary safeguards and precaution may 
be specified to ensure that these rating agencies do not give any unwanted lever age to any 
institute that may improve their rating. 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.17.2, 4.17.3 and 4.17.4 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 33 
 
 The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation as given for Clause 2(h) 
which emphasizes its recommendations given in 109th Report on the NMC Bill, 2017. 
 
 The clause is adopted without changes. 
 
(Paras 4.18.5 and 4.18.6 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 51 
 The Committee is of the view that this effort towards creating a rational and 
sustainable interface between the various systems between Indian System of Medicine 
(ISM), Homoeopathy and Modern Medicine is a laudable objective. The Committee has 
highlighted the need for such a positive interface often in its previous reports. Joint sittings 
of the Commissions can provide a platform for building on this idea and reduce the 
incidence of diseases and to keep the public health in good stead in the country. The 
Committee also recommends that there should be express provision in the Bill with respect 

102 
 
to the procedure for selecting the Chairperson for the joint sitting, preferably on rotation 
basis so that all the Chairpersons of the three Commissions get an opportun ity to chair the 
joint sittings. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to prepare 
specific guidelines, statement of procedure and agenda for these joint sittings. 
 The Committee also desires that the opportunity of the joint sittings c an also be 
utilized as a platform for self performance appraisal of the Commission and explore the 
scope for further improvement in functioning of the Commission for better furtherance of 
public health care. 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
(Paras 4.19.5, 4.19.6 and 4.19.7 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 52 
 
 The Committee is of the view that presently the health infrastructure of the country 
especially the public health services delivery system in the  rural, tribal and urban slum 
areas of the country   are highly inadequate. People from rural areas have to trav el miles 
for availing primary health care to get the first line of treatment. Such an environment   
that lacks  basic health care needs a focused approach and mandating the States to take 
necessary measures to enhance the health professionals in the rural a reas is a step in the 
right direction. Such a state of affairs is also quite common in slums in urban areas. The 
Committee, therefore, also feels that the services of AYUSH doctors should not be just 
limited only to rural areas but be promoted and encouraged at pan India level.  
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 52 may be amended as follows:  
Every State Government may, for the purposes of addressing or promoting 
public health care especially in rural, tribal and urban slum areas, take nece ssary 
measures to enhance the capacity of the healthcare professionals. 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.20.4, 4.20.5 and 4.20.6 of 115th Report) 
Clause- 57 
 
 The Committee is of the view that premature termination of the employees of CCIM 
after its dissolution appears to be very harsh and unfair. The provision is against the 
principle of natural justice and, further, violates the Article 21 of the Indian Consti tution 
by depriving employees their means of life and a life with dignity and Right to Livelihood. 
The Committee wishes to highlight that right to livelihood is a fundamental right that 
cannot be taken away. The Committee has found that there are only 24 r egular employees 

103 
 
working at the CCIM and the sudden termination of their service at this critical age when 
the responsibility of the bread earner of the family multiplies,  may lead to great hardship 
for them and the members of their family. 
 
 The Committe e, further, believes that the compensation that amounts to three 
month’s pay and allowances for the premature termination of their employment is not at 
all adequate and cannot be compared to years of pay and allowance that they will be 
deprived of due to premature termination. 
 The Committee, therefore, does not agree with the decision of the Ministry for 
termination of services of the staff of CCIM in the new Commission after the enactment of 
the Bill. The Committee is of the considered view that the emplo yees of CCIM can be 
accommodated either in the new Commission or in the different Departments of the 
Ministry in any part of the country. They can be placed under Surplus Staff Establishment 
in the Ministry for their redeployment so that they are available  for placement in other 
organizations/offices/divisions of the Ministry of AYUSH.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry that instead of termination of 
their services, the employees of the Council may be suitably absorbed on compassionate 
and humanitarian grounds either in the Commission or in any Department of the 
Government so as to protect the right of livelihood of these employees.  
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.21.5, 4.21.6, 4.21.7, 4.21.8 and 4.21.9 of 115th Report) 
 
PREAMBLE 
 
 The Committee is of the considered view that the Preamble rightly explains the 
Bill's purpose and to implement its underlying philosophy, the Committee has made many 
recommendations in the previous paragraphs. The Committee through its 
recommendations in the composition of the Commission has ensured that the concerns of 
the professionals are addressed and the Commission does not end up being a nominated 
body. Also, the Committee observes that clause 26 mentions the Powers and  Functions of 
different Autonomous Boards and "facilitating research programmes" has been mentioned 
as one of the functions of the Boards. The Committee has also recommended a separate 
Autonomous Board for Research so as to emphasize upon the importance of  research 
activities. 
 Further, the Committee notes that clause 51 provides for joint sittings of National 
Commission of Indian System of Medicine, National Commission for Homoeopathy and the 
National Medical Commission. The Committee would also like to po int out that even 
though the Preamble need not reflect clause -wise details, it should certainly reflect the 
spirit and essence of the Bill.  

104 
 
 The Preamble is adopted without any change. 
           The Committee also recommends for all consequential changes  to be carried out in 
the relevant clauses of the Bill keeping in view the Committee's observations and 
recommendations contained in the report. 
           The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any changes. The 
Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed incorporating the suggestions made by 
it.  
(Paras 4.22.4, 4.22.5, 4.22.6, 4.22.7 and 4.22.8 of 115th Report) 
FEE REGULATIONS 
 The Committee notes that there is no provision to regulate fees of ISM colleges in 
the proposed Bill, unlike the NMC Act that empowers the Commission to regulate fees and 
all other charges in respect of fifty percent of seats in private medical institutions and 
Deemed to be Universities which are governed under the provisions of NMC Act. The 
absence of provision for regulation of fees may result in charging of high fees by the private 
medical institutions and universities. The Committee believes that regulation of fees would 
certainly ensure protection of the interests of students from exploitation and enc ourage 
students from any strata of society to study in such medical institution. High fees will 
discourage the students from taking up Indian System of Medicine as a career. 
 The Committee believes that this may deprive large number of meritorious students  
who due to the financial constraints will not be able to pursue ISM medical education. 
Given the problem of shortage of doctors in the country especially in rural areas, the 
Committee feels that there is a need to encourage alternative system of medicine like Indian 
System of Medicine and Homeopathy. 
 The Committee, further, believes that medical education must be treated as a public 
good.  It should not be a profit maximization venture because such policies would only 
encourage and incentivize commerciali zation of medical education instead of tempering it 
down. Because of the above reasons , the education of Traditional Systems of Medicine 
needs to be given utmost support and resources by the State. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that fees for 50% of private Institutions including Deemed to be University 
must be fixed on the lines of the NMC Act. 
(Paras 5.1.3, 5.1.4 and 5.1.5 of 115th Report) 
NOMINATION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
 Given the rising importance and popularity of the Indian System of Medicines in the 
country, the Committee is of the view that representation of Members of Par liament in the 
Governing Body/Executive Council of ISM Universities and Institutions of national 
importance should be given as given in AIIMS, Delhi and other AIIMS in different parts of 
the country. 

105 
 
 The representatives of the people come across the grievances of the common masses. 
Their representation in the management of the Universities and Institutions will form the 
voice of the people spelling out the ground realities. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that three Members of Parliament (two from L ok Sabha and One from Rajya 
Sabha) should be nominated in the Governing Bodies of all the ISM Universities and 
Institution of National Importance in the country.  
(Paras 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 of 115th Report) 
 
EDUCATION 
 The Committee understands the importance of Sanskrit, Tamil and Urdu in the 
teachings of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani. The Committee also notes that many students 
who wish to apply for ISM medical courses may not have knowledge of these languages. 
The conditionality that one needs to be expert in t hese languages to pursue ISM courses 
leads to only a specified group of students enrolling in these courses. The Committee 
believes that to encourage students from all over the country to pursue ISM education, it is 
important to address this apprehension. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
that ISM Institutes should also carry out language crash courses in Sanskrit, Tamil and 
Urdu so that language does not serve as a hurdle for meritorious students who may not 
have any knowledge of these languages.  
 The Committee also notes that there is an urgent need to establish Indian System of 
Medicine as a preferred choice of career among the students. The present poor health 
infrastructure in the country demands more trained healthcare providers from the m odern 
as well as Indian System of Medicine. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that 
different disciplines of Indian System of Medicine should also be introduced in the School 
curriculum. Small chapters on each discipline of ISM will help in  dissemination of 
information on these traditional systems of medicine  with the intention of propagation and 
popularization of ISM . The Committee also notes that the National Education Policy 2019 
has emphasized on reforms at all levels of education from school to h igher education. The 
NEP 2019 also lays down that the school curriculum should be integrated and flexible with 
equal emphasis on all subjects and fields. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that, on 
the same lines of National Education Policy, the Cur riculum should also be designed 
according to the changing dynamics with regards to quality education and population 
requirement. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to take 
necessary initiatives to make students from early childhood aware of the concept of 
mindfulness and holistic health that the AYUSH system is based on.  
(Paras 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 of 115th Report) 
 
 

106 
 
REGISTRATION OF COMPLAINTS 
 The Committee is of the view that the registration of complaints filed against the 
AYUSH practitioners should be restricted to the area where the doctor is practicing. The 
Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry may consider making provision, either in 
the Bill itself or regulations, restricting the place of registration of complaints at the place 
of medical practice rather than the residential place of complainant. 
(Paras 5.4.2 of 115th Report) 
FUTURE OUTLOOK 
 The Committee notes that since recent times there has been an increase in the 
Government's initiatives to mainstream AYUSH serv ices. AYUSH doctors are being 
utilized in various Governments' National Programs and are fundamental to achieve all the 
National Health Goals. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should adopt a 
focused approach for propagation of AYUSH and set s pecific plans and objectives for 
achieving the same. With an increase in non -communicable diseases and chronic ailments, 
there has been a shift towards adopting lifestyle changes and growing emphasis on 
alternative systems of medicine. In such a scenario, India has the potential to emerge as a 
global hub for medical tourism in AYUSH. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should also address and focus on promotion of medical tourism in AYUSH in 
its policy and aim to develop better AYUSH infr astructure in partnership with the Private 
Sector.  
(Paras 5.5.1 of 115th Report) 
 
  

107 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
  

108 
 
IV  
 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3:00 p.m. on Thursday, the 24 th January, 2019 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
2.  Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
3.  Shri Jairam Ramesh  
4.  Dr. Santanu Sen 
5.  Shri Ashok  Siddharth 
6.  Dr. C. P. Thakur 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA  
 
7.  Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8.  Shri C. R. Patil 
9.  Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Desh Deepak Verma   Secretary-General 
2. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Rakesh Naithani    Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
 
1.       Shri Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha              Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH  
2. Shri Nilanjan Sanyal Chairman, Board of Governors, CCH 
3. Shri P.K. Pathak Additional Secretary 
4. Dr. Depujari Jayant Yeshwant President, CCIM 
5. Dr. Manoj Nesari Adviser(Ayurveda) 
6. Dr.S.R.K.Vidyarthi Director 
7. Ms. Vijaya Laxmi Bharadwaj Deputy Secretary 
8. Dr. S.R.Chinta Assistant Adviser (Homeopathy)  
 
 
 

109 
 
 
I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committ ee and apprised them 
that three Bills, namely (i) *** (ii) the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 
2019 and (iii) *** have been referred to the Committee for examination and report. ***. The 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019 and *** with two new 
regulatory bodies and the Committee has to submit a report on these two Bills before 30 th 
January, 2019. The Chairman also apprised the Committee that i n view of the paucity of time, 
the examination of t he National Commission for Indian  System of Medicine Bill, 2019 *** has 
been prioritized and in the process, Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH has been invited  to give 
presentation on both the Bills. ***. 
3. *** 
4. Thereafter, the Committee discussed the reference of the other two Bills, namely, t he 
National Commission for India n System of Medicine Bill, 2019  and *** and the time frame 
available for examination and report thereon is before 30 th January, 2019. The Chairman taking 
cognizance of the short period available for examination of the two Bills invited the suggestions 
of the Members of the Committee as to how to cover all the stages of the examination of the Bill. 
The Chairman also emphasized that a minimum of five meetings would have to be conducted 
before drafting the Report on any Bill. During the examination of a Bill (i) one preliminary 
meeting has to be co nducted with the Secretary of the concerned Department/Ministry; (ii) two -
three meetings are required for oral evidence of the stakeholders; (iii) one meeting for internal 
discussion of the Committee; (iv) two meetings for detailed clause by clause examination and (v) 
one meeting for adoption of the Report. 
5. The members of the Committee were of the opinion that the Committee would not be 
able to do justice with the examination of both the Bills within the given time frame as both the 
Bills are comprehensi ve as well as complex.  After a brief discussion, the Committee members 
made the following observations:  
*** Relates to other matter 

110 
 
(i)  The Ministry has not exercised/applied its efforts in formulating the Bills as the 
Bills appear to have been drafted by the NITI Ayog;  
(ii)  NITI Ayog has proposed two separate and independent Commissions i.e. 
"National Commission For Indian Systems of Medicine" and "National 
Commission For Homeopathy " while the Ministry of AYUSH earlier submitted 
that the Indian System  of Medicine and Homeopathy needs to be dealt under one 
Commission, therefore, the NITI Ayog and the Ministry concerned are not at 
consensus ad idem;  
(iii)  The Ministry has not properly assessed the ground realities of the 
stages/progress/growth of the I ndian Medicine Systems and Homeopathy. The 
main coordinator and implementing agency is the Ministry but it has not taken 
into account the needs of the Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy by 
consulting the stakeholders;  
(iv)  Both the Bills contain 5 8 clauses each with wider implications, therefore hasty 
examination of the Bills is unjustified and time for detailed examination is 
required;  
(v)  Both the Bills do not stipulate any provisions about the growth and development 
of Yoga and Naturopathy practitioners;  
(vi)  The members of the Committee underscored the importance of hearing the views 
of the stakeholders/associations/experts/individuals by inviting their 
views/suggestions on the various clauses of the Bills through Press Release; and 
(vii)  Both the Bil ls have been framed on the lines of National Medical Commission 
Bill 2017 but the Ministry failed to acknowledge that administrative structure in 
the Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy is far different than the 
Allopathic Medicine. The one size fits all approach adopted by the Ministry is not 
the solution for improving the AYUSH sector. 
 6. The Committee accordingly decided to seek extension of time for at least three months 
for presentation of the reports on both the Bill s and directed the Secretariat to issue a Press 
Release for eliciting the response of the general public as well as concerned stakeholders on both 
the Bills. The Committee, therefore, authorized the Chairman to seek extension of time for at 
least three mon ths for presentation of the Reports on the two Bills to the Parliament and 
approach Hon'ble Chairman in this regard. 
 
*** Relates to other matter 

111 
 
 
 II. Oral evidence of Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH on the National Commission 
for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019 *** 
 
7. The Committee then heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH on t he National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019  and ***. The Secretary apprised the 
Committee of the background and objectives of both the Bills. In his presentation, he also drew a 
comparison between the existing Central Council of Medicine/Central Council of Homeopathy 
and the proposed National Commission of  Indian Medicine/National Commission of 
Homeopathy with respect to mode of selection and tenure of members, inspection, structure  of 
the various Boards, permission of setting up of medical College and increase of seats, removal of 
President/ members, Exit Test, teachers' eligibility test etc. 
8. After the presentation of the Ministry on the Bills, the Members made several 
observations and raised queries w.r.t the following issues-  
(i)  the Ministry took 28 months to finalize both the Bills but only two wee ks time is 
being given to the Committee for examination;  
(ii)  number of undergraduate and post graduate seats in AYUSH colleges;  
(iii)  reasons for establishment of two separate C ommissions for Indian System of 
Medicine (ISM) and Homoeopathy practitioners;  
(iv)  constitution of a separate commission for Yoga and Naturopathy and its non -
inclusion in both the Bills;  
(v)  opinions and views of stakeholders not taken into account; 
(vi)  anomalies in various clauses;  
(vii)  issue of entitlement and extent of practitioner of Indian system of medicin e to 
perform surgeries lawfully;  
(viii)  scientific validation of the research outcomes with respect to Indian system of 
medicine;  
(ix)  role of different Autonomous Boards and Advisory Councils;  
(x)  due consideration to be given to the opinion of States and UTs;  
(xi)  representation from patients and students in the Advisory Councils;  
(xii)  adequate budgetary allocation for both the Commissions; and 
(xiii)  inclusion of clinical aspect in the EXIT exam etc. 
*** Relates to other matter 
 

112 
 
 
9. The Secretary did not reply to the queries put up by the Members and instead sought one 
week's time for submitting written replies to all the queries raised by various members during the 
meeting. The Committee then decided to hear the Secretary again based  on the replies received 
from the Ministry to queries raised during the meeting.   
Witnesses then withdrew 
10. Keeping in view the fact that the Committee has been directed to report on the above 
mentioned two Bills, namely, t he National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 
2019 *** before 30 th January, 2019 and the commencement of the Budget session from 31 st 
January, 2019, the Committee felt that it needed more time to prepare two reports on the two 
Bills.  
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The Committee then adjourned at 4:30 p.m. 
  

113 
 
IV 
 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Monday, the 21 st October, 2019 in   Committee 
Room D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. 1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav         -         Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2.     Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3.     Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
4.     Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5.     Shri K. Somaprasad 
6.     Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
7.      Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8.      Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
9.      Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
10.     Adv. Adoor Prakash 
11.     Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
12.     Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
13.     Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.     Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
            Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of Ministry of AYUSH 
 

114 
 
1. Shri Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Pathak, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Roshan Jaggi, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Vikram Singh, Director 
5. Dr. M. Nesari, Adviser (AYUSH) 
6. Dr. D.C. Katoch, Adviser (AYUSH) 
7. Dr. Mohd. Tahir, Adviser (Unani) 
8. Dr. S.R. Chinta, Deputy Adviser (Homoeopathy) 
 
Representative of Central Council of Homoeopathy  
 
9. Shri Nilanjan Sanyal, Chairman, Board of Governors 
 
Representative of Central Council of Indian Medicine  
 
10. Dr. Deopujari Jayant Yeshwant, President 
 
 I.        Opening Remarks 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them 
about the agenda of the day i.e. to hear the views of the Secretary,  Ministry of AYUSH on the 
two Bills namely (i) "The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019"  ***.  
He then informed the members that in  these two Bills, there are provisions for constitution of 
State Councils/Commissions. He proposed that since the implementing mechanism of the 
policies under the proposed legislation rests w ith the State Governments, therefore, it would be 
appropriate for the Committee to solicit the views of the State Governments  for comprehensive 
examination of the three Bills. The Committee, then, agreed to the proposal of the Chairman and 
directed the Secretariat to seek the views of all State Governments/UTs on the two Bills. 
II.      Oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH on the two Bills namely (i) "The 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019" and  *** 
  
3.        The Committee, then, heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH on the two 
Bills (i) "The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019" *** The 
Secretary apprised the  members about the background of the Bills and need for  proposed 
legislations; Consultative process and  approach while the   drafting the two Bills ;  its Salient 

115 
 
features; constitutions and functions of Central and States Councils; maintenance of Central and 
States registers etc.  The Secretary then made a power point presentation before the Committee 
which highlighted the following:- 
(i) objectives of the Bills 
(ii) background of the Bills 
(iii) number of AYUSH Colleges in the country 
(iv) Comparison of existing CCIM/CCH and the proposed NCIM/NCH 
(v) selection of Members of the Commission 
(vi) common features of proposed National Commissions 
(vii) composition of Commissions/Boards 
(viii) initiatives/steps taken by the Ministry to improve the AYUSH education  
  
4.       After the presentation of the Secretary, the Member s raised some queries w.r.t. the Bills 
which are as follows:- 
 Standardisation of education of AYUSH institutions. 
 Inclusion of Yoga and Naturopathy in NCISM Bill. 
 Inclusion of representatives of the Parliament  in Governing Bodies/Executive Councils 
in ISM & *** and institutions of National Importance.  
 Increasing the number of State representation in the Commission. 
 Services of Employees of CCIM  * should not be terminated but be merged in other 
Government departments.  
 Training to AYUSH doctors for giving Emergency critical care aid. 
Thereafter, the Secretary replied to some of the queries raised by the members. The 
Chairman directed the Ministry to send written replies to the queries within a week's time. He 
also directed the Secretariat to forward a quest ionnaire on the Bills to the Department for their 
written comments. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.29 p.m.  
 
V 

116 
 
 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 22 nd October, 2019 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav         -         Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
 2.     Shri A.K. Antony 
 3.     Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
 4.     Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
 5.     Shri Suresh Prabhu 
 6.     Dr. Santanu Sen 
7.      Shri K. Somaprasad 
8.      Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
9.      Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
10.       Ms. Ramya Haridas 
11.       Shri Arjunlal Meena 
12.       Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
13.       Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
14.     Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
15.     Adv. Adoor Prakash 
16.     Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
17.     Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
18.     Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
19.     Shri Anurag Sharma  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
            Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 

117 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
I. Representatives of Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) 
 
1. Shri Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, Former President and Member 
2. Dr. P. MD. Hasan Ahmed, Member 
3. Dr. Abul Hasan Ashraf, Member  
4. Dr. Khalid Jawad, Member 
 
II. Representative of Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS), Chennai 
 
Dr. K. Kanakavalli, Director General 
 
III. Representative of National Institute of Siddha (NIS) Chennai 
 
Prof. N.J. Muthukumar, Director 
 
IV. Representative of Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), New 
Delhi 
 
Dr. Zaki Ahmad, Research Officer 
 
V. Representative of National Institute of Unani Medicine (NIUM) Banglore 
 
Prof. Abdul Wadud, Director 
 
VI. Representative of National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur 
 
Prof. Sanjeev Sharma, Director 
 
VII. Representatives of National Integrated Medical Association (NIMA)  
 
1. Dr. Vinayak Tembhurnikar, President  
2. Dr. Nitin Kothale 
3. Dr. Ved Prakash Sharma 
 
VIII. Representatives of All India Ayurvedic Congress (AIAC) 
 
1. Dr. Rajesh Sharma, Vice President  
2. Dr. Vaidya Tarachand Sharma 
 
IX. Representative of The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Ltd. 

118 
 
 
Dr. U. Indulal, Advisor 
 
X. Representatives of Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) regd 
 
1. Dr. Ramphal Panchal, Chairman, Legal Committee 
2. Dr. R.P. Parasher, National General Secretary 
 
XI. Representatives of Indian Naturopathy and Yoga Graduates' Medical Association, 
(INYGMA) 
National: 
1. Dr. Naveen KV, President 
2. Dr Prashanth Shetty, General Secretary 
International: 
1. Dr. Rajesh Singh 
2. Dr. RC Verma 
XII. Representatives of Maharashtra Council of Indian Medicine 
 
1. Dr. Ashutosh Gupta, President 
2. Dr. Abhinandan Yuvraj Patil, Member 
 
I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them 
that the meeting was convened to hear the views of the stakeholders in connection with the 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019 ***  which had been referred to 
the Committee for examination and report. 
2.1 The Committee made an assessment of the volume of the work that was required to be 
done on the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019 ***  Keeping in 
view the wider implications of the proposed legislations on the regulatory oversight of Indian 
System of Medicine *** in the country, the Committee decided that it needed to hear the views 
of a large number of experts/stakeholders. The Chairperson apprised the members that Press 
Releases on both the Bills had been published in all leading newspapers on 9 th February, 2019 
inviting views of a wide spectrum of important experts/stakeholders on both the Bills.  The 
Committee had already received a large number of Memoranda from a wide cross -section of 
stakeholders in response to the Press Releases which w ere sent to Ministry of AYUSH for their 
comments. The comments of the Ministry on the memoranda have been received by the 
Committee. 
 

119 
 
II Oral evidence of the representatives of various Association/Federations on the 
National Commission of Indian System of Medicine, 2019 (NCISM Bill, 2019) 
3. Thereafter, the Committee started with the oral evidence of stakeholders on the NCISM 
Bill, 2019.  
3.1 The Committee first heard the views of Former President and Member of Central Council 
of Indian Medicine (CCIM).  He sought to make a separate Commission for Unani as per 
Clause2(h); inclusion of Yoga and Naturpathy as per Clause 4(2), removal of the eligibility 
criteria of 25 years experience  & 5 years Head of Departme nt and MD degree for Members,  
addition of one elected members in the Commission from every State, removal of the Pre -Tib 
and Pre-Ayurveda course, maintaining the quota of 15% seats for  outsiders and 85%  for the 
State in Clause 14(3), inclusion of Final Exam Test as Exit Test and for PG admission, 
equivalent fees and salary in every college, deletion of  the clause 33(c), absorption  of  the 
employees of present Commission in other Government Departments. 
3.2 The Member of Central Council of Indian Medici ne (CCIM)  suggested an independent 
Commission for Unani, appointment of Chairman on rotation basis from Ayurveda and Unani, 
allowing practice in modern allopathic medicine upto a certain extent as per Clause 33(3)(b). 
3.3 Director General , Central Council  for Research in Siddha (CCRS), Chennai  inter -alia 
suggested a separate Board for Siddha and inclusion of more members in the Board. 
3.4 Director, National Institute of Siddha  (NIS) Chennai submitted that a separate Board 
should be created, appointment of  Chairman has made on rotation basis from the States and 
Union Territory as per Clause 11(2)(d) in Chapter III and members from Siddha has nominated.  
3.5 Research Officer,  Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), New 
Delhi suggested an ind ependent Commission for Unani, increase in the number of ex -officio 
members, nomination from DG, CCRUM, Unani Councils, Ayurveda Council, inclusion of in 
Urdu knowing persons, addition of Right to practice integrated system and  increase in the 
Budget, etc. 
3.6 Director, National Institute of Unani Medicine (NIUM), Banglore submitted that the 
Director, National Institute of Unani, Bangaluru should be read as National Institute of Unani 
Medicine, Bengaluru in the Chapter II Clause 4(3)(h). He further added t hat member of Unani 
should have knowledge of Urdu. The National Teachers Eligibility Test should be conducted 
only at entry level in the Chapter IV Clause 17(1) and there should be a  separate Board for 
Unani Medicine. 
3.7 Director, National Institute of A yurveda (NIA), Jaipur  wanted nominating Faculty 
Dean/Research Council DGs in Advisory Council Member 
3.8 The r epresentative of National Integrated Medical Association Central Council 
(NIMACC)  sought  to change the definition of Indian System of Medicine in place of Indian 

120 
 
System of Modern Medicine in the Clause 33(3) and Rural Area instead of Public Health in the 
Clause 52 and giving representation from each State.  
3.9 The Vice President, All India Ayurvedic Congress (AIAC) suggested to make a provision 
to upgrade the standard of Ayurveda. Modern techniques and tools should be incorporated at the 
teaching level in Clause 24.   He also added that 30%  private practitioners should be included in 
the Commission and increase suggested to the age limit of 70 to 75 years for Ayurveda  legends 
in order to get benefits of their experience.  
 
III *** 
4.1 ***. 
4.2 ***. 
4.3 ***.  
4.4 *** 
4.5. ***. 
4.6 ***. 
4.7 *** 
4.8 *** 
4.9 *** 
4.10 *** 
4.11 *** 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.08 p.m.  
 
 
 
 
*** Relates to other matter 
 

121 
 
VI 
 
SIXTH MEETING 
  
 
 The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 7 th November, 2019 in   Committee 
Room D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA    
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween 
4. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
6. Shri K. Somaprasad 
7. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
8. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
9. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
10. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
11. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
13. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
14. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
15. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
16. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
17. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
18. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
19. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of AYUSH 
 
1. Shri Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Pathak, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Roshan Jaggi, Joint Secretary 

122 
 
4. Dr. D.C. Katoch, Adviser (AYUSH) 
5. Dr. Mohd. Tahir, Adviser (Unani) 
6. Dr. S.R.K. Vidyarthi, Director 
7. Shri Vikram Singh, Director 
8. Dr. S.R. Chinta, Deputy Adviser (Homoeopathy) 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice  
 
Department of Legislative Department 
 
1. Smt. Veena Kothavale, Joint Secretary & Legislative Council 
2. Shri Prashant Singh,  Deputy Legislative Council 
Department of Legal Affairs 
 
Shri Mahendra  Khandelwal, Additional Government Advocate 
I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them 
that the meeting was convened to have clause -by-clause consideration on the (i) The National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019; and ***.  The Members were also 
informed that most of the provisions of the aforementioned Bills have been drafted on the lines 
of National Medical Commission Act.   
II Clarification on the various clauses of The National Commission for Indian System 
of Medicine Bill, 2019  
3. The Members of the Committee first deliberated on various clauses of the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019 and gave various suggestions on the 
provisions of the Bill which are as follows:  
(i)  the definitions of terms professional misconduct and ethical misconduct should be included 
in the Bills;  
(ii)   a separate board for Naturopathy and Yoga should be constituted;  
(iii)  knowledge of Urdu/Tamil may also be added as the eligibility criteria for appointment in 
the Commission;  
(iv)  Director Generals of Central Council of Research in Ayurveda (CCRA), Central Council for 
Research in Siddha (CCRS), Central Council for Research in Unani Me dicine (CCRUM) and 

123 
 
Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN) should also be included in the 
Commission;  
(v)   the Director of Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga and Director, National Institute of 
Naturopathy, Pune should also be included in the Commission;  
(vi)   the representation of States/UTs be increased in the Commission;   
(vii)   a common Medical Appellate Tribunal for AYUSH may be constituted;  
(viii)  the paramedical courses in Ayurveda must also be regulated;  
(ix)   the Commission should also regulate admission to Pre -Tib and Pre -Ayurveda courses and 
assess the quality and standard of such courses;  
(x)    a common final year undergraduate exam which will also be a National Exit Test should be 
conducted;  
(xi)  a Board of Research must be constituted to promote multidisciplinary research 
collaborations among Research Councils of all disciplines of Indian System of Medicine;  
(xii)  Members of the  anemailra (ahS bnSi awl hS  faowa ard Srl bnSi awl ha ma faowa ) may 
be nominated in the Governing Bodies of all the ISM Universities; and  
(xiii)  AYUSH and Homoeopathy education should also be included in the syllabus of New 
Education Policy etc. 
III ***  
4. *** 
4.1 ***   
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12:27 p.m.  
 
 
 
*** Relates to other matter 

124 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3:00 p.m. on Friday, the 15 th November, 2019 in Room No.  A, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA    
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Dr. Santanu Sen 
4. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
5. Shri K. Somaprasad 
6. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
7. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
8. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
9. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
10. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
11. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary  
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
Opening Remarks 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt draft 115 th Report on the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) Bill, 2019 and ***.    
3. The Committee then considered the draft 115th Report on the National Commission for 
Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) Bill, 2019 and ***. After some discussion and few 
modifications, the Committee adopted both the reports. 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 27 th November, 2019. 
The Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee and two other members namely, Dr. 
Santanu Sen and Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. 
Mahesh Sharma and Shrimati Pratima Mondal, Member of Lok Sabha to lay the Reports on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3:11 p.m.   
 
*** Relates to other matter 

125 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
  

126 
 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
 
The NCISM Bill, 
2019.pdf
 
https://rajyasabha.nic.in/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/BillFile/Bill/14/11
3/I%20of%202019_2019_2_15.pdf 

127 
 
ANNEXURE - II 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
Representatives of Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) 
 
1.     Shri Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, Former President and Member 
2. Dr. P. MD. Hasan Ahmed, Member 
3. Dr. Abul Hasan Ashraf, Member  
4. Dr. Khalid Jawad, Member 
 
Representative of Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS), Chennai 
 
Dr. K. Kanakavalli, Director General 
 
Representative of National Institute of Siddha (NIS) Chennai 
 
Prof. N.J. Muthukumar, Director 
 
Representative of Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), New Delhi 
 
Dr. Zaki Ahmad, Research Officer 
 
Representative of National Institute of Unani Medicine (NIUM) Banglore 
 
Prof. Abdul Wadud, Director 
 
Representative of National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur 
 
Prof. Sanjeev Sharma, Director 
 
Representatives of National Integrated Medical Association Central Council (NIMACC)  
 
1. Dr. Vinayak Tembhurnikar, President  

128 
 
2. Dr. Nitin Kothale 
3. Dr. Ved Prakash Sharma 
 
Representatives of All India Ayurvedic Congress (AIAC) 
 
1. Dr. Rajesh Sharma, Vice President 
2. Dr. Vaidya Tarachand Sharma 
 
Representative of The Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Ltd. 
 
Dr. U. Indulal, Advisor 
 
Representatives of Integrated Medical Association (AYUS) regd 
 
1. Dr. Ramphal Panchal, Chairman, Legal Committee 
2. Dr. R.P. Parasher, National General Secretary 
 
Representatives of Indian Naturopathy and Yoga Graduates' Medical Association, (INYGMA) 
National: 
1. Dr. Naveen KV, President 
2. Dr Prashanth Shetty, General Secretary 
International: 
1. Dr. Rajesh Singh 
2. Dr. RC Verma 
Representatives of Maharashtra Council of Indian Medicine 
 
1. Dr. Ashutosh Gupta, President 
2. Dr. Abhinandan Yuvraj Patil, Member 
 
 