PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA   20 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2006-2007 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 8TH MARCH, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 8TH MARCH, 2007) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2007/VISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA) 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2006-2007 (DEMAND NO. 46) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
LITERACY 
(MINIST 
RY O 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 8TH MARCH, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 8TH MARCH, 2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2007/PHALGUNA, 1928 (SAKA) 


CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ....................................................................................................... (i)—(iii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT  
 Chapter-I Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government ................................................................................. 
2—20 
 Chapter-II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies .............................................................................................. 
21—34 
 Chapter-III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee ................................................................................................... 
35—68 
 Chapter-IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
Final replies of the Government are still awaited .................................................. 
69 
4. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS ………………………………………………………….………. 70—77 
5. MINUTES ……………………………………………………………………………..……………….. 79—81 
6. ANNEXURES ........................................................................................................................................... 83—92 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
( 2006-07 ) 
 1. Shri Amar Singh  — Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 #2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur  
 @3. Shri A.K. Antony 
 4. Prof. P. J. Kurian 
 5. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
 6. Shrimati Maya Singh 
 7. Shri Digvijay Singh 
 8. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
 9. Shri Lalh Mingliana 
 *10. Shri Manohar Joshi 
 $$11. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
  LOK  SABHA  
 @12. Shri M. Ambareesh  
 ^13. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli 
 14. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 15. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 16. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
 17. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 18. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman 
 19. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah 
 20. Shri Rasheed Masood 
 21. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 22. Shri Nihal Chand 
 23. Shri D.B. Patil 
 24. Shrimati K. Rani 
 25. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
 26. Dr. R. Senthil 
 27. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin 
 28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 29. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
 30. Shri Uday Singh 
 31. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
 **32. Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya 
 ^^33. Shri Vinod Khanna  
 $34. Shri R.L. Jalappa 
# Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 15th December, 2006 on demise. 
@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 24th October, 2006. 
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 4th  September, 2006. 
$$ Nominated w.e.f. 30th November, 2006. 
^ Nominated w.e.f 31st August, 2006. 
** Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2006. 
^^ Nominated w.e.f 3rd September, 2006. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006. 
 
  

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri H.C. Sethi, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Pradeep Chatur vedi, Under Secretary 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer  
 
 
  

 
PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliament ary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, 
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Twentieth Report 
of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report on 
Demands for Grants (Demand No.46) of the Department of  Health and Family Welfare,  Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare for the year 2006-07. 
2. The Sixteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare was presented/laid in both the Houses on 22nd May, 2006. Replies of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Family Welfare were considered by the 
Committee at its meeting held on 28th February, 2007. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted th e same at its meeting held on  28th February, 2007. 
  AMAR SINGH 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman, 
February 28, 2007 Department-related Parliamentary 
Phalguna 9, 1928 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
observations contained in its Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare for the year 2006-07.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Go vernment in respect of the recommendations observations 
contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:- 
 (i) Recommendations/Observations which ha ve been accepted by the Government:-  
  (Chapter-I) 4.2, 5.2, 6.1, 6.2, 7.1, 7.2, 8.1, 8.2, 10.1, 10.4, 11.3, 11.4, 13, 15.4, 17.1, 17.2, 18.2, 19, 21.1, 
21.2, 25.4.3, 25.5.1, 25.5.2, 25.5.3, 27.1, 27.2, 27.3, 27.5, 29.6, 30.5, 30.6, 33.1 Total-32 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committe e does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies:-  
  (Chapter-II) 3.1, 3.2, 5.3, 11.5, 15.2, 15.5, 18.3, 18.4, 24.3, 24.4, 24.5, 25.5.5, 28.4, 28.8, 29.2, 29.3, 29.4, 
29.5, 31.5, 32.1, 32.2 Total-21 
 (iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee:-  
  (Chapter-III) 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 3.4, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 5.4, 5.5, 8.3, 9.3, 9.4, 9.6, 10.3, 12.2, 12.3, 
12.4, 14.1, 14.2, 15.6, 16.2, 20, 22.2, 23, 25.2.2, 25.2.4, 25.2.5, 25.3.2, 25.4.1, 25.4.2, 26.2, 26.3, 27.4, 
28.2, 28.3, 28.5, 30.2, 30.3, 30.4, 32.3, 33.2 Total-45 
 (iv) Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:- 
  (Chapter-IV) - Nil 

CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL  
Recommendations/Observations 
4.2 The Committee, while appreciating the level of utiliz ation of plan funds allocated for Sufdarjung Hospital 
during 2005-06, also notes that as compared to Rs. 12. 88 crores worth equipment purchased in 2005-06, it is 
proposed to purchase equipment costin g Rs. 15.00 crores during 2006-07. The Committee, therefore is of the view 
that required funds for procurement of equipments in Sa fdarjung Hospital need to be provided in 2006-07. The 
Committee also observes that against 153 number of eq uipments to be purchased during 2005-06, number of 
equipments purchased was only 98. Additional efforts should, therefore, be made to expedite the proposed 
formalities so that targets set for 2006-07 are achievable. 
Action Taken 
 A schedule has already been prepared  to procure the equipments worth Rs .15 crores in the current financial 
year. Rs. 12.79 crores have been allocated in the B.E. fo r the purchase of equipments in this year 2006-07. Every 
effort is being made and process of procurement is regula rly monitored to get the equipments as per the targeted 
schedule. Funds requirement, if any above Rs. 12.79 crores will be projected at the RE stage. 
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL 
Recommendations/Observations 
5.2 The Committee notes that sixteen projects/schemes were  approved under the Tenth Plan. Their latest status 
report, however, does not seem to be very encouraging. Setting up of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical 
Education and Research at the hospital is the most ambitio ns project. The Committee is constrained to observe that 
this project seems to have been entangled in the numer ous procedural formalities. Designated plot was handed over 
to M/s HSCC (India) Ltd. on the 14th June, 2005 for demo lition of old barracks and co nstruction of the institute 
building. Although about one year has passed since then but only around 65 per cent of the demolition work has been 
completed. The Committee is not satisfied by the reply of th e Ministry that the tendering work is in process and 
actual construction is likely to commence shortly. The Comm ittee feels that the present pace of construction clearly 
gives an indication that it may perhaps take another plan period (Eleventh Plan commences from 2007-08) to get the 
building of PGIMER ready and functional. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the construction project 
may be completed under ‘a prescribed time-schedule closely monitored by a designated group of authorities. 
Action Taken 
 After following the prescribed tendering process, th e construction project for building of PGIMER at Dr. 
R.M.L. Hospital has been awarded to L-l tenderer for tota l estimated contract price of Rs. 44, 96, 11, 318. The 
contractor has already started the work in May, 06 and the entire work shall be completed within twelve months. As 
regards demolition work, about 80 per cent work is comple ted and remaining demolition will be carried as per 
requirements for construction of the PGIMER building. The project is being monitored by a Project Management 
Committee headed by Secretary (Health and FW). Cost and time schedule for the project are reasonably firmed up. 
VI. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY, RANCHI  
Recommendations/Observations 
6.1 Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi is a premier inst itute in the field of mental health in India. It offers 
clinical services to mentally ill, trains manpower in th e field of mental health and carries out various research 
programmes. Committee has been observing that this premier institute has not been taking the benefit of plan funds 
earmarked for it for one reason or the other for the past few years. Details regarding the last three years are self-
revealing:- 

(Rs. in crores) 
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
Approved outlay AE Approved outlay AE Approved outlay RE 
8.00 4.33 9.00 2.83 18.50 10.26 
 Achievement level of financial targets has been very disappointing. Approved outlay of Rs. 18.50 crore in 
2005-06 had to be reduced to Rs. 10.26 crore at the RE stage and actual utilization figures are not known to the 
Committee. The Committee is not optimistic  about full utilization of Rs. 10.65 crore plan funds allocated for the 
institute for 2006-07 in view of its past track record. 
6.2 Progress made in the procurement of some medical equipments during 2005-06 supports Committee’s 
apprehension. In respect of equipment like Colour Doppler and Campus Server although approved by SFC in 2001-
02 (February, 2002), orders could be placed at the end of th e fourth year (last quarter of financial year 2005-06). In 
the case of procurement of another equipment, Spiral CT Scan also cleared by SFC in February, 2002, advice of 
Ministry of Law has been sought on some procedural matter on 1st March, 2006. The Committee takes a serious 
view of this. The Committee reiterates that there is an urgent need for streamlining the procurement procedure so that 
premier institutes like CIP, Ranchi do not continue to suffer. 
Action Taken  
Para 6.1 and 6.2 
 The allocation in respect of C.I.P. Ranchi for the year 2005-06 was Rs. 10.26 crores under Revenue Budget 
and Rs.8.24 Crores under Capital Budget, making a total of Rs.l8.50crores. 
 The allocation of Rs. 10.26 crores under Revenue was retain ed at RE stage. It may be seen that during 2005-06 
utilization of funds was Rs.7.69 crores and equipments procured include the Colour Doppler and Campus Server. The 
major reason for shortfall in meeting of targets was non procurement of Spiral CT Scan due to revision of technical 
specifications. The Spiral CT Scan same is being procured during 2006-07. 
 As regards utilization of funds under Capital head during 2005-06, as against an allocation of Rs.8.24 crores 
expenditure of only Rs.0.87 crores coul d be incurred. The non-ut ilization of funds under Ca pital was because of the 
fact that the funds allotted for CIP Ranchi under M/o Urban Development were not made available in time to the 
Chief Engineer for executing the works of the institute. 
 During 2006-07, as against the provision of Rs. 10.65 crores under Revenue, Rs.7.36 crores has already been 
utilized as on 30.11.2006. All efforts are being made to utilize funds allocated during 2006-07. 
VII. JIPMER, PONDICHERRY  
Recommendations/Observations 
7.1 Plan allocation for JIPMER, Pondicherry during BE 2005-06 was Rs. 62.00 crore which was substantially 
reduced to Rs. 42.00 crore at the RE stage. Explaining the reasons for the reduced allocation, the Department 
submitted that besides the ongoing activities, the plan allo cation for 2005-06 was meant for the establishment of a 
Super Specialty Centre and Trauma Care Centre. These new proposals involving financial implication worth Rs. 
118.00 crore although cleared by the C.C.E.A had to go through a number of procedural formalities. As these 
activities would take considerable time, the provision in RE   was made to the tune of Rs. 42.00 crore. The latest 
position indicated by the Department was that selection of executing agency was going on which is expected to be 
finalized by early April, 2006. The Committee appreciates the preparedness shown by the Department in fixing a 
time schedule for completion of Super Speciality and Trauma Centre. The Committee, however, recommends that the 
Department should closely monitor the progress in this regard so that the projects can be completed on time. 
Action Taken 
 It is stated that the price bids su bmitted have been opened and action is under way to award the work to EPC 
Developer on turnkey basis and efforts will’ be made to complete the projects relating to establishing the Super-
Speciality Center and the Trauma Care Center at JIPMER, Pondicherry well in time. 
Recommendations/Observations 

7.2 On a specific query, the Committee was informed that against the sanctioned faculty strength of 175, there 
were 89 vacancies at present. Not only this, as per the information made available in the Performance Budget (2006-
07), against the original sanctioned strength of total posts of 3185, the, existing strength is only 2465. The Committee 
has been given to understand that sinc e its inception in April, 1956, the Ins titute has grown to become a premier 
institute providing most modern allopathic treatment for all diseases and disorders. Through its Regional Cancer 
Centre status and also Cardiac Cath Laboratory, the institute has been serving the cause of poor and downtrodden 
patients by providing free but quality medical care to  them. During 2005-06, 221 major operations including 120 
open-heart operations were conducted totally free of cost . Its status as the leading teaching institute is well-
established. An institute of such a high standard continui ng with a depleted staff streng th is however, a cause of 
serious concern. The Committee, accordingly, observes that the Department should take immediate steps for 
providing the necessary infrastructure and required faculty. If need be, a review of both recruitment and procurement 
procedure may also be made by the Department. 
Action Taken 
 It is stated that action is taken expeditiously by the Institution and all concerned for procuring the equipments 
required for the Institution as early as possible. During  last financial year two hi-tech equipments namely MRI 
scanner and whole body spiral CT Scanner were procur ed and during this financial year another Cardiac 
Catherization laboratory and 1000. A X-ray machine are being procured. With these new hi-tech equipments the 
patient care services will improve rema rkably. Besides, regarding the recruitm ent of vacant posts of faculty on 
contract basis was advertised twice a nd about 21 Assistant Professors were appointed on contract basis pending 
regular appointments through UPSC and one Assistant Professor of Anesthesiology and one Lecturer in Radiology 
(Medical Physics) were appointed on regular basis after selection by UPSC. Similarly, 77 numbers of Group ‘C’ 
posts is going on and will be completed in another two months time. This will also improve the patient care services. 
VIII. POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH  
Recommendations/Observations 
8.1 PGI Chandigarh, an institute of ‘National Importance’ as declared way back in April, 1967, has been 
providing exemplary service to the coun try, both in the field of health car e and medical education. The Committee 
observes that the Institute continues to make optimum and judicious utilization of allocated plan funds. However, the 
Committee has been given to understand that plan funds al located to the Institute  are not in accordance with its 
requirements. Against the proposed Tenth Plan outlay of Rs . 401.50 crore, an outlay of only Rs. 200.00 crore was 
approved. The Committee has its own doubts about the actual re lease of these approved funds to the Institute. As per 
the details available about the last four years of Tenth Pl an (2003-07), only Rs. 133.00 crore have been allocated 
during this period. It cannot be that in the very first year of the plan period, an amount of Rs. 67.00 crore were placed 
at the disposal of the Institute. As many as 11 project works have been proposed for 2006-07 by the Institute. The 
Committee hopes that plan funds of Rs. 40.00 crore for 2006-0 7 will prove to be adequate for these projects. If not, 
required funds at the RE stage may be provided to the institute. 
8.2 With regard to non-plan funds, the Committee observes th at there is only a marginal increase of Rs. 1.00 crore 
in 2006-07 when compared with the non-plan provision of Rs. 121.00 crore in 2005-06. As per the data regarding 
patient care and other cost indices, 10 per cent increase ha s to be added in the expenditure incurred during 2005-06. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should not be any mismatch between the requirement and 
allocation of non-plan funds for the Institute. 
Action Taken 
 In the Tenth Five Year Plan Rs. 200 crores were a pproved under Plan for the PGIMER. Out of the sanctioned 
Rs. 200 crores, Rs.133 crores have been  allocated to PGI and the same have b een utilized. In the first year, Rs.67 
crores was placed at the disposal to attend to the carry over projects of the 9th Plan. The Institute has also submitted 
that against the balance amount of Rs.67 cores, out of s. 200 crores of the Tenth Plan, only Rs.40.00 crores have been 
allocated to the Institute for the current financial year 200 6-07under Plan and Rs.25.00 cror es have been released. If 
additional amount is required for completion of projects, provisions would be made at R.E. stage. 
 Against the demand of PGI for Rs. 145.72 crores in BE. 2006-07 only Rs.122 crores were approved. On 
account of the following reasons, PGI have requested additional amount of Rs.23.72 crores. 

 (i) For salary and pension additional funds to the tu ne of Rs.1600 lakhs are required due to increase in 
DA and basic pay of employees and due to retirement of about 150 official in the financial year 2006-
07. 
 (ii) An additional amount of Rs.72 lakhs is required due to hike in air-fare, petrol, diesel and in the cost of 
other transport services. 
 (iii) In material and supplies an additional amount of Rs .300 lakhs is required due to increase in the cost of 
prices of various consumables items needed for the essential services being provided by the hospital. 
Also, the new centres like Advanced Urology Ce nter, Bone Marrow Transplant Center (BMTC), 
Advanced Eye Center have started working and their requirement of consumables is also being met 
out of the current allocation. 
 (iv) For maintenance of hospital buildings, campus and equipment, additional funds amounting to Rs.200 
lakhs are required. 
 (v) For replacement of old equipment funds amounting to Rs.200 lakhs are required. 
 To avoid any mismatch between the requirement and allocation of Non Plan funds the additional amount of 
Rs.23.72 crores requested by PGI may be sought at R.E. stage. 
X. SHORTAGE OF REQUIRED MANPOWER AT CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  HOSPITALS/ 
INSTITUTES  
Recommendations/Observations 
10.1 For the last two-three years, the Committee has been monitoring the ever-increasing shortage of manpower-
both medical and para-medical at Premier Institutes/Cen tral Government Hospitals. The Committee observes that 
significant development has taken place in this crucial area during 2005-06. Applicability of Department of 
Personnel and Training O.M. dated 16.05.2001 would no longer be there on technical posts lying vacant for more 
than three years. As per the revised decision of the Cabi net, these technical posts could not be filled up without 
referring them to the Screening Committee. Not only this , future vacancies of scientific and technical posts can 
remain unfilled for a period of three years, instead of the earlier period of one year. The Committee feels that this was 
a step in the right direction. The Committee notes that 69  vacant technical (para-medi cal) posts were advertised 
during the last year. Selection process in respect of some posts has been completed and in respect of the remaining 
posts also, the selection process is expected to be completed very soon. The Committee is of the view that the process 
of filling up of all the vacant technical posts should be closely monitored so as to get the desired result at the earliest. 
Action Taken  
ME.III 
 As regards Lady Hardinge Medical Co llege and Associated Hospitals, it is stated that the action for filling up 
the post is taken as per relevant rules and instructions. However, in order to speed up the action for filling up the post 
in these institutions, directions have been issued to the Directorate General of Health Services also to evolve an 
effective regulating mechanism. 
 As regards JIPMER, Pondicherry, it is stated that the ac tion for filling up the post is taken as per relevant rules 
and instructions. The action for filling up the posts in this institution is also being monitored. 
CHS 
 Owing to the Instructions issued by DoPT regarding optimization of direct recruitment, the posts of CHS 
could not be filled for almost 4 years from 2001 to February 2005 when approval of Cabinet was accorded to the 
exemption from the said instructions. Thereafter, all the po sts have been reported to UPSC. Since its takes almost 1 
to 1½ years for the UPSC to recomme nd candidates, the process of recruitment has started gaining momentum and 
recommendations have started coming in. However, simulta neously contractual appointments for one year or till 
regular doctors join, whichever is earlier, in the Teaching and Non-Teaching sub-cadres are also being allowed so 
that patient care does not suffer since joining of regular docto rs is likely to take time as verification of character and 
antecedents is also involved. 
Recommendations/Observations 

10.4 The Committee has also been observing media reports both for and against levying of user charges for 
diagnostic and other procedures at AIIMS. The Committee does not appreciate the disturbing trend of politicization 
of this reputed Institute. The Committee has been given to understand that this decision  was the result of a detailed 
examination at various fora and necessary approval of all competent authorities including ratification by the 
Governing Body of the Institute on 5.7.05. The Committee, is however surprised to note that all these details 
furnished to the Committee have found no mention in the media reports. Th e Committee would like to emphasize 
that premier Institutes like AIIMS need to react in an ob jective manner to the media reports appearing from time to 
time which at times are not based on facts. 
Action Taken 
 There have been many references from some Members of  Parliament raising concern over the revision of user 
charges at AIIMS. A Committee has also been constituted to review the user charges and make the recommendations. 
In the mean time the Institute Body  in its meeting held on 5.7.2006 considered appropriate to restore status quo ante, 
till the recommendations of the Committee are received. 
XI. SETTING UP OF AIIMS LIKE INSTITUTIONS (PRADHAN MANTRI  SWASTHYA SURAKSHA 
YOJANA) PMSSY 
Recommendations/Observations 
11.3 The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier reco mmendation that a scheme should be launched only after 
completing all the ground work and preparatory exercise. It has taken almost four years in getting the CCEA 
approval for PMSSY. The Committee now apprehends that mana gement of such a big project may prove to be too 
difficult to be handled effectively by the Ministry in spite  of their having set-up a designated Cell for the same. The 
Committee is not inclined to agree with the Department’s contention that in view of the track record of State 
Government not being able to manage their own institutio ns, the scheme needs to be implemented by the Centre 
directly. The Committee is of the firm view that the conc erned State Govts. should be  involved in the setting 
up/upgrading of institutes in their States. The Committe e appreciated the PMSSY. This needs to be started 
immediately without any delay. First upgradation of hospitals to be started immediately. For this allocation of Rs.300 
crore to be allotted without any delay. 
Action Taken 
 The CCEA approved the proposals relating to setting up of six AIIMS-like hospital and upgradation of 13 
existing Government Medical College Institutions on 16.3.2006 and 22.6.2006, respectively. The overall 
implementation of the PMSSY including the construction of AIIMS-like institutions will be supervised directly by 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare through the Project Management Committee. The setting up of 6 AIIMS-
like institutions will be executed on  turnkey basis selected th rough a competitive bidding process. The process of 
selection of Project Consultant for implementation of six AI IMS-like Institutions has been expedited and is likely to 
be selected by October, 2006. Likewise, the process of se lection of Architectural concept/Design has been expedited 
and selection is likely by November, 2006. Action for getting the pre-construction survey and environmental 
clearance has been initiated. A special PMSSY Cell is bein g set-up in the Ministry incl uding one Joint Secretary and 
one Director level officer. In addition, a Project Cell at each  site of the six AIIMS like institutions is still also be set 
up for monitoring of construction activities and proper lia isoning with the State Governments. State Governments 
have been requested to arrange for infrastructure requirements for power, water and roads etc. The upgradation of 
existing 13 medical institutions is being undertaken in consultation and above co-ordination with the concerned State 
Governments. Out of Rs.120 crores outlay sanctioned for u pgradation of each institute, the Central Government will 
invest Rs.100 crores as a one time measure and remaining cap ital expenditure of Rs.20 crores will have to be borne 
by the respective State Governments. The State Government s will also need to bear the recurring expenditure in 
terms of man-power, maintenance and further replacement of all the upgraded facilities. The concerned State 
Governments have been asked to contribute Rs. 20 crores as part of their share to the upgradation proposal. 
 Preliminary Project proposals are being prepared by the institutions. Expert teams from Government of India 
Institutions visit the sites. These proposals are now being fi nalized by discussions by Stat es and Institutions. It is 
hoped that DPR’s will be made between December, 06 and December, 07. A mee ting of Health Secretaries/Director 
of Medical Education/Principals of Me dical Colleges identified for up-gradatio n was being held in New Delhi, on 
29th-30th August, 2006 for working out the commonality of approach an d strategy for freezing of specifications and 

procurement of medical equipments. Experts will be involved in this process. States will also spend themselves their 
earmarked funds on procurement of equipments as identified under the Project. 
Recommendations/Observations 
11.4 The Committee is concerned about on e crucial financial aspect of PMSSY. There is a ceiling of Rs. 330 crore 
per institute, out of which Rs. 110 crore will be the contribution from Centre and States pooling Rs. 20 crores. 
Remaining Rs. 200 crore are to come from other sources.  The Committee feels that this  is a grey area and every 
attempt should be made to restrict the role of private s ector in PMSSY. With the private sector being the major fund-
raiser, there is a distinct possibility of management slip ping into their hands. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Centre should be more generous by increasing its share and respective State Govts. should also be pursued to 
contribute more. The Committee is also of the view that the exercise of recruiting the required manpower for the 
proposed institutes should also begin at the earliest. If th at does not happen, the Comm ittee has little hope of these 
institutes becoming functional in the near future. 
Action Taken 
 There are two components of the PMSSY setting up of 6 AIIMS like institutions and upgradation of 13 
medical institutions in 10 States. The estimated cost of setting up of each AIIMS like institution is Rs.332 crores. 
These funds will be met entirely by the Government of I ndia. Under the Upgradation Scheme, the sum proposed is 
Rs.120 crores out of which Rs.100 crores will be provi ded by Government of India and Rs. 20 crores will be 
contributed by the State Government concerned. In the case  of Banaras Hindu University, this will be provided by 
Ministry of HRD. In the case of SVIMS, Tirupati, the share will be on a 50-50 basis between Government of India 
and the TTD Trust. Therefore, most of the funds are not pr oposed to be raised from private sources. In order to 
address the issue of demand for faculty/staff for the new institutions, AIIMS/PGIMER have been asked to suggest 
options. To facilitate the process, an Expert Group has been constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. Kusum 
Verma, Former Dean of AIIMS. It is also planned to comp lete the process of recruitment of faculty/staff for the six 
new AIIMS. like institutions by 2008. For the medical institutions upgraded under th e PMSSY, State Governments 
have been advised to take advance action for recruitment of additional manpower required for running the upgraded 
facilities. 
XIII. RASHTRIYA AROGYA NIDHI  
Recommendations/Observations 
13. Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi was launched in 1996-97 and has been constituted with the objective of providing 
financial assistance to the BPL population for meeting the ex penses on treatment for life threatening diseases in the 
Government hospitals. At the state level, similar societie s have been constituted in the various States/UTs which 
provide the financial assistan ce to BPL patients upto Rs. 1.50 lakh. The Central Government provides the funds to 
these societies to the extent of 50 per cent of the amoun t contributed by the respective State Government and subject 
to a maximum of Rs. 5.00 crore for bigger States and Rs. 2.00 crore for smaller states. The Committee notes that 21 
States have been the beneficiaries of the Nidhi with Ka rnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and 
Rajasthan getting the maximum funds. The Committee notes th at although the scheme was launched in 1997, all the 
N.E States with the exception of Tripura and Mizoram have  remained outside the ambit of the scheme so far. The 
Committee is not aware about the reasons therefor. It seem s that one obvious reason must be the weak financial 
position of such States. The Committee feels that the Depart ment has to make vigorous efforts to prevail upon these 
states to join the scheme. 
Action Taken 
 Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi (RAN) is a Re gistered Society under the Societies Registration Act, with the objective 
to provide much needed financial assistance to the poor for whom expensive but essential treatment is out of reach in 
the present system. The RAN has its Managing Committee comp rising Secretary (H and FW), Director General of 
Health Services, Joint Secretary and Chief Controller of Accounts (CCA) and HFM as Chairman. 
 All State Governments and Union Territories (except Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab and Uttar Prades h) are also operating similar kind of Societies in their States and provide 
financial assistance for medical treatment to the patient(s) living BPL to the tune of  Rs. 1,50,000 for life threatening 

diseases. Central Government provides grants to such Societ ies to the extend of half of the contribution made by the 
respective State Government subject to submission of utilization certificate for the earlier grants. 
 Such Societies in some States like Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan are operating 
the schemes effectively and based on their utilization and as  also respective State Government’s contribution, they 
are being sanction grant from the Central Government limite d to 50 per cent of the respective State Government’s 
contribution. 
 In so far as North Eastern States are concerned, ex cept Tripura and Mizoram no other State has set up such 
Societies. It is proposed to take up this issue again wi th the Governments of all remaining States including North 
Eastern States. This issue will also be taken up in the next meeting of the Central Council of Health. 
XV. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
15.4 Committee’s attention has been drawn by a number of as many as 15 very valuab le suggestions made by the 
Planning Commission in its Mid Term Appraisal of Tenth Plan, some of which are as follows:— 
 — assigning the sentinel surveillance of HIV to professional groups under the overall supervision of 
ICMR and the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme. 
 — using diverse channels like private sector, local bodies, elected representati ves, celebrities, sports 
icons and film stars for outreach, messaging and behavioural change in respect of use of condom. 
 — developing a policy framework and a range of Progr amme interventions to address children affected 
with AIDS, currently not specially included under the Programme. 
 — expediting the legislation on HIV/AIDS which has been finalized after over 18 months of deliberation. 
 — research on improved management and treatment of HIV/STDs would also expand the range of 
prevention options for women in particular.  
 The Committee hopes that the Department must have already initiated required action on these suggestions 
made in the Mid Term Appraisal of Tenth Plan. 
Action Taken 
 During 2006, special efforts have been made to strengthen the quality of sentinel surveillance data by 
involving five regional public health  institutions to technically support the SACS and to provide su pportive 
supervision. The central surveillance team has also been constituted under National Institute of Health and Family 
Welfare and National Institute of Medical  Statistics (ICMR) to randomly supe rvise the surveillance process. Out of 
the five regional institutions, two institutions belong to ICMR. 
 Inter-sectoral collaboration with private sector incl uding industrial and business houses remains primary focus 
for formulating and implementing HIV/AIDS work policy interventions. Advocacy programmes are organized for 
elected representatives of Parliament/State Legislatures and local bodies for taking th e HIV/AIDS programmes to 
grassroot levels. The TV and radio spots and other programm es are regularly broadcast featuring celebrities, sports 
icons and film stars for spreading HI V/AIDS messages and promoting condom u se in view of their mass appeal. 
Famous personalities used for such promotional campaigns include Amitabh Bacchan, Shabana Azmi, Sharmila 
Tagore and Rahul Dravid. The weekly half an hour programme, Haath se Haath Mila produced in collaboration with 
BBC-WST and Doordarshan as tripartite agreement regularly features film stars for spreading HIV/AIDS messages. 
 The country specific pediatric AIDS gu idelines have been finalized. The drugs for 10,000 children to be given 
in the first year.  
 India’s first ever National Consultation on children orphaned or vulnerable by HIV/AIDS took place in Delhi 
on March 28 and 29, 2005. A resolution endorsing 5 key strategies concerning affected children was passed as Delhi 
Commitment. The strategy is being worked out for inclusion under National AIDS Control Programme-Phase III. 
The country specific pediatric AIDS guidelines finalized drugs for 10,000 Children to be procured in 1st year. 
 The Draft bill on HIV/AIDS prepared by the Lawyers’ Collective, was circulated in Feb., 2005 among the 
Project Directors SACS, for their comments. The same have been received from them on the basis of further series of 

consultations held with stage holding partners. After inco rporating views of SACS, the feedback was provided to 
Lawyers’ Collective. A presentation on Draft Bill was made  before the Minister (H and FW) and senior officers on 
10.02.2006. On the observations made by the experts, the draft HIV/AIDS Bill has been further modified 
incorporating the feedback provided by NACO. 
XVII. NATIONAL CANCER CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
17.1 Cancer is an important public health problem in In dia with nearly 7-9 lakh new cases occurring every year in 
the country. It is estimated that there are 20-25 lakh cases of cancer in the country at any given point of time. With 
the objectives of prevention, early diagnosis and treatm ent, the National Cancer Control Programme (NCCP) was 
launched in 1975-76. The Programme was revised in 1984-85 and subsequently in December 2004. There are 5 
schemes under the revised Programme. 
 (i) Recognition of New Regional Cancer Centres (RCCs) 
  In order to augment comprehensive cancer care f acilities in regions of the country lacking them, New 
RCCs afre being recognized. A one-time grant of Rs. 5.00 crores is being provided for New RCCs. 
  For the year 2006-07 four new Regional Can cer Centres have been recognized . They are: 
  • Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 
  • Post Graduate Institute of Medi cal Education and Research, Chandigarh 
  • Sher-I-Kashmir Institute of Medica l Sciences, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir 
  • Arignar Anna Memorial Cancer Research In stitute and Hospital, Kancheepuram, Tamil Nadu. 
 (ii) Strengthening of Existing RCCs 
  A one time grant of Rs. 3.00 crores is provided to  the existing RCCs in order to further strengthen the 
cancer treatment facilities in the existing centres. 
 (iii) Development of Oncology Wing 
  The scheme aims to correct the geographical  imbalance by providing financial assistance to 
Government institutions (Medical Colleges as well as Government hospitals) for enhancing the cancer 
care facilities. The one-time grant has been enhan ced from Rs. 2.00 crores to Rs. 3.00 crores. Under 
the Oncology Wing scheme 13 proposals worth Rs. 26.46 crores have been cleared for financial 
assistance till date for the year 2005-06. 
 (iv) Decentralized NGO Scheme: 
  This scheme has been devised to promote preventi on and early detection of cancers. Non-government 
organizations (NGOs) will implement these activi ties under the coordination of the Nodal Agency, 
which will be an RCC or an Oncology Wing. A grant of Rs. 8000/- per camp will be provided for 
organizing camps for IEC and early detection activities. 
 (v) This scheme lays focus on presentation, scre ening, early detection and treatment of Cancer. The 
programme would be managed and operationalized by nodal instituti ons, e.g. RCCs or Government 
Medical Colleges and Government Hospitals wh ich have well developed radiotherapy/oncology 
facilities. The districts would be selected on the recommendation of the State Government and a 
financial assistance of Rs. 22.00 lakhs in the first year and Rs. 17.00 lakhs in each of the next four 
years would be released to the nodal institution for implementation of the scheme over a period of 5 
years, whereafter it is expected that the project would be taken over by the Government. It is proposed 
that the activities will be carried out in two or three districts congruent to the district selected for 
DCCP. The nodal institutions would carry out traini ng of health workers, ANMs, self-help groups etc. 
Under the DCCP IEC activities would also be carried out for promoting prevention, awareness, self-
breast examination, early detection of cancer, anti- tobacco activities etc, in which NGOs would be 
involved. It is proposed to cover 80 districts under the scheme in the last 3 years of Tenth Plan. An 

amount of Rs. 44.00 lakhs has been sanctioned in respect of two DCCP projects covering congruent 
districts in Kerala and Mizoram during the financial year 2005-06. 
 The Committee would like to be informed about the num ber of districts covered in various states, activities 
done, amount spent and over all physical and financial performance in respect of DCCP. 
Action Taken 
 During the year 2005-06 wide publicity was given to all the schemes including the District Cancer Control 
Programme (DCCP). However only 6 districts (3 in the Stat e of Kerala and 3 in the State of Gujarat) could be 
covered under the DCCP because of the initial operational problems like non-submission of enough proposals by the 
State Governments reservations of State Governments on th e cessation clause of our guidelines, non-settlement of 
earlier utilization certificates by the States/UTs/Grantee institutions. 
 During the year 2006-07 11 districts (5 in Mizoram, 3 in Rajasthan and 3 in Assam) have been covered so far. 
 Since these grant-in-aid were released either at the fag end of the last financial year or in the beginning of the 
current financial year, the gr antee institutions are undertaking the groundwork for starting the activities under the 
scheme. Regular monitoring of the scheme  will be done at the highest level fo r successful implementation of the 
scheme. In addition the State Governments are regularly reminded to submit the proposal for availing grant-in-aid 
under the scheme. 
17.2 The Committee understands that delayed detection is one  of main reasons of mortality due to cancer in our 
country. If detected early, a numb er of these precious human lives could be saved. The Committee therefore, 
appreciates the urgency shown by the Deptt. to make interv ention down at the district level. The Committee in this 
regard takes note of the scheme to involve NGOs who wi ll be organizing camps to promote prevention and early 
detection of cancer. The Committee also takes note that Training manuals have been developed under the NCCP for 
capacity building in cancer control at the District level: 
 (i) Manual for Health Professionals 
 (ii) Manual for Cytology 
 (iii) Manual for Palliative care 
 (iv) Manual for Tobacco Cessation 
 The Committee however, feels that the vision and ef fort shown by the Department to detect this life 
threatening disease early will bear fruit only if good an d credit worthy NGOs are involv ed and oncology wings are 
properly strengthened at the District Level. The Committee al so feels that personnel in these district hospitals should 
be specially trained to detect most common types of Cancer in out country e.g. breast and cervix cancer in women. 
Action Taken 
 The point raised by the Committee has been noted and will be taken care of. 
XVIII. AVIAN INFLUENZA  
Recommendations/Observations 
18.2 The Committee feels that th ough bird flu till now has not claimed any human life, but its potential to take a toll 
on the same is very high. Therefore, before this epidemic occurs, Government should be prepared in every respect to 
tackle any emergency situation. Further more, as the number of  laboratories to test avian flu cases are few, there is a 
need for strengthening the same. 
Action Taken 
 Indian Council of Medical Research has set up an influenza surveillance network. There are 5 laboratories in 
the network apart from National Institute of Communicabl e Diseases. The network is being strengthened by adding 
3-5 laboratories. Government has also taken other necessary steps to tackle any emergency situation as explained in 
reply to para 18.3. 
XIX. NEW INITIATIVES  

Recommendations/Observations 
19. The Committee in its 7th and 15th reports had comment ed upon six new initiatives /pilot projects to be 
launched during the Ninth Plan. Having observed that these projects have not taken off so far, the Committee in both 
the Reports recommended that instead of six projects, focu s should be concentrated only on two programmes namely 
Diabetes Control Programme and Cardiovascular Disease Control Programme including the control of Rheumatic 
Fever. The Committee, however, finds that this specific recommendation of the Committee has escaped the attention 
of the Department. The Committee therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation to give priority to the Diabetes 
control programme and cardiovascular Disease Control Programme. 
Action Taken 
 A Committee was constituted under the Chairmanship  of Shri K. Ramamoorthy, Joint Secretary for 
introduction of National programme for Prevention and Cont rol of Diabetes, Cardiovasc ular Diseases and Stroke. 
The Committee after several round of me etings recommended to implement the programme in a phased manner. It 
will be piloted during 2006-07 and subsequently the programme would be implemented across the country through 
selected institutions over the Eleventh Plan. 
 The Planning Commission has accorded in principle approval to the propo sal for introduction of National 
Programme for Control of Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) on a pilot basis during 2006-07. 
The proposed budget for the pilot project is Rs.5.00 crore and the proposal has been approved for implementation by 
the Secretary and the Finance Division during the re maining period of 2006-07. The Committee has also 
recommended Rs.1680 crore for National Programme for Cont rol of Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke 
(BPCDCS) for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The proposal has been sent to Planning Commission for approval. 
XXI. PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP  
Recommendations/Observations 
21.1 The Secretary gave an idea to the Committee about an initiative recently taken in the area of Public Private 
Partnership in Health Sector. Public Health Foundation of  India, an autonomous Public-Private Partnership has been 
launched by the Prime Minister on 28th March, 2006. The Institute will be having a Corpus of Rs. 200 crore with 
additional one time contribution of Rs. 65 crore by the Government The Committee was informed that EFC has 
recommended the proposal and the matter is to be placed be fore CCEA. Initially, two world class Institutes of Public 
Health are proposed to be establishe d. The Committee was given to understand that a lot of Indian Corporates had 
shown their interest. 
21.2 While welcoming the initiative, the Committee has a wo rd of caution for the Government The track record of 
private sector participation in health sector has not been very  helpful so far as public at large is concerned. A number 
of corporate Hospitals have come up on Government land  acquired at nominal rates. However, the management of 
such Hospitals has miserably failed to provide free treatment to  the poor as agreed to by them at the time of starting 
such hospitals. The Committee woul d like to point out that this so called pub lic-private sector has now penetrated in 
the State Health Systems also. The Committee is not much convinced by the contention of the Department that this 
experiment will be confined to the area of public (medi cal) education only. The Committee would like to be apprised 
about the full details of this initiative. 
Action Taken 
 The Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) is a Pu blic Private Partnership created for capacity building in 
Public Health Education, training and research. Considering the public health challenges that India faces, the demand 
for Public Health Professionals far ex ceeds the availability of adequately tr ained Public Health manpower. PHFI 
seeks to address this concern. Therefore, in the next 5-10 years, the PHFI would over the next 5-10 years help in 
creating around 2000 plus Public Health Professionals annu ally. This would be through establishment of world class 
Schools of Public Health (IIPH); strengthening of existing Sc hools of Public Health in the country. PHFI would also 
help establish standards in Public Health Education by enabling the formation of independent accreditation system. 
 The Government of India is contributing Rs. 65 crore approximately one-third of the initial seed capital 
required for kick-starting the PHFI and for establishmen t of two Schools of Public Health. The remaining amount 

(approximately Rs.135 crore) is being raised from outside the Government, namely, Melinda and Bill Gates 
Foundation (Rs.65 cr.) and from high net-worth individuals. PHFI is managed by an independent Governing Board 
that includes 3 members from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfares viz. Secretary (H and FW); DG ICMR and 
DGHS. Shri T.K.A. Nair Principal Secretary to Prime Minister, Dr. M.S. Ahluwalia , Vice Chairman, Planning 
Commission; Smt. Sujata Rao, AS and PD, NACO, Ministry of Health; Dr. Mashelkar, DG CSIR are also members 
of the Governing Board. The presence of the officials from Government would ensure that the decisions taken in 
PHFI are in consonance with the objectives for which PHFI has been supported by Government of India. It is 
expected that all members of the Governing Board would ensure the functioning of the Foundation as a professional 
organization and with complete transparency. 
XXV. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Japanese Encephalitis 
Recommendations/Observations 
25.4.3 The Committee’s attention has been drawn by media re ports saying that about 3.4 crore children between the 
age of 1 and 15 need to be vaccinated. The Committee has been informed that vaccine worth Rs. 50.00 crore has 
been imported from China and a massive immunization programme has been planned. The Committee has been 
given to understand that an inexpensive vaccine for Japanese  Encephalitis (JE) is availa ble which other JE affected 
countries are currently using to contro l the disease. The Secretary assured th e Committee that appropriate measures 
have been taken by the Centre to effectively control any ep idemic outbreak of JE in any part of the country. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the vaccine that is available in the internat ional market and what has 
been its success rate in controlling JE in the user countries. The Committee hopes that all preventive measures will 
continue to be made on a sustained basis so that epidemic of J.E. which occurred in UP in 2005 may not recur. 
Action Taken 
 JE vaccination programme has been made an integral component of Universal Immunization Programme in a 
phased manner using single dose live attenuated AS-14-14-2 vaccine. During 2006, 135 lakhs doses of live 
attenuated JE vaccine (SA-14-14-2) were  imported from China by Gol. Total co st of vaccine including delivery at 
site is Rs. 12.83 crores and unit cost is Rs.9.50 per dose. 
 Three types of JE vaccine are curren tly in use in JE endemic countries of Asia-Pacific Region as detailed 
below: 
 (i)  Mouse brain-derived inactivated vaccine: The mouse brain-derived in activated JE vaccine is 
produced in several Asian countries such as India, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam. So 
far, this is the only type of JE vaccine that is co mmercially available in the international market. In 
Thailand, JE vaccination has been successfully incorporated into the national immunization 
programme. Studies in Korea and Japan showed > 99 per cent reduction in JE cases after 
immunization. In India, inactivated vaccine is being manufactured at the Central Research Institute 
(CRI), Kasauli and the cost per dose is about Rs.50/-. 
  The mouse brain-derived JE vaccine is administered in 3 doses of 0.5 ml or 1 ml (days 0, 7, 30) and 
booster doses at the intervals of every 3 years. In several Asian trials, primary immunization has a 
disease-preventing efficacy of > 95 per cent. Howeve r, the production capacity of CRI, Kasauli is 
limited and do not meet the requirements of endemic States. 
 (ii) Cell culture-derived live attenuated vaccine: This Chinese vaccine is based on a stable neuro-
attenuated strain of the JE virus (SA-14-14-2). In non-endemic areas, 1 single dose of this vaccine 
induced an antibody response in 83 per cent-100 per cent of children aged 6-7 years and in older 
children immunized twice a t intervals of 1-3 mont hs, 94 per cent-100 per cen t showed a serological 
response. Apart from hundreds of m illions of doses used in China, In dia began introduction of this 
vaccine in eleven high endemic districts in four St ates during 2006. This vaccine is also in use in 
Nepal and South Korea. 
 (iii) Cell culture-derived inactivated vaccine: This vaccine is being manufactured in China. Primary 
immunization of infants with this fo rmalin-inactivated vaccine results in about 85 per cent protection. 

The vaccine is inexpensive, and upto 90 million doses are distributed for use in China every year. 
However, in China the cell culture-derived live attenuated vaccine is gradually replacing this vaccine. 
  Besides vaccination in highly endemic district s for prevention and contro l of JE, guidelines and 
advisories have been sent for planning and implementation of district-wise specific action plan. Efforts 
are on to strengthen surveillance, laboratory diagnost ic facility, treatment centres at periphery in JE 
endemic areas. Training is being conducted in case management for Clinicians and Nurses. 
Recommendations/Observations  
25.5 Chicken Guinea 
25.5.1 The Committee then drew the atte ntion of the Secretary towards the outbreak of Chicken Guinea epidemic in 
some parts of the country that was widely spreading. The Committee was informed that three States, Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka and Maharashtra were affected. Nearly 25,000 pe ople were suspected to be affected by Chicken Guinea 
virus. Nearly 50 per cent positivity has been confirme d by NICD, Delhi and 35 per cent by NIV, Pune. The 
Committee was given to understand that State Government was taking appropriate steps. 
25.5.2 The Committee is however, not inclined to agree with the reported cases of Chicken Guinea disease in 
Andhra Pradesh. The Committee’s apprehensions are based on first-hand information reports being received from the 
affected districts of Andhra Pradesh as  per which the disease has already affected a very large number of people and 
spreading fast. The Committee is of the firm opinion that required steps need to be initiated by the Centre on an 
urgent basis. 
Action Taken 
 The Government of India has already initiated requisite  action for effective cont rol of Chikungunya in the 
State of Andhra Pradesh. The following measures have b een taken to tackle the problem of Chikungunya in the 
affected States including Andhra Pradesh: 
 • States have been provided detailed guidelines for prevention and control of Chikungunya fever. 
 • The teams from National Institute of Communicabl e Diseases and NVBDCP undertook investigations 
in Andhra Pradesh from 13-17th Feb., 2006. The Director, NVBDCP reviewed the Chikungunya 
situation of Andhra Pradesh on 26th June, 2006 and on 29th July, 2006. 
 • The State has been provided with 7,700 It. of Temephos and 4,500 It. of Pyrethrum extract (2 per 
cent). 
 States have been authorized to utilize funds ma de available under NVBDCP for awareness campaigns. 
Recommendations/Observations 
25.5.3 The Committee was informed by th e Director of ICMR that a research team has been sent to the affected 
district, which will be sending its reports about the actual nu mber of cases in Chittoor district and adjoining areas in 
Andhra Pradesh. The Committee would like to point out th at alongwith the assessment of epidemic outbreak, 
preventive measures were required to be initiated without any further delay. Health education and water management 
system are the two priority areas which need to be attended to, to prevent the ongoing epidemic as well as such 
outbreaks in future. The Committee woul d, therefore, recommend that the Department now take, a pro-active 
approach towards preventive measures in active co-ordin ation with state and local authorities. Otherwise such 
outbreaks of epidemic would continue to occur. 
Action Taken 
 Two teams from the National Institute of Epidemiolo gy (ME), Chennai and Centre for Research in Medical 
Entomology (CRME), Madurai, carried out investigation in Tirupati during 8- 12 April, 2006. Earlier a team from 
NIE had visited Kadapa for investigating the outbreak in the district. 
 The team in Tirupati interacted with District Health Authorities and with some of private practitioners in 
Tirupati who had treated several cases of Chikungunya. The team carried out repeated sample survey in urban 
ward/villages affected by Chikungunya in and around Tiru pati to establish the proportion of individuals having 
symptoms indicative of Chikungunya fever. Rapid environmental survey was done to assess water storage and usage 
in the area and mosquitogenic conditions. The team carried out the survey in Bramhagunta, Nehru Nagar at Tirupati, 

Vinayak Nagar, Bogga Street at Reningunta and Ambedkar Nagar at Chittur. A total of 219 individuals from 44 
households were interviewed for the presence of symptoms indicative of Chikungunya ( i.e. fever and joint plain). 76 
(34.7 per cent) of the individuals were having symptoms suggestive of Chikungunya fever. The clinical 
manifestations of the disease included fever that was short lasting (for about 1-3 days) and joint pains. A few of the 
patients also had macuto-papular rash especially on trunk . Swelling of the affected joint was also a common feature 
among the affected individuals. In the localities surveyed, people used to store water in cement tanks, big earthen 
vessels, plastic drums and pitchers. Of the 44 houses survey ed, 29 (65.9 per cent) showed presence of Aedes larva in 
these containers. 
 In district Kadapa, the team carried out house-to-hou se survey in Mallela village in Thondur PHC having a 
population of 1965 to identify suspected cases of Chikungunya. A total of 243 (12.4 per cent) suspected cases of 
Chikungunya fever were identified during the survey. 58.4 per cent of the cases were females. No deaths were 
reported due to Chikungunya in the village surveyed. All age groups are affected but incidence was high in the age 
group of 15 years and above. Cases of Chikungunya were occurring in the village since first week of December 2005 
and reached the peak in the third week of March, 2006. Of the 8 areas of villa ges surveyed, the prevalence of disease 
ranged between 0 to 20.6 per cent. 
 Environmental survey was carried out in Sarpanch B azar, Sivalyam Street, Muslim area and BC colony. A 
total of 56 households were surveyed for presence of larvae  in various clean water containers. The type of containers 
included cement tanks, earthen pots, plastic drums and pitc hers. 22 of the 108 (20.4 per cent) containers were having 
mosquito larvae. 17 of 56 (30.4 per cent) houses were having containers with mosquito larvae. 
 The team visited 34 of the 57 affected PHCs in the di strict and collected information regarding the number of 
suspected cases of Chikungunya attending the outpatient clin ics (defined as fever with joint pains). The team also 
collected information regarding the number of suspected cases identified through various medical camps that were 
conducted in different villages in th e affected PHCs. Analysis of the data  from these sources revealed that the 
outbreak is still ongoing and indications are that it is likely to continue and spre ad further. Estimates available at the 
district were mainly based on the figures of medical camp s carried out in various affected villages. Based on the 
investigations carried out in Tirupati and Kadapa, the ICMR teams recommended the following: 
 (i) Anti-larval activities 
 (ii) Strengthening of disease surveillance 
 (iii) Rational use of medications 
 (iv) Community awareness 
 (i) The Government of India has initiated the following actions: 
 (i) States have been provided detailed guidelines for the prevention and control of Chikungunya fever. 
 (ii) Review of Chikungunya situation by Hon’ble Mini ster of State for Health and Family Welfare, Govt 
of India on 29th of July, 2006. The meeting was also attended by Hon’ble State Health Minister of 
Andhra Pradesh and Director, NVBDCP. 
 (iii) On 30th of July, 2006, a meeting of Health Ministers of four States namely Andhra Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka was held at Bangalore. The Director, NVBDCP, also 
attended this meeting. A joint action plan was prepared for collaboration between the health 
authorities of Border States. 
 (iv) The officers of NVBDCP made field investigations  in the four States. The visits, dates and places are 
given below: 
State Date 
Andhra Pradesh 13-17 February, 2006/29th July, 2006 
Maharashtra 3-7 April, 2006 
Tamil Nadu 16-19 June, 2006 
Karnataka 13-18 March, 2006 
Madhya Pradesh 5-11 July, 2006/28.7.06 to 4.8.2006 

 (ii) Supply of logistics by NVBDCP 
 The following materials have been supplied to the States during 2005-06: 
State Temephos  Pyrethrum 
 (in litres) (in litres) 
Maharashtra 6290 5000 
Andhra Pradesh 7700 4500 
Tamil Nadu 5425 7700 
Karnataka 2600 2500 
 The State of Madhya Pradesh has been supplied 3500 litres of Temephos and 6000 litres of Pyrethrum. 
XXVII. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS  
Recommendations/Observations 
27.1 India has nearly 15 percent of the world’s visually handicapped. The programme was launched in 1976 
throughout the country with the goal to reduce the prevalence of blindness from 1.4 per cent to 0.3 per cent 
27.2 Total Tenth Plan allocation for th e programme was Rs. 445.00 crore. During the first four years of the plan 
period (2002-07), an expenditure of Rs. 302.74 crore has already been incurred. Achievement level of various 
components under the programme has also  steadily maintained gradual increase  rate over the years. The Committee, 
however, notes that as per details available during the firs t three quarters of 2005-06, there seems to be gap between 
the targets set for different components and fulfilled as indicated below:- 
2005-06 (uptill 31.12.2005) 
Target Achievement Achievement upto  
  February, 2006 
Cataract Surgeory-44 lakhs 26 lakhs 35.20 lakhs 
School eye screening programme- 76 children screened 181 lakhs 
children to be screened - 350 lakhs   
Children to be detected with refractive  3.4 lakhs — 
errors-24.5 lakhs   
Free spectacles to be provided - 7.35 lakhs 1.5 lakhs 2.30 lakhs 
Training of eye surgeons - 980 175 ophthalmic surgeons trained 200 
27.3 The Committee notes that identical targets have been set for 2006-07 also . However, the level of achievement 
during 2005-06 does not give much hope to the Committee. Even if last quarter of the year 2005-06 shows a high 
achievement level, that cannot be c onsidered a balanced progress. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that 
progress of different targets should be monitored every quarter to ensure better implementation of the programme. 
Action Taken 
 The recommendation of the Committee to monitor progre ss of different targets every quarter has been noted 
for compliance to ensure better implementation of programme. 
Recommendations/Observations 
27.5 As per a survey in 2001-02, prevalence of blindness in the country is estimated to be 1.1 per cent. Target for 
the Tenth Plan is to reduce the same to 0.8 per cent by 2007. The Committee notes that a national survey is planned 
to obtain the status of target of reduction by 2007. The Committee is of the view that impact of the programme would 
vary from State to State. Data regarding NE States co nfirms Committee’s observation. The Committee observes that 
as per a survey conducted in 2003, States like Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Manipur show the blindness prevalence 
rate to be much higher than the national rate, i.e. 2.28 per cent, 3.05 per cent and 1.38 per cent respectively. The 
Committee is worried by the low performance level of NE States except Tripura. During the entire Tenth Plan, 
performance level of cataract operation has been about 50 per cent with Manipur and Sikkim even less then 50 per 

cent. The Committee finds the utilization of cash grants is also equally worrisome. Overall figures show that almost 
the double of allocated funds have been utilized during the Plan period. However, Assam and Manipur are the two 
exceptions as they have not succeeded in utilizing the cash grants for reasons unknown to the Committee. Position is 
the same in the level of utilization of Grants-in-Aid releas ed to District Blindness Cont rol Societies in NE region. 
The Committee has been highlighting the discouraging status of Blindness Control Programme in NE region. But it 
seems no visible remedial steps have been initiated so far. The Committee once again urges the Department to 
concentrate its attention on the remote inaccessible region of the country. 
Action Taken 
 In order to reduce prevalence of blindness in NE States including Sikkim, a special drive for cataract 
operations/IOL implantation, School Eye Screening, IE C and other comprehensive Eye Care Programme has been 
initiated in these States from the year 2005-06. The spec ial drive has resulted in improvement level in cataract 
surgeries in NE States. Against the target of 59000 catar act surgeries for NE States in cluding Sikkim for the year 
2005-06, a total 57141 cataract operations were performed in  these States with the help  of NGOs from outside the 
region. 
 In order to improve performance level and utilization of funds for eye care activities under NPCB, regional 
review meetings have been organized with the concerned State Health authorities under the programme. 
XXIX. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH CARE-RCH-II  
Recommendations/Observations 
29.6 Submission of Utilization Certific ates in respect of Grants-in-Aid of r ecurring nature released to the State 
Societies during the preceding financial year is necessary for release of  Grants-in-Aid to them during the subsequent 
financial year under Rule 212 of Ge neral Financial Rules, 2005. The Co mmittee understands that a special 
dispensation has been sought from the Ministry of Financ e keeping in view the complex funds flow involving multi-
tier structure and the time taken thereby and the reporting of expenditure from the end-use of funds upto the level of 
Central Government and reporting infrastructures available in the States/UTs. The Committee is not inclined to agree 
with the contention of the Department. The Committee strongly  feels that adherence to GFRs is very much required 
not only for making accountable all concerned — both Central Government and implementing agencies, but also for 
optimum and judicious utilization of  allocated funds. The Committee woul d, therefore, recommend that the 
Department instead of asking for such a dispensation should take measures for streamlining the accounting 
procedure. 
Action Taken 
 The releases to the States/UTs societies are made af ter the fulfillment of all requirement of GFR 212. The 
Department has also, as suggested, taken steps to streamline and rationalize the accounting procedures including 
constitution of State and district level programme management  units staffed by finance sp ecialists, adoption of new 
accounting and reporting formats, fund transfers using e-banking facilities and close monitoring at the level of the 
Ministry through a Financial Management Group (FMG). 
XXX. ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
30.5 Pulse Polio Immunization Programme started in 1995-96 has made an impressive progress since then. As 
against 1600 cases in 2002, 134 cases were detected in 2004. There has been 92 per cent decline in polio cases. The 
Committee has been informed that 24 districts in UP, all in Western UP and 14 districts in Bihar can be considered to 
be very high risk. The Committee notes that although funds have been duly released to Bihar and UP during 2004-05 
and 2005-06 and there has been optimum expenditure thereof, in respect of Bihar for 2005-06, Expenditure Status 
has not been received. 
Action Taken 
 Funds for the PPI rounds are sanctioned to the States as per approved financial guidelines by the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). The unspent balan ces available with the States are reduced from the 

sanctioned amount at the time of first release of funds to  the States during the financial year. The details of funds 
allocated to Bihar and Uttar Pradesh and the reported expenditure by the States during 2005-06 are given below:— 
State Year Funds Sanctioned Reported  
   (Rs.) Expenditure (Rs.) 
Bihar 2005-06 43,05,43,448 39,52,03,322 
Uttar Pradesh 2005-06 155,64,22,637 135,61,53,014 
Recommendations/Observations 
30.6 The Committee observes that inspite of unsatisfactory performance level, funds are being duly released to UP. 
The Committee is of the opinion that remedial action in the light of constraints being faced in Pulse Polio Programme 
in the two most affected States of UP and Bihar needs to be taken. This is all the more required in view of sporadic 
cases of polio being reported from UP. This year 17 case s have already been reported fr om there. The Committee is 
of the view that sustained efforts need to be made in UP and Bihar otherwise the goal of Eradication of Polio from 
the country will remain unfulfilled. 
Action Taken 
 The polio situation in the country are being reviewed regularly by India Expert Advisory Group on polio 
(IEAG) comprising the experts from WHO, UNICEF, CDC, IAP, State Government and Gol and the recommended 
strategies are implemented to control the polio circulat ion. During the year 2006-07, two National Immunization 
Days in all States and UTs during April and May, 2006 and two Sub National Immunization rounds during June and 
July in the high risk districts and States have already been implemented. Two Sub National Immunization days in the 
high risk districts and States and two National Immunizat ion days in whole country will be implemented during 
September, November 2006 and January , February, 2007 respectively. For the State of UP and Bihar, following 
additional activities are being undertaken: 
 (i) Identification and vaccination of the missed children are being undertaken by ASHA, link volunteer, 
etc. 
 (ii) Community Mobilizers (CMC) are engaged for motivation and mobilization of the children and 
counter any rumour in the community. 
 (iii) Regular meetings are held at  the highest level of administrati on between GoI and Government of 
UP/Bihar to evaluate the programme and for taking appropriate actions to overcome the shortcomings. 
 The Committee’s suggestion for sustained efforts in UP  and Bihar have been noted for future compliance. 
XXXIII. MISCELLANEOUS  
Recommendations/Observations 
33.1 There is acute shortage of trained nurses in the worl d. Many nurses from India are going abroad for jobs, with 
the result that there is shortage of nurses in the country . The Committee understands that there is a certain ratio of 
bed strength: trainee-nurses, for training these nurses. The present ratio is that for five beds, one nurse can be trained. 
The Committee understands that suddenly we cannot improve the bed strength in  order to overcome the shortages. 
Hence, the ratio of 5:1 can be relaxed to 3:1 from this academic year itself. 
Action Taken 
 The Indian Nursing Council has already taken action on the Recommendations/observations of the Committee 
regarding Nursing Sector and approved that the norms of Students Patients Ratio for clinical experience to be relaxed 
from 1:5 to 1:3. 

CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME  
Recommendations/Observations 
3.1 Plan allocation for the CGHS during 2005-06 was Rs. 26.00 crores which has been increased to Rs. 32.00 
crores in 2006-07 with an addition al allocation of Rs. 3.00 crores for NE Region. The Committee was given to 
understand that the enhanced allocation of plan funds in 2006-07 was meant for the on-going schemes as well as for 
modernization/computerization of CGHS. The Committee obser ves that computerization of CGHS dispensaries will 
substantially enhance the efficiency of the system whic h was very much required. Th e Committee would, however, 
like to point out that the Department should take all steps so that the proposed computerization is completed during 
the current financial year itself. 
Action Taken 
 Pilot project for Computerization of CGHS Dispensary Laxmi Nagar, Delhi has been running successfully. 
 Data entry, Installation of Computer Hardware incl uding LAV cabling and Internet Connectivity have been 
completed at CGHS dispensaries at North Avenue, South Avenue and Medical Center at Parliament House Annexe. 
 On site training of Staff and Trial runs have started. Inventory stores in these dispensaries is being updated. 
 Digitalization of Index Cards of CGHS beneficiaries of CGHS East Zone and Central Zone has been 
completed. Digitalization of data of Index cards of dispen saries of South Zone and North Zone is under process and 
is expected to be completed soon. 
 Proposal for computerization of remaining dispensari es and issue of a separate  plastic card for every 
beneficiary through NIC at an estimated expenditure of Rs.8.7 crores is under process. The computerization of CGHS 
Delhi is targeted for completion within the current financial year. 
 A work shop on computerization of CGHS dispensaries was organized by NIC at NIC Head Quarters on 29th 
and 30th of June, 2006 for CMOs in charge of all CGHS Dispensaries. As on the site demonstration of working of 
Dispensary on computers was organized for CMOs in charge of dispensaries of CGHS, East Zone on 10th July, 2006 
at CGHS dispensary, Laxmi Nagar. 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.2 The Committee observes that trend of utilization of non-plan funds indicates that required funds are not being 
made available to CGHS. As per the details made available to the Committee, substantive and increasing expenditure 
is being incurred under non- plan, which has reached from Rs. 381.73 crores in 2002-03 to Rs. 565.00 crores during 
2005-06. Keeping in view this trend of expenditure, th e Committee strongly feels that non-plan provision of Rs. 
276.50 crores in 2006-07 will drastically fall short of the required funds. These non-plan funds, in addition to 
maintenance of infrastructure of CGHS dispensaries and pay and allowances of its em ployees, are also meant for 
settlement of medical claims of CGHS beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that provision for non-
plan funds should be strictly in accordance with the actual requirements. 
Action Taken 
 The actual expenditure during 2005-06 under non-plan was Rs.565.23 crores including that of pensioners 
expenditure. This year total allocation under non-plan is Rs.576.50 crores which includes Rs.300.00 crores for 
pensioners head. This allocation is at par with last year’s actual expenditure. This additional requirement, if any, will 
be projected in the Revised Estimates for 2006-07. 
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL  
Recommendations/Observations 

5.3 Strengthening of Emergency and Trauma services at  Dr. Ram Manhor Lohia hospi tal is another prestigious 
project of the Hospital. As per the status report furnished by the Department, the 78 bedded Trauma center is nearing 
completion. Action has been initiated both for procurement of equipment a nd requirement of manpower for the 
Centre. The Committee would, however, like to point out th at the initial target date for completion of the Trauma 
Centre building was October, 2004. Department has indicate d that there was delay in st arting the construction work 
due to some procedural formalities to be gone through. The Committee would, however,  like to point out that 
position remains to be the same when the Trauma Centre project is nearing completion. In spite of intimation given 
by the CPWD on 1st March, 2006 that the building would be ready for operational use, so far, the building has not 
been handed over by CPWD to hospital authorities. The Committee apprehends that the original estimated cost of Rs. 
30.11 crores for the Trauma Centre building is bound to increase which shows that this project was being constructed 
without adhering to a prescribed time-schedule. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier observation that every 
effort should be made to make the Trauma Centre fully functional without any further delay. 
Action Taken 
 Construction work of the Trauma Center building has been completed by the Co ntractors. However, the 
building has not yet been cleared for occupation as the Fire  Adviser has raised some obje ctions are being attended to 
by necessary additions/alterations/modifications. The work is going to be completed shortly. 
XI. SETTING UP OF AIIMS LIKE INSTITUTIONS (PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA 
YOJANA) PMSSY 
Recommendations/Observations 
11.5 The Committee has also observed that N.E Region has remained unrepresented in the PMSSY which cannot 
be considered a happy sign. The Committee, therefore, urge s upon the Department to identify one State in the N.E. 
Region for inclusion in PMSSY. 
Action Taken 
 The Government of India is already in the process of setting up of North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional 
Institute of Health and Medical Sciences at Shillong at an estimated cost of Rs.422.60 crores. The Project is likely to 
be functional by December, 2007. 
 Besides, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is also considering a proposal for up gradation of 
Guwahati. Therefore, it was not felt necessary to take up the N.E. region in the PMSSY. 
XV. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
15.2 The Committee notes that against an approved Tent h Plan outlay of Rs. 1392.80 crore for the Programme, 
during the first four years of the plan period itself, Rs. 1426.50 crore have been released which have been fully 
utilized. Proposed allocation for 2006-07 stands at Rs. 900.00 crore. Achievement level of Physical Targets during 
2005-06 also shows a commendable performance, with achievements exceeding the targets in respect of Community 
Care Centres, Drop-in Centers, Traini ng of Teachers and New Schools covered.  Only shortfall noticed is in the 
coverage of Patients on ART. Against a target of 50,000 patients, only 23,000 could be covered during 2005-06. The 
Committee is, however, surprised to note that no targets were set in 2005-06 with regard to the following:— 
 z Condom use among high risk groups; 
 z Awareness about protective role of condoms; and 
 z Awareness in rural areas. 
 The only data available with the Ministry pertains to  a Survey done in 2001 which is not very encouraging. 
Action Taken 
 Setting up of ART services requires infrastructure, appointment of additional personnel, their training, 
laboratory support and provision of drugs. These are time-co nsuming activities coming in way to meet the targets. 
However, following steps have been taken to enhance ART service:— 

 z Increase in number of ART centres from 54 to 100. 
 z Supply of anti-retroval drugs to ART centres adequate to treat 85,000 patients and through Clinton 
Foundation drugs for 10,000 children.  
 z Provision of facilities for laboratory tests including CD4 count. 
 z Setting up linkages with TB centre, STD clinics, integrated Counselling and Testing Centres, Community 
Care Centres and Targeted Interventions for High Risk groups. 
 z Increase public awareness about availability of ART through various, means of communication 
 z Setting up ART centres in medical facilities available with PSUs, Army, Railways, ESI, Para-military forces 
etc. 
 z Scheme for involvement of Non-Government Sector. 
 z Presently, 46,000 (including 39651 in NACO ART Centres) patients are getting treatment. 
 z As per the latest surveys done, the percentage of protection by use of condom has increased from 54 per 
cent in 2001 to 63 per cent in 2005 in the rural areas and the same has been  sustained during this period in urban 
areas at 73 per cent. 
 (Source: Knowledge, Attitude and Practice (KAP) ba seline 2005 study carried out by British Broadcasting 
Service (World Service Trust) in seventeen States). 
 Awareness in rural areas: 
 The awareness level on HIV/AIDS in the rural areas increased from 72 per cent in 2001 to 82 per cent in 2005 
and in urban area, the percentage has been sustained at about 90 per cent. Similarly, the attendance in Voluntary 
Counseling and Testing Centres (VCTC). Centres providing Anti Retroviral Therapy (ART) and Sexually 
Transmitted Disease (STDs) has gone up. 
 IEC activities are not only creating awareness HIV/AIDS but promoting appropriate and responsible 
behavioral practices. They also tend to promote the use of services. 
Recommendations/Observations 
15.5 Committee has observed that consid erable expenditure is being incurred on Mass Media /REC activities under 
the Programme. As per the figures available with the Co mmittee, out of total allocation of Rs. 289.37 crore and 
285.98 crore in 2004-05 and 2005-06 respectively, expenditure on IEC activities has been Rs. 35.98 crore and 68.98 
crore in the two years. The Committee ob serves that whereas total allocation level has remained the same, allocation 
for IEC component has almost doubled in 2005-06 when co mpared with 2004-05. State-wise details for 2005-06 
reveal a more alarming position- 
(Rs. in crores) 
State Total releases  Expenditure on 
 (2005-06)  Mass Media IEC 
Andhra Pradesh 50.98 11.68 
Assam 6.97 3.89 
Bihar 11.78 7.47 
Chhattisgarh 3.50 1.90 
Daman and Diu 0.25 0.16 
Haryana 0.00 0.63 
J and K 0.50 0.16 
Karnataka 11.75 1.52 
Maharashtra 17.00 3.30 
Manipur 4.50 1.88 
Mizoram 3.80 1.28 

Nagaland 7.00 2.04 
Punjab 0.00 0.48 
Tamil Nadu 26.25 4.79 
Uttaranchal 36.87 10.72 
 The Committee would like to be apprised about the status of other components/infrastructure under the 
programme in respect of the above-mentioned States. The Committee would also like to know about criteria/ceiling 
on IEC activities in accordance with the Programme as a whole. 
Action Taken 
 In view of no cure for HIV/AIDS till now, prevention is the major component of the National AIDS Control 
Programme. The IEC activities, implemented through various media channels including inter-personal 
communication, advocacy programmes and inter-sectoral collaboration aim at creating awareness and promoting safe 
behavioural practices through various interventions among the general population and High Risk Groups. Further, 
these activities cut across all programme components to achieve the overall programme objectives and therefore there 
are no specific criteria/ceiling on IEC activities as such. 
XVIII. AVIAN INFLUENZA  
Recommendations/Observations 
18.3 The Committee has been informed that the Ministry has spent a large amount of money to procure medicine 
for bird flu from one particular firm namely - Hetro Drug s. This medicine, however, has an expiry period of six 
months after which it will be unfit for human consumption. Although no human case of bird flu has been reported so 
far, it is understood that an order for 1 lakh vials of vaccine (one vial costing about 12 dollars) has been placed. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feels that an enquiry may be carried out by the Department. Committee may be 
apprised about the outcome thereof. 
18.4 The Committee has been informed about an advertisement in the media which promotes the consumption of 
Indian Chicken. The advertisement shows popular cine stars vouchsafing that there is no health hazard involved in 
eating chicken. This advertisement was sponsored by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee 
understands that the promotion of any general food item doe s not fall within the domain of Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare whose mandate is to regulate the medical sector and not the cause of some other agency. This, the 
Committee feels is sheer wastage of money. 
Action Taken 
 Government of India over the last 1½ years has b een preparing itself for handling any outbreak of avian 
influenza in the country. As per the WHO guidelines, Pandemic Preparedness plan, Contingency Plan and State 
Action Plan have been duly prepared. 
 As a part of the Contingency Plan, it was decided by  a Committee of Secretaries headed by Cabinet Secretary 
to create a national stock pile of anti viral drugs of 1 la kh courses. This was in accordance with WHO guidelines and 
considered to be a necessary preventive measure. 
 The quantity of one lakh courses was procured at an approximate cost of  Rs.7.00 crores (Rupees seven crores 
only) from M/s Roche and from M/s Hetero Drugs Ltd. 
 These purchases were processed by an Inter Ministerial Task Force that had been set up with the following 
terms of reference: 
 (i) To assess the drugs and vaccines required for managing the Avian Flu virus including their 
availability/non-availability in India; 
 (ii) To examine the possibility of manufacturing these drugs/vaccines in India including: 
 (a) the possibility of resorting to the provisions of public health emergency under the patents law;  
 (b) the possibility of compulsory licensing of Indian companies to manufacture the required 
drugs/vaccines.  
 The members of the Task Force are - 

 (i) Secretary, Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare 
 (ii) Secretary, Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying 
 (iii) Secretary, Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
 (iv) Secretary, Industrial Policy and Promotion 
 (v) Secretary, Department of Biotechnology 
 (vi) Secretary, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 (vii) DG, ICMR 
 (viii) Drug Controller of India 
 (ix) Director General of Health Services, Government of India. 
 This Committee contacted Indian Pharma Companies like Hetero Drugs, Ranbaxy and Cipla in a meeting held 
on 18.11.2005. Only Hetero Drugs offered to supply the drug in quantities required by the Government of India. 
 It was decided to procure 50,000 courses of Oseltamivi r Phosphate from Hetero Drugs Limited at Rs.600.00 + 
Excise Duty + Sales Tax, total cost for Rs.724/- per pack of 10 capsules. Hetero Drugs gave an additional discount of 
2 per cent on their quoted price. An order for 30,000 courses of Tami flu was placed with Roche for delivery by 
March/April,2006. When the outbreak of Avian Influenza was announced at Navapur in February this year, another 
20,000 courses were purchased from Hetero Drugs Limited. This drug has a shelf life of three to five years and not 
six months. Therefore, this drug will remain available for use. This drug is necessary not only for the treatment of 
human cases of avian influenza but also as a prophylactic for health and animal husbandry workers who are deployed 
for surveillance, culling and clean up ope rations in the area of infection amongst  poultry. During the outbreaks at 
Navapur, Jalagaon, Surat and Burhanpur, this drug was administered to Rapid Response Teams, Cullers, Clean up 
labour, surveillance workers and patients suspected to have been in close contact with infected poultry. More than 
3000 courses have already been used in the field. Additionally, this drug has also been provided to HSABL Bhopal 
and NICD for cover to workers testing samples. During the outbreak in Turkey, this dr ug was also supplied to the 
Indian Mission there. 
 It would be evident from the facts narrated above that  Government of India have followed a very transparent 
procedure in procuring anti viral drugs for Avian Influenza.  Had this prophylactic cover not been available, it would 
not have been possible to undertake the massive culling and clean up operations. The workers had first to be 
reassured about their personal security. 
 In so far as advertisements in media are concerned, it is clarified that this Ministry has not issued nor 
sponsored any advertisement that shows popular cine stars promoting the consumption of Indian Poultry. This 
advertisement was reportedly released by the National Eg g Co-ordination Committee. Other press advertisements 
promoting consumption of well-cooked chicken were released and paid for by the Department of Animal Husbandry 
and Dairying. This Ministry has only released Press Advert isements about Do’s and Don’s and FAQs pertaining to 
Avian Flu. 
XXIV. NATIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION  
Recommendations/Observations 
24.3 Implementation status of key NRHM activities during 2005-06 is as follows:— 
     
     
Sl. Key Activities High Focus Non-High Total 
No.  States Focus States  
1. Departments of Health and Family Welfare merged 17 15 32 
2. State Health Missions constituted 18 16 34 
3. District Health Missions constituted 18 12 30 

4. Mission Directors appointed 15 14 29 
5. Merger of Societies:    
 State level  12 14 26 
 District level 11 13 24 
6. Registration of Rogi Kalyan Samiti:     
 District Hospital  148 90 238 
 CHC/SOH/Others 2211 747 2958 
7. MoUs with GoI signed 14 9 23 
8. No. of ASHA proposed to be selected by 31.03.2006 2,28,327 — 2,28,327 
9. No. of ASHAs selected t ill date 1,45,546 — 1,45,546 
10. No. of ASHAs trained till date 32,000 — 32,000 
11. No. of CHCs selected @ 2 per districts for  720 426 1146 
 upgradation to IPHS    
24.4 The Committee observes that analysis of State-wise  implementation of key activities during  2005-06 clearly 
indicates that in a few High Focus States, NRHM is yet to take off. Status of activities in Uttar Pradesh, the most 
crucial State under the Mission reveals a very discouraging scenario. Neither the Departments of Health and Family 
Welfare have been merged nor merger of  Societies and registration of Rogi Kalyan Samitis have taken place. Even 
MoU with GoI has not been signed. Status of selection process of ASHA, the most innovative component of the 
Mission is yet another non-starter in the State. Against 65,000 ASHAs to be selected, only 9548 ASHAs could be 
selected, with not even a single ASHA getting trained. Position is more or less the same in respect of other 
components. Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh are the other States where preparatory exercise has barely 
started. Status of NRHM is equally worrying. Out of total 2,28,327 ASHAs proposed to be selected, only 1,45,546 
ASHAs have been selected as on 21.3.2006 with Rajasthan, Bihar, Orissa and Chhattisgarh almost meeting the target 
and U.P. and M.P. remaining way behind their target. In the case of NE States, H.P. and J and K, Assam is the only 
State which is almost touching its target, in respect of othe r States, selection of ASHAs is not even envisaged. What 
is more striking is that training of selected ASHAs is simply missing. Out of 1,45,546 selected ASHAs, only 32,000 
could be trained and these 32,000 are from one single Stat e of Chhattisgarh. In the case of NE States, HP and J and 
K, nobody seems to have given a thought to the most important aspect of training of ASHA under NRHM. The 
Committee observes that preparatory activities have take n place in most of seventeen Non High Focus States. 
However, in Delhi, the capital of th e country and nearest to the Department, it seems that the message has not 
reached so far. 
Action Taken 
 The first year of the Mission was the preparator y phase during which the States were setting up the 
institutional framework of the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). 
 The Selection of Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) is one of th e key strategies under NRHM. During 
2005-06, 40 per cent ASHAs out of the total of 2.5 lakh originally envisaged under the Mission were expected to be 
selected. This has been far exceeded. Th ere are however some delay in starting the selection process in some States 
due to administrative reasons. The State of Uttar Pradesh was expected to select 27,000 ASHAs during 2005-06 
(there was no target allocated to the States as the pr ocess of selection of ASHA is a community based process 
wherein progress was a function of multiple factors including community participation and availability of appropriate 
voluntary workers). Against this, the State of U.P. has reported selection of 19,887 ASHAs during the period. 
 Till date 1.94 lakh ASHAs have already been selected in ten States out of which 78,174 ASHAs have also 
been trained, Mentoring Group for ASHA has been set up and various training modules have been finalized. 
 NRHM has taken off even though the pace of implementation of the Mission is not uniform throughout the 
country. The overall progress of the Mission, however, has been as per the expected schedule. A copy of status of the 
implementation of NRHM is enclosed. 

Recommendations/Observations 
24.5 The Committee understands that the State and District Health Missions are envisaged to be the central players 
in the monitoring of the performance le vel of the various initiatives under the Mission. Both State and District 
Missions have been set up in all the States with a few ex ceptions. However, with only six State Action Plans and 151 
District Action Plans prepared so far, one cannot say that  any monitoring is being done so far. The Committee is of 
the firm opinion that the Department should continue making persistent efforts with all the concerned States so that 
NRHM takes off in the real sense. The Committee would al so like to point out that NRHM is a well-conceived 
Programme but the fact remains that it is the State Gove rnments that would be the im plementing agencies. Not only 
the flagship programmes of Family We lfare but also some of the major Disease Control programmes have been 
brought under one Umbrella Programme. Experience with re gard to implementation of National Health Programmes 
and Family Welfare Programmes on individual programme basi s has varied so far from State to State. Status of 
various Health Indicators and availability of unspent balanc es with the implementing agencies clearly indicates lack 
of effective monitoring mechanism. The Committee is not very convinced especially in view of so many 
programmes. Another complex dimension of the Mission will be inter-sectoral convergence, with the concerned 
Ministries. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that  a highly dedicated team at the Centre alongwith its 
counterparts in States can only be effective. 
Action Taken 
 The framework of the Mission provides for regular monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the 
various strategies under the NRHM. This is done through regu lar review meetings, data collection, visits to States by 
officers of the GoI and interaction with  the State officials etc. To ensure the compliance with overall NRHM goals, 
the institutional framework in the State including State and District health Mi ssions are also monitoring the progress 
of implementation of the Mission. The Mission also envisages a proactive role for the community in monitoring the 
service delivery in the Health facilities. As part of this initiative, Rogi Kalyan Samitis have been envisaged under the 
Mission and over 6000 Samitis have already been operatio nalized in various States. The detailed multilevel 
monitoring protocols under the NRHM are being made full y operational and the progress of the Mission activities 
including the utilization of funds at various levels is expected to show substantial improvement over the coming 
years. 
 The significant role of Inter-Sectoral Convergence in ensuring the delivery of preventive, promotive and 
curative health care in a holistic manner  is fully articulated in th e strategies of the Mission. The Integrated district 
Health Action Plan is envisaged to be comprehensive docu ment which provides the framework for integrating all the 
related determinants of health into a common plan of Action. 
 The State Plans and Integrated  District Health Action Plans are envisaged to be finalized by all the Districts by 
December, 2006. The funds for this activity have already be en released along with deta iled guidelines and several 
districts are in final stages of preparation of the plans. 
XXV. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
25.5.5 The Committee observes that the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) is an apex referral 
organisation meant for prevention and control of communicabl e diseases in the country. Its most important mandate 
is to evolve an integrated approach for early warning si gnals and surveillance of diseases of major public health 
importance. Government has also initiated the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme since 2004-05. The 
Committee feels that with such an effe ctive mechanism in place, instances like  recent outbreak of chickengunya in 
Andhra Pradesh and other adjoin ing States should not be a llowed to reach such a serious dimension. The Committee 
hopes that all possible measures would be affected prom ptly. The Committee strongly feels that a suitable amount 
may be allotted for the total eradication of chickengunya fever in districts of Chittoor of Andhra Pradesh and 
Bangalore city. 
Action Taken 
 The GoI has already initiated action for effective prevention and control of chikungunya including supply of 
logistics and funds for awareness activities as indicated in Para 25.5.3. 

 The NICD is an apex organisation under Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, Government of India. The Institute functions with following mandates: 
 (i) Trained Manpower Development for Disease Control. 
 (ii) Operational Research 
 (iii) Referral Diagnostic and Specialized Services 
 The institute extends support to States in carrying out epidemiological investigations and provides feedback 
for appropriate remedial measures. Surveillance is the key activity for generating early warning signals of impending 
outbreaks and to strengthen the same, Government of India initiated National Surveillance Programme for 
Communicable Diseases (NSPDS) as a p ilot project during 1997-98 with NICD as the nodal agency and program 
covered 101 districts in a phased manner. Subsequently a World Bank funded Integrated Disease Surveillance Project 
was launched in November 2004 for decentralized State based surveillance of communicable and non-communicable 
diseases. Advanced Information Technology set up under IDSP is currently being established across the country and 
all districts in the country are being interconnected us ing satellite/broadband technology. Regular collection of 
syndromic and presumptive surveillance data on weekly basis ha s also been started. This data would get analyzed at 
the district level itself and the IDSP software would genera te the early warning signals ba sed on the trigger levels of 
different diseases being covered. The di strict and the State would start getting the early warning signals that would 
evolve with the complete data collection and data analysis ac tivity at district level. The project also has a component 
of upgradation of the State/District Public Health labs. The project was being implemented from MOH and FW and 
has recently been shifted to NICD. 
XXVIII. INFRASTRUCTURE  
Recommendations/Observations 
28.4 The Committee understands that a Task Force has been  set up on review of population norms for setting up of 
Health Centre. The Committee would like to be informed about the major recommendations of this Task Force as and 
when made. 
Action Taken 
 Since the position of ANMs is linked to the number of Sub-Centres, it has resulted in inadequate availability 
of health services, taking into account the population norms as followed presently. It would, therefore, proposed to 
revisit the population norm and effort be made to link the number of ANMs at any Sub-Centre to caseload and the 
distance of village/habitation which comprise the Sub-Cent re. The same logic applies to the number of PHCs and 
CHCs taking into account the staff number at these ins titutions.. Framework for Implementation (2005-2012) of 
NRHM has incorporated the necessity of reconsidering and revising the norms for setting up of health centres. 
Steering Committee in the Planning Commission on Primary He alth Care (Eleventh Five Year Plan) is also looking 
into the issue of review of population norms for setting up  of health centres. The major recommendations of this 
committee will be intimated as soon as they are available. 
Recommendations/Observations 
28.8 The Committee understands that a Task Force constit uted under NRHM has given a number of very crucial 
recommendations to ensure availability of doctors in rural areas. The Committee would appreciate if follow-up action 
is initiated both at the Central and State level at the earli est. The Committee is happy to learn that number of States 
like Punjab, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Orissa and Gujarat have come 
forward in formulating strategic policies to attract and pe rsuade doctors to serve in rural areas. The Committee hopes 
that such initiatives will result in marked improvement in  quality of Primary Health Care. The Committee finds that 
Tamil Nadu is the only State which has provided residentia l accommodation to doctors in most of the PHCs. While 
making the stay of doctors compulsory, strict action is also required to be taken against the erring doctors. The 
Committee is of the view that similar action needs to be taken by other States also. The Committee would appreciate 
if the Centre takes a pro-active approach in this regard by  taking up with other States to follow the above example. 
Another initiative that has come to the notice of the Comm ittee is handing over of PHCs to selected NGOs by States 
like Orissa, Bihar, Uttaranchal, Delhi, Jharkhand and Karn ataka. The Committee is of the view that performance of 
such PHCs needs to be monitored to assess the outc ome of such experiments for further improvement and 
diversification, if necessary. The Committee would like to be apprised about the performance level of such NGOs 
during the year 2005-06. 

 As per the census of 2001, due to increase of popu lation, proportionate new Primary Health Centres and Sub-
centres need to be started all over the country. This ne eds budget allocation. The Committee therefore recommends 
that budget allocation should be suitably enhanced. 
Action Taken 
 A number of States have taken various initiatives to ensure the presence of doctors in rural areas such as 
follows:  
 The Government of Punjab has taken following measures: 
 • First posting in Rural/Difficult areas for three years. 
 • Three years rural posting essential for applying for PG courses. 
 • The State is actively considering the appointment of doctors on contract basis. 
 The Steps taken by Government of Arunachal Pradesh include: 
 • Mandatory three years service in rural areas to re gulate the nomination of serving doctors to various 
post-graduate and in-service training courses. 
 • Identification of certain station as “soft and ur ban” posting places for the purpose of selecting in-
service candidates for post-graduate and in-service training courses. 
 • Classification of the locations of  posting of doctors as category A, B and C and compulsory rotation of 
doctors on completion of prescribed tenure as per classification of locations. 
 • Introduction of contractual appointment of doctors. 
 The steps taken by the State Government of Tripura are: 
 • First posting of medical officers is essential in ru ral/interior areas for three years. The period does not 
include any kind of leave enjoyed. 
 • Three years rural service is a pre-condition for nomination to undertake Post-Graduate study. 
 • Availing of the facility of forgoing non-pra cticing allowance and undertaking practice without 
compromising on assigned duties, as per the service rules. 
 • Attempts are being made to work out details for of fering choice posting after tenure in rural/interior 
areas. 
 • Medical officers were appointed on contract basi s and posted near their home places, to make the 
package attractive. 
 • The State Government is not considering any in centive in the form of allowance etc. to medical 
officers during their posting in rural/interior areas  since this will have a cascading effect on other 
categories of Government employees also. 
 The Government of Sikkim has taken the following measures: 
 • It is mandatory for all MOs to complete 3 years of rural posting in PHCs to enable them to qualify for 
nomination for PG studies by the State. 
 • The MOs posted in the PHCs are given Rural Ar ea allowances of Rs. 1000/-pm which is an added 
incentive for them to opt for rural posting. 
 The following measures have been taken by the State Government of Himachal Pradesh: 
 • First posting in rural/difficult area for 3 years 
 • Tenure of posting in the rural/difficult area is a pre-requisite for promotion, foreign assignment or 
training abroad 
 • Three years rural posting essential for applying for PG Courses. 
 • Choice of posting after rural/difficult area tenure. 
 • Appointment of doctors on contract basis. 
 • Rural/difficult area incentive in form of allowance, retention of Government accommodation in the 
place of last posting for family. 

 The details of steps taken by the Government of Tamil Nadu are: 
 • Persons selected by direct recruitment through the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission are being 
posted in the Primary Health Centres that are rural an d difficult areas. They should serve compulsorily 
for a minimum period of 3 years in the PHCs. 
 • Three years of rural service ha s been made compulsory for applyi ng for Post-Graduate Course as a 
service candidate. 50 per cent of the total seats ar e reserved for the service candidates and the post-
graduate study period is being treated as duty period, countable for pension. 
 • After completing 3 years of rural service, Post-G raduate qualified candidates are being released to 
Government Hospitals/Government Medical Colleges according to the requirement. 
 • Orders were issued appointing 186 doctors to the 93 upgraded PHCs on contract basis for a period of 
one year on a consolidated pay of Rs. 8000/- per mensem. 
 • Doctors working in rura l areas are granted incentives such as rural allowance for serving in rural areas. 
They are also provided with quarters in most of the PHCs. Stay at the HQ’s  of the PHCs has been 
made compulsory and strict action is being taken against erring Medical Officers. Further, those who 
stay in the HQs alone are allowed for Post Gradua te Courses. Weightage marks are given for rural 
service for selection to Post Graduate Courses. 
 The Government of Mizoram has informed that they have not framed transfer and posting norms for their 
doctors, as they do not have much prob lem in posting their doctors in the rural areas. Doctors are normally posted in 
the rural area and hard places on rotation. 
 The Action Taken Report of the Government of Orissa includes: 
 • Introduction of modified internship in the State for Undergraduate students under which three months 
are set aside for compulsory rural service. 
 • It has been decided that a candidate who has worked  as Medical Officer for three years or more in any 
rural area/tribal area/backward area shall be entitled to get 5 per cent of marks added to his qualifying 
marks. 
 • Before going for PG study, the selected PG candidates do one-year mandatory rural services. 
 • The candidate selected for the first recruitment posting of the Orissa Medical Service shall have to 
serve the initial period of minimum 3 years of services in backward areas and next three years in rural 
areas. 
 • In order to be eligible for promotion to the rank of Specialist/Junior Class-I, an Assistant Surgeon shall 
have to render not less than 7 years of services as such inclusive 3 years of rural service. 
 The Government of Gujarat gives a doctor an additional Rs.500 for working in the tribal and remote areas. The 
following steps are under consideration of the Government: 
 • Reservation of 10 per cent of seats for Post-graduation in Obs. and Gyne., PSM, Paediatrics, 
Anaesthesia for doctors who have worked in remote and inaccessible areas continuously for 5 years. 
 • Enhancing incentive pay of Rs.500 to 20 per cent of the pay in the remote and tribal areas. 
  Monitoring of PHCs to selected NGOs is done by concerned State Government. Their monitoring 
reports and performance level during the year 2005 -06 will be obtained to be placed before the 
Committee. Visits to the concerned States would also  be undertaken by the officers of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. 
 Under NRHM, it is proposed to set up Sub-Centres as  per 2001 population norms all over the country and 
upgrading existing Sub-Centres including building for Sub-Centres functioning in rented premises. The funds for 
setting up of PHCs are provided by Planning Commission un der PMGY. However, under NRHM, it is proposed to 
provide funds for improving physical infrastructure of PHCs. The recommendation of the Committee for enhancing 
the budget allocation is noted for compliance. 
XXIX. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH CARE (RCH-II) 

Recommendations/Observations 
29.2  RCH-II is the flagship programme on Reproductive Child and Maternal Health under NRHM, with 
components like Essential Obstetric Care  which include (i) institutional delivery and (ii) skilled birth attendants. 
Under RCH-II, States have been encouraged to evolve dist rict plans based upon a situation as analysis of ground 
realities and requirements. Accordingly, during 2005-06 PIPs  have been obtained from all States/UTs and appraised 
and approved by the Department. As per the Performance Budget (2006-07) PIPs for Rs. 1523.75 crore have been 
approved by the Department against which estimates for Fl exi Pool Budget 2005-06 were of Rs. 762.94 crore and 
releases made amounted to Rs. 685.52 crore. As per the latest position as on 15.03.2006, made available to the 
Committee, it is observed that out of Rs. 726.89 crore released under RCH-II Flexi-Pool, expenditure reported upto 
December, 2005 was only Rs. 141.63 cror e. The Committee finds that although tr end of under-utilization is there in 
respect of all the States, position is very bad in some of the EAG States: - 
(Rs. in crores) 
States Funds released  Expenditure upto  
 (15.3.2006) December, 2005 
Bihar 24.38 0.46 
Madhya Pradesh 56.20 1.32 
Uttar Pradesh 169.73 8.56 
Uttaranchal 6.96 0.91 
 In absence of utilization figures for NE States, assessment about their performance cannot be made. The 
Committee, however, understands that a mid-term review  of the programme was scheduled in January-February, 
2006. The Committee would like to be apprised about the outcome thereof. 
Action Taken 
 During the year 2005-06, under the programme releases  to the States/UTs were made to the extent of 
Rs.894.83 crores against the BE amount of Rs.762.99 cr ores. The Ministry reviewed the Programme in February, 
2006 and the level of expenditure reported by the States is at Annexure-I. 
 Thus against total release of Rs.898.83 crores, expe nditure of Rs.386.18 crores has been reported pending 
Financial Management Report of two states (i.e. Manipur and Delhi) for the quarter ending March, 2006 (43  per cent 
of expenditure). Since this was the first year of the re-d esigned programme with States undertaking flexible need 
based decentralized planning, there was delay in submission and appraisal of the State Programme Implementation 
Plans (PIPs) and their effective implementations that resulted in reported expenditure being less than satisfactory. 
Recommendations/Observations 
29.3 The Committee understands that a provision of Rs. 23 5 crores was kept under World Bank assisted RCH-II 
project during 2005-06 for procurement of supplies and material including medicines for sub centre, PHCs and CHCs 
could not be utilized as M/s HSCC agency of the Departme nt could not float tenders due to delayed receipt of No 
Objection from the World Bank. The Committee takes a serious  view of this. It seems delay in receipt of NOC from 
World Bank must have occurred due to want of some re quired information by the World Bank. If that be so, the 
department should make efforts so that such instances do not occur in future. 
Action Taken 
 The World Bank assisted RCH-I programme ended in March, 2005. Just before the 2006, negotiation with the 
World Bank for RCH-II, which was due in April, 2005, the Bank submitted a confidential interim report based on the 
investigation done by its Department of Institutional In tegrity (INT). Based on the Interim Report, World Bank put 
on hold the RCH-II project, which otherwise could have been approved in 2005, till such time the sufficient 
procurement capacity was built. 
 During the negotiation with the World Bank, the procurement issues were discussed extensively. As an 
outcome of these negotiations, Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) was agreed to. GAAP addresses 
the weakness of the procurement system. One of the important features of GAAP is to set up a Centralized 

Procurement Unit in the Deptt. Consequently, the Deptt.  of Health and Family Welfare established Empowered 
Procurement Wing (EWP) to consolidate,  streamline and strengthen  the procurement activity and to professionalize 
the procurement of Health Sector Goods. The negotiations with the World Bank have since been successfully 
completed on 15 July, 2006. 
Recommendations/Observations 
29.4 Another disturbing trend that has come to the notice of the Committee is availability of unspent balance of Rs. 
201.16 crore under the programme with various States. Out of total release of Rs. 1019.94 crore, expenditure of 
Rs.818.83 crore has been incurred so far, thus leaving an unspent balance of Rs.201.15 crore. Bihar and Orissa are 
the two States that could utilize only less than half of the allocated funds. 
Action Taken 
 Out of unspent balances of Rs.201.16 crores, a sum of Rs.6.77 crores have been refunded by some States and 
expenditure of Rs.58.22 crores has been additional reported by the some States. Now the remaining unspent balances 
is Rs.136.17 crores, which will be settled by obtaining refunds/or adjusting in the next releases. 
XXIX. REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH CARE (RCH-II)  
Recommendations/Observations 
29.5 The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department towards overall achievement level of 
Financial Targets under Family Welfare Programme as indicated in its Performance Budget 2006-07. The Committee 
observes that as on 31.1.06 as many  as 968 Utilization Certificates amoun ting to Rs. 398.88 crore are pending which 
date back to 1976-93. The Committee stro ngly feels that such a position can only be considered to be very alarming. 
This clearly indicates that in the absence of Utilization Certificates for huge sums, showing a steady increase over the 
years, quality of services being provided under the vari ous Programmes cannot be judged properly. The Committee 
would like to have full details (State-wise) in this regard. 
Action Taken 
 During the year 2006-07, the provisional utilization ce rtificates of Rs. 111.80 crores have been received 
against the total releases of Rs.898.84 crores. The correct position of the actual utilization of the funds will be made 
available on completion of audit of all the States/UTs, which is in progress. 
XXXI. FOREIGN FUNDING  
Recommendation/Observations 
31.5 The Committee observes that damage-control exercise  has been started by the Department in the matter of 
World Bank funding for various projects being put on hold . The Committee is of the view that the very fact that 
instances of corruption and fraud in a number of projects during a prolonged time-frame being noticed by World 
Bank and its funding being put on hold establishes that th ere were inherent flaws in the procurement system which 
went unnoticed for a considerable period of time. Quantum of World Bank funding being too small or Government 
ability to manage in the absence of the same cannot bring back the loss of prestige of the country world over and 
setback to various projects in Health and Family Welfar e sector. The Committee is of the opinion that a thorough 
assessment of procurement procedure in respect of all pr ojects whether foreign funded or otherwise needs to be 
made. This task can be entrusted to the Empowered Proc urement Committee of the Ministry and some independent 
experts should also be involved in this exercise. The Committee would also like to reiterate that monitoring 
mechanism needs to be further strengthened and activated . The Committee would like to be apprised about the final 
outcome of ongoing CBI investigation in the matter of World Bank funding. 
Action Taken 
 Under Empowered Procurement Wing (EPW), the Department of Health and Family Welfare has engaged the 
services of a Consultant Organizatio n to strengthen the procurement process in the Department. The Consultant 
Organization will conduct a comprehensive review of existi ng procurement system, resources, procedure etc. in the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to identify the ar eas that need further strengthening. The Team Leader of 
Consultant Organization to strengthen the EPW is review ing the existing system of procurement. Consultant 
organization will also assist the Department to establis h a system for procurement m onitoring, reporting, supplier 

performance and complaint database and to develop detailed complaint redressal procedure. CBI is investigating the 
matter and yet to submit its report. 
XXXII. DECLINING SEX RATIO 
Recommendations/Observations 
32.1 Declining trend in the child sex ra tio has been a matter of serious concern. Child sex ratio in the age group of 
0-6 years has been show ing a continuous decline over the decades, fr om 976 in 1961 to 927 in 2001. Specially 
vulnerable States have been Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh and Himachal Pradesh showing more than 50 points 
decline during the decade 1991-2001. 
Recommendations/Observations 
32.2 The Committee observes that besides th e age-old factors responsible for this dismal situation, easy availability 
of sex determination tests across the country can be consid ered as a reason behind the declining sex ratio. Coming 
into force of the Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act in 1996 and subsequent 
amendments made to remove the inherent inadequacies has so far failed to make any impact in checking this malaise. 
Action Taken 
 To give special focus to the States of Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan, Gujarat etc., a ‘National Support and 
Monitoring Cell’ with external assistance for effective implementation of the Act by appointing professionals from 
police, law and social sciences as consultants has been set up. The major exception is that the cell will help in putting 
a mechanism in place so that actual wrong doers who are committing female foeticide/abetting female foeticide are 
apprehended by the Appropriate Authorities. They are expected to network with the Appropriate Authorities/medical 
officers in the State and help in stepping up successful "sting/decoy operations" by the Appropriate Authorities to nab 
the actual wrong doers. 

CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
Recommendations/Observations 
2.1 Total allocation for the Department of Health and Fami ly Welfare for the year 2006-07 is  Rs. 12545.88 crores 
against the provision of Rs. 10307.30 crores in 2005-06. Th e Committee notes that year wise trend of both allocation 
and expenditure during Ninth and Tenth Plan shows a steady enhancement. Expenditure reported in 1997-98 (first 
year of Ninth Plan) was Rs. 3476.12 crores which has reached to Rs. 9210.46 crores in 2005-06 (Fourth year of the 
Tenth Plan). Committee’s attention has, however, been constantly drawn by one disturbing factor. Over the years, the 
Department has not been able to keep pace with the enha nced allocation of plan funds. Every year, invariably, BE 
allocation gets reduced at the RE stage and expenditure reported is even lesser. Year 2005-06 was no exception. Plan 
allocation of Rs. 9332.00 crore was brought down by almost Rs. 1000.00 crores (Rs. 8500.00 crores) at the RE stage 
and the actual expenditure reported was only Rs. 8076.76 cr ores. The Committee, however, notes that the position is 
entirely different with regard to the trend of allocat ion and utilization of non-plan  funds. Against a non-plan 
allocation of Rs. 943.09 crores in 2004-05, expenditure reported was Rs. 1227.81 crores. Similarly in 2005-06, there 
was an expenditure of Rs. 1133.70 crores against BE provision of  Rs. 975.36 crores. What is more worrisome is that 
shortfall of non-plan allocation has been made good by appropriating funds from plan allocation. Details made 
available to the Committee clearly indicate that position has deteriorated over the years. Diversion of plan funds 
under health schemes of Rs. 68.43 crores to non-plan in 2002-03, has reached the figure of Rs. 289.13 crores in 2005-
06. The Committee finds that premier institutions like AIIMS continue to be deprived of required non-plan funds. 
Position was the same with CGHS. The Committee apprehends that position may be the same more or less in respect 
of other institutions and schemes. The Committee fails to  comprehend the reasons for non-provision of required non-
plan funds. The Committee understands that as a result of concerted efforts made at th e Secretary and Ministerial 
level by the Department, there has been some increase in  the allocation of non-plan funds in 2005-06 which however 
proved to be inadequate. The Committee w ould like to emphasize that there is an  urgent need to curb the trend of 
diversion of plan funds to non-plan side. Such a position cannot be considered advisable for the successful 
implementation of any plan scheme. 
Action Taken 
 We agree with the committee’s observation that diversio n of funds from Plan to Non-plan is not a healthy 
trend. However, this apparently has been resorted to by the Ministry on account of shortage of funds under the non-
plan in respect of certain major health institutions like AIIMS.  It is felt that an internal exercise is necessary to look 
into the non-plan budget particularly of institutions like AIIMS and a strategy be drawn up for the same so that we 
may avoid such transfer of funds from Plan to non-plan side. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is surprised by the response of the Department to such an im portant issue. Instead of 
taking any corrective measures, the Department is simp ly reiterating the observat ion of the Committee made 
last year. The Committee can only conclude that status of diversion of plan funds to non-plan side would be 
the same this year too. The Commi ttee views with serious concern the la ck of action on the part of the 
Department.  
Recommendations/Observations 
2.2 To ensure optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds, for any scheme, prescribed financial norms 
need to be strictly adhered to. Non-existence of pending  utilization certificates and non-availability of unspent 
balances are the two visible symptoms thereof. The Committe e is, however, constrained to observe that both pending 
UCs and unspent balances continue to persist. This clearly  indicates the failure of im plementing agencies both in the 
private and Government Sector to successfully handle the schemes and also likelihood of inherent flaws in the 
schemes/projects. The Committee has been  given to understand that level of pendency of UCs/unspent balances has 
been reduced due to the constant efforts made by the De partment. However, UCs amounting to Rs. 1675.00 crores as 
on 31st March, 2006 and availability of unspent balanc es of Rs. 15.35 crores as on 1st January, 2006 cannot be 
considered a negligible amount. The Committee is of the vi ew that the Department need s to make all conceivable 

efforts to eliminate such pendency, by  making the monitoring mechanism at all levels more effective and result 
oriented. 
Action Taken 
 The directions of the Hon’ble Comm ittee has been noted for compliance.  
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is not happy with th e evasive reply of the Department. In stead of giving specific details 
about the various steps taken for reducing the pendency le vel of unspent balances and Utilization Certificates, 
simply noting the directions of the Committee for compliance cannot be considered an Action Taken Note.  
Recommendations/Observations 
2.3 The Committee would like to recall its observation made in the 7th Report that ''to meet the target contained in 
the National Health Policy, 2002, health sector needs manifold increase in budgetary support and recommended that 
external grant should be taken over and above the budgetary support''. The Committee, however, finds that the past 
practice of including external assistan ce in the gross Budget of the Departme nt is still continuing. In the domestic 
Budget for the year 2006-07, an external aid component of Rs. 1299.07 crores has been included. The Committee in 
this connection is constrained to observe that if the practice  of including external aid in domestic Budget continues, 
then the commitment of the Government to raise the allo cation in the health sector to 2-3 per cent of GDP will 
remain only on paper and not be realized in actual prac tice. Moreover, the Committee also feels that financing the 
non-plan expenditure by external aid is not a healthy pr actice. The Committee therefore, again recommends that the 
matter must be vigorously pursued with the Planning Comm ission and the Ministry of Finance to consider the 
external assistance over and above the gross budgetary support. 
Action Taken 
 The matter regarding External Assistance over and abov e the Gross Budgetary Support is being taken up with 
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The matter of inclusion of external aid component in  domestic Budget has been engaging the attention 
of the Committee for quite some time. The Committee, ho wever, is surprised to note that instead of there 
being any positive development in this direction, the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance are yet 
to be approached. It seems that the Department is eith er not interested in additional funding or does not have 
the capacity to utilize the same. 
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME  
Recommendations/Observations 
3.4 The Committee expresses its deep sense of concern on the status of implementation of SIU Report on CGHS. 
This exercise has been going on for the last so many ye ars. The Committee finds that it was only after a fresh SIU 
study conducted on the orders of CAT that a final decision with regard to the posts of Safaiwala, Chowkidar, Lab 
technician, Lab Assistant and Lab Attendant could be arrive d at which was accepted by the Central Government in 
January, 2003. The Committee is, however, given to understand  that as in August, 2004, 453 posts of Safaiwala and 
284 posts of Chowkidar are to be progressively outsourced. Latest feedback in this regard as well as in respect of Lab 
staff still remains unavailable to the Committee. Not only th is, SIU Report may lead to another dispute. It has been 
informed that a number of posts are likely to be declared surplus on the basis of SIU Report. Accordingly, 
information on existing strength in the dispensaries ha ve been sought from CGHS units. The Committee takes a 
strong exception to this appr oach. The Committee is of the view that had there been regular interaction between the 
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Health and Family We lfare, this kind of uncertainty would not have prevailed 
for so long. The Committee, therefor e, recommends that the Department should complete the exercise of 
implementation of SIU Report without any further delay. 
Action Taken 
 The directions of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance. 
Comments of the Committee 

 The Committee is constrained to observe that no pr ogress whatsoever seems to have been made in the 
implementation of SIU Report on CGHS. The Committee re iterates that a final view needs to be taken in the 
matter without any further delay. 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.6 The Committee was informed that a Committee has been set up on the 6t h May, 2005 under the Chairmanship 
of Shri P.K. Kaul, former Cabinet Secretary to review  the functioning of CGHS and make recommendations for 
making it more user-friendly. The Committee will also look into and suggest changes with  respect to the financial 
viability of the scheme in view of the rapidly incr easing expenditure in CGHS. The Committee may suggest 
alternative cost effective models of he alth care provisioning to Government employees as well as alternative source 
of financing the CGHS. The Committee notes that the Euro pean Commission is also funding a separate study of 
CGHS functioning to be conducted by the A.E Ferguson and Company. As per the Performance Budget (2006-07) of 
the Ministry, the report was expected in  the next three weeks. The Committee w ould, like to be apprised about the 
findings of EC study of CGHS which must have been received by the Ministry by now. 
Action Taken 
 The report prepared by M/s Ferguson and Company sponsored by European Commission has been received in 
1st week of July which is being examined. Broadly the report has suggested sweeping changes on the following 
subjects. 
 (a) Financial — CGHS is an open ended scheme providing unlimited OPD/IPD coverage with limited 
contribution and any attempt to increase the employee contribution or restrict the scheme coverage is a 
policy decision which the Government must take keeping in view the entire compassionate package 
that it would like to provide its employees. 
 (b) Procurement and supply chain — To prefer procurement structure suggestions are as  
under:- 
 (i) Rate Contract system 
 (ii) Formulation of procurement policy 
 (iii) Procurement Cell to be set up at the Central level for procurement etc. 
 (iv) Strengthen the tendering and rate fixation process  
 (v) Design an Integrated Materials Planning System  
 (vi) Strengthen Internal controls related with receipt and issue 
 (vii) Training of manpower on rele vant aspects of material management. 
 (c) Claims settlement — Suggestions are as under:- 
 (i) Better budgeting to counter delay in bill processing.  
 (ii) Preparation of claims settlement manual. 
 (iii) Monthly reporting. 
 (iv) Track and Analyze Refusal of Cred it and Deviation from Package rates. 
 (v) Claim Tracking Mechanism. A unique serial number to every claim for tracking to CGHS 
Website. 
 (vi) Low value claims say below Rs.500 be disposed off the dispensary level. 
 (d) Service delivery — This chapter provides over view of various service delivery points in the CGHS 
system and suggestions are as under:- 
 (i) Complete data base of CGHS beneficiaries. 
 (ii) Convenient timings for service employees.  
 (iii) Cut down waiting time at the dispensaries.  
 (iv) Re-designing of CGHS cards having data base of beneficiaries. 

 (v) Provision of better emergency services.  
 (vi) Behavioral aspects of the staff. 
 (vii) Specialists consultation.  
 (viii) Laboratory services . 
 (ix) In patient treatment. 
 (e) Hospital Recognition — A schedule may be prepared for the hospital recognition with set dates for 
initiation and completion of each activities. Differential rates may be considered. 
 (f) Grievance Handling — Suggestions are as under:- 
 (i) Set up standard guidelines for addressing grievances  
 (ii) Data base grievances received at all levels  
 (iii) Computerization for records  
 (iv) Monthly MIS on Grievances 
 (g) Utilization of Human resources and infrastructure — Suggestions are as under:- 
 (i) Consolidation of the dispensary 
 (ii) Manpower Utilization continuing CAB, Pharmacists and Nurses to be trained and 
Rationalization of class IV staff as per the workload assessment. 
 (iii) Utilization of Laboratories suggest optimum utilization of the facilities by relax timings, 
reducing the cost of service delivery and to improve beneficiaries satisfactorily. 
 (iv) This chapter focuses on strategic option available to CGHS for outsourcing its operation for 
example Insurance Scheme, TPAs etc.  
 (h) Governance and Autonomy — Suggestions are as under:- 
 (i) Convert CGHS into an autonomous Organization with a well defined framework for 
governance. 
 In this regard it is stated that the above recommend ations of the Committee are being examined and decision 
taken by the Government on the recommendation will be communicated in due course. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee has been informed that report of the European Commission sponsored study of CGHS 
has been received in the 1st week of July and is at present under examination in the Ministry. The Committee 
fails to understand the reason for undue delay in taking  a view on the report on the part of the Department. 
The Committee would once again emphasize that the De partment needs to take co rrective measures based on 
the study reports of both European Commission and Kaul Committee, but within the parameters of the 
existing system. Recommendations/Observations 
3.7 The Committee fails to understand the rationale for having two studies on the fu nctioning of CGHS being 
conducted simultaneously specially in view of the mand ate of the Kaul Committee covering all aspects of CGHS 
functioning. The Committee is surprised to note that alth ough almost a year has passed since the setting up of the 
Kaul Committee, it has met only on three occasions. It seems only preliminary exerci se has been done by this 
Committee so far. What is more surpri sing is that no time-frame has been fixed for this Committee. The Committee 
views this with serious concern. This does not leave any hope for any significant improvement in the functioning of 
CGHS providing medical services to Central Government employees in the near future. 
Action Taken 
 The Kaul Committee which has been mandated to look in to the functioning of CGHS and to suggest measures 
for improvement by making it user friendly. The Committee so far has had 12 meetings and the proceeding of the 
Committee are still continuing and certain actions have alr eady been initiated as per the decisions taken in the 
Committee proceedings e.g. computeriza tion of Laxmi Nagar Dispensary as a pilot project which is now fully 

operational. A trial run of dispensaries of North Avenue, South Avenue and Medical Centre at Parliament House has 
also started. Digitalization of index cards of CGHS beneficiaries of East Zone, Central Zone and South Zone of Delhi 
has been completed. Proposal for computerization of remainin g dispensaries at an estimated cost of Rs.8.70 crores is 
under process. 
 Computerized processing of all Hospital bills and bills  of local chemists has been outsourced on a pilot basis 
in respect of two dispensaries under CGHS Delhi to Third Party Administrators (TPA) recognized by the Insurance 
Regulatory Development Authority. The pilot project has already started for two dispensaries under CGHS East 
Zone, Delhi. The TPA has to do the following:- 
 (i) Computerizing the receipt, processing and sanction of all claims received by CGHS 
Delhi so as to ensure settlement of claims/bills within five working days. 
 (ii) Placing the entire processing movement on a web-site. 
 (iii) Attending to all queries about bills/claims. 
 (iv) Enabling claimants to track the progress of their claim on the web. 
 (v) Advising the claimants about the disposal of their claim and if sanctioned to confirm 
receipt of payment by them. 
 (vi) From the claims to capture data about disease profiles, course of treatment, drugs 
prescribed etc. 
 (vii) Create an appropriate MIS for future planning. 
 Computerization will help in reducing waiting time of  patient at dispensaries, fast delivery of indented 
medicines to the beneficiaries, processing of all records relating to reimbursement indents reports will be handled 
efficiently, data for MIS would be generated for future planning. 
 Local Advisory Committees have been constituted in the dispensaries to address grievances of beneficiaries, 
with CMOP-in-charge as Chairman and Members from Pensioners Welfar e Associations, Residents Welfare 
Associations and Area Welfare Officers. Local chemists are also required to attend these meetings. 
 Empanelment of private hospitals/dia gnostic centres has now been converted into a continuous process. No 
tenders are henceforth to be floated for empanelment. Hosp itals/Diagnostic centres that fulfil CGHS norms for such 
empanelment can now apply anytime provided they are w illing to accept the rates approved by CGHS. This will 
eliminate the periodicity in the empanelment process. Th e eligible Private Hospitals and Diagnostic centres can 
submit their applications electronically also. The final report of the Kaul Committee will be submitted on the analysis 
of the pilot project and measures initiated.  
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee has been given to understand that the final report of the Kaul Committee would be 
submitted on the analysis of the pilot project and measures taken based on its initial recommendations. The 
Committee fails to comprehend the basi s for this approach. Whenever a Commit tee is constituted, it has to be 
give a report in accordance with it s mandate within a specified period of time. The Committee is of the view 
that this should have been the case with the Kaul Committee also. 
Recommendations/Observations 
3.8 The Committee finds that in view of the st udy being conducted by the Kaul Committee, all 
expansion/strengthening of infrastructure work of CGHS dispensaries has been brought to virtually a stand-still. The 
Committee would like to quote two instances in this re gard. Proposal for construc tion of building of CGHS 
Dispensary No. 73 in Gurgaon, Haryana for which land has already been purchased will be taken up only after the 
receipt of report of the Kaul Committee and reaction of the Department thereon. Same is the fate of the proposal 
initiated in 2005 for construction of a new building for CGHS headquarter at Kidwai Nagar, New Delhi. The 
Committee would like to emphasize that basic purpose of an y study can only be achieved if it is conducted within a 
prescribed time-frame. The Department should ensure that the report of the Kaul Committee is received at the earliest 
and action initiated immediately thereafter. 

Action Taken 
 As mentioned at para 3.6, rapid strides are being taken to improve and strengthen the functioning of CGHS 
like computerization, constitution of advisory committees , improvement in delivery system etc. As regards 
construction of the buildings for CGHS at Gurgaon and Ki dwai Nagar the Planning Commission has observed that it 
is time to restructure, reform and rejuvenate this contribu tory health scheme. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
is already examining the shortcomings reported, and could consider several options. Ex isting subscribers to the 
CGHS could exercise an option of continuing with the current arrangement, or alternately, subscribing to a new 
system developed within the CGHS. At the beginning of 2005, the Planning Commission had intimated that keeping 
in view the outcome of exercise for ra tionalization during the review of the Plan schemes they were of the view that 
CGHS as a Plan Scheme being administered by Health Ministry also need not continue and hence no provision 
should be kept w.e.f. Annual Plan 2005-06. However, after persuasion by this Ministry during last financial year an 
amount of Rs.31 crores was allocated for CGHS under Plan head. As Planning Commission has allowed CGHS to 
continue as Plan Scheme, the expansion of CGHS will be taken up with them. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed to note that th e Central Government Health Scheme is undergoing a 
very confusing phase. On the one hand the Government has appointed Kaul Committee to suggest ways and 
means to improve the existing CGHS system, on the other hand Planning Commission in its Mid-Term 
Appraisal of Tenth Plan has come out with the opinion that CGHS need not continue as a plan scheme and 
accordingly no provision on the plan side should be kept for 2005-06 budget. As a result, projects for 
construction of new CGHS buildings have been put on hold. 
 The Committee would like to point out that Centra l Government Health Sche me is a welfare scheme 
aimed to cater to the health needs of a large nu mber of beneficiaries incl uding Central Government 
employees, pensioners and VIPs like Members of Parlia ment, Judges of the Supreme and the High Courts, 
freedom fighters etc. Any attempt to tinker with the sc heme to the disadvantage of its beneficiaries cannot be 
appreciated. The Committee would like to  emphasize that this state of ind ecisiveness should not be allowed to 
continue. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to further improve and strengthen the facilities 
under the existing system. Introducing another parallel system does not seem to be an appropriate move.  
Recommendations/Observations 
3.9 The status of vacancies of doctor s under CGHS Delhi is another area of concern. Position as on 1st March, 
2006 is as follows:- 
Name of the post Sanctioned st rength In position Vacancy position 
SAG 33 4 29 
GDMOs 660 567 103 
Non Teaching 101 83 18 
 The Department has informed that it has received 468 nominations for appointment as Medical Officers on the 
basis of Combined Medical Service Examination, 2004 and 2005. Offers of appointment in respect of CMSE, 2004 
(168 candidates) were under issue wh erein pre-appointment formalities were  complete. Nomination of CMSE 2005 
(300 candidates) was under process. Vacancies in CG HS will be filled up as and when the medical 
officers/specialists become available. The Committee apprehends that this w ould again be a long drawn exercise. As 
168 candidate of CMSE, 2004 were still to join service, there was little likelihood of 300 successful candidates of 
CMSE, 2005 joining in the near future. The Committee strongly feels that urgent action needs to be taken in this vital 
area. Simultaneously, a review of the existing procedure is al so required to be taken so that bottlenecks therein are 
eliminated. 
Action Taken 

 Out of 168 candidates of CMSE-2004, on completion of pre-appointment formalities of Medical Examination 
and CVR etc. about 100 offers of appointment of CMSE-2004 candidates have been issued so far. Out of this, 20 
candidates have already joined their duties. Offer of  appointment to remaining 68 candidates CMSE-2004 and 
candidates of CMSE-2005 will be issued on completion of the requisite formalities. Presen tly, work related to cadre 
allocation to CMSE-2005 candidates is in process. 
 Against sanctioned strength of 668 posts of GDMOS in CGHS Delhi, 548 posts are filled up on regular basis. 
Against 120 vacancies, 92 offer of appoin tment/transfer of officers stands, leaving only 28 clear vacancies as on 
1.7.2006. 
 As regards the SAG posts of GDMO sub-cadre are conc erned, there are 23 vacancies of SAG grade in CGHS 
Delhi. A proposal to fill up 112 vacanc ies (including 23 vacancies  of CGHS Delhi) of SA G (Regular Side) for the 
year 2005-06 and 2006-07 has been sent to UPSC and the DPC is likely to be held in a month or two. The vacant 
posts of SAG in CGHS Delhi will be filled up on receipt of panel from UPSC and approval of ACC. 
 Besides this, the following number of vacancies have b een reported to UPSC in Medical Officers’ Grade of 
GDMO Sub-cadre of CHS: 
Year No. of vacancies reported 
CMSE - 2005 300 (Cadre allocation is  
 being done) 
CMSE - 2005 300 (interviews are being  
 held in UPSC) 
CMSE - 2005 200 
 Since delay in verification of character and antecedent s is the major hurdle, which delays appointments, this 
Department is reviewing the existing procedure. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that vacan cy position in CHS remains unchanged. Last year 
also, offers of appoin tment to 168 candidates of CME-2004 were under issue. Late st picture which emerges is 
that out of 100 letters of appointment actually issued, only 20 candidates have joined so far. Offer of 
appointment to remaining 68 candidat es of CME- 2004 will only be issued on completion of the requisite 
formalities. The Committee can well imagine the fate of CME- 2005. This is indeed a sorry state of affairs. 
Continuance of vacancies for such a long period that too in such a vital sector demands revamping of the 
existing cumbersome procedure. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that this may be taken up on a 
priority basis. 
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.3 The Committee notes that there has been a marginal increase in th e allocation of n on-plan funds for 
Safdarjung Hospital from Rs. 72.42 crores in 2005-06 to Rs. 74.58 crores in 2006-07. The Committee has been 
observing that every year, pressure on Safdarjung Hospital has been growing. Following indicators in respect of 
different services are self-revealing:- 
 Actual Estimated Estimated 
 (2004-05)  (2005-06) (2006-07)  
Admissions 1,12,557 1,23,813 1,36,194 
Emergency Attendance 2,68,341 2,95,175 3,24,693 
Total operations 72,215 84,937 93,430 
General OPD Attendance 14,02,074 15,42,281 16,96,510 

Cost Indicators  1485 1634 1797 
(Cost per patient per bed per day)    
4.4 The Committee strongly feels that in view of overall an ticipated increase in the various medical services being 
provided by Safdarjung Hospital, proportionate increase in the non-plan funds also needs to be made. The Committee 
observes that whereas patient load and resultant pressure on various services being provided by the hospital has been 
steadily increasing, bed strength remains stuck at 1531 for the last so many years. It has not been possible to add even 
a single bed so far. The Committee wonders whether anybody has given a thought in this direction. The Committee is 
of the firm opinion that there is an urgent need to provide more beds so that better health care may be provided to the 
patients at Safdarjung Hospital. 
Action Taken 
 At this stage it is not feasible to increase the bed strength in view of the constraint of existing infrastructure. A 
comprehensive re-development plan for Safdarjung Hospital is being drawn up. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry is deafenin gly silent about making proportionate 
increase in the Non-Plan funds for Safdarjung Hospital, as recommended by the Committee. The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Ministry to make all out efforts for enhancement of non-plan funds. 
 The Committee, however, welcomes the comprehen sive redevelopment plan being drawn up by the 
Ministry for Safdarjung Hospital. Safarjung Hospital is one of the biggest tertiary care hospitals in Delhi 
where admissions, emergency attendance, total operations,  general OPD attendance etc.  have been increasing 
year after year. Consequently, there is an urgent ne ed for increasing bed stre ngth and enhancing other 
infrastructure facilities in the hospital. The Committee hopes that all the constraints hindering the capacity 
expansion of the Safdarjung Hospital will be taken ca re of in the redevelopment plan. The Committee would, 
however, like to emphasize that the implementation of the redevelopment plan should be carried out in a time 
bound manner. Recommendations/Observations 
4.5 The Committee understands that evening OPDs are also being run at Safdarjung Hospital for quite some time. 
The Committee would, however, like to point out that pub lic at large is perhaps not aware about evening OPDs. The 
Committee is of the view that adequate publicity needs to be given to such services. 
Action Taken 
 The functioning of the evening OPDs running at Safdarjung Hospital was periodically reviewed and it was 
observed that the number of patients attending evening OPDs have shown a decline over the past few years as low as 
average 2 to 3 patients per day in a Speciality. There is already emergency services running in casualty where the 
small number of patients attending the evening OPDs have to be again called in the morning hours for various 
investigations which defeats the very purpose of running evening OPDs. It was also observed that the majority of 
patients seen in the evening OPDs are either spill over from the morni ng OPD or known to hospital staff. The 
Specialist services at Safdarjung Hospit al are already overstretched due to s hortage of doctors/staff, increasing 
patients load in the emergency/I.P.D./O.P.D. and posting of doctors/staff for various VIP, VVIP and disaster 
management duties etc. There is also  no willingness of the staff/doctors for coming to run the evening OPDs due to 
their already overstretched routine workload. During the Resident Doctors strike in May, 2006 evening O.P.Ds were 
suspended to strengthen the strike contingency plan. The periodic reviews shows that the services in evening OPDs 
has not proved useful to the patients. Hence, after getti ng the overall review of the circumstances, evening OPDs 
have been suspended. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is not convinced by the justifications  given for the closure of evening OPD services at 
Safdarjung Hospital. Working conditions were the same  when decision to start evening OPD services was 
taken. Fact remains that wide publicity was never given to  this initiative. Had it be done, patients would have 
definitely availed of such a service.  Heavy patient load in th e morning OPDs would also have been some what 

less. The Committee would also like to emphasize that any new facility should be introduced only after making 
a proper assessment of the ground realities and the effective mechanism, so as to ensure its maximum reach. 
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL  
Recommendations/Observations 
5.4 The Committee observes that out of the remaining projects in hand, preliminary exercise of getting the 
approval of the competent authorities is going on in respect of the following:- 
 (i) Setting up of Nuclear Medicine Department  
 (ii) Setting up of Thoracic Science Department  
 (iii) Setting up of Neuro Science Centre  
 (iv) Upgradation of School of Nursing to College of Nursing 
 The Committee hopes that every effort would be made to expedite the process so that construction work on the 
project starts at the earliest. The Committee would also like  to emphasise that the progr ess of the other technically 
feasible projects in hand should be closely monitored to avoid any undue delay. 
Action Taken 
 All these new projects are under active consideration and efforts are being made to draw out viable PIP’s 
which are technically feasible. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is not happy with the snail’s pace of the progress made in the matter of setting up of 
Nuclear Medicine and Thoracic Science Departments, Neuro Science Centre and up- gradation of School of 
Nursing into College of Nursing, which is evident from  the fact that even after a lapse of more than six 
months, the above projects are still at the consideration  stage. The Committee woul d like the Department to 
appreciate that delaying the expansion of hospital services results in delaying the treatment to the patients and 
thereby prolonging their pa in and suffering. The Committee, theref ore, recommends that the Department 
should expedite the decision taking process and take ef fective tangible steps for speedy implementation within 
a specific time-frame. 
Recommendations/Observations 
5.5 The Committee has also observed that the Performanc e Budget (2006-07) indicates the statistical data about 
various services being provided at Dr. Ram Manohar Lo hia Hospital for 2004-05 only. No details about 2005-06 
either actual about the first three quarters/first half or es timated data have been given, as done in respect of 
Safdarjung Hospital. The Committee strongly feels that th is data can prove to be very useful for making an 
assessment about additional infrastructure/manpower/funds required for the running of the Hospital. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that these deta ils for the last 3-5 years may be collected and analysed for making a proper 
assessment of the needs of the Hospital. 
Action Taken 
 Statistical data for the last three years about vari ous activities of the Hospital are given in the Statement 
enclosed (Annexure-III). Comparative data and data about actual expenditure in the previous year, BE, RE 
achievements made during the year for the last three years are given in the statement enclosed as Annexure-IV. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is surprised to observe that althou gh bed strength at Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital 
has remained unchanged during the period 2003-06, num ber of major operations carried out has shown a 
declining trend, reason be ing all the operation theatr es not being functional. Total attendance at OPD also 
reflects the same disturbing trend. The Committee is al so constrained to observe that for the last two years i.e. 
2004-05 and 2005-06 the Hospital has not been able to fully utilize its budgeted allocation on the plan side due 
to non- procurement of certain vital equipments/machi nes like Heart-Lung Machine, CT Scaner, Cath Lab, 
Intensive Care Ventilator, Digital X-ray Machine etc. The protraction in purchasi ng these equipments for 

which allocation of funds have been approved by the Pa rliament, in the opinion of the Committee, is too grave 
a matter to be ignored. Th e Committee feels that but for the proc edural rigmaroles/bureaucratic red-tape 
these vital diagnostic or life saving equipments could h ave been purchased and utilized in the hospital for the 
benefit of common people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department needs to explore the 
feasibility of simplifying and rationalizing th e procedure for the procurement of such vital 
equipments/machines. 
VIII. POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND  RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH  
Recommendations/Observations 
8.3 The Committee is surprised to note that against the total sanctioned 5585  posts for the Institute, there are only 
4805 posts filled up as on 31st Marc h, 2005. The Committee is of the view that as many as 780 posts lying unfilled 
cannot be considered a healthy sign. The Committee would like to be apprised about the category-wise status of these 
vacant posts and efforts made for filling them up. 
Action Taken 
 The Government of India, on 24th May and 31st August, 2001 had issued instructions regarding optimization 
of direct recruitment of civilian posts. As per the instructions each Ministry/department including autonomous bodies 
are required to prepare their Annual Direct Recruitment Plans in respect of non technical posts and l/3rd of the 
vacancies arising in a year could be fille d up subject to the condition that this  does not exceed 1 per cent of the total 
sanctioned strength of the department. For this purp ose, a Screening Committee ha s been constituted in each 
Ministry, which clears the Annual Recruitment Plans of the Organization falling under their administrative control. 
 Due to increasing workload, the Institute had requested the Ministry on 23.2.2002 to exempt them from the 
above mentioned instructions. But PGI was instructed to follow the said instructions of the Government. In the 
meeting of Screening Committee held on 14.10.2003 the matter was discusse d and it was decided that all the 
technical posts may be filled up. However in respect of non technical posts, the said instructions on optimization of 
direct recruitment will be effective i.e. 2/3rd of the direct recruitment vacancie s occurring in a year shall have to be 
surrendered. Accordingly, the Institut e has surrendered 48 posts of Class IV in lieu of 73 non technical posts. 
However, in the minutes of the meeting it was mentione d that Screening Committee is  not competent to grant 
exemption to technical posts from the provisions of the DOPT orders. Also there was no clarity on the number of 
posts cleared for the PGIMER though there was a reference of number of vacancies. The Institute requested the status 
of non technical posts to be filled up. The Institute had sent updated information regarding vacant non technical posts 
to the Ministry on 20.6.2006, approval of Screening Committe e is still awaited. All the non technical posts are lying 
vacant since 2001-02 as the vacant non technical posts have not been approved by the Screening Committee. 
 In view of the recommendations of the Parliamentar y Standing Committee, approval of the Screening for 
filling up all the vacant non technical posts without any cut may be requested for so that the Institute may able to 
ensure deliverance of quality services at every outlet to the ailing humanity and optimal utilization of resources. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the casual approach of the Department in a matter connected 
with a premier institute of the country . Instead of taking the required acti on and giving the feedback in its 
Action Taken Note, the Department is simply indicating th e line of action required to be taken by it. Taking a 
serious view of this, the Committee would also like to point out that the Screening Committee of the Ministry, 
not taking any decision inspite of the Institute sending the requisite information on the 20th June, 2006, 
confirms lack of action/initiative for reasons best known to the Department. 
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI  
Recommendations/Observations 
9.3 On a specific query about the delay taking place in making the Trauma Centre at AIIMS functional, the 
Committee was given an idea about the facilities to be made  available at the centre. Apart from the 186 bed Trauma 
Centre, additional areas would be avai lable to handle about 100 affected/injured persons affected by natural 
calamities. Not only this, in an emergency, the 186 beds at the Centre could be converted into ICU like facility within 
a short time. The Centre would also be having the facility of two helipads to evacuate the injured. Along with the six 

OTs of the centre, services of multi-discipline super spec iality available at AIIMS will also be easily available. The 
Committee has been given to understand that manpower for th e Trauma Centre has already been recruited and hired, 
the building component was complete an d all the machinery would be installe d in a short time. Appreciating the 
progress made in the project on Trauma Centre at AIIMS,  the Committee hopes it would be made functional without 
any further delay. 
Action Taken 
 The clearance Central Electricity Authority has been ob tained. N.D.M.C. has issued a provisional clearance 
certificate. Efforts are also afoot to obtain other mandatory clearances from the respective author ities. Further, few 
equipments have already been installe d. Procurement of remaining equipments are being retendered. The Ministry 
has already recommended creation of 587 regular posts and 372 posts for outsourcing. The approval of Finance 
Ministry is awaited. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that another year has passed but the Trauma Centre at AIIMS 
is yet to be made fully functional. Not only all the mandatory clearances have been received till date, required 
equipments are also yet to be installed. Even if, so me progress would be made in the matter, creation of 
regular/temporary posts will continue  to remain on a proposal stage for long. The Committee has been 
pointing out on regular basis that with  starting a project the exercise of creation of required posts should also 
begin simultaneously. The Committee strongly feels that the impressive building of Trauma Centre with the 
infrastructure also available to some extent would not provide any relief if the medi cal/para-medical staff is 
not there. The Committee a ccordingly recommends that a ll out efforts should be made in a time-bound 
manner. 
Recommendations/Observations 
9.4 Committee’s attention has been drawn by the fact that in  spite of AIIMS being a supe r-speciality hospital, it 
lacks the facilities to treat burn patients. It was clarified that AIIMS has never been envisaged to have burn speciality, 
and the nearby Safdurjung Hospital is fully equipped to treat burn cases. The Committee, however, strongly feels that 
a premier institution should be having every kind of facility. The Committee hopes that as assured by the Director, 
AIIMS, its suggestion would be placed before the Governing Body at the earliest for an early decision in the matter. 
Action Taken 
 The Committees recommendations for setting up of a Burn  unit will be placed before the Governing Body for 
its consideration. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that its r ecommendation for setting up of a Burn Unit/Ward is 
yet to be placed before the Governing Body of AIIM S. The Committee takes a se rious view of the casual 
approach of the Department towards recommendations made by a Parliamentary Committee. The Committee 
would like to emphasize that assurance given before a Pa rliamentary Committee is bound to be followed by 
some action on the part of the Administrative Ministry, otherwise the very purpose of Action Taken Note to be 
submitted by the Ministry gets defeated. 
Recommendations/Observations 
9.6 Committee’s attention has been drawn by another di sturbing development with re gard to procurement of 
medical equipment. The Committee is surprised to learn that the earlier practice of tax exemption for imported 
medical equipment and life-saving devices was withdrawn few year ago. Since then, tax has to be paid for imported 
medical equipment/life-saving devices whic h has been gradually increasing. The present rate is 9.5 per cent tax plus 
VAT of 4 per cent. As a result, poor patients are facing problems in getting treatment. The Committee strongly feels 
that this issue of tax imposition on medical equipment/lif e-saving devices should be ex amined afresh. Government 
medical institutions and private hospitals need to be treated on a different footing in such matter. 
Action Taken 
 No comments. 
Comments of the Committee 

 The Committee is surprised to fi nd that on the vital issue of se eking tax exemptions on medical 
equipments, the Department, instead of approaching Ministry of Finance has decided to sit idle. The 
Committee feels that exemption of tax on such life saving equipments will go a long way in reducing the cost of 
treatment and ensuring availability of costly medical de vices in hospitals. In view of this, the Committee 
reiterates its earlier recommendations to examine the issue of imposition of tax on medical equipments and life 
saving devices and take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. 
X. SHORTAGE OF REQUIRED MANPOWER AT CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  HOSPITALS/ 
INSTITUTES  
Recommendations/Observations 
10.3 The Committee notes that the Jave d Chowdhury Committee in its report has given separate recommendations 
for CHS officers and AIIMS/PGI doctors which include bett er service conditions, enha nced allowances, including 
NPA etc. The Committee is of the firm view that implementation of the recommendations of Javed Chowdhury 
Committee’s Report should be carried out at the earliest. It is  not inclined to agree with the Department’s contention 
that in public service, one should not think about salaries and facilities etc. Our doctors in Government Institutes are 
indeed doing a commendable job working under tremendous pressure. Nobody should object better service 
conditions for them. At the same time, the Committee would al so like to point out that there is an urgent need for 
having a mechanism in place, where-under doctors servin g Government institutes do not have the liberty to leave 
their service for better placements. Various options can be made applicable. Minimum Service Bond can be one. 
Action Taken 
 The recommendations of the Committee are in the advanc ed stage of consideration. However, consultations 
with Department of Expenditure, Department of Person nel would be necessary before taking a decision. The 
recommendations of the Committee regarding bond obligations are also under consideration. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for undue delay in the matter  of implementation of 
Javed Chaudhury Committee Report. Reply of the Department clearly indicates that consultation with the 
Departments of Expenditure and Personnel are yet to be initiated. Only thereafter, a final view would be taken 
by the Department. The Committee would like to remind the Department that the Javed Chowdhury 
Committee was constituted to look into the problem of  CHS doctors seeking voluntary retirement/resignation. 
Delay in the implementation of the recommendati ons will aggravate the problem further and ultimate 
sufferers would be the general public. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates an early action in the matter. 
XII. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH  
Recommendations/Observations 
12.2 The Committee is happy to know that pioneering work is being done by ICMR in the emerging area of Stem 
Cell Therapy. Under a joint ICMR -DBT initiative draft guide lines for regulatory aspects of Stem Cell research have 
been finalized and will be released to wider circulation and national debates. ICMR has taken a leading role with its 
institutes like National Institute of Immunohaematology, National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health and 
National Institute of Nutrition actively involved in vari ous aspects of Stem Cell Research and Therapy. The 
Committee understands that as many as  17 research proposals, are at different stages of implementation. The 
Committee sees it as a very encouraging sign for modern medical science and impresses upon the Department to 
encourage such activities whole-heartedly. 
12.3 The Committee observes that approv ed outlay of Rs. 870 crore for ICMR during Tenth Plan has not proved to 
be adequate. This is corroborated by a review done by the Performance Appraisal Boar d under the Chairmanship of 
Dr. Kasturirangan and having two foreign experts. The projected requirement of ICMR for 2006-07 as assessed by 
the Board was Rs. 510 crores. However, an  allocation of Rs. 217 crore has been made which is less than half of the 
requirement assessed by the Board. The Committee fails to comprehend the purpose of setting up an expert body for 
the Premier Research Council of the country if its recomm endations are not given due consideration. This trend of 
allocation of funds is all the more disturbing when co mpared with Tenth Plan outlays of other Science and 
Technology agencies like ICAR, CSIR, DST and DBT which have been on the higher side for the last so many 
decades. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that as ad vocated by the Performance Appraisal Board, funding 

for ICMR for 2006-07 should be enhanced at the RE stage. Eleventh Plan allocation should also reflect the enhanced 
pattern of funding. 
Action Taken 
 The ICMR have initiated a number of stem cell resear ch proposals as at Annexure -I which are at different 
stages of implementation. ICMR ha s projected a requirement of about Rs.161 crores for 2006-07 for the 
implementation of pending proposals. 
 Approved outlay is Rs.870.00 crores. For the 5th year of Tenth Plan, a provision of Rs.217 crores has been 
made in the BE. However, in view of the Performance Appraisal Board (PAB) recommendations for Rs.510 crores 
for 2006-07 efforts are being made to get more funds for ICMR during the year at RE stage. These will include 
following proposals as well. 
 (i)  Rs. 6 crores (paid by the council on account of  various taxes in connection with JICA project). 
 (ii) Rs.5 crores for renovation of Enterovirus Research Centre, Mumbai.  
 (iii)  Rs. 10 crores for establishment of BSL-4 laboratory.  
 (iv)  Rs.510 crores for establishing and up-gradation of  various facilities at ICMR and its institutes/center.  
 (v)  Rs.90 crores (approx.) on account of restoration ad justed out of Tenth Plan Budget for JICA projects. 
This allocation will be utilized for purpose of initiation and completion of 'Tropical Diseases Research' 
in Patna and construction of laboratory at Belgam etc. 
 As for the setting up a expert body for the premier research council, it is stated that a proposal for creation of a 
Department of Health Research within the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the purpose of providing 
necessary impetus to the medical research has already been moved for consideration/approval of the Cabinet. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee in its last report had simply drawn the attention of the Department to the review done 
by the Performance Appraisal Board under the Chairman ship of Dr. Kasturirangan. The Committee fails to 
understand the need for crea tion of a Department of Health Research for providing necessary impetus to the 
medical research. The Committ ee strongly feels that ICMR having the mandate  for carrying out medical 
research and a dedicated team therefor should be allowe d to have free hand. Depa rtment should be solely 
guided by their expert advice. 
Recommendations/Observations 
12.4 The Committee was informed that against a proposed Plan allocation of Rs. 255 crore for 2005-06, the 
Council was released Central assistance of only Rs. 190 crore. Reason being grant of Rs. 66 crore given by 
Government of Japan to the Council after competing inte rnationally. The Committee finds it rather strange that 
instead of maintaining the level of approved outlay, grants  being released by other countries are being taken into 
account by the Government. It would not be wrong to conclude that securing of foreign funds by a body after striving 
very hard for the same acts as a deterrent instead of boos ting its resources. The Committee is disturbed to note that 
instead of taking any remedial action in the matter as earlier suggested by it, another adverse condition has been put 
into effect. Under the new international arrangements, instead of donor country paying the taxes, the recipient body is 
to pay taxes. The Committee was informed that during 2005-0 6 ICMR had to pay Rs. 6 crore as taxes on the foreign 
funding received by them. The Committee is  of the firm opinion that the existi ng practice of adju stment of foreign 
grants against the domestic funding and also levy of tax on foreign grants should be reviewed afresh and withdrawn 
at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
 The issue regarding adjustment of foreign grants against domestic will be taken up with Planning Commission 
and Ministry of Finance. 
Comments of the Committee 

 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the lack of initiative on its recommendation concerning a premier 
body of medical research in the country. The Committee would like to point out that the initiative should have 
come from the Department. However, inspite of their attention being drawn about a year ago, no action 
whatsoever has been initiated so far. The Committee has every reason to believe that position would have 
remained unchanged during 2006-07 also. Taking a seri ous view of this, the Committee impresses upon the 
Department to take up this issue with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance at the earliest. 
XIV. OTHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS/BODIES  
Recommendations/Observations 
14.1 Plan allocation of Rs. 11.81 crore in 2005-06 was meant for a number of educational institutions. The 
Committee, however, notes that this allo cation had to be reduced to Rs. 9.93  crore at the RE Stage and the actual 
expenditure at the end of the year amounted to only Rs. 2.08 crore. Details in respect of some of the institutions made 
available to the Committee are self-revealing:— 
(Rs. in crores) 
Name of the Institute BE 2005-06 RE 2005-06 Actuals 
RAK College of Nursing 0.85 0.57 0.40 
Medical Council of India 1.00 1.00 0.50 
Lady Reading Health school 0.60 0.60 0.18 
National Board of Examinations 6.77 6.77 0.20 
Medical Grants Commission 1.00 0.00 0.00 
 Decrease in allocation has been mainly attributed to  non-filling up/non-creation of Plan posts under various 
educational institutions and also unspent balances lying with the autonomous bodies included under this Head. The 
Committee is of the view that reasons given for under u tilization clearly indicate towards bad management. The 
Committee strongly feels that the Centre needs to play a more pro-active role and ma ke an assessment about the 
problems being faced by these institutions/bodies and take remedial steps. 
Action Taken  
Nursing Section 
RAK College of Engineering  
Lady Reading Health School 
 In order to ensure that the allocated amount is spen t as per the provision made in the Budget, it has been 
emphasized upon above institutions to send invariably monthly progress report of expenditure. The Division would 
convene every quarterly a meeting with the above institutions to assess the progress of expenditure and would evolve 
ways and means to remove any bottle neck so that the allocation of budget made is fully utilized. 
Medical Council of India 
 During the financial year 2005-06 the budget alloca tion for Medical Council of India was as  under: 
(Rupees in lakhs) 
MCI B.E. R.E Actual 
Plan 100 100 100 
 *The final installments of Rs.50 lakhs of Plan head wa s released only on 31st March, 2006. On the request of 
Medical Council of India with the approval of the competent authority, this Ministry has allowed MCI to utilize 
unspent amount during this year subject to the condition that the amount would be utilized for the purpose it was 
sanctioned. 
 It is also stated that MCI earns significant amounts/r ecourses through inspection fees levied under the IMC, 
Act, 1956. As per the balance sheet of the medical council of India for the year 2003-04 and 2004-05, a sum of 
Rs.21.69 crores and Rs.30.44 crores respectively have been  shown as credit in the corpus fund maintained by the 

Council. Additionally a sum of Rs.13.63 crores and Rs.6.4 9 crores have been shown as earmarked endowment fund 
during the above mentio ned two years. The reserves and surplus am ount has also increased  from Rs.2.00 crores 
during 2003-04 to Rs.5.00 crores during  2004-05. Therefore,  the Council has adequate funds to perform its duties as 
entrusted to it under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. 
Comments of the Committee 
 Attention of the Committee was drawn by under- utilisation of allocated funds by some institutions. The 
Committee takes note of the details of action taken by the Department during 2006-07 in respect of these 
institutions. However, the Committee ob serves that there is one exception, i.e. National Board of 
Examinations. Status of allocated funds for the Boar d has not been conveyed. The Committee would like to 
understand the reasons therefor. 
Recommendations/Observations 
14.2 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn by th e air of indecisiveness lying around the matter of setting 
up of Medical Grants Commission. Rs. 5.00 crore we re earmarked for Tenth Plan . The Committee has been 
observing that year after year an amount of Rs. 1 crore is being allocated. Last year of the Tenth Plan has arrived and 
the idea still remains on paper. The Co mmittee is of the view that this indecisiveness should not continue in the 
Eleventh Plan. Planning Commission in its Mid Term Appr aisal of Tenth Plan has observed that the Ministry may 
concretize suggestions and current thinking about setting up of a Medical Grants Commission. 
Action Taken 
 The proposal to set up Medical Grants Commission is  under consideration of Government. Technical aspects 
with regard to terms of preference of the proposed Comm ission are being examined. Also other administrative and 
financial aspects of the Commission are under consideration. In view of this the funds for 2005-06 could not be 
utilized. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is appalled to note that the matter of setting up the Medical Grants Commission has not 
moved beyond the consideration stage even at the fag end of the Tenth Five Year Plan. This, in the opinion of 
the Committee, is reflective of an extremely sorry state of  affairs. Instead of surren dering the funds allocated 
by the Parliament, the same could have been used for some other fruitful purposes. The Committee, at the cost 
of being repetitive, would like the Department to appreciate the necessity  of a Medical Grants Commission as 
a funding agency for the institutes providing Medical Education in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to expedite the matter so th at the setting up of Medical Grants Commission is 
not put on perpetual hold. 
XV. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
15.6 The Committee also takes note of the fact that the is sue of revealing of HIV status  to donors was discussed in 
the 16th Governing Body meeting of National Blood Transfusion Council. The Co mmittee has been given to 
understand that the Council was of the opinion that all out e fforts should be made to ensure  provision of facilities in 
terms of pre-testing, counseling and HIV testing so that more and more donors will come forward to know their HIV 
status and can access these services as and when required. The Department has also accepted that revealing of HIV 
status can follow the effective preventi on practices by the individual found to be  positive. On a specific query in this 
regard, officials of NACO informed the Committee that its  suggestion has been agreed to. The Committee hopes that 
this change in the policy must have been conveyed to a ll the implementing authorities across the country. If not, 
action should be taken at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
 On the recommendation made by the Parliament Standing  Committee, this matter was placed as an agenda in 
the 16' G.B. meeting of National Blood Transfusion Coun cil (NBTC) to discuss and take the opinion of all the 
members regarding the implication of the policy. The members of NBTC suggested that the sero-reactive donors may 
be called upon to the blood bank concerned for their counse ling and confirmatory test instead of referring them to 

various counseling and testing centres. Th ey opined that Blood Bank, particularly the Major Blood banks should be 
equipped with the facilities for counseling and confirmatory  testing for the sero-reactiv e donors, as Blood Banks are 
already conducting HIV tests on donated units by trained sta ff. The members also expressed other alternatives that 
the blood banks collecting blood from blood donors directly or through camps, should send the sero-reactive samples 
at their own initiative to government recognized diagnostic laboratories for confirmatory tests. 
 As per the recommendations made by the members of NBTC, one post of counselor may be created for all the 
Major Blood Banks in the Government sector supported by NACO. These couns elors will be providing the pre and 
post test counseling to the HIV sero-reactive blood donors along with confirmatory testing for HIV. 
 This will be placed as an agenda  for approval by next National AIDS Control Board (NACB) meeting. Once 
NACB approval is received all the implementing authorities across the country will be informed. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee has been pursuing the implementati on of its recommendation regarding revealing of 
HIV status to blood donors. Last year itself the Commi ttee was informed that the matter was discussed at the 
16th General Body meeting of the National Blood Transf usion Council. Action Taken Note of the Department 
also gives the same details. The Committee finds that the proposal is yet to get the formal approval of the 
National AIDS Control Board. The Committee would like to emphasize that the meeting of the Board, if not 
held so far, should be  convened without any further delay so also  to expeditiously implement the proposal, 
vital for prevention of HIV/AIDS. 
XVI. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
16.2 Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 139 crore was approved fo r the National Ment al Health Programme. However, the 
Committee notes that although funds were released every year during the Plan period, utilization figures reveal a very 
discouraging picture. During the first three years of the Plan period, against an allocation of Rs. 90.00 crore, 
expenditure reported is only Rs. 33.55 crore. The Committee apprehends that expenditure would not have shown any 
increasing trend in 2005-06 in spite of there being an enhanced allocation of Rs. 40.00 crore. The main factor 
responsible for this state of affairs was the delay in approva l of the revised District Mental Health Programme. As a 
result, against a target of up gradation of 37 Government Mental Hospitals and 75 medical colleges during the Tenth 
Plan period, only 18 Government Mental Hospitals and 13 medical colleges could be funded, as per the latest reports. 
The Committee hopes that during the last  year of the Tenth Plan, the programme would ultimately take off and 
implemented as envisaged. The Committee is also of the view that shortage of trained psychiatric manpower and lack 
of awareness regarding treatment, the two major constrai nts of the programme need to be addressed without any 
further delay. 
Action Taken 
 During the Tenth Five Year Plan it is envisaged to expand District Mental Health Programme to cover 100 
districts in the country, strengthen the 37 Government me ntal health institutes and also psychiatric wings of 75 
medical colleges, undertake IEC activities and research and training. So far 94 districts have been covered under the 
District Mental Health Programme; funds have been rele ased for up-gradation of psychiatric wings of 24 medical 
colleges and 19 Mental Hospitals. Further, funds have also  been released for undertaking research and IEC activities. 
In fact, during the year 2005-06, under National Mental  Health Programme Rs.46.00 crores has been released 
(Rs.40.00 crores from the NMHP Programme and Rs.6.00 cr ores under North East Funds). As regards shortage of 
trained psychiatric manpower, there are over 3000 qualified ps ychiatrists, 500 clinical psychiatrists, 300 psychiatric 
social workers and about 400 trained psychiatric nurses in th e country. The effort of the Government is to diagnose 
the mentally ill patients at an early stage and treat them th rough the general health delivery system. For this purpose 
under the National Mental Health Programme, the General Duty Medical Officers are given short-term training in the 
field of psychiatry for handling cases of mental illness. The Government is also providing primary treatment to the 
common man through the District Mental Health Programme (DMHP). 
Comments of the Committee 

 The Committee is pleased to note that under the Dist rict Mental Health Programme, out of 100 districts 
to be covered during the Tenth Five Year Plan, 94 distri cts have been covered. However, in respect of the 
target of upgradation of 75 medical colleges and 37 Government mental hospitals, during the same period, the  
achievement figures so far are only 24 and 19 respectiv ely. Therefore, the performance of the Department in 
this regard has fallen woefully short of its target. With only a few months left for the completion of the Tenth 
Plan, the Committee has serious doubts whether these target s will ever be achieved. The Committee feels that 
up-gradation of these medical hospitals and mental hospital s is required to be carried out on an urgent basis 
as it will help in curing the patients at the initial stage and save him or her from the agony of being sent to the 
mental asylum. 
XX. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL 
SCIENCES, SHILLONG  
Recommendations/Observations 
20. The main objective of the institute is to provide advanc ed specialized health care to  the people of NE Region. 
The Committee has been observing the progress being made in making this ambitious project fully operational. Out 
of the original approved cost of Rs. 422.60 crore since 1997-98, expenditure incurred upto 2004-05 is Rs. 201.90 
crore. The Committee understands that th e project is being constantly monitore d by various agencies including the 
PMO and the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implem entation. The Committee is, however, disturbed by the 
level of achievement of financial targets during 2005-06. Against an allocation of Rs. 126.51 crore reduced to Rs. 
86.98 crore at the RE stage, funds released by the end of the financial year amount to only Rs. 30.00 lakhs. Revised 
date of completion of different phases of project which wa s to be made functional by mid 2005 is now June/July, 
2006. In the absence of details about the progress made under the different phases of project, and also in view of the 
level of expenditure during 2005-06 the Committee can only co nclude that chances of this National level Institute 
primarily meant for the people of NE Region becoming fully functional seem to be very dim. The Committee 
observes that status of manpower as on 31.12.05 is even more disturbing. Out of total sanctioned 1520 posts, only 
198 posts could be filled up to 31.12.05. This is confirme d by the statement of the Department that all sanctioned 
posts subject to availability of applicants in super speciality Departments are expected to be filled up during 2006-07. 
The Committee is of the view that an intensive drive needs to be initiated, if not alrea dy done so far. Otherwise the 
situation that will finally emerge will be that at least anot her Plan period will be required for acquiring the required 
manpower for the Institute. 
Action Taken 
 The BE for the financial year 2005-06 in respect of No rth Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health 
and Medical Sciences, (NEIGRIMS), Shillong was Rs. 126.51 cr ores of which substantial part was to meet the cost 
of various high-end equipment. However due to various technical reasons, the medical  equipment could not be 
procured during the said financial year and therefore allocation was reduced to Rs.86.98 crore. 
 The 125 bed hospital facility is already fully functional  in the main campus and all out efforts are being made 
inter-alia to procure most of the equipment required for the fully operationalization of th e 1st phase of the project 
(300-bed). 
 As regards filling up of the post, as on 21.8.2006, out of the 1519 sanctioned posts, 280 have been filled and 
action to fill up the remaining posts is at an advanced stage. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction with th e slow pace of filling up of sanctioned posts at 
NEIGRIMS, Shillong. As on 31st December, 2005, out of sanctioned 1520 posts, only 148 could be filled up. 
Latest position as informed by the Department is that 280 posts have been filled up as on 21st August, 2006. 
The Committee strongly feels that the remaining posts should be filled up in a time-bound manner under the 
close monitoring of the Department. 
XXII. SERVICES AVAILABLE FOR CRITICAL PATIENTS IN GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS 
Recommendations/Observations 

22.2 The Committee, however, observes that ground reali ties specially in Government hospitals are entirely 
different. Firstly, there is acute shortage of ICU beds even in Central Government hospitals like Dr. RML hospital 
and Safdarjung hospital in Delhi. The Committee can well understand the condition of hospitals in States. The 
Committee would like to point out that  hospitals like Dr. RML hospital and Safdarjung hospital receive a huge 
number of patients from all over the country generally in a very serious/critical condition. The Committee is of the 
firm view that there is a need for having a review of ICU services available in Government hospitals in the country. 
A beginning can be made by conducting such an exercise for the two premier hospitals namely Dr. RML hospital and 
Safdarjung hospital located in Delhi.  The Committee would appreciate if this  exercise is undertaken within a 
prescribed time schedule so that remedial steps can be initiated at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
 Observation of the Committee have b een take note of and action for revi ew of I.C.U. services in Dr. Ram 
Manohar Lohia hospital and Safdarjung hospital has been initiated. 
Comments of the Committee 
 Attention of the Committee was drawn by the uns atisfactory level of ICU services at Central 
Government Hospitals. The Committee had accordingly suggested that a re view of these services at Dr. Ram 
Manohar Lohia hospital and Safdarjung hospital may be done in the first instance. The Committee is 
surprised to note that this exercise is yet to be completed. The Committee can well imagine the time likely to 
be taken in providing the required services. The Committee therefore once again emphasizes that required 
action may be taken at the earliest. 
XXIII. UPGRADATION/STRENGTHENING OF EMERGENCY FACILITIES AT STATE 
GOVERNMENT 
HOSPITALS LOCATED ALONG NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
Recommendations/Observations 
23. The Committee notes that a provision of Rs. 35 crores  was made in 2005-06 for up-gradation strengthening of 
emergency facilities at State Government hospitals located alongwith national highways. As per the information with 
the Committee, Rs. 35.86 crores were released to 22 State Government hospitals spread over 11 States in the country, 
with Tamil Nadu getting the assistance for maximum number of hospitals (7 Government hospitals). The Committee 
notes a new initiative has been taken by the Department under this scheme. The National Highways Authority which 
has been entrusted with the 3500 kms. of the Golden Quadrilateral have been requested to identify hospitals along the 
national highways for funding under the scheme. Besides that, it was proposed to involve NHAI in providing services 
to the victims of road accidents and needing trauma services urgently. Reason being the financial constraints and lack 
of manpower available with the State Governments The Co mmittee, while welcoming the proposed revision of the 
scheme, would like to point out that the Centre need to play a more pro-active role in the implementation of a scheme 
meant for welfare of general public. The Committee would al so like to be apprised about the status of hospitals 
opened so far (State-wise) under the scheme of Up-gra dation/Strengthening of Emergency Facilities at State 
Government hospitals located alongwith National Highways. 
Action Taken 
 A complete list of State Government Hospitals located on National Highways to whom the grant has been 
sanctioned under the scheme is enclosed . The Government has taken up a review of the scheme with a view to make 
it more effective. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes that funds have been released  to a number of State Government Hospitals located 
on National Highways. However, utilisation certificates are awaited in quite a few cases. No feedback has been 
given by the Department about the st atus of these hospitals. The Commit tee would like to emphasize that 
review of this scheme is expedited so that victims get the required medical assistance. 
XXV. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Malaria 

Recommendations/Observations 
25.2.2  The Committee has been informed that NE States together contributed 40 per cent of the country’s malaria 
population, 7 per cent of malaria cases and 19 per cent of malaria deaths reported in the country during 2004. The 
Committee notes that besides NE States, Orissa and West Be ngal reported the maximum number of deaths in 2004. 
As per the records made available to the Committee, in cidence of Malaria cases in 2005 (upto August, 2005) 
indicates no improvement whatsoever in respect of these States. Details of 295 deaths (State-wise) reported till 
August, 2005 reveal that maximum 90 deaths have occurred in Orissa, followed by West Bengal (81), Mizoram (50) 
and Assam (45). As per the Performance Budget 2006-07, details available till November, 2005 shows the number of 
deaths reaching 530. When compared with the details available since 2001, the Committee can only conclude that NE 
States, Orissa and  
W. Bengal continue to perform badly. The Committee observes  that funds are being duly al located to these States by 
the Centre. The Committee strongly feels that level of implementation needs strengthening in these vulnerable States. 
It seems that neither the funds are being released by State Governments to districts nor there is adequate supervision 
and monitoring being done by them. The Committee also notes that in Assam and Orissa, another handicap noticed is 
that there is acute shortage of Health Workers responsi ble for surveillance and detect ion of malaria in villages. 
Overall shortage of Health Workers in these few States is very high especi ally as per the required norms as indicated 
below: - 
State Required Sanctioned In position 
Assam 5104 638 320 
Orissa 5927 628 337 
Action Taken 
 The NE States together contribute 4 per cent of the country’s population, 8 per cent of malaria cases and 27 
per cent of malaria deaths reported in the country during 2005. Incidence of Malaria cases in 2006 (Reported upto 
June, 2006) indicates no improvement in these States. De tails of 288 deaths (State-wise) reported till June, 2006 
revealed that maximum 234 deaths have occurred in Assam, followed by Orissa (20), West Bengal (8), Tripura (7), 
Karnataka (3). 
 Global Funds for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (G FATM) supported Intensified Malaria Control Project 
(IMCP) is being implemented in seven NE St ates and West Bengal, Orissa and Jharkhand w.e.f. 1st July, 2005 for 
enhanced support. GFATM grants are being released to the State Societies. 
 Due to large number of vacancies of male health work ers in States, early detection of malaria cases through 
active surveillance and prompt treatment get delayed. Gol has requested the State Govts to fill the vacant positions to 
improve surveillance and treatment of malaria cases. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that situ ation continues to remain grim so far as malaria 
cases/deaths reported in NE States, Orissa and West  Bengal is concerned. Situation in Assam has rather 
deteriorated further with maximum number of deaths reported from that State alone. The Committee would 
like to point out that mere release of massive funds through the Glob al Funds for AIDS, TB and Malaria 
(GFATM) to these badly affected States is not showin g any visible improvement. The Committee reiterates its 
apprehensions that funds are not reaching the district s. This is borne out by the statement made by the 
Department that GFATM funds are being released to State Societies. The Committee can only conclude that 
there is no mechanism to confirm wh ether the districts are receiving the funds in time. Another disturbing 
trend noticed by the Committee last ye ar was the acute shortage of male health workers in these vulnerable 
States. Taking a serious note of the nonchalant attitude shown by the chronically malaria-endemic States of 
Assam and Orissa, the Committee would like to point out that non-filling of vacancies by States is a serious 
drawback that is eventually going to affect the Global Funds for  AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) 
supported Intensified Malaria Control Project (IMCP). The Committee is disturbed to note that the only 
initiative taken by the Department is making a request  to the State Governments to fill up the vacancies. The 
Committee would also like to impress upon the fact that a more pro-active role is required on the part of the 
Department in the prevailing situation. The very first action which can be taken by the Department 

immediately is to impress upon the NE  States, Assam and Orissa to first zer o in on the underlying causes of 
vacancies and take prompt remedial measures accordingly. 
 The Committee would like to be informed about steps taken and also progress made by the NE States, 
Orissa and West Bengal regarding the filling up of the vacant posts. 
Recommendation/Observation 
25.2.4 The Committee understands that us e of Insecticide Treated Bed Nets is an alternative and cost effective 
vector control measure which is being supplied free or at highly subsidized rates to the high risk areas of endemic 
States. Committee has made a specific query about adverse Report of CAG abou t allotment of 5.20 lakh mosquito 
nets to Assam by the Centre in 2000. These nets were handed over to the State Government between 7th February 
and 7th April, 2000. As per CAG Report, out of 5.20 lakh  mosquito nets, 4,86,133 nets were distributed to 22 
districts from 7th to 11 April, 2001. The Committee, however,  notes that instead of being distributed, these nets had 
to be kept in the health department stores and godowns of the State Warehouse Corporation till February 2005 at a 
monthly rent of Rs. 82,500 since February, 2001. 
Recommendation/Observation 
25.2.5 From the detailed note submitted by the Department , the Committee could infer that prescribed norms were 
not adhered to while negotiating the procurement of 8 lakh single bed nets and 2 lakh double bed nets. The 
Committee notes that supply or ders were placed with three different fi rms based in Guwahati, Kolkata and Delhi. 
During the process, a complaint abou t the sub-standard quality of bed ne ts was received from CVC. After 
preliminary inspection by the central team, distribution of  bed nets was stopped till further directions from the 
Centre. Analysis of samples of bed nets was got done by IIT, Delhi that confirmed the bad quality of nets. On being 
asked to lift the bed nets, the concerned firm went to court. Subsequently, one of the firms went to the Indian Council 
of Arbitration and the matter hangs there. The Committee not es that only one Delhi based firm has received the 
payment. The Committee takes a serious view of this deve lopment. The Department has chosen not to reply to the 
specific query about the rent being paid for storage of be d nets in the State warehouse and godowns. The Committee 
strongly feels that the Department has to be very cautious while entering into any procurement procedure involving 
such big amount of funds. Non-adherence to procurement procedure has resulted not only in financial losses but also 
depriving the most vulnerable class of society. Payment of rent to godowns for keeping sa fe mosquito nets certified 
and fit for use is a classic case of mismanagement. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department 
should make all conceivable efforts for settlement of case so as to stop incurring of unnecessary expenditures. 
Action Taken 
 The Department has not mentioned anything in the Action Taken Note.  
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the indifferent approach adopted by the Department to such a 
serious issue reported upon by the Co mmittee. The Committee would like to impress upon the fact that 
through Action Taken Notes, the concerned Department  is expected to apprise the Committee about the 
specific action taken after submission of the Report. Non-committal approach of the Department confirms the 
apprehension of the Committee that the CAG case about Insecticide Treated Bed nets in Assam remains 
unresolved and the likely beneficiaries continue to suffer. 
25.3 Kala-Azar  
Recommendations/Observations 
25.3.2 The Committee is constrained to note that in spite  of funds being made availa ble to the states, they are 
somehow not making an optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds. Result is that provision of Rs. 58.86 
crores in 2005-06 had to be brought down to Rs. 17.62 crore at the RE stage. What is more worrying is that cash 
assistance could not be released to Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal for want of Utilization Certificates for the 
previous years. The Committee understands that Rs. 20.00 crore have been provided under the programmes for the 
four endemic states. The Committee hopes that Bihar, Jh arkhand and West Bengal must have submitted Utilization 
Certificates by now. The Committee is of the view that in  order to achieve the elimination of Kala-azar by 2010 
vigorous efforts need to be made with special focus on endemic States. 
Action Taken 

 During 2005-06, against the allocated budget of Rs.58. 86 crores, Rs.40.00 crores w as kept for procurement of 
DDT and medicines and Rs. 18.86 crores as cash assistance to  States. The allocated budget could not be utilized by 
third quarter due to late receipt of DDT consignee instructions from the States particularly from the State of Bihar for 
supply of allocated quantity of DDT. The consignee instruct ion from Bihar received in the fag end of financial year 
(February2006) resulting to reduce the budget from Rs.58.86 crores to Rs. 17.62 crores in RE 2005-06. 
 In current financial year 2006-07, Rs.20.00 crores has been kept under BE which includes  
Rs. 15.00 crores for DDT and Kala-azar medicines and Rs.5 .00 crores approved as cash assistance for meeting 
operational costs. 
 The utilization certificates (UCs) of previous years are mandatory for release of next instalment of cash grant. 
Due to non-submission/partial submission of UCs from the States, the cash assistance for the current year could not 
be released yet. The issue has been taken up with the four endemic States for early submission of UCs. 
Comments of the Committee 
 Kala-azar has a history of taking a heavy toll on human lives in the four endemic States. Though, of 
late, its incidence has registered a decrease, its total er adication is still a far cry, which is why the Ministry 
should not lower its guard against Kala-azar. Timely submission of UCs assumes added significance in view of 
the fact that timely release and utilization of funds wo uld play a crucial role in co mbating Kala-azar. Merely 
informing the Committee that “the issue has been taken up with the four States for early submission of UCs” 
without specifying the efforts made and the level of correspondence entered into with the defaulting States is 
not sufficient. The Committee, would therefore, like to be enlightened about the precise steps taken 
subsequent to the Committee’s recommendation on making vigorous efforts for early submission of Utilization 
Certificates and subsequent judicious utilization of allocated funds. 
25.4 JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS  
Recommendations/Observations 
25.4.1 Japanese Encephalitis (JE) is a viral disease with a tendency of seasonal outbreaks. JE has been reported 
repeatedly from 15 States. During the year 2004, 1714 case s and 367 deaths due to suspected JE were reported from 
the States. In 2005 (up to 5.12.2005), 6550 cases and 1645 deat hs have been reported due to  outbreak in eastern part 
of Uttar Pradesh. The strategy for control includes stre ngthening the surveillance activ ities and integrated vector 
control, capacity building and Behavior Change communication. 
25.4.2 The Committee is constrained to note that despite  continuous efforts made by the Department, number of 
cases of JE infection is on the rise. Year 2005 was exceptionally bad. Upto December 2005, as many as 6550 cases 
were already reported with 1645 cases of deaths. In UP, major outbreak of JE was reported with number of 
cases/deaths being 5978 and 1458 respectively. The Committee observes that UP has been the most endemic state for 
quite a few years. The Committe e is not aware whether any special drive has been launched in UP to contain the 
spread of disease. The Committee also observes that Haryan a seems to be poised for increase in the number of cases 
reported. 
Action Taken 
 For effective prevention and control of JE and implementation of advance action plan to prevent any outbreak, 
the Dte of National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme  (NVBDCP), Gol is regularly  monitoring the situation 
through continuous interaction with State Government In addition, the Dte is convening review meetings; organizing 
trainings for capacity building, awareness campaigns for co mmunity involvement and field visits for supervision and 
monitoring and providing technical guidance to States. 
 During the year 2006, Gol has initiated JE vaccinat ion programme as an integral component of Universal 
Immunization Programme (UIP) with single dose live attenuated JE vaccine (SA-14-14-2) in 4 States - Uttar Pradesh, 
Assam, West Bengal and Karnataka. JE  vaccination campaign was completed su ccessfully in 7 districts of Uttar 
Pradesh for children between 1 and 15 years of age (in Dist ricts Gorakhpur, Kushinagar, Maharajganj, Kheri, Deoria, 
Siddharth Nagar; Sant Kabir Nagar) with coverage of above 95 per cent of estimated target. 
 The State of Haryana is endemic for JE; the most af fected districts are Karnal , Kurukshetra, Kaithal and 
Panipat. The JE situation of Haryana during the last three years is given below: 
Years Cases Deaths 

2003 104 67 
2004 37 27 
2005 46 39 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is happy to note that steps have  been initiated to contain the spread of Japanese 
Encephalitis, in U.P, Assam, West Bengal and Karnataka. However, the Department has been silent as to 
whether any steps have been initiated to contain the disease in Haryana. The figures given by the Department 
for the year 2005 already show a rise in the number of reported cases as well as deaths in Haryana. 
Apprehending a similar trend in 20 06 also, the Committee would appreciat e if JE vaccination programme is 
made an integral component of Universal Immunization Programme in Haryana. 
XXVI. REVISED NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
26.2 The Committee observes that assessment of the TB Control Programme during 20 05-06 after being brought 
under NRHM does not show a satisfactory level in respec t of few States. Against a percentage of TB suspects 
examined, out of total new adult outpa tients (target upto 2-3 per cent), Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Tripura have 
shown only 1 per cent achievement. Similarly, against Annualized total case detection rate of 115 (per 1 lakh 
population), achievement level remained at 61 in respect of Bihar, J and K and Tripura, 77 and 25 in respect of 
Kerala and Lakshadweep respectively. 
Action Taken 
 Though the Revised National TB Control Progra mme (RNTCP) has been brought under NRHM, it is 
implemented and monitored as per the Programme’s guide lines, specific norms and criteria. For increasing the 
percentage of examination of TB suspects among the new adult out patients and annualized total case detection rate, 
special emphasis is laid on IEC activities for mass awaren ess and involvement of NGOs and Private Practitioners 
(PPs) in the Programme. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes that the Depa rtment’s reply does not address the concerns raised by it with 
regard to under-achievement of targets by certain States /UTs in terms of examination of T.B. suspects among 
the new adult outpatients and in annualized total ca se detection rate. The Committee would like the  
Department to focus their attentio n on vulnerable states under RNTCP.  The Committee hopes that with 
NGOs and Private Practitioners being involved in IEC acti vities concerning awareness building among people 
spread of T.B. would be contained. 
Recommendations/Observations 
26.3 The Committee’s attention has also been drawn by uns pent balances lying with North East states under the 
programme. The Committee notes that Rs. 360 crore were av ailable with NE states as on 1.04.2005. Another Rs. 
360.00 crore was duly released during 2005-06, thus making total funds amounting to Rs. 720.68 crore available with 
the NE states. However, the Committee notes that till J une, 2005, expenditure of only  Rs. 165.85 crore could be 
incurred. Actual utilization figures are not available with the Committee. Even then availability of unspent balances 
clearly indicates that some constraints are definitely ther e in the implementation of th is programme in NE region. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly feels th at more focused attention needs to be given to NE states so as to ensure 
better performance of all disease control programmes including TB. 
Action Taken 
 Regarding Tuberculosis: The figures mentioned in this para do not match with figures pertaining to RNTCP. 
The position in regard to release of funds to the North-East ern States and utilization ther eof in respect of RNTCP is 
as under: 
(Rs. in lakhs) 
(a)  Balance as on 01.04.2005 298.12 

(b)  Funds released during 2005-06 1040.00 
TOTAL: (a+b) 1338.12 
Expenditure upto June, 2005 165.85 
Expenditure upto 31st March, 2006 989.37 
 Steps taken under the National TB Control Programme for proper utilization of funds by the North-Eastern 
States are as under: 
 (i) Financial Guidelines for Districts/States TB Cont rol Societies have been framed and widely circulated 
to the societies to facilitate utilization of funds and proper maintenance of accounts. In the guideline 
financial norms for various activities have been stipulated and general conditions for proper utilization 
are given. 
 (ii) For maintaining the accounts of the societies an d timely submission of the quarterly statement of the 
expenditure, provision has been made for appointment of full time Accountant for the State TB 
Societies and part-time accountants for the District TB Societies. 
 (iii) The balances with the societies are reviewed from time to time with a view to reallocate the same 
under the different heads where more funds are required. 
 (iv) To facilitate better utilization,  flexibility has been provided to the DTOs for reallocation of funds upto 
15 per cent and with the approval of State TB Society upto 100 per cent under the different heads so as 
to avoid blocking of funds under the head where it is not immediately required. 
 (v) As a step towards decentraliz ation of financia l ownership of the Programme , it has been decided to 
release the funds as lump sum to the State TB Societies for onward tr ansmission to the District TB 
Societies as per their requirement. The State TB Societies have been inst ructed to monitor the 
expenditure of the District TB Societies and divert/reallocate the funds wherever necessary. 
 (vi) The Accountants and the State TB Officers have been provided training on various aspects of financial 
management. 
 (vii) To facilitate maintenance of proper financ ial records and accounts, provision for contractual 
appointment of full time Data Entry Operator for District TB Societies and State TB Societies has 
been made and funds for procurement of computers are given to the societies. 
 (viii) Unspent balances are allowed to be carried forward for utilization in the next financial year. 
 (ix) Further release of the funds to the societies are ma de keeping in view the availability of balances with 
the societies under the different heads and after receipt of SOE, utilization certificate and audit reports. 
Generally releases are made twice a year and effort is made to ensure to keep the balances with the 
societies to meet requirement for six months. 
 (x) To ensure proper utilization of funds th e accounts of societies are subject to Audit. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that status of unspent balances under RNTCP shows no 
improvement in 2005-06. Against unspent balances amounting to Rs. 298.12 lakhs as on 1.4.2005 availability of 
unspent balances has reached Rs. 348.75 lakhs as on 1.4.2006. The Committee hopes that the impact of 
number of initiatives taken by the Department would have been evident in 2006-07. The Committee would also 
like to point out that availa bility of unspent balances and their being carried forward to the next year cannot 
be considered a positive sign. This ca n only mean that the implementing agencies are facing some constraints 
in optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds. This aspect also needs to be taken care of. 
XXVII. NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS  
Recommendations/Observations 
27.4 Training of Eye Surgeons in IOL surgery is the most crucial activity under th e programme. The Committee, 
however, notes that since 1996-97 up till 2004-05, only  1974 eye surgeons have been trained. The Committee 
strongly feels that number of eye surgeons trained in IOL surgery is too small for such a big country. This is all the 

more a cause for concern as at least 62 percent of blindn ess in the country is attributed to cataract. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Departments should initiate time bound targeted training programme for eye surgeons 
with focus on districts suffering from lack of good eye- care. The Committee would also take the opportunity to draw 
the attention of the Department about the specific suggestion made by the Planning Commission that quality of Intra-
Ocular Lenses (IDLSI) produced indigenously needs to be improved in view of very high demand for the same. 
Action Taken 
 Training of Eye Surgeons in ECCE/IOL, SICS, PHACO Emulsification and other sub-specialities of 
Ophthalmology is in integral part of the National Programme for Control of Blindness. During the period 1996-2002, 
a total 841 Eye surgeons were trained in ECCE/IOL and SICS techniques of Cataract  surgery. During the period 
2002-03 to 2005-06 (upto March, 2006), a total 1005 Eye surg eons have been trained in various techniques including 
ECCE/IOL. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee notes with concern that the Department has given ev asive response. The Committee is 
very much aware as to how many surgeons have been trained but the Committee’s concern was that the 
number is not adequate considering the higher percenta ge of blindness cases in the country. The Committee 
would like to emphasize once again that the Department should evaluate time bound plan for training for eye 
surgeons specially for those districts which suffer from  lack of good eye care. Th e Committee would also like 
t o  b e  e n l i g h t e n e d  o n  t h e  s u g g e s t i o n  m a d e  b y  t h e  P l a n n i n g  C o m m i s s i o n  t h a t  q u a l i t y  o f  I n t r a - o c c u l a r  l e n s e s  
needs to be improved. 
XXVIII. INFRASTRUCTURE 
Recommendations/Observations 
28.2 The Committee notes that out of the Tenth Plan target of setting up of 8669 Sub-Centres in the Country, only 
6552 Sub-Centres have been opened so far. The Committee is  constrained to observe that Bihar, Meghalaya, Tripura 
and Delhi are the four States which have failed to set up  even one Sub-Centre against the targetted 1218, 5140 and 
148 respectively. The Committee has been observing that inspite of Central funding available for Sub-Centres, States 
continue to fail miserably on this accoun t. The Committee strongly feels that drastic action is required to be taken at 
the earliest to improve at least the qua ntity aspect of Primary health infrastructure. The Committee finds that the 
position is equally discouraging in respect of PHCs. Against the Tenth Plan target of 1714 PHCs in different states, 
only 81 PHCs could be set up, that too, by two states, Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh. CHCs also continue to fall 
way behind the required/targeted number. 
Action Taken 
 Under NRHM, it is proposed to sanction new Sub-Ce ntres as per 2001 population norm including buildings 
for Sub-Centres functioning in rented premises. It is also proposed to create new Community Health Centres (30-50 
beds) to meet the population norms as per census 2001 and bearing their recurring cost for the Mission period. 
28.3 The Committee observes that one of the goals of NRHM  is to consider setting up of new CHCs to meet the 
population norms of Census 2001. This seems to be an am bitious plan in view of the ground realities. This is 
corroborated by the fact that out of 720 districts of the 18 High Focus States and 426 of 17 Non High Focus States 
selected for up-gradation to Indian Public Health Standards during 2005-06 under NRHM, facility survey could be 
done only in 11 and 6 districts respectively. The Committee fails to comprehend the constraints being faced by 
respective State Governments to initiate preparatory exercises inspite of Rs. 20 lakhs per CHC duly released by the 
Centre to all States/UTs. They have also been sent the formats for facility survey. It seems that either the State Govts. 
are not interested or there are too many complexities invo lved in conducting a facility survey. Whatever may be the 
situation, the Committee is of the stro ng opinion that it is time that defaulti ng States are held accountable. The 
Committee strongly feels that different key activities under NRHM cannot be carried out in a mission mode in a fixed 
time frame, if even the preparatory exercises cannot be accomplished timely. 
Action Taken 

 The States have been reminded often to carry out facility survey of the CHCs selected for upgradation to 
Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) for which the funds have already been released. The facility survey reports 
have been received only from the States of West Bengal, Tripura and Pondicherry. The reminders have been issued 
to furnish facility survey reports on 06.07.06 from Secretary (Health and Fami ly Welfare), on 19.09.05 and 09.12.05 
from Additional Secretary (J) and at the level of JS (AS) on 07.04.06, 12.06.06 and on 12.07.06. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee takes serious note of the nonchalant attitude shown by States in furnishing facility 
survey reports despite so many reminders  issued to them in this regard. At the same time, it is also amazed to 
note that the Government has shown helplessness in this  regard. Apprehensions of the Committee seem to be 
coming out true. Already the second year since the laun ch of NRHM is nearing its end, and the base level 
work of facility survey regarding CHCs has not been completed by the States. The Committee has been given 
to understand that upgradation of CHCs to IPHS standards occupies centrality in providing adequate 
healthcare service across the country under NRHM. Und er these circumstances, the planned targets which  
the Government has envisaged to achiev e by end of each year under NRHM is sure to remain on paper only. 
The Committee would impress upon the Department to go beyond sending reminders to respective State 
Governments and get completed the over-due preparatory exercise so that a beginning could finally be made 
for effective implementation of NRHM. 
Recommendations/Observations 
28.5 The Committee has been observing that Sub-Centres, PH Cs and CHCs continue to suffer from the perennial 
problem of shortage of required Staff. As per the latest pos ition available, against the re quired number of 1,69,261 
Multipurpose Workers (female)/ANMs, sanctioned number of posts is 1,39,840 with number of ANMs in position 
being 1,33,232 as on September, 2005. Status of ANMs appointe d on contract basis is no better. Out of total 14,101 
ANMs appointed on contract basis, in-position are only 6096 with Bihar having not even one ANM against 1516 to 
be hired on contract. The Committee has also observed that State-wise details about ANMs reveals a more disturbing 
trend with some of the States sanctioning and recruiting more than the required number of ANMs, and in contrast, 
some States lagging far behind the target of even less than  required sanctioned posts. Position is the same in respect 
of the other key functionaries like Health Assistants (Mal e) at PHCs. The Committee has been constantly bringing 
this disturbing trend to the notice of Central Government. But it seems that the Central Government is helpless before 
the State Governments. The Committee can only conclude that all the planning at Central level, if not implemented 
by the State Governments in the right spirit as envisaged, will defeat the very objective for which the funds have been 
provided. It is high time that with the NRHM in its second year, the Central Government sits up and persuades the 
States to strengthen the health care infrastructure in rural areas. Constraint s/drawbacks of the existing as well as new 
programmes need to be eliminated at the earliest. 
Action Taken 
 The NRHM envisages the provision of an additional ANM at each Sub-Centre. Taking into account the 
vacancy of ANMs as per 1991 populati on norm and about 21983 new Sub-Centres needed to be established as per 
2001 population norm, in addition to provision of 142,655 additional ANMs under NRHM, about 2 lakhs ANMs 
would be required for strengthening the Sub-Centres. The salary of Health Assistant (Male) at PHCs is borne by State 
Government. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee expresses its seriou s dissatisfaction with the very vague and ambiguous reply given by 
the Department to a very specific reco mmendation made by it on a serious issue. Instead of enlightening the 
Committee about the factors responsible for acute shor tage of functionaries of Sub-Centres/PHCs/CHCs, the 
Department has indicated that position is going to wo rsen further. Instead of de vising means to check the 
anomalous appointment of ANMs and Health Workers, and taking initia tives to bridge the increasing gap 
between the required and in-position manpower of Sub-Centres/PHCs/CHCs, the Department has shown its 
disinclination to take any initiative and depend solely  on State Governments. Such distortions existed before 
the launch of NRHM and still continue even after the end of a year and half of its commencement. This is the 
position to which the Committee has been constantly drawing the attention of the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, once again urges upon the Departme nt to take up the matter with the States and bring 
forth a satisfactory/visible result at the earliest so that the mission objectives are timely met. 

XXX. ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMME  
Recommendations/Observations 
30.2 State-wise figures of funds released and utilizati on thereof (till December, 2005) during 2005-06 establishes 
the varying standard of implementation of the Programme. Following performance indicators are self-explanatory:- 
(Rs. in crores) 
State Funds released  Expenditure reported 
 as on 15.3.2006  by the States 
Gujarat 2.73 4.74 
Maharashtra 4.97 9.29 
West Bengal 4.61 9.30 
Bihar 13.65 27.80 
Uttar Pradesh 29.86 0.16 
Rajasthan 11.40 2.05 
Madhya Pradesh 8.56 0.03 
Andhra Pradesh 4.15 0.20 
Karnataka 3.52 0.46 
 Whereas some States have miserably failed to take be nefit of allocated funds, there are States that have 
exceeded the allocated  funds. The Committee strongly feels that this imbalance in performance level of different 
States needs to be removed without any further delay. 
Action Taken 
 A statement showing release of fund s and the reported expenditure from the States for strengthening of 
Routine Immunization is as under: 
(Rs. in crores) 
States Funds released Expenditure Comments 
 during 2005-06 reported by  
  the States  
1 2 3 4 
Gujarat 2.7264 0 A consolidated expenditure of Rs.5.42 crores has been 
reported by the State against the available funds of Rs. 
11.99 crores for the activities of Routine Immunization 
and Polio eradication, separate expenditure for the funds 
released for Routine Immunization has not been 
received. 
Maharashtra 10.2846 1.0004  
West Bengal 8.6080 1.2585  
Bihar 13.6455 8.2504  
Uttar Pradesh 29.8593 5.5676  
Rajasthan 11.4091 0.2348  
M.P. 8.5649 0.2765  
A.P. 4.1492 0.6163  
Karnataka 7.9447 2.9318  
   

 Strengthening of the Routine Immunization Programme has been newly launched as part of ‘C in the State 
Programme Implementation Plan (PIPs) under the RCH-II/NRHM of GoI during 2005-06. Various new activities 
essential for improvement of the service delivery of Routine Immunization were included in Immunization 
programme and accordingly, the guidelines were framed by this Ministry for facilitating the States to prepare their 
own State PIPs with reference to their special requirement. A lump sum provision of Rs.177 crores was kept in BE 
during 2005-06 for implementation/release of funds to States for Routine Immunization under the Head RCH flexible 
pool part ‘C. The first installment of funds amounting to Rs.88.03 crores (equal to 50 per cent of the provision kept 
for strengthening of RI) were released  to all States/UTs for Strengthening of Routine Immunization for first six 
months during 2005-06. 
 Many activities were included in the Immunization to strengthening the service delivery for the first time 
during 2005-06 like alternate vaccine  delivery, mobilization of children by ASHA workers, monitoring and 
supervision, construction of pits etc. Since the activities were introduced for the first time, the States have faced 
difficulties to prepare their Plan as per their specific re quirement and implement the activities at the ground level. 
Many activities, which were projected in the PIP during last  year, could not be started and, therefore, the utilization 
of funds was slow during last year. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that leve l of expenditure by the States under the Routine 
Immunization Programme during 2005-0 6 has been very discouraging. The Committee is not very convinced 
by the justification for slow pace of utilization of funds given by the Department. The very fact that States 
were facing difficulties in preparin g their plan as per the specific re quirement and implementation thereof 
indicates that there was lack of in teraction between the Centre and the State level implementation agencies. 
The Committee hopes that things might have improved in 2006-07 and utilization level reached a satisfactory 
level. 
Recommendations/Observations 
30.3 As reported in the Annual Report of the Ministry (2005-06), Household Survey (2002-03) has indicated that 
the coverage levels in most of the districts have been declining with re spect to district level coverage reported in 
1998-99. Staff vacancies, inadequate mobility of the he alth workers/supervisory staff, problem of delivery of 
vaccines and reporting of actual number of children vaccinated are the major factors cited as re sponsible for poor 
performance level of the Programme. The Committee is, how ever, surprised to note that from 2003-04 onwards upto 
December, 2005, reported immunization coverage as reported by various States shows completely different status. 
Percentage of coverage for different vaccines has reached the level of 90 per cent and above during this period. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the percentage of coverage as per household survey 2002-03 and 2003-04 
(State- wise). The Committee has been given to understand  that a number of measures have been initiated by the 
Department to ensure better coverage of Routine Immuni zations Programme. The Committee would appreciate if the 
state figures were verified by an independent survey. 
Action Taken 
 The MoHFW lays great emphasis on the monitoring of various Programmes/Schemes being funded by the 
Department. The MoHFW mainly relies on the monthly monitoring reports received from the State Governments 
with regard to physical achievements under various schemes including that for immunization. In addition, periodic 
surveys are also carried out to assess the change in pro cess indicators and the impact of the FW Programme in the 
field with the assistance of independent agencies. 
 The MoHFW also undertakes process monitoring of va rious interventions through special studies conducted 
by the Population Research Centres (PRCs) and other independent research organizations. 
 Similarly, Regional Evaluation Teams located at the Re gional offices of MoHFW at Delhi, Bangalore, Bhopal, 
Patna, Lucknow, Kolkata, and Chennai are undertaking sample verification of Family Welfare Programme 
beneficiaries both on qualitative an d quantitative parameters. The findings of these teams are regularly 
communicated to the State Governments and district authorities for taking necessary actions. 

 In addition, the MoHFW conducts large-scale sample surveys that also cover immunization data as given 
below: 
 National Family Health Survey (N FHS): For creating a comprehensive de mographic and health database in 
India at National and State level, National Family Health Surveys were conducted during the year 1992-93 and the 
Second Round was conducted in 1998-99. The results of both rounds of the survey have been published. The third 
round of National Family Health Survey 2006-07 is currently under progress. The International Institute for 
Population Sciences (UPS), Mumbai is the designated nodal agency for organising the survey. The final result is 
expected to be released in February-March, 2007. This survey covers various health and family welfare interventions 
including immunization. Under the NFHS-III, the survey covers 1.25 lakh households that would yield reliable 
estimates at the State level. 
Rapid Household Survey (RHS)/District Level Household Survey (DLHS): To assess the impact of the RCH 
Programme, utilization of services provided by Government h ealth facilities etc. at district level, RHS in all the 
districts of the country in two phases was initiated in the ye ar 1998-99. In the first round, 50 per cent of the districts 
were covered in the first phase of the project in 1998 and thereafter, the remaining 50 per cent districts were covered 
under second phase in 1999. The IIPS, Mumbai organised the survey. 
 The second round of the district level RHS was initiated in the year 2001. The survey was conducted in two 
phases. The sample size for the survey was fixed at 1000 households per district. 
 The comparative data for immunization, computed as the ratio of children in the age group of  
12-23 months who have received BCG, 3 doses of DPT, 3 doses of Polio, Measles for the DLHS-I (1998-99) and 
DLHS-II (2002-04) is at Annexure-II. Presently, preparatory work for the third round of the DLHS is in progress. 
 Thus there is a variation in the source and methodolog ies for data collection from the health administrative 
machinery (Sub-Centres/PHCs/CHCs etc.) and that collected through a Survey, which is essentially canvassed to the 
Households/recipients of the service. Consequently, the data from the two sources are not strictly comparable. The 
immunization data as given by surveys shows the percenta ge of children in the age group 12-23 months immunized 
for the particular antigen whereas the service data performance data sent by States/UTs is compiled and analyzed vis-
a-vis the estimated beneficiaries in that year for the particular antigen. 
 In addition, there is no mechanism at  present to independently verify the field level figures for any State. The 
data released through Surveys are essentially an impact assessment of the Family Welfare initiative. 
 The numbers of measures initiated by the Department to ensure better coverage of Routine Immunization 
Programme are as under: 
 (i) Downsizing Bacille Ca lmette Guerin (BCG) vial from 20 dose to 10 dose. 
 (ii) Use of auto disable syringes replacing the ex isting glass syringe in order to bring in improved 
injection safety and fidelity to the programme. 
 (iii) Alternate vaccine delivery-last storage point for vaccine in the country is PHC. In order to carry out 
the village session sites, vaccine w ill be delivered from the last stor age points to these village session 
sites. 
 (iv) Social mobilization of children -ASHA/Li nk worker will mobilize all children immunization to 
session site. 
 (v) Slum and underserved/unserved area will be supported by the alternate vaccinator. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee does not dispute the fact that there is a variation in the source and methodologies for 
data collection from the health administrative mach inery (Sub-Centres/PHCs/CHCs etc.) and that collected 
through a survey. The Committee would however, like  to point out that the objective of both the 
methodologies is to make the correct assessment of ground realities for taking corrective measures afterwards. 
The very fact that there is no mechanism at present to independently verify the field level figures for any State 
confirms that exact implementation status of various interventions under RCH programme is not  available. 

The Committee, therefore, reiterates that State figures ne ed to be verified by an independent agency. A pilot 
study can easily be initiated by the Department. 
Recommendations/Observations 
30.4 Cold Chain System is required to be in place for storage and transp ortation of vaccines. The Committee notes 
that out of 67,173 units consisting of various cold chain eq uipment, a large number were supplied prior to 1992 and 
have thus outlived their normal life. The Committee is of the view that the process of replacement of cold chain 
system already started by Government needs to be expedited. 
Action Taken 
 The suggestion of the Committee for replacement of cold chain system has been noted for compliance. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is disappointed to note the ‘action’ taken by the Department. The view of the 
Committee cannot be considered as mere suggestion. The Committee was expecting the concrete plan from the 
Department to expedite the process of replacement of Cold Chain System. The Committee, therefore, directs 
the Department to indicate the mechanism adopted by it  to ensure early replacement of Cold Chain System 
and the progress made since the initiation of this process. 
XXXII. DECLINING SEX RATIO  
Recommendations/Observations 
32.3 The Committee notes that there are as many as 27,2 28 bodies (Genetic Counseling Centers, clinics, labs, 
ultrasound, machines/ image centers et c.) registered in the country as on 31.07.2005. The Committee would, 
however, like to point out that there might be equal number of, if not more, unregistered clinics doing their business. 
Total number of 322 complaints filed in the courts/police st ations against the violators of law and sealing and seizure 
of 33 ultrasound machines during 2005-06 can only be termed  as a very small and insignificant attempt to solve a 
sensitive problem, which indi cates a dark future for our country. Th e Committee appreciates that the Govt has 
initiated a number of measures, at both State and Central le vel. The Committee, however, feels that these measures 
can only bring about a change if sustained initiatives are pu t into effect by all concerned. One should also not forget 
that social awareness about the implications of this probl em has to be built up. The Committee would also like to 
point out that our medical community is in need of sensitizing the public so that they start playing a pro-active role. 
The Committee understands that a survey of ultrasound centres was undertaken during 2004-05 in the most 
vulnerable states and findings of this survey have been sent to the concerned States for taking necessary action on 
30.03.2005. The Committee would like to be apprised about full details in this regard. 
Action Taken 
 Nine Population Research Centres were entrusted with  the task of carrying out a survey of clinics/centres 
registered under the Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnost ic Techniques Act, 1994 to know the extent of use of 
ultrasound machines by these centres and to know the opinion of AYUSH doctors regarding use of ultrasound 
machines. The States covered were Andhra Pradesh, Punjab , Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Prad esh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, 
Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu. The findings indicated that  the Appropriate Authorities are not aware about their 
functions, and not visiting the registered clinics and ex amining their records properly. The records maintenance by 
the registered clinics was poor and they were not aware of various violations and provisions of the Act. Reports of 
the findings were sent to the respective States for taking action on the findings. 
 Government of India has requested the States/UTs to organize sensitization of the Appropriate Authorities 
regularly with the funds available with them under RCH Programme. Indian Radiological and Imaging Association 
has been given financial assistance for organizing zonal wo rkshops to create aw areness about the provisions of the 
Act among its members. 
 Teams of National Inspection and Monitoring Committee (NIMC) also visit the States/UTs from time to time 
to see the implementation of the Act on the ground. During the past one year or so, the team has visited the States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal  Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and West Bengal. The concerne d District Appropriate Authorities take action on all 

violations like non-registration of ultrasound centres a nd non-maintenance of records noticed during these visits. 
Reports of the visits are sent to the Chief Secretaries of the concerned States for taking action on the findings. 
 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare regularly monitors the implementation of the PC and PNDT Act in the 
States/UTs. As per the latest information (31.7.2006) available from the States/UTs, 28870 clinics have been 
registered under the Act and 395 court cases are filed in different courts for violating different provisions of the Act. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is happy to note that a number of initiatives have been taken by the Department in Co-
ordination with State Government for sensitizing all concerned about the declining Sex Ratio and also 
constant monitoring of implementation of the PC/PNDT Act in the States/UTs. It has been informed by the 
Department that as on 31.7.2006, 28870 clinics have been registered un der the Act and 395 Court cases have 
been filed in different courts for violations of differen t provisions of the Act. In this regard, the Committee 
would like to be further informed as to how many conv ictions have been made so  far. The Committee also 
feels that the efforts in this regard would be more result oriented if public at large is sensitized towards this 
social evil by involving the local bodies and focusing on districts showing an alarming sex-ratio. 
XXXIII. MISCELLANEOUS 
Recommendations/Observations 
33.2 The Committee further contends th at in our country, there are abou t 100 Government Medical Colleges and 
hospitals. The burns wards, trauma wards, children wards in these Government medical colleges, can be given a one-
time suitable grant by the Government for the maintenance of basic amenities inside such wards. Similarly, in 
Primary Health Centers, many of the refrigerators are not in working condition. Government can add one more 
refrigerator for storage of vaccines and important medicines that require suitable conditions for shelf life. 
Action Taken 
 Considering the need for strengthening the Government Medical Colleges, a proposal for providing grant for 
diagnostic facilities in Government Medical Colleges has been included in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Under 
Immunization Programme, in order to ensure proper stor age of different vaccines according to the temperature 
requirement, the Government of India is providing one Ic e-lined Refrigerator and one Deep Freezer at PHC level. 
Funds are provided to States for repairing and maintenance of these cold chain equipments. The Government also 
provides such equipment as replaceme nt whenever the State/UTs ask for non-functioning and non-repairable 
condition. In case any request is rece ived from the State for ad ditional cold chain equipm ent for PHCs, the matter 
could be considered depending upon need and justification for the same. 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee hopes that adequate funds would be provided during the Eleventh Plan period for 
improving the health care services available in Govern ment Medical Colleges. The Committee is of the view 
that pre-assessment of level of requirement in State G overnment Hospitals can be initiated by the Department 
by involving an independent agency. The Committee would also like to point out that a survey may be 
conducted through the existing monitoring mechanism at State/Centre level about the status of availability of 
cold-chain equipments at PHCs so that wherever required, necessary provision could be made. 

CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
— Nil — 
 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Comments of the Committee 
 The Committee is surprised by the response of the Department to such an im portant issue. Instead of 
taking any corrective measures, the Department is simp ly reiterating the observat ion of the Committee made 
last year. The Committee can only conclude that status of diversion of plan funds to non-plan side would be 
the same this year too. The Commi ttee views with serious concern the la ck of action on the part of the 
Department.  (Para 2.1) 
 The Committee is not happy with th e evasive reply of the Department. In stead of giving specific details 
about the various steps taken for reducing the pendency le vel of unspent balances and Utilization Certificates, 
simply noting the directions of the Committee for compliance cannot be considered an Action Taken Note. 
  (Para 2.2) 
 The matter of inclusion of external aid component in  domestic Budget has been engaging the attention 
of the Committee for quite some time. The Committee, ho wever, is surprised to note that instead of there 
being any positive development in this direction, the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance are yet 
to be approached. It seems that the Department is eith er not interested in additional funding or does not have 
the capacity to utilize the same. (Para 2.3) 
III. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME  
 The Committee is constrained to observe that no progress whatsoever seems to have been made in the 
implementation of SIU Report on CGHS. The Committee re iterates that a final view needs to be taken in the 
matter without any further delay. (Para 3.4) 
 The Committee has been informed that report of the European Commission sponsored study of CGHS 
has been received in the 1st week of July and is at present under examination in the Ministry. The Committee 
fails to understand the reason for undue delay in taking  a view on the report on the part of the Department. 
The Committee would once again emphasize that the De partment needs to take co rrective measures based on 
the study reports of both European Commission and Kaul Committee, but within the parameters of the 
existing system. (Para 3.6) 
 The Committee has been given to understand that the final report of the Kaul Committee would be 
submitted on the analysis of the pilot project and meas ures taken based on its initial recommendations. The 
Committee fails to comprehend the basis for this approach. Whenever a Commit tee is constituted, it has to be 
give a report in accordance with it s mandate within a specified period of time. The Committee is of the view 
that this should have been the case with the Kaul Committee also. (Para 3.7) 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed to note that th e Central Government Health Scheme is undergoing a 
very confusing phase. On the one hand the Government has appointed Kaul Committee to suggest ways and 
means to improve the existing CGHS system, on the other hand Planning Commission in its Mid-Term 
Appraisal of Tenth Plan has come out with the opinion that CGHS need not continue as a plan scheme and 
accordingly no provision on the plan side should be kept for 2005-06 budget. As a result, projects for 
construction of new CGHS buildings have been put on hold.  
 The Committee would like to point out that Centra l Government Health Sche me is a welfare scheme 
aimed to cater to the health needs of a large nu mber of beneficiaries incl uding Central Government 
employees, pensioners and VIPs like Members of Parl iament, Judges of the Supreme Court and the High 
Courts, freedom fighters etc. Any atte mpt to tinker with the scheme to th e disadvantage of its beneficiaries 
cannot be appreciated. The Committee would like to emphasize that this state of indecisiveness should not be 
allowed to continue. The Committee is of the view that there is a need to further improve and strengthen the 
facilities under the existing system. Introducing another parallel system do es not seem to be an appropriate 
move.  (Para 3.8) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that vacan cy position in CHS remains unchanged. Last year 
also, offers of appointment to 168 candidates of CME 2004 were under issue. Latest picture which emerges is 
that out of 100 letters of appointment actually issued, only 20 candidates have joined so far. Offer of 

appointment to remaining 68 candidat es of CME- 2004 will only be issued on completion of the requisite 
formalities. The Committee can well imagine the fate of CME- 2005. This is indeed a sorry state of affairs. 
Continuance of vacancies for such a long period that too in such a vital sector demands revamping of the 
existing cumbersome procedure. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that this may be taken up on a 
priority basis. (Para 3.9) 
IV. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL 
 The Committee notes that the reply of the Ministry is deafenin gly silent about making proportionate 
increase in the Non-Plan funds for Safdarjung hospit al, as recommended by the Committee. The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Ministry to make all out efforts for enhancement of non-plan funds. 
 The Committee, however, welcomes the comprehen sive redevelopment plan being drawn up by the 
Ministry for Safdarjung hospital. Safarjung hospital is one of the biggest tertiary care hospitals in Delhi where 
admissions, emergency attendance, total operations, gen eral OPD attendance etc. have been increasing year 
after year. Consequently, there is an urgent need for increasing bed strength and enhancing other 
infrastructure facilities in the hospital. The Committee hopes that all the constraints hindering the capacity 
expansion of the Safdarjung hospital will be taken ca re of in the redevelopmen t plan. The Committee would, 
however, like to emphasize that the implementation of the redevelopment plan should be carried out in a time 
bound manner. (Para 4.3 and 4.4) 
 The Committee is not convinced by the justifications  given for the closure of evening OPD services at 
Safdarjung Hospital. Working conditions were the same  when decision to start evening OPD services was 
taken. Fact remains that wide publicity was never given to  this initiative. Had it be done, patients would have 
definitely availed of such a service.  Heavy patient load in th e morning OPDs would also have been some what 
less. The Committee would also like to emphasize that any new facility should be introduced only after making 
a proper assessment of the ground realities and the effective mechanism, so as to ensure its maximum reach. 
  (Para 4.5) 
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL  
 The Committee is not happy with the snail’s pace of the progress made in the matter of setting up of 
Nuclear Medicine and Thoracic Scien ce Departments, Neuro Service Centre  and up-gradation of School of 
Nursing into College of Nursing, which is evident from  the fact that even after a lapse of more than six 
months, the above projects are still at the consideration  stage. The Committee woul d like the Department to 
appreciate that delaying the expansion of hospital services results in delaying the treatment to the patients and 
thereby prolonging their pa in and suffering. The Committee, theref ore, recommends that the Department 
should expedite the decision taking process and take ef fective tangible steps for speedy implementation within 
a specific time-frame. (Para 5.4) 
 The Committee is surprised to ob serve that although bed strength at  Dr. Ram Manhor Lohia hospital 
has remained unchanged during the period 2003-06, num ber of major operations carried out has shown a 
declining trend, reason bein g all the operation theatres not being f unctional. Total attendance at OPD also 
reflects the same disturbing trend. The Committee is al so constrained to observe that for the last two years i.e. 
2004-05 and 2005-06 the Hospital has not been able to fully utilize its budgeted allocation on the plan side due 
to non- procurement of certain vital equipments/machi nes like Heart-Lung Machine, CT Scaner, Cath Lab, 
Intensive Care Ventilator, Digital X-ray Machine etc. The protraction in purchasi ng these equipments for 
which allocation of funds have been approved by the Pa rliament, in the opinion of the Committee, is too grave 
a matter to be ignored. Th e Committee feels that but for the proc edural rigmaroles/bureaucratic red-tape 
these vital diagnostic or life saving equipments could h ave been purchased and utilized in the hospital for the 
benefit of common people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department needs to explore the 
feasibility of simplifying and rationalizing the proc edure for the procurement of such vital equipments/ 
machines. (Para 5.5) 
VIII. POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND  RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH  
 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the casual approach of the Department in a matter connected 
with a premier institute of the country . Instead of taking the required acti on and giving the feedback in its 

Action Taken Note, the Department is simply indicating th e line of action required to be taken by it. Taking a 
serious view of this, the Committee would also like to point out that the Screening Committee of the Ministry, 
not taking any decision inspite of the Institute sending the requisite information on the 20th June, 2006, 
confirms lack of action/initiative for reasons best known to the Department. (Para 8.3) 
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES, NEW DELHI  
 The Committee is constrained to observe that another year has passed but the Trauma Centre at AIIMS 
is yet to be made fully functional. Not only all the mandatory clearances have been received till date, required 
equipments are also yet to be installed. Even if, so me progress would be made in the matter, creation of 
regular/temporary posts will continue  to remain on a proposal stage for long. The Committee has been 
pointing out on regular basis that with  starting a project the exercise of creation of required posts should also 
begin simultaneously. The Committee strongly feels that the impressive building of Trauma Centre with the 
infrastructure also available to some extent would not provide any relief if the medi cal/para-medical staff is 
not there. The Committee a ccordingly recommends that a ll out efforts should be made in a time-bound 
manner. (Para 9.3) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that its r ecommendation for setting up of a Burn Unit/Ward is 
yet to be placed before the Governing Body of AIIM S. The Committee takes a se rious view of the casual 
approach of the Department towards recommendations made by a Parliamentary Committee. The Committee 
would like to emphasize that assurance given before a Pa rliamentary Committee is bound to be followed by 
some action on the part of the Administrative Ministry, otherwise the very purpose of Action Taken Note to be 
submitted by the Ministry gets defeated. (Para 9.4) 
 The Committee is surprised to fi nd that on the vital issue of s eeking tax exemptio ns on medical 
equipments, the Department, instead of approaching Ministry of Finance has decided to sit idle. The 
Committee feels that exemption of tax on such life saving equipments will go a long way in reducing the cost of 
treatment and ensuring availability of costly medical de vices in hospitals. In view of this, the Committee 
reiterates its earlier recommendations to examine the issue of imposition of tax on medical equipments and life 
saving devices and take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. (Para 9.6) 
X. SHORTAGE OF REQUIRED MANPOWER AT CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  HOSPITALS/ 
INSTITUTES  
 The Committee fails to understand the reasons for undue delay in the matter  of implementation of 
Javed Chaudhury Committee Report. Reply of the Department clearly indicates that consultation with the 
Departments of Expenditure and Personnel are yet to be initiated. Only thereafter, a final view would be taken 
by the Department. The Committee would like to remind the Department that the Javed Chowdhury 
Committee was constituted to look into the problem of  CHS doctors seeking voluntary retirement/resignation. 
Delay in the implementation of the recommendati ons will aggravate the problem further and ultimate 
sufferers would be the general public. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates an early action in the matter. 
  (Para 10.3) 
XII. INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH  
 The Committee in its last report had simply drawn the attention of the Department to the review done 
by the Performance Appraisal Board under the Chairman ship of Dr. Kasturirangan. The Committee fails to 
understand the need for crea tion of a Department of Health Research for providing necessary impetus to the 
medical research. The Committ ee strongly feels that ICMR having the mandate  for carrying out medical 
research and a dedicated team therefor should be allowe d to have free hand. Depa rtment should be solely 
guided by their expert advice. (Para 12.2 and 12.3) 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the lack of initiative on its recommendation concerning a premier 
body of medical research in the country. The Committee would like to point out that the initiative should have 
come from the Department. However, inspite of their attention being drawn about a year ago, no action 
whatsoever has been initiated so far. The Committee has every reason to believe that position would have 

remained unchanged during 2006-07 also. Taking a se rious view of this, the Committee impresses upon the 
Department to take up this issue with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance at the earliest. 
  (Para 12.4) 
XIV. OTHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS/BODIES  
 Attention of the Committee was drawn by under- utilisation of allocated funds by some institutions. The 
Committee takes note of the details of action taken by the Department during 2006-07 in respect of these 
institutions. However, the Committee ob serves that there is one exception, i.e. National Board of 
Examinations. Status of allocated funds for the Boar d has not been conveyed. The Committee would like to 
understand the reasons therefor. (Para 14.1) 
 The Committee is appalled to note that the matter of setting up the Medical Grants Commission has not 
moved beyond the consideration stage ev en at the fag end of the Tenth Five Year Plan. This, in the opinion of 
the Committee, is reflective of an extremely sorry state of  affairs. Instead of surren dering the funds allocated 
by the Parliament, the same could have been used for some other fruitful purposes. The Committee, at the cost 
of being repetitive, would like the Department to appreciate the necessity  of a Medical Grants Commission as 
a funding agency for the institutes providing Medical Education in the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Department to expedi te the matter so that the setting up  of Medical Grants Commission is 
not put on perpetual hold. (Para 14.2) 
XV. NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME  
 The Committee has been pursuing the implementati on of its recommendation regarding revealing of 
HIV status to blood donors. Last year itself the Commi ttee was informed that the matter was discussed at the 
16th General Body meeting of the National Blood Transf usion Council. Action Taken Note of the Department 
also gives the same details. The Committee finds that the proposal is yet to get the formal approval of the 
National AIDS Control Board. The Committee would like to emphasize that the meeting of the Board, if not 
held so far, should be  convened without any further delay so also  to expeditiously implement the proposal, 
vital for prevention of HIV/AIDS. (Para 15.6) 
XVI. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME  
 The Committee is pleased to note that under the Dist rict Mental Health Programme, out of 100 districts 
to be covered during the Tenth Five Year Plan, 94 distri cts have been covered. However, in respect of the 
target of upgradation of 75 medical colleges and 37 Government mental hospitals, during the same period, the  
achievement figures so far are only 24 and 19 respectiv ely. Therefore, the performance of the Department in 
this regard has fallen woefully short of its target. With only a few months left for the completion of the Tenth 
Plan, the Committee has serious doubts whether these target s will ever be achieved. The Committee feels that 
up-gradation of these medical hospitals and mental hospital s is required to be carried out on an urgent basis 
as it will help in curing the patients at the initial stage and save him or her from the agony of being sent to the 
mental asylum. (Para 16.2) 
XX. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND MEDICAL 
SCIENCES, SHILLONG  
 The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction with th e slow pace of filling up of sanctioned posts at 
NEIGRIMS, Shillong. As on 31st December, 2005, out of sanctioned 1520 posts, only 148 could be filled up. 
Latest position as informed by the Department is that 280 posts have been filled up as on 21st August, 2006. 
The Committee strongly feels that the remaining posts should be filled up in a time-bound manner under the 
close monitoring of the Department.  (Para 20) 
XXII.  SERVICES AVAILABLE FOR CRITICAL PATIENTS IN GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS 
 Attention of the Committee was drawn by the uns atisfactory level of ICU services at Central 
Government Hospitals. The Committee had accordingly suggested that a review of these services at Dr. Ram 
Manohar Lohia Hospital and Safdarjung Hospital may be done in the first instance. The Committee is 
surprised to note that this exercise is yet to be completed. The Committee can well imagine the time likely to 

be taken in providing the required se rvices. The Committee, therefore, once again emphasizes that required 
action may be taken at the earliest. (Para 22.2) 
XXIII. UPGRADATION/STRENGTHENING OF EMERGENCY FACILITIES AT STATE 
GOVERNMENT HOSPITALS LOCATED ALONG NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
 The Committee notes that funds have been released  to a number of State Government Hospitals located 
on National Highways. However, utilisation certificates are awaited in quite a few cases. No feedback has been 
given by the Department about the status of these ho spitals. The Committee would like to emphasize that 
review of this scheme is expedited so that victims get the required medical assistance. (Para 23) 
XXV. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME  
Malaria 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that situ ation continues to remain grim so far as malaria 
cases/deaths reported in N.E States , Orissa and West Bengal is concerned. Situation in Assam has rather 
deteriorated further with maximum number of deaths reported from that State alone. The Committee would 
like to point out that mere release of massive funds through the Glob al Funds for AIDS, TB and Malaria 
(GFATM) to these badly affected States is not showin g any visible improvement. The Committee reiterates its 
apprehensions that funds are not reaching the district s. This is borne out by the statement made by the 
Department that GFATM funds are being released to State Societies. The Committee can only conclude that 
there is no mechanism to confirm wh ether the districts are receiving the funds in time. Another disturbing 
trend noticed by the Committee last ye ar was the acute shortage of male health workers in these vulnerable 
States. Taking a serious note of the nonchalant attitu de shown by the chronically malaria-endemic States of 
Assam and Orissa, the Committee would like to point out that non-filling of vacancies by States is a serious 
drawback that is eventually going to affect the Global Funds for  AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM) 
supported Intensified Malaria Control Project (IMCP). The Committee is disturbed to note that the only 
initiative taken by the Department is making a request  to the State Governments to fill up the vacancies. The 
Committee would also like to impress upon the fact that a more pro-active role is required on the part of the 
Department in the prevailing situation. The very first action which can be taken by the Department 
immediately is to impress upon the N.E States, Assam and Orissa to first zero in on the underlying causes of 
vacancies and take prompt remedial measures accordingly. 
 The Committee would like to be informed about steps taken and also progress made by the N.E States, 
Orissa and West Bengal regarding the filling up of the vacant posts. (Para 25.2.2) 
 The Committee is deeply disturbed by the indiffe rent approach adopted by th e Department to such a 
serious issue reported upon by the Co mmittee. The Committee would like to impress upon the fact that 
through Action Taken Notes, the concerned Department  is expected to apprise the Committee about the 
specific action taken after submission of the Report. Non-committal approach of the Department confirms the 
apprehension of the Committee that the CAG case ab out Insecticide Treated Bed nets in Assam remains 
unresolved and the likely beneficiaries continue to suffer. (Para 25.2.4 and 25.2.5) 
Kala-Azar  
 Kala-azar has a history of taking a heavy toll on human lives in the four endemic States. Though, of 
late, its incidence has registered a decrease, its total er adication is still a far cry, which is why the Ministry 
should not lower its guard against Kala-azar. Timely submission of UCs assumes added significance in view of 
the fact that timely release and utilization of funds wo uld play a crucial role in co mbating Kala-azar. Merely 
informing the Committee that “the issue has been taken up with the four States for early submission of UCs” 
without specifying the efforts made and the level of correspondence entered into with the defaulting States is 
not sufficient. The Committee, would therefore, like to be enlightened about the precise steps taken 
subsequent to the Committee’s recommendation on making vigorous efforts for early submission of Utilization 
Certificates and subsequent judicious utilization of allocated funds. (Para 25.3.2) 
Japanese Encephalitis 

 The Committee is happy to note that steps have  been initiated to contain the spread of Japanese 
Encephalitis, in U.P, Assam, West Bengal and Karnataka. However, the Department has been silent as to 
whether any steps have been initiated to contain the disease in Haryana. The figures given by the Department 
for the year 2005 already show a rise in the number of reported cases as well as deaths in Haryana. 
Apprehending a similar trend in 20 06 also, the Committee would appreciat e if JE vaccination programme is 
made an integral component of Universal Immunization Programme in Haryana. (Para 25.4.1 and 25.4.2) 
XXVI. REVISED NATIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME  
 The Committee notes that the Depa rtment’s reply does not address the concerns raised by it with 
regard to under-achievement of targets by certain States /UTs in terms of examination of T.B. suspects among 
the new adult outpatients and in annualized total ca se detection rate. The Committee would like the  
Department to focus their attentio n on vulnerable States under RNTCP.  The Committee hopes that with 
NGOs and Private Practitioners being involved in IEC acti vities concerning awareness building among people 
spread of T.B. would be contained. (Para 26.2) 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that status of unspent balances under RNTCP shows no 
improvement in 2005-06. Against unspent balances amounting to Rs.298.12 lakhs as on 1.4.2005 availability of 
unspent balances has reached Rs.348.75 lakhs as on 1.4.2006. The Committee hopes that the impact of number 
of initiatives taken by the Department would have been evident in 2006-07. The Committee would also like to 
point out that availability of unspent balances and th eir being carried forward to the next year cannot be 
considered a positive sign. This can on ly mean that the implementing agenci es are facing some  constraints in 
optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds. This aspect also needs to be taken care of. (Para 26.3) 
XXVII.  NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR CONTROL OF BLINDNESS  
 The Committee notes with concern that the Department has given ev asive response. The Committee is 
very much aware as to how many surgeons have been trained but the Committee’s concern was that the 
number is not adequate considering the higher percenta ge of blindness cases in the country. The Committee 
would like to emphasize once again that the Department should evaluate time bound plan for training for eye 
surgeons specially for those districts which suffer from  lack of good eye care. Th e Committee would also like 
to be enlightened on the suggestion made by the Planning Commission that quality of Intra-occular lenses 
needs to be improved. (Para 27.4) 
XXVIII. INFRASTRUCTURE 
 The Committee takes serious note of the nonchalant attitude shown by States in furnishing facility 
survey reports despite so many reminders  issued to them in this regard. At the same time, it is also amazed to 
note that the Government has shown helplessness in this  regard. Apprehensions of the Committee seem to be 
coming out true. Already the second year since the laun ch of NRHM is nearing its end, and the base level 
work of facility survey regarding CHCs has not been completed by the States. The Committee has been given 
to understand that upgradation of CHCs to IPHS standards occupies centrality in providing adequate 
healthcare service across the country under NRHM. Und er these circumstances, the planned targets which  
the Government has envisaged to achiev e by end of each year under NRHM is sure to remain on paper only. 
The Committee would impress upon the Department to go beyond sending reminders to respective State 
Governments and get completed the over-due preparatory exercise so that a beginning could finally be made 
for effective implementation of NRHM. (Para 28.2 and 28.3) 
 The Committee expresses its seriou s dissatisfaction with the very vague and ambiguous reply given by 
the Department to a very specific reco mmendation made by it on a serious issue. Instead of enlightening the 
Committee about the factors responsible for acute shor tage of functionaries of Sub-Centres/PHCs/CHCs, the 
Department has indicated that position is going to wo rsen further. Instead of de vising means to check the 
anomalous appointment of ANMs and Health Workers, and taking initia tives to bridge the increasing gap 
between the required and in-position manpower of Sub-Centres/PHCs/CHCs, the Department has shown its 
disinclination to take any initiative and depend solely  on State Governments. Such distortions existed before 
the launch of NRHM and still continue even after the end of a year and half of its commencement. This is the 

position to which the Committee has been constantly drawing the attention of the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, once again urges upon the Departme nt to take up the matter with the States and bring 
forth a satisfactory/visible result at the earliest so that the mission objectives are timely met. (Para 28.5) 
XXX. ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMME  
 The Committee is constrained to observe that leve l of expenditure by the States under the Routine 
Immunization Programme during 2005-0 6 has been very discouraging. The Committee is not very convinced 
by the justification for slow pace of utilization of funds given by the Department. The very fact that States 
were facing difficulties in preparin g their plan as per the specific re quirement and implementation thereof 
indicates that there was lack of in teraction between the Centre and the State level implementation agencies. 
The Committee hopes that things might have improved in 2006-07 and utilization level reached a satisfactory 
level.  (Para 30.2) 
 The Committee does not dispute the fact that there is a variation in the source and methodologies for 
data collection from the health administrative machinery (Sub-Centres/PHCs/CHCs etc) and that collected 
through a survey. The Committee would however, like  to point out that the objective of both the 
methodologies is to make the correct assessment of ground realities for taking corrective measures afterwards. 
The very fact that there is no mechanism at present to independently verify the field level figures for any state 
confirms that exact implementation status of various interventions under RCH programme is not  available. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterates that State figures ne ed to be verified by an independent agency. A pilot 
study can easily be initiated by the Department. (Para 30.3) 
 The Committee is disappointed to note the ‘action’ taken by the Department. The view of the 
Committee cannot be considered as mere suggestion. The Committee was expecting the concrete plan from the 
Department to expedite the process of replacement of Cold Chain System. The Committee, therefore, directs 
the Department to indicate the mechanism adopted by it  to ensure early replacement of Cold Chain System 
and the progress made since the initiation of this process. (Para 30.4) 
XXXII. DECLINING SEX RATIO  
 The Committee is happy to note that a number of initiatives have been taken by the Department in Co-
ordination with State Government for sensitizing all concerned about the declining Sex Ratio and also 
constant monitoring of implementation of the PC/PNDT Act in the States/UTs. It has been informed by the 
Department that as on 31.7.2006, 28870 clinics have been registered un der the Act and 395 Court cases have 
been filed in different courts for violations of differen t provisions of the Act. In this regard, the Committee 
would like to be further informed as to how many conv ictions have been made so  far. The Committee also 
feels that the efforts in this regard would be more result oriented if public at large is sensitized towards this 
social evil by involving the local bodies and focusing on districts showing an alarming sex-ratio. (Para 32.3) 
XXXIII. MISCELLANEOUS 
 The Committee hopes that adequate funds would be provided during the Eleventh Plan period for 
improving the health care services available in Govern ment Medical Colleges. The Committee is of the view 
that pre-assessment of level of requirement in State G overnment Hospitals can be initiated by the Department 
by involving an independent agency. The Committee would also like to point out that a survey may be 
conducted through the existing monitoring mechanism at State/Centre level about the status of availability of 
cold-chain equipments at PHCs so that wherever required, necessary provision could be made. (Para 33.2) 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 

 
VI 
 SIXTH  MEETING 
 The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday the 28th February, 2 007 in Committee Room “A”, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman 
 2. Shri Digvijay Singh 
 3. Shri Lalhming Liana 
 4. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
  LOK  SABHA  
 5. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 6. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah 
 7. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 8. Shri Nihal Chand 
 9. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
 10. Shri Uday Singh 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Under Secretary 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Committee thereafter, took up for 
consideration the draft 20th and 21st Reports on Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on 161st and 171th  Reports of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2006- 07) of the Department of Health an d Family Welfare and Department of 
AYUSH respectively. While discussing the ATNs subm itted by the Ministry, the Committee expressed its 
displeasure over the non-implementation of most of th e recommendations of the Co mmittee and the perfunctory 
manner in which the Ministry has been  responding to some of the suggest ions of the Committee. The Committee 
decided to convey its displeasure to the Secretaries of the concerned Departments during the course of their 
deposition before the Committee on De mands for Grants (2007-08). The Committee, thereafter, adopted its 20th and 
21st Reports. 
3.  The Committee decided to present/lay its 20th and 21s t Reports on 8th March, 2007 in both the Houses of 
Parliament. The Committee authorised Shri Amar Singh and in his absence Shri Digvijay Singh to present the reports 
in Rajya Sabha and Shrimati Maneka Gandhi and in her absence Shri Uday Singh were authorised to lay the reports 
in Lok Sabha. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
(Ref: Para 29.2) 
RCH-II — RELEASES AND THE LEVEL OF EXPENDITURE REPORTED BY THE STATES 
 
Sl. No. State Releases Reported Expdt. % age 
   During 2005-06 upto 31.03.06 
1 2 3 4 5 
A. Non-EAG States    
1. Andhra Pradesh 58,85 51.33 87 
2. Goa 1.05 0.28 27 
3. Gujarat 33.83 22.12 65 
4. Haryana 11.42 8.06 71 
5. Himachal Pradesh 5.00 3.21 64 
6. Jammu & Kashmir 6.05 1.71 28 
7. Karnataka 28.80 5.24 18 
8. Kerala 21.44 4.84 22 
9. Maharashtra 52.80 15.98 30 
10. Punjab 17.42 5.97 34 
11. Tamil Nadu 61.38 52.49 86 
12. West Bengal 59.83 3.18 5 
13. A&N Islands 0.44 0.32 73 
14. Chandigarh 0.74 0.64 86 
15. D&N Haveli 0.35 0.17 49 
16. Daman & Diu 0.23 0.43 187 
17. Delhi 7.27 2.38 33 
18. Lakshadweep 0.12 0.14 117 
19. Pondicherry 0.87 0.92 106 
B
 TOTAL:  367.89 179.39 49 
B. EAG States    
20. Bihar 29.38 4.37 15 
21. Jharkhand 40.60 18.21 45 
22. Maahya Pradesh 66.20 25.30 38 
23. Chhattisgarh 27.46 25.57 93 
24. Orissa 40.50 36.52 90 
25. Rajasthan 40.00 22.72 57 
26. Uttar Pradesh 169.72 48.14 28 
27. Uttaranchal 7.46 4.28 57 

B. TOTAL:  421.32 185.11 44 
C. N.E. States    
28. Arunachal Pradesh 7.35 4.65 63 
29. Assam 64.91 3.72 6 
30. Manipur 7.43 0.64 9 
31. Meghalaya 4.50 0.83 18 
32. Mizoram 11.82 8.78 74 
33. Nagaland 6.61 0.01 0 
34. Sikkim 1.00 1.03 103 
35. Tripura 6.00 2.02 34 
C.
 TOTAL:  109.62 21.68 20 
A+B+C TOTAL:  898.83 386.18 43 
 
 

ANNEXURE-II 
 
IMMUNISATION - RAPID HOUSEHOLD SURVEY, 1998-99 AND 2003-04 
Sl. State/UT/ Agency Full Immunisation BCG DPT (3 Injections) Polio (3 Drops) Measles 
No.  DLHS-I DLHS-II DLHS-I DLHS-II DLHS-I  DLHS-II DLHS-I DLHS-II DLHS-I DLHS-II  
  (1998-99) (2002-04) (1998-99) (2002-04) (1998-99) (2002-04) (1998-99) (2002-04) (1998-99) (2002-04) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
 All India 54.2 47.6 73.0 74.7 66.1 59.0 68.0 58.2 60.4 58.0 
I. Major States (Population > 20 Million)  
1. Andhra Pradesh 74.5 62.9 94.0 92.5 88.5 78.7 89.7 82.2 82.1 74.4 
2. Assam 46.7 19.3 73.6 62.7 60.0 39.5 66.5 30.0 55.1 39.1 
3. Bihar 22.4 24.4 40.8 46.8 34.9 35.0 37.4 34.3 25.6 28.2 
4. Chhattisgarh  60.9  87.8  70.5  70.6  70.2 
5. Gujarat 58.1 57.7 81.0 86.6 71.1 68.9 73.0 71.2 68.4 69.4 
6. Haryana 66.0 62.9 82.0 83.3 77.1 75.7 76.3 75.0 73.3 69.2 
7. Jharkhand  29.3  52.0  39.3  38.4  34.5 
8. Karnataka 71.8 74.1 88.6 92.5 82.2 84.5 86.6 83.7 77.8 80.4 
9. Kerala 84.0 81.2 97.3 98.0 91.4 90.7 91.3 89.6 88.6 90.0 
10. Madhya Pradesh 48.4 32.5 71.9 72.6 63.5 43.9 71.5 47.2 57.7 50.1 
11. Maharashtra 79.7 74.3 94.1 95.9 90.4 88.5 90.3 82.3 87.9 88.0 
12. Orissa 57.8 55.1 81.2 88.5 75.8 70.0 77.0 69.3 64.1 69.9 
13. Punjab 72.9 75.3 84.3 88.0 83.4 82.8 83.3 82.7 77.4 79.1 
14. Rajasthan 37.1 25.4 57.0 60.6 48.2 36.4 49.7 36.8 42.3 36.8 
15. Tamil Nadu 91 .5 92.1 97.8 99.0 96.3 96.8 96.4 95.5 93.7 95.7 
16. Uttar Pradesh 43.7 28.1 61.9 57.8 55.2 37.9 56.6 36.9 49.0 37.7 
17. West Bengal 51.5 54.4 77.2 86.4 65.3 69.8 66.9 67.0 58.7 67.6 
II. Smaller States/U.T.s  (Population < 20 million) 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
30.6 22.5 54.4 56.1 45.3 36.0 54.0 32.1 37.3 39.3 
2. Delhi 84.8 61.0 96.3 90.9 91.5 71.1 89.6 71.9 91.5 76.4 
3. Goa (North) 88.6 81.5 98.1 96.6 95.0 87.7 95.0 87.9 90.6 93.1 
4. Himachal Pradesh 74.4 79.4 95.7 96.1 93.9 91.2 78.9 36.5 92.5 89.7 
5. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
52.3 38.9 93.6 94.5 74.2 47.8 71.0 54.1 76.2 82.8 
6. Manipur 51.1 37.0 73.8 83.4 62.8 48.8 65.3 50.6 56.3 55.6 
7. Meghalaya 32.7 14.1 72.5 64.9 49.4 31.2 54.7 26.1 37.2 30.3 
8. Mizoram 68.4 35.3 87.6 79.0 78.8 48.7 78.4 46.1 78.0 61.6 
9. Nagaland 26.1 14.4 52.1 67.7 38.7 32.5 58.7 26.7 40.0 40.2 
10. Sikkim 65.6 50.2 86.6 91.4 79.2 74.0 76.0 60.0 79.7 82.6 
11. Tripura 46.3 26.7 72.5 75.0 59.6 47.9 61.9 35.2 55.7 44.7 
12. Uttaranchal  47.2  72.8  57.7  57.3  56.9 
III. Union Territories 
1. A&N Islands 77.4 47.7 94.5 98.4 89.2 86.3 88.1 51.5 81.2 90.4 

2. Chandigarh 61.6 53.3 84.8 89.9 81.3 78.6 81.3 62.8 80.4 79.0 
3. D&N Haveli 77.5 85.2 92.5 95.7 87.8 92.1 86.4 92.1 84.0 87.0 
4. Daman & Diu 
(Daman) 
68.7 57.3 88.0 94.0 82.5 77.7 86.7 67.6 79.6 78.6 
5. Lakshadweep 94.5 67.6 99.7 99.7 97.7 86.9 96.2 74.5 98.5 91.8 
6. Pondicherry         95.3 69.4 98.9 99.3 98.9 93.8 98.9 94.8 96.6 95.8 
    

ANNEXURE-III 
STATISTICAL DATA DULY ANALYSED 
(Rs. in thousands) 
Head of  Actual exp.  BE FE  Achievements Remarks 
Accounts  2002-03  2003-04 2003-04   
2003-04      
Plan 178526 185000 187600 MRI system installed. Target fully achieved. 
    Many new equipments like   
    Amplifier, Skin Graft, Compact   
    Anaes. System with Monitor.   
    Flexible Therapy Broncoscope.   
    Auto Clave Dental  
Non-Plan 441530 457500 458531 Cell Washing System, Portable  
    Vascular Doppler Compel. Auto  
    matic X-ray Film Processor etc.  
    have been added in the hospital  
    to upgrade the patient care  
    services.  
    Voluntary Counselling and Testing  
    Centre of HIV/AIDS has been  
    started.  
Head of  Actual exp.  BE FE  Achievements Remarks 
Accounts  2002-03  2003-04 2003-04   
2004-05      
Plan 187082 256600 219857 Many new equipments like Target could not be 
    Harmonic Scalpel, Intra Aortic achieved under the head   
    balion Pump. Visual field  Plan due to non-finalisation 
    Analyser, Stereo static System.  of under mentioned 
    Colour Doppler for Echo   machines: 
    Cardiography. Paed. Ventilators. 1.  1000mA Digital X-ray 
Non-Plan 457837 471000 498001 Cardio-Anglo Film Projector etc.  Machines  
    have been added in the hospital 2. Head Lung  Machine 
    to upgrade the patient care  3. Operating Microscope 
    service. 4. Echo Cardiography 
      Machine 
     5. Rapid TB Culture 
      Machine 
     6. Hyper Baric Chamber 
Head of  Actual exp.  BE FE  Achievements Remarks 
Accounts  2002-03  2003-04 2003-04   
2005-06      
Plan 220455 473000 264100 Many new equipments like Target could not be 
    Q-Switched Nd Yag Laser  achieved under the read 
    System, HPLC System. Fully Plan due to non-finalisa- 

    Automatic Chemitumihefe nee tion of under mentioned 
    Work Station Analyser,  machines: 
    Haemodialysis Machine etc.  1. 1000mA Digital X-ray 
    have been installed to Upgrade   Machine 
Non-plan 498641 493000 536100 the patient care services. 2. Cath Lab. 
     3. 32 Slice CT Scanner 
     4. Medical Gas Pipeline 
      System 
     5. Anaes Work Station 
     6. Intensive Care 
Ventilators 
     7. 16 Slice CT Scanner 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-IV 
STATISTICAL DATA OF DR. RML HOSPITAL 
Sl. 
No. 
Description 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 
 Name of the Hospital Dr . Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital 
2. Hospital Beds 1000 1000 1000 
3. No. of Discharges during the year 42925 46320 45314 
4. No. of Admissions during the year 48205 49472 49726 
5. No. of New Borns during the year 582 572 593 
6. No. of discharges of New Borns 579 565 583 
7. Total No. of patients days (Adult/Child) 248124 254310 253180 
8. Average length of stay (Adult/Child) 5.1 5 5 
9. Average length of stay (New Borns) 4.4 4.4 4.8 
10. No. of New Born patients days 2615 2569 593 
11. Bed Occupancy Rates % 67.9 67.9  
 (a) Medicine and its spec ialities 74.2 74.6 74.9 
 (b) Surgery and its specialities 88.8 75.2 80.8 
 (c) Paediatrics and its specialities 84.8 90.5 96.8 
 (d) Obst. and Gynae. and its  specialities 66.2 78 84.4 
12. Bed Turn over Rate 48 49 49 
13. Out Patient Department    
 (a) Total Attendance of New and Old patients 1251170 1198060 1147634 
 (b) Average No. of out patients per day 4170 4061 3825 
14. Emergency Service    
 (a) Total emergency attendance 171746 175012 184866 
 (b) Average No. of patients per day 470 480 506 
15. Operations    
 (a) No. of Operation Theatres 7 7 6 
 (b) No. of Major and Minor Operations 23280 18809 16126 
 (c) No. of Major Operations 15863 16014 9821 
 (d) Average No. of Operations per O.T. 9784 9843 N.A. 
 (e) No. of operations per day O.T. 12 8 19 
16. Laboratory Services    
(a) Total No. of investigations Clinical Path Lab 1584670 1532396 1470221 
(b) Total No. of investigations Microbiology Lab 72582 79306 83758 
(c) Total No. of investigations Biochemistry Lab 875327 1208184 1073856 
(d) Total No. of investigations done 2992319 3199051 2714070 
(e) Average No. of investigations done per lab per day 1662 1777 1507 
(f) Average No. of lab investigations done per day per bed N.A. N.A. N.A. 
17. Radiology Services    

(a) Total No. of X-Ray done during the year 133102 134408 140202 
(b) Total No. of U/S done during the year 25112 26306 26652 
(c) Total No. of CT Scan done during the year 7392 7648 9124 
(d) Total No. of Colour Doppler Scans   N. Operational  N. Operational 741 
(e) Total No. of MRI study N. Operational 1442 1691 
TOTAL: 165606 169804 178410 
18. Death Rate 2776 2881 2847 
(a) Gross Death Rate % 5.7 5.8 5.7 
(b) Net Death Rate % 3.2 3.3 3 
19. Family Welfare Department    
(a) Male Operations 62 44 36 
(b) Female Operations 218 235 280 
(c) MTP cases 568 531 494 
(d) IUD 552 492 493 
(e) Total Attendance 3890 4221 4649 
(f) No. of conventional contra expensive distributed N.A. N.A. N.A. 
(g) No. of oral pills distributed N.A. N.A.  N.A. 
TOTAL: MLC Cases 5789 6103 7720 
 