Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
 
REPORT NO. 
70
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
 
SEVENTIETH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the
Department of AIDS Control
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

27
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SEVENTIETH REPORT
Demands for Grants 2013-14 (Demand No. 50) of the
Department of AIDS Control
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  26 th April, 2013)
(Laid on the table of Lok Sabha on  26 th April, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)-(iv)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( v)-(vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—15
5. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 16—20
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 21—26

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
do hereby present this Seventieth Report of the Committee on the Demand for Grants (Demand
No. 50) of the Department of AIDS Control, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, for the year
2013-14.
2. The Committee held one sitting, on 5
th April, 2013 for examination of Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Department of AIDS Control and heard the Secretary (AIDS Control) and other
officers thereon.
3. The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied upon the
following documents:–
(i) Address by the President of India to both Houses of Parliament assembled together on
21st February, 2013;
(ii) Speech of Finance Minister on 28 th February, 2013 while presenting the Union Budget
2013-14;
(iii) I mplementation of Budget Announcements 2012-13;
(iv) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Department of AIDS Control for the year 2013-14;
(v) Annual Report of the Department for the year 2012-13;
(vi) Outcome Budget of the Department for the year 2013-14;
(vii) Detailed Explanatory Note on Demands for Grants of the Department of AIDS Control
for the year 2013-14;
(viii) Physical and financial targets fixed and achievements made during the Eleventh Plan
period;
(ix) Projection of outlays for the schemes to be undertaken by the Department during the
Twelfth Five Year Plan;
(x) Details of under-utilization of the allocations made under different heads during the last
three years;
(xi) Written replies furnished by the Department to the Questionnaires sent to them by the
Secretariat;
(xii) Presentation made by the Secretary (AIDS Control) and other concerned officers; and
(xiii) W ritten clarifications furnished by the Department, on the points/issues raised by the
Members during the deliberations of the Committee.

4. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on
23rd April, 2013.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
23rd April, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Vaishakha 3, 1935 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
(iv)

(v)
ACRONYMS
AEP – Adolescence Education Programme
AIDS – Acquired Immuno-Deficiency Syndrome
ANC – Ante-natal Clinic
ART – Antiretroviral therapy
BPL – Below Poverty Line
AR V – Anti-retro-viral
BCSUs – Blood Component Separation Units
CBO – Community-Based Organisation
CoEs – Centres of Excellence
CLHIV – Children living with HIV/AIDS
CABA – Children affected with AIDS
CPFMS – Computerized Project Financial Management System
DAC – Department of AIDS Control
DLBB – District Level Blood Banks
DAPCUs – District AIDS Prevention and Control Units
EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
FSW – Female Sex Worker
FHI – Family Health International
GFA TM – Global Fund of AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
GIPA – Greater Involvement of People Living with HIV/AIDS
LCHAU – Lawyers Collective’s HIV/AIDS Unit
NACP – National AIDS Control Programme
NACO – National AIDS Control Organisation
HBV – Hepatitis B Virus
HCV – Hepatitis C Virus
HIV – Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HRG – High Risk Group
ICTC – Integrated Counseling and Testing Centre
IEC – Information, Education and Communication

IDU – Injecting Drug User
ICMR – Indian Council of Medical Research
NBTA – National Blood Transfusion Authority
NCERT – National Council of Educational Research and Training
MSM – Men having sex with Men
NGO – Non-Government Organisation
NRHM – National Rural Health Mission
OST – Opioid Substitution Therapy
PLHIV – People Living with HIV
PPTCT – Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission
RTI – Reproductive Tract Infection
RREP – Red Ribbon Express Project
RRE – Red Ribbon Express
SACS – S tate AIDS Control Society
STRC – State Training and Resource Centre
STI – Sexually Transmitted Infection
TI – Targeted Interventions
TG – Trans-genders
TB – Tuberculosis
TSUs – T echnical Support Units
UNICEF – United Nations Children’s Fund
USAID – United States Agency for International Development
WHO – World Health Organisation
(vi)

1
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 As per information furnished by the Department of AIDS Control, India has the third
highest number of estimated people living with HIV/AIDS, after South Africa and Nigeria (UNAIDS
Report on the Global AIDS epidemic, 2010). According, to the HIV Estimations 2012, the estimated
number of people living with HIV/AIDS in India was 20.89 lakh with an adult prevalence of 0.27%
in 2011. HIV epidemic in India is concentrated among High Risk Groups and heterogeneous in its
distribution.
1.2 As per information received from the Department, its main objective envisions preventing
and reducing HIV burden in India. The NACP Phase-I (1992-99), Phase–II (1999-2006) and
Phase– III (2007-12) was initiated by the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO). During the
NACP phase-III, the Department of AIDS Control was made as a separate department under the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The mission is to reduce HIV prevalence in population
groups at risk of HIV/AIDS thorough an integrated prevention, care and support programme.
1.3 To achieve this, the National AIDS Control Programme (NACP) is being implemented as a
comprehensive programme for prevention and control of HIV /AIDS in India since 1992 when it
was launched with support from the World Bank. With improved understanding of the complex HIV
epidemic in India, substantial changes have been made in the policy frameworks and approaches
of NACP. The focus has shifted from raising awareness to behavior change, from a national
response to a more decentralized response and to increasing involvement of NGOs and network of
PLHIVs.
1.4 The Department has further informed that an analysis of targets done at the time of mid-
term review and subsequent joint implementation review mission has revealed that most of the
targets have been achieved or will be achieved shortly. Results of the epidemiological models and
programme data (surveillance ANC, HRG population, and ICTC) shows that the target of halting
the epidemic has been achieved and reversal process has been initiated at the national level during
this time frame. Adult HIV prevalence at national level has declined from 0.41% in 2001 through
0.35% in 2006 to 0.27% in 2011. India has demonstrated an overall reduction of 57% in
estimated annual new HIV infections (among adult population) during the last decade from 2.74%
lakhs in 2000 to 1.16 Lakhs in 2011. Wider access to ART has led to 29% reduction in estimated
annual AIDS-related deaths during NACP–III period (2007-11). India is committed to achieving
Millennium Development Goals. Keeping this in view, the primary goal of National AIDS Control
Programme–IV is to accelerate the process of reversal and further strengthen the epidemic
response in India through a cautious and well-defined integration process over the next 5 Years.
1.5 Towards this end, the National AIDS Control Programme Phase-IV has been introduced
with the aim to accelerate the process of reversal and further strengthen the epidemic response in
India through a cautious and well-defined integration process over the next 5 years, i.e., 2012-17.
The Secretary, Department of AIDS Control, during the course of his deposition, apprised the
Committee of the following initiatives proposed in NACP–IV:
(a) Pronged Strategy for NACP-IV
· Intensifying and consolidating, prevention services with a focus on (a)high-risk groups
and vulnerable population and (b) general population;

2
· Expanding IEC services for (a) general population and (b) high-risk groups with a
focus on behavior change and demand generation;
· Increasing access and promoting comprehensive care, support and treatment;
· Building capacities at national, State, district and facility levels;
· Strengthening Strategic Information Management Systems.
(b) Key priorities under NACP IV
· Preventing new infections by sustaining the reach of current interventions and
effectively addressing emerging epidemics;
· Prevention of Parent to Child transmission;
· Focusing on IEC strategies for behaviour change in HRG, awareness, among general
population and demand generation for HIV services;
· Providing comprehensive care, support and treatment to eligible PLHIV;
· Reducing stigma and discrimination through greater involvement of people living with
HIV(GIPA);
· Ensuring effective use of strategic information at all levels of programme;
· Building capacities of NGO and civil society partners especially in States of emerging
epidemics;
· Integrating HIV services with health systems in a phased manner;
· Mainstreaming of HIV/AIDS activities with all key Central/State level Ministries/
departments will be given a high priority and resources of the respective departments
will be leveraged. Social protection and insurance mechanisms will be leveraged.
(c) Key Initiatives in Care, Support and Treatment
· Phasing out Stavudine based regimen:
– Was part of national programme for patients who are anemic.
– WHO recommendation to phase out in view of its long term side effects.
– Phase out initiated in India from June, 2012 (No new patients being given
Stavudine)
– All existing patients are being shifted to Tenofovir – to be completed by April, 2013
· Universal access to second line ART:
– Second line ART introduced in January, 2008 at 2 Centres of Excellence (CoEs)
– Expanded to the all 17 COEs and 24 upgraded ART Plus Centres
– Initially, provided free only to widows, children and BPL patients
– Made available free to all those who require it, since 2010
II. Budgetary Allocation
2.1 As per information given in the Background Material, an amount of Rs. 15,815 crore was
projected to the Planning Commission as Twelfth Five Year Plan Outlay (2012-17) for National
AIDS Control Programme Phase–IV . However, Planning Commission has approved an outlay of
Rs. 11394.00 for the Twelfth Plan as budgetary support.

3
2.2 The Planning Commission has been requested to revise the project cost of NACP-IV to
Rs.15,815.00 crore, keeping in view the future support from Global Fund and extra budgetary supports
from the other development Partners. The Department has further informed that in view of EFC’s
approval for World Bank assisted project and revision of EFC for 4 metro Blood Banks, the project cost
of NACP–IV is being reworked and likely project cost would be of the order of Rs.15724.00 crore.
2.3 The Committee observes that the 1st year of the Twelfth Plan Period has already
elapsed and the 2nd Year is in progress. However, the Department is still in the process of
reworking the project cost of NACP–IV for the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee
observes that the delay of more than a year in finalization of the project cost of such a
critical programme like NACP-IV is a sad commentary on the working of the Department
and calls for urgent remedial measures. The Committee feels that the delay will have an
adverse impact on the intended outcomes of NACP-IV unless timely action taken. In an era
of e-governance and with IT resources currently available, the Department should have
finalized the project cost long back. The Committee, therefore, deprecates the delay in this
regard and desires to be apprised of the reasons for the same. The Committee recommends
that the Department should finalize the project cost at the earliest and in such a manner
so that the intended outcomes of this programme are not adversely affected. The
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
2.4 The Committee has been informed that against a projection of Rs.2770.00 crore by the
Department of AIDS Control, a plan outlay of Rs.1785.00 crore has been allocated by the Planning
Commission for the year 2013-14. The Department has informed that the components of the Plan likely
to be affected due to shortfall include blood safety, IEC, supply of condoms, contribution for Global
Fund, Care, Support and Treatment and ICTC/PPTCT. It is Government’s endeavour to ensure
implementation of the programme with funds allocated. However, if enhancement of provision is
required during the course of the year, it will be obtained through supplementary demands for grants.
2.5 The Committee observes that in a resource constrained country like India, the
efficient deployment of the available resources is the key for success of any programe/
scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should initiate
concrete measures for efficient use of the allocated funds and remove apparent
inefficiencies at every level of programme implementation.
2.6 The Secretary, Department of AIDS Control, during the course of his deposition before the
Committee on 5
th April, 2013 informed the Committee that the BE, RE and expenditure figure for
2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 are as follows:–
(Rs. in crore )
Year Budget Revised Expenditure % Budget
Estimates Estimate Incurred Utilization
2010-11 1435.00 1400.22 1 167.21 83.36%
2011-12 1700.00 1500.00 1313.86 87.59%
2012-13 1700.00 1759.56 1345.16* 76.45%
2.7 On the reasons for downward revision at the RE stage, the Secretary informed that saving
occurred due to delayed implementation of programme/activities in some of the States. Releases
were also made to the SACS taking into consideration the balances available with States. Savings
was also due to delay in procurement process, less expenditure incurred on State Training and
Resource Centre (STRC)/Technical Support Unit (TSUs) which conducts training of staff and
provides technical experts to the implementing agencies and funds allocated for planned
procurement could not be fully utilized due to inability of the procurement agent to complete
planned procurement on schedule.

4
2.8 The Budgetary allocation made in 2012-13 was Rs.1700.00 crore which was increased to
Rs.1759.56 crore at RE stage with expenditure of Rs.1345.16 crore. Explaining the reasons for
enhancement in RE stage, the Secretary informed that the main reason for enhancement of plan
allocation during the year was on account of procurement of drugs and consumables required for
free treatment of People Living with HIV/AIDS (PLHA). The enhanced allocation for the year was
not fully utlised during the year as savings occurred due to shortfall in certain expenditures relates
to North Eastern States and procurements mainly related to ARV drugs, tests kits and blood bags
not materializing.
2.9 The Committee expresses its serious concern that the actual expenditure of the
Department for the year 2010-11 was Rs.1167.21 crore as against the BE of Rs.1435.00
crore; for the year 2011-12, Rs.1313.86 crore as against BE of Rs.1700.00 crore, and for the
year 2012-13, Rs.1345.16 crore as against BE of Rs.1700.00 crore. The Committee expresses
its disappointment at this persistent trend of under-utilization of the budgeted funds and is
of the view that this trend is not only indicative of fiscal indiscipline but also points to slack
monitoring of utilization of the sanctioned provisions. The Committee feels that the reasons
adduced by the Department cannot justify shortfall in expenditure to the tune of Rs.267.79
crore in 2010-11, Rs.386.14 crore in 2011-12 and Rs.354.84 crore in 2012-13. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should put in place a strict and effective
monitoring mechanism to ensure that the funds allocated to the Department are monitored
quarterly, and exercise utmost fiscal prudence and discipline so as to make realistic Budget
Estimates in future. The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures initiated in this
regard.
2.10 Regulation of release of funds to the State AIDS Control Societies due to availability of
considerable balances with them has been cited as the main reasons for the savings. On a specific
query in this regard, the Department has informed that the opening balance amounting to Rs.206.32
crore was available with SACS as on 1
st April, 2012, which increased to Rs. 290.23 crore as in
the opening balance at the beginning of 2013-14. A comparative analysis of State wise figures
during 2011-12 and 2012-13 indicates that the status regarding the main defaulter States remained
unchanged. Following details are self explanatory:–
(Rs. in crore )
SACS 201 1-12 2012-13 Balances as on
Opening Balance Opening Balance 28.02.13
Andhra Pradesh SACS 15.45 7.24 23.33
Bihar SA CS 6.16 8.29 18.22
Delhi SACS 8.54 1.41 7.81
Gujarat SACS 9.75 8.70 14.58
Karnataka SACS 19.20 14.83 26.60
Madhya Pradesh SACS 13.98 16.09 22.22
Maharashtra SACS 19.81 12.40 18.61
Rajasthan SACS 7.33 7.89 3.33
Tamil Nadu SACS 7.51 6.14 27.91
West Bengal SACS 13.04 15.17 3.35

5
2.11 The Department has stated that the following concrete steps are being taken to ensure
optimum utilization of funds:–
(i) Alignment of Budget with project goals and prioritization of activities.
(ii) E-payment of salaries to staff of peripheral units like, Anti Retroviral Treatment (ART)
Centers, Integrated Counseling and Testing Centers (ICTC), Blood Banks, Sexually
Transmitted Infection (STI) Clinics has been implemented by SACS. This has helped
to reduce the substantial amount of advances that were earlier being extended for this
purpose and pace of utilization has improved significantly.
(iii) Monitoring of resource utilization by SACS is conducted through a computerized
Project Finance Management System (CPFMS).
(iv) Releases to States are bein g done through e-transfer to reduce transit delay.
(v) Improvement in Staffing and Capacity Building.
(vi) DAC has taken steps to ensure implementation of systems and procedure for regular
periodic adjustment of advances as opposed to one-time special efforts for clearing
advances being made hitherto.
(vii) Systems have been established to release the sanctioned amount in phased manner and
to closely monitor the cash flow to peripheral units so that the states, at no point,
face shortage of resources.
(viii) Monitoring is done through on line systems by having a snap shot of the resource
position at any given point of time.
(ix) Review of various components of the programme implementation in the States is taken
with all the SACS.
2.12 The Committee appreciates that due to the efforts made by the Department, there
has been a considerable decline in unspent balances available with the SACS. The
Committee would, however, like to point out that availability of unspent balance with some
SACS, like Andhra Pradesh SACS (Rs.23.33 crore), Bihar SACS (Rs.18.23 crore), Gujarat
SACS (Rs.14.58 crore), Karnataka SACS (Rs.26.60 crore) is still quite high. The Committee
emphasizes that the Department should make concerted efforts to get resolved all the
unspent balances with the societies so that funds do not accumulate and remain unutilized.
The Committee recommends that in order to ensure timely and effective utilization of
unspent balances, the Department should insist on quarterly feedback from all the State
AIDS Control Societies. Close monitoring of their activities and spending will certainly
deliver the desired results.
2.13 It has been informed that the allocation for grants to SACS in BE 2013-14 has been
proposed at Rs.833.00 crore keeping in mind the level of activities proposed for this year. The
Committee was also informed that during 2013-14, the increased cost is due to the setting up of
new targeted interventions to cover the HRG (High risk groups) populations in hitherto uncovered
areas and transitioning of TI projects from Development partners into the national programme and
300 new TI projects (including source/transit migrant intervention) and 80 new Opioid Substitution
Therapy (OST) centres would be set up in the year.
2.14 The Committee takes note of the submission that the increased grants to SACS is
due, transitioning of Targeted Intervention (TI) projects from Development Partners into
the national programme. The Committee observes that funding from Development Partners
have played a vital role in supporting the NACP programme interventions in the past. The

6
Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the reasons behind shifting the TI
projects from Development Partners to the national programme and its implication on
funding of HIV programmes in the Country.
III. Role of NGOs.
3.1 The Committee understands that Targeted Interventions are preventive interventions working
with high risk groups in defined geographic area. Target Intervention Projects (TIs), implemented
by NGOs/Community Based Organization (CBOs) work with both core HRGs (Female Sex Worker
(FSW), Men having sex with Men (MSM), Transgenders (TG) and Injecting Drug Users (IDU) as
well as Bridge population and provide preventive interventions through a peer led approach. As per
the information provided by the Department regarding updated status of the discontinued NGOs,
the Committee has been apprised that out of the total outstandings from NGOs amounting to
Rs.352.17 lakhs in 27 States, an amount of Rs. 251.8 lakhs has been recovered which is 71%.
NGOs in 11 States have a balance of Rs.100.8 lakhs still to be recovered from terminated NGOs
as on January, 2013. Action has been initiated with respect to recovery of the unspent balances
amount from NGOs/CBOs and against those NGOs which do not comply, necessary legal action
is taken by involving the district Collector or Commissioner.
3.2 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the issue of non-recovery of unspent
balances from the NGOs by the Department, even after about two years. Out of 27 States,
11 States have a balance of Rs.100.8 lakhs still to be recovered. The Committee
recommends that the issues like contract norms fixed for NGOs-State-wise, the reasons for
delay in recovering the same along with the details of action taken against the NGOs who
have repeatedly defaulted in paying back the unspent balances. In future, funds should be
released only to such agencies which have the capacity to utilize the allocated amount.
IV. Setting up of new Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs)
4.1 The Department has informed that in order to promote rational use of blood, 82 BCSUs
were established during the first two phases of NACP through installation of essential equipment,
manpower and consumable support. At present, there are 175 NACO supported BCSUs with the
license for operating as component separation units. These BCSUs have started working in their
respective States and the proportion of blood units processed for component separation has risen
from 47% to 51% in the financial year 2012-13, till December, 2012. Quality management modules
were prepared by Technical Resource Group to increase Blood Component separation in the BCSUs.
4.2 The Committee, in its 57
th Report presented to Rajya Sabha on 26 th April, 2012, had
commented about addressing the issue of quality of blood banks. The Department, in its Action
Taken Notes, has informed that NACO is focusing on quality management systems in Blood Banks
and efforts are being made to monitor the blood banks and core Committees have been constituted
in all states to monitor all blood banks.
4.3 The Committee is not aware as to what headway has been made towards concretizing
the above proposal. Considering the fact that blood transfusion is a life-saving treatment in
many situations but it can also be a quick route for the transmission of infectious agents
such as HIV, HBC, HCV , etc.; the Committee recommends that urgent measure be taken
on war footing to regulate Blood Banks. The Committee desires to be furnished with a
Status Note, indicating the initiatives taken by the Department towards ensuring quality
management systems and monitoring of Blood Banks and the outcome thereof.
4.4 As per information received from the Department, the objective of blood safety programme
under NACP-IV , supported the installation of Blood Component Separation Units and also funded

7
modernization of all major blood banks at State and district levels. A total of 229 component
separation facilities (including 34 model blood banks) are presently being supported under the
programme as on 31
st December, 2012. A four -pronged strategy is as follows:
(i) Ensuring that regular voluntary non-remunerated blood donors constitute the main
source of blood supply through phased increase in donor recruitment and retention;
(ii) Establishment of blood storage centres in the primary health care system for
availability of blood in remote areas;
(iii) Promoting appropriate use of blood, blood components and blood products among the
clinicians; and
(iv) Capacity building of staff involved in Blood Transfusion Service through an organized
training programme for various categories of staff.
4.5 The Committee notes that during NACP-III, the Department had fulfilled the target
of setting up 80 Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs) at tertiary level of public
health care delivery system and proposes to continue the support to these facilities and also
take up upgradation of existing licensed blood banks in the Government and charitable
sector with annual blood collection of over 5000 blood units at BCSUs, so as to saturate the
same, by the end of NACP-IV . The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress
made towards upgrading the existing licensed blood banks in the Government and
Charitable Sector.
4.6 In reply to a query regarding the progress made towards establishment of the four Metro
Blood Banks, the Department has informed that the four metro blood banks were proposed to
be set up as four regional centres of excellence in Transfusion Medicine in Chennai, Delhi,
Mumbai and Kolkata and the proposal was approved in 2008. The total outlay for the scheme
was Rs. 468.00 crore. There has been a delay in the above metro blood banks and their revised
cost estimates now amounts to Rs. 1024.00 crore. The Department has also informed that the
EFC has asked for a revised proposal and necessary action is being taken to prepare a revised
proposal.
4.7 From the information furnished by the Department, the Committee gathers that the
scheme pertaining to setting up of four Metro Blood Banks is yet to be approved by EFC,
and time-overrun has led to the cost escalation of the scheme. The Committee deprecates
the Department for not visualizing the problems of its implementation at the planning
stage, which has resulted in time-overrun and cost escalation. The Committee recommends
that the Department should expedite revision of proposal of the scheme and proactively
pursue its approval with the EFC so that this scheme could be translated into action and
there is no further cost-overrun. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the updated
status of approval of this scheme. The proposal brooks no delay and an expeditious action
needs to be taken for its early approval. The Committee also impresses upon the
Department to speed up the process for acquisition of land for the proposed Metro Blood
Bank in Delhi.
V. Setting up of new District level Blood Banks
5.1 As per the information given in the Annual Report 2012-13 of the Department at present
there are 909 NACO supported blood banks across the country which include 167 major blood
banks and 742 district level blood banks. During NACP III, 39 newly created districts were
identified which did not have Blood banks. NACO had taken the initiative with the concerned state
Health Department for setting up blood banks in these districts.

8
5.2 The Committee has been informed that the blood needs of the State and region are estimated
on the basis of population and blood need for the country is estimated to be 1% of the total
population as per WHO norms. Accordingly, blood banks are set up in every district. In addition,
Blood Storage Units are set up under National Rural Health Mission to cater to blood needs of first
referral units at sub-district level health facilities.
5.3 In reply to a query, the Department has informed that a target of setting up of 39 blood
banks was made during the Phase-III of NACP; however, only 27 blood banks were set up in the
States of Jharkhand, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh Kerala, Mizoram and Uttar Pradesh. The details in this
regard are given below:–
Sl. No. Name of the State Target for NACP-III Targets achieved (DLBB)
1. Bihar 1 0
2. Chhattisgarh 2 2
3. Jharkhand 11 6
4. Karnataka 4 3
5. Kerala 1 1
6. Mizoram 2 2
7. Uttar Pradesh 15 13
8. Uttarakhand 3 0
T
OTAL :3 92 7
5.4 39 blood banks were identified on the basis of an assessment of urgent requirement in
underserved areas. When enquired about the reasons for non-completion of 12 blood banks, the
Department has stated this was on account of various factors like non-completion of infrastructure,
lack of equipments and non-acquisition of license.
5.5 The Committee expresses its disappointment that the Department has not been able
to meet the target of setting up of 39 blood banks during NACP-III. In some states not
even one blood bank was setup which gives a dismal picture of the implementation. The
Committee feels that the above issues could have easily been sorted out, had there been
a streamlined mechanism in place and the Department had pursued the matter vigorously.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department needs to play a pro-active role
by taking up the matter with the concerned State Governments as well as the agencies at
an appropriate level to expedite the procedural formalities.
5.6 The Committee has been informed that the Department is taking cognizance of the
underserved areas including districts of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand in country wide
plan for blood safety. More than 60% of the blood requirement of these States as per their
population is catered through Department of AIDS Control supported blood banks. There are 11
DLBBs in Uttarakhand, 47 DLBBs in Uttar Pradesh and 18 DLBBs in Jharkhand supported by the
NACO under the programme. On the reasons for some of the DLBBs not being functional in these
States, the Department has informed the reasons for the same as lack of manpower, non-availability
of health infrastructure for a blood bank and pending licences for operationalisation of these blood
banks.
5.7 The Committee recommends that for resolving the problem of unfunctional District
level Blood Banks (DLBBs), the Department should take up the matter with the Drug

9
Controller General of India regarding licencing and operationlisation of these blood banks
on priority basis. The issues of shortage of manpower and lack of infrastructure should also
be taken up with the States. The Committee also recommends that the Department should
take special care of the underserved districts of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand.
VI. Integrated Counseling and Testing Centres (ICTCs)
6.1 As per the information given in the Annual Report-2012-13, this programme offers
Counseling and Testing services for HIV infection, which includes three main components –
Integrated Counseling and Testing Centres (ICTC), Prevention of Parent to child Infection, and
HIV–TB Collaborative activities.
6.2 As per information furnished by the Department, the targets set for mothers who were to
be tested and counselled during the years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 and achievements made
in respect thereof are as follows:–
2010-11 201 1-12 2012-13
Target Achievement Target Achievement Target Achievement
86.49 66.38 90.00 85.63 90.00 57.10
lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs lakhs
6.3 The Committee notes that the achievements vis-à-vis  the targets fixed for 2010-11,
2011-12 and 2012-13 leaves a lot to be desired in the implementation of the targets. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department needs to fine tune its ground level
machinery. The Committee therefore recommends that Department should focus on setting
monitorable targets and their realization to the maximum extent. The Committee desires
to be apprised of the targets fixed for 2013-14 and the measures put in place to monitor
progress in this regard.
VII. Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) Centre
7.1 As per information given in the Annual Report 2012-13, as on December, 2012, nearly
17.36 lakh PLHIV have been registered at 380 ART Centres of whom 6,04,987 clinically eligible
patients (including 34,367 children) are receiving free ART in Government health facilities.
7.2 The Department has informed that it is estimated that around 2.8% to 4% of PLHIV fail
on first line ART after three years, which translates to nearly 34,000 PLHIV requiring second line
ART by end of NACP IV (2017). Second Line ART was rolled out in 2008 at two centres of
Excellence (CoE). This has now been extended to 17 CoEs and 24 ART Plus Centres to provide
Second line ART drugs during 2013-14.
7.3 As per information received from the Department, another 24 ART centres would be
upgraded to ART Plus centres in 2013-14 to provide second line ART drugs. It is also planned to
have 7 more ART Plus centres in 2013-14. This will ensure that each State will have at least one
ART centre to provide second line ART. All high prevalence states will have at least 3-4 centres
to provide second line drugs.
7.4 The Committee recommends that the Department should ensure the achievement of
targets set for upgradation of 24 ART centres to ART Plus Centres in 2013-14 and due
diligence should be ensured that no delay should occur on this account. The Committee be
apprised of the progress made in this regard.

10
7.5 On being asked about latest figures of the AIDS patients in the country state-wise and the
last survey undertaken in this regard, the Department has stated that as per Reports received from
the State AIDS Control Societies, as on December, 2012, the total number of AIDS patients in the
country is 6,04,987 ( State-wise details is given at Annexure). These are reported AIDS cases in
ART centres across the country. For estimation of figures about AIDS patients, no specific surveys
are undertaken, However, annual HIV sentinel surveillance is undertaken under the programme at
periodic intervals for monitoring trends of HIV prevalence and HIV estimation purposes.
7.6 The Committee gathers from the information furnished by the Department that
there is a steady decline in overall prevalence of HIV/AIDS. However, a lot still remains
to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends that during NACP-IV , additional ART
Centres be established and high quality treatment be made available to the eligible people.
The Committee also recommends that pre-ART follow-up be strengthened and all people
eligible for treatment identified.
VIII. New Initiatives
(i) Setting up of National Blood Transfusion Authority (NBTA)
8.1 The Committee was informed that the proposal for setting up of National Blood Transfusion
Authority was one of the approved activities under NACP phase-III. A vision document on NBTA
was prepared in 2008 which was reviewed during a meeting of experts. A draft cabinet note was
prepared and sent to various departments such as Department of Expenditure and Economic
Affairs, under Ministry of Finance, Department of Health and the Planning Commission for
comments in September, 2009. However, the Ministry of Finance could not support the proposal
due to certain reasons. Thereafter, the Department did not pursue the matter further for setting up
of National Blood Transfusion Authority. Subsequently, a Committee was set up by Department of
Health on creation of National Blood Service under the chairpersonship of Additional Secretary and
Director General (CGHS) and two meetings were held on 22
nd November, 2011 and 23 rd March,
2012 to consider the following issues:
(i) Necessity of having a separate legislation for setting up of National Blood Transfusion
Authority (NBTA)
(ii) Amendment to Rules and Regulations of Drugs and Cosmetics Act to strengthen the
regulatory mechanisms for grant of approval of blood banks and enforcement of rules
and regulations relating to proper functioning of blood banks
(iii) Synergizing the structures of National AIDS Control Organization and Indian Red
Cross Society to have a strengthened National Blood Service.
8.2 The report of the Committee is still awaited.
8.3 The Committee is not happy with the slow progress in establishing the National Blood
Transfusion Authority and the proposal is still on paper only. The Committee desires that
the Department should formulate its stand on the issue on a priority basis and take an
early decision.
(ii) Setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre (PFC)
8.4 It has been informed by the Department that under NACP-III, it was proposed to set up
a Plasma Fractionation Centre with a processing capacity of more than 1.5 lakh litres of plasma
annually. These plasma derivatives will be provided to the public sector hospitals at affordable
prices for treatment of economically weaker sections to ensure equitable access to the life saving

11
products and achieve self sufficiency in the availability of plasma derivatives in the country. A large
volume of excess plasma in the country is being discarded, as there is no such centre in the public
sector in the country. The project was approved in 2008, The Government of Tamil Nadu has
provided land to NACO for the purpose.
8.5 As per latest information provided by the Department, a sub- Committee of national
and international experts would be set up to discuss and explore the possibility of recombinant
Factor-VIII and Factor-IX or any other new technology which might be more viable/appropriate
than the existing proposal on preparation of Factor-VIII and Factor-IX of plasma. In this regard,
a Committee has been set up and its report is awaited.
8.6 The Committee notes that the project for setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre
was approved in 2008. Almost 5 years have elapsed since then and there is no indication
that it will see the light of day in the near future. The Committee, therefore, impresses
upon the Department to make all out efforts for expediting submission of the report of Sub-
Committee of experts so that further follow-up action could be initiated without further
delay. An early decision is appreciated.
IX. Adolescence Education Programme (AEP)
9.1 Adolescence Education Programme (AEP) runs in secondary and senior secondary schools to
build up life skills of adolescents to cope with the physical and psychological changes associated with
growing up. The programme is being implemented in 23 States and till date 85,000 schools have been
covered. As the follow-up to the suspension of AEP in some States, a toolkit was devised and
disseminated for resumption of the programme in some of the States where it was suspended.
9.2 As per information received from the Department, after the suspension of Adolescence
Education Programme (AEP) in some States, the material on Adolescence Education Programme
had been reviewed by an expert committee constituted by DAC in consultation with Ministry of
HRD and NCERT during 2007-08. The revised prototype material was disseminated to States in a
consultation held in July, 2008. All States were requested to adapt and contextualize the material
further to suit the local needs of students. Most States have adapted and contextualized the material
in consultation with local experts and stakeholders and have been implementing AEP either directly
or through NRHM. But, despite Department’s continuous advocacy efforts, the programme
remained suspended in five States including Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh
and Uttar Pradesh.
9.3 It has also been informed that, recently Karnataka has made notable progress in integration of
content on HIV prevention in curriculum for school students through other ongoing programmes such
as school health program under NRHM. This followed an effort by the State AIDS Prevention and
Control Society which had taken up the matter with the State Education Department. The Department
of AIDS Control is also continuing its efforts through State AIDS Control Societies to remove
apprehensions and concerns in other States where there are problems in implementation of AEP.
9.4 The Committee is concerned to note that Adolescence Education Programme (AEP)
remains suspended in five States namely, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in
its 57th Report on Demand for Grants (2012-13) of the Department that it should vigorously
take up with the States where the Programme is still under suspension and resolve their
apprehensions in view of the fact that HIV/AIDS usually attacks the vulnerable population
due to lack of awareness of the devastating effects the disease could have on them. The
Department may take up the matter with all concerned States and clarify their
apprehensions. The States also should understand the necessity of the programme.

12
X. New Strategies
(i) Setting up of District AIDS Prevention and Control Units (DAPCUs)
10.1 The Department has informed that DAPCUs have been established in 189 high priority
(A and B Category) districts spread across 22 States under NACP-III. DAPCUs have been
established in all ‘A’ and ‘B’ category districts (189) as per the categorization of high prevalence
and vulnerable districts including the three districts i.e. Deoria (September, 2010) and Etawah
(in February, 2011) of UP; Sonitpur district was changed to Kamrup in Assam,SACS based on
severity of HIV epidemic. Further the DAPCU in Kamrup district was established in August, 2010.
10.2 As per the information received from the Department, DAPCU staffs are trained on different
components of National AIDS Control Programme for effective monitoring and coordination at the
district level. They are also trained on their roles and responsibilities with respect to different
programmatic interventions at the district level with an aim to involve line departments through
district administration. Further, DAPCU staff (953 in induction training and 348 in refresher
trainings) have been trained through national level training for DAPCU.
10.3 The Committee is of the opinion that setting up of the District AIDS Prevention and
Control Units function as a supportive structure below the state level and would fill up the
necessary gaps to coordinate the activities at the district level as DAPCUs are expected to
play a pivotal role in monitoring and coordination of delivery from the different facilities
in the district. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Department should
explore the possibility of expanding the same to more districts in the near future so as to
implement the programme more effectively.
(ii) Scheme of link workers in rural areas of category A and B districts
10.4 As per information received from the Department, the Link Worker Scheme is supported by
the Global Fund for AIDS, TB and Malaria Round (GFATM)- VII and has the mandate for
implementation in 163 high prevalent and highly vulnerable districts till August, 2013. The Link
Worker Scheme is being implemented in 155 districts. In the States of Chhattisgarh (4 districts),
UP (3 districts) and Rajasthan (1 district) selection is due and the scheme is expected to be
operational by end of March, 2013. In 2012-13, a total of 12391 and 15437 Red Ribbon Clubs and
Village Information Centres were functioning. A total of 21066 Condom Depots were functioning
leading to easy accessibility of condoms to the target population at the village level. Locale-specific
and culture-specific IEC programmes were organized to reach out to the rural people, especially
the vulnerable and high risk population.
10.5 The Committee notes that the Link Worker Scheme is an intensive rural-based
intervention reaching out to the marginalized groups which remain uncovered even after
the expansion of urban based prevention programmes. The Scheme is being implemented
only in 155 districts as of now. The Committee recommends to the Department to assess
the need to cover the remaining districts and closely monitor the scheme as the success of
this scheme is crucial for achieving the goal of halting and reversing the epidemic of AIDS.
Effective implementation of this scheme can bring perceptible change.
(iii) Pr eferred private provider scheme for management of Sexually Transmitted
Infections (STYI) among high risk groups.
10.6 As per inf ormation provided by the Department, STI services are provided to HRGs through
3564 preferred private providers across the country. All these providers have been trained on
standardization training curriculum to provide STI services. During the period April, 2012 to

13
January, 2013, about 25.8 lakh clinic visits were made by High Risk Group individuals for STI
services from the preferred providers. In order to detect hidden STI and promote health seeking
behaviour, HRGs are being encouraged to undergo quarterly regular medical check up and bi-annual
syphilis testing. 17.57 lakh regular medical check ups were conducted, 6 lakh syphilis tests were
conducted and syphilis positivity was found to be 0.4%. Seven percent of HRGs were diagnosed
with serious STIs and treated through syndromic case management using colour coded STI/RTI
drug kits.
10.7 This is very good scheme which has the potential to penetrate to the lowest level
provided it is implemented with dedication. The Committee recommends close and strict
monitoring of the Preferred Private Providers Scheme to ensure that it is not misused for
financial benefits by the preferred private providers and strict norms should be put in place
for identifying the preferred private providers for management of sexually transmitted
infection.
XI. National Pediatric HIV/AIDS Initiative
11.1 The Committee has been informed that the National Pediatric HIV/AIDS Initiative was
launched on 30 November, 2006. As on December , 2012, nearly 1,12,385 children living with HIV/
AIDS (CLHIV) are registered in HIV care at ART centres of whom 34,367 are receiving free ART.
Pediatric formulations of ARV drugs are available at all ART centres. Currently, provision of second
line ART for children has been made available at all COEs, pediatric CoEs and ART Plus centres.
Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission of HIV(PPTCT) programme was started in 2002 and
aims to prevent the parental transmission of HIV from an HIV infected pregnant mother to her new
born baby. HIV positive women and the new born are given prophylactic drugs to prevent
transmission of HIV from mother to child. The PPTCT programme is transitioning from single dose
Nevirapine to the more efficacious multi drug regimen in a phased manner.
11.2 In response to a query regarding the status of HIV positive children in high risk states of
Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra, the Department has submitted that 23,269 HIV positive children
have been registered and 5978 eligible HIV positive children are on pediatric ART in Andhra Pradesh
whereas, 25,833 HIV positive children have been registered and 8627 eligible HIV positive children
are on pediatric ART in Maharashtra. The Committee is also given to understand that rising trends
of HIV prevalence among pregnant women are noted in some low prevalence/vulnerable States of
North India including, Bihar, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, and Rajasthan.
11.3 The Committee is of the view that the Department needs to delve deeper on the reasons
for rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women in the State like Bihar, Gujarat,
Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. The Committee recommends that the Department should prepare
specific State-wise interventions in these States after analyzing the reasons for increase in HIV
prevalence in these States and if need be specific pilot projects for interventions on PPP mode
may be mooted with specific targets being fixed under these projects.
11.4 As per information received from the Department, a national task force was constituted
with representatives from MWCD and DAC, UNICEF, USAID, FHI 360, India HIV/AIDS Alliance
and the Clinton Foundation. A joint proposal was prepared to pilot this intervention for children
affected with AIDS (CABA). It was implemented in 10 districts and concluded on 31
st March,
2012. Overall 7601 HIV infected children and 38121 HIV affected children were enrolled in this
intervention. Nearly 48000 field level health care providers and other Government functionaries
were trained to provide linkages as envisaged in this intervention.
11.5 The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department in constituting a
national task force under which there is a joint proposal to pilot this intervention for

14
children  affected with AIDS (CABA). The Committee recommends that the Department
should expand similar initiatives to other affected districts which would help in
complementing and supplementing the Government’s efforts in its fight against combating
HIV/AIDS.
XII. Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
12.1 The Committee has been informed that the various interventions have been initiated for
carrying out IEC campaigns, like theme-wise campaigns for promoting HIV counseling etc, mass
media campaigns, booklets for High Risk Groups etc., folk media campaign Red Ribbon Express
Project (RREP). RREP, a special exhibition train can be rightly considered as world’s largest mass
mobilization against HIV/AIDS which covered 162 stations in 23 States reaching out to about 1.14
crore people and training one lakh district resource persons.
12.2 The Department has informed that the following are the key achievements during the
Eleventh Plan.
· Mass Media Campaigns on different thematic areas
· Focus areas: Condom Promotion, Youth, Stigma and Discrimination, ICTC/PPTCT,
ART and Blood Safety
· Successful completion of 3rd phase of the Red Ribbon Express (RRE)
· Migrant IEC campaign launched at transit and source points in 8 out-migration States
· Multi-media campaign in the North-East was upscaled to cover all 8 States in the
North–East
· Evaluation of Drop-in-Centres and SHGs
· Inter-ministerial conference to mainstream HIV
· 3.61 lakh frontline workers of other ministries trained.
12.3 The Committee feels that Information, Education and Communication is the backbone
to ensure success of various schemes carried out by the Department. The Committee would
like the Department to orient IEC activities towards laying greater focus on behavior change
and strengthening the enabling environment. The Department should also design more media
campaigns to address stigma and discrimination attached with HIV/AIDS. The Committee
desires that more aggressive IEC activities are required to bring perceptible change.
XIII. HIV/AIDS Bill
13.1 The Committee has been given to understand that an International Policy Makers Conference
on HIV/AIDS jointly organized by NACO, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and
International AIDS Vaccine Initiative (IA VI) was held in May, 2002 in New Delhi which was
attended by Parliamentarians and senior bureaucrats from eight countries. At the end of the
conference, all the countries pledged to “strengthen legislation and regulatory systems” to fight the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. As a follow up to the conference, a working group of experts on policy, legal,
gender, ethics and technical matters was set up to advise on various HIV/AIDS prevention, care
and treatment issues. NACO and ICMR were also part of the group. The group and the then Law
Minister, requested Lawyers Collective’s HIV/AIDS Unit (LCHAU) to undertake the task of
preparing a draft law on the subject. The draft of the HIV/AIDS Bill, 2006 prepared in consultation
with key stakeholders at national and regional level was submitted to NACO on 30
th June, 2006
by the Lawyers Collective.

15
13.2 Giving latest information in this regard, the Department has informed that as advised by the
Ministry of Law and Justice, a note along with the draft of the HIV/AIDS Bill was prepared and
circulated in March, 2012 to various Ministries for comments. Comments received from the
Ministries were incorporated in the draft Bill and the draft Cabinet Note alongwith the draft Bill was
sent to the Ministry of Law and Justice for vetting. Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and
Justice returned the file to this Department with certain comments. Then, again the Bill was
submitted to Ministry of Law and Justice after making changes, as suggested by the Ministry and
the reply is still awaited.
13.3 The Committee observes that much delay has already taken place in introducing the
AIDS Bill in Parliament. The Committee recommends that the Department should
proactively pursue the matter for getting the Bill vetted from the Ministry of Law and
Justice without any further delay so that the Bill may be introduced in the Parliament at
the earliest. The Committee does not understand the reasons why it should take more than
ten years to finalise a Bill when a decision was taken in 2002. The Bill is yet to be finalized.
The delay is not justifiable when the problem is enormous and India is third largest AIDS/
HIV affected Country.
XIV. Miscellaneous
14.1 The Committee observes that there were invariably delays in procurement of HIV kits,
which resulted in patient care suffering on this account. The Committee, therefore, impresses
upon the Department to streamline the process of procurement of HIV kits and ensure
strict monitoring of the same so as to eliminate delays in procurement thereof.

16
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
II. Budgetary Allocation
The Committee observes that the 1 st year of the 12 th Plan Period has already elapsed
and the 2 nd Year is in progress. However, the Department is still in the process of reworking
the project cost of NACP-IV for the 12 th Plan period. The Committee observes that the delay
of more than a year in finalization of the project cost of such a critical programme like
NACP-IV is a sad commentary on the working of the Department and calls for urgent
remedial measures. The Committee feels that the delay will have an adverse impact on the
intended outcomes of NACP-IV unless timely action taken. In an era of e-governance and
with IT resources currently available, the Department should have finalized the project cost
long back. The Committee, therefore, deprecates the delay in this regard and desires to be
apprised of the reasons for the same. The Committee recommends that the Department
should finalize the project cost at the earliest and in such a manner so that the intended
outcomes of this programme are not adversely affected. The Committee may be apprised of
the progress made in this regard. (Para 2.3)
The Committee observes that in a resource constrained country like India, the
efficient deployment of the available resources is the key for success of any programme/
scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should initiate
concrete measures for efficient use of the allocated funds and remove apparent
inefficiencies at every level of programme implementation. (Para 2.5)
The Committee expresses its serious concern that the actual expenditure of the
Department for the year 2010-11 was Rs. 1167.21 crore as against the BE of Rs. 1435.00
crore; for the year 2011-12, Rs. 1313.86 crore as against BE of Rs. 1700.00 crore, and for
the year 2012-13, Rs. 1345.16 crore as against BE of Rs. 1700.00 crore. The Committee
expresses its disappointment at this persistent trend of under-utilization of the budgeted
funds and is of the view that this trend is not only indicative of fiscal indiscipline but also
points to slack monitoring of utilization of the sanctioned provisions. The Committee feels
that the reasons adduced by the Department cannot justify shortfall in expenditure to the
tune of 267.79 crore in 2010-11, Rs. 386.14 crore in 2011-12 and Rs. 354.84 crore in 2012-13.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should put in place a strict
and effective monitoring mechanism to ensure that the funds allocated to the Department
are monitored quarterly, and exercise utmost fiscal prudence and discipline so as to make
realistic Budget Estimates in future. The Committee desires to be apprised of the measures
initiated in this regard. (Para 2.9)
The Committee appreciates that due to the efforts made by the Department, there
has been a considerable decline in unspent balances available with the SACS. The
Committee would, however, like to point out that availability of unspent balance with some
SACS, like Andhra Pradesh SACS (Rs.23.33 crore), Bihar SACS (Rs.18.23 crore), Gujarat
SACS (Rs.14.58 crore), Karnataka SACS (Rs.26.60 crore) is still quite high. The Committee
emphasizes that the Department should make concerted efforts to get resolved all the
unspent balances with the societies so that funds do not accumulate and remain unutilized.
The Committee recommends that in order to ensure timely and effective utilization of
unspent balances, the Department should insist on quarterly feedback from all the State
16

17
AIDS Control Societies. Close monitoring of their activities and spending will certainly
deliver the desired results. (Para 2.12)
The Committee takes note of the submission that the increased grants to SACS is
due, transitioning of Targeted Intervention (TI) projects from Development Partners into
the national programme. The Committee observes that funding from Development Partners
have played a vital role in supporting the NACP programme interventions in the past. The
Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the reasons behind shifting the TI
projects from Development Partners to the national programme and its implication on
funding of HIV programmes in the Country. (Para 2.14)
III. Role of NGOs
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the issue of non-recovery of unspent
balances from the NGOs by the Department, even after about two years. Out of 27 States,
11 States have a balance of Rs.100.8 lakhs still to be recovered. The Committee
recommends that the issues like contract norms fixed for NGOs-State-wise, the reasons for
delay in recovering the same along with the details of action taken against the NGOs who
have repeatedly defaulted in paying back the unspent balances. In future, funds should be
released only to such agencies which have the capacity to utilize the allocated amount.
(Para 3.2)
IV. Setting up of new Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs)
The Committee is not aware as to what headway has been made towards concretizing
the above proposal. Considering the fact that blood transfusion is a life-saving treatment in
many situations but it can also be a quick route for the transmission of infectious agents
such as HIV, HBC, HCV , etc; the Committee recommends that urgent measure be taken on
war footing to regulate Blood Banks. The Committee desires to be furnished with a Status
Note, indicating the initiatives taken by the Department towards ensuring quality
management systems and monitoring of Blood Banks and the outcome thereof. (Para 4.3)
The Committee notes that during NACP-III, the Department had fulfilled the target
of setting up 80 Blood Component Separation Units (BCSUs) at tertiary level of public
health care delivery system and proposes to continue the support to these facilities and also
take up upgradation of existing licensed blood banks in the Government and charitable
sector with annual blood collection of over 5000 blood units at BCSUs, so as to saturate the
same, by the end of NACP-IV . The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress
made towards upgrading the existing licensed blood banks in the Government and
Charitable Sector. (Para 4.5)
From the information furnished by the Department, the Committee gathers that the
scheme pertaining to setting up of four Metro Blood Banks is yet to be approved by EFC,
and time-overrun has led to the cost escalation of the scheme. The Committee deprecates
the Department for not visualizing the problems of its implementation at the planning
stage, which has resulted in time-overrun and cost escalation. The Committee recommends
that the Department should expedite revision of proposal of the scheme and proactively
pursue its approval with the EFC so that this scheme could be translated into action and
there is no further cost-overrun. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the updated
status of approval of this scheme. The proposal brooks no delay and an expeditious action
needs to be taken for its early approval. The Committee also impresses upon the
Department to speed up the process for acquisition of land for the proposed Metro Blood
Bank in Delhi. (Para 4.7)

18
V. Setting up of new District level Blood Banks
The Committee expresses its disappointment that the Department has not been able
to meet the target of setting up of 39 blood banks during NACP-III. In some states not
even one blood bank was setup which gives a dismal picture of the implementation. The
Committee feels that the above issues could have easily been sorted out, had there been
a streamlined mechanism in place and the Department had pursued the matter vigorously.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department needs to play a pro-active role
by taking up the matter with the concerned State Governments as well as the agencies at
an appropriate level to expedite the procedural formalities. (Para 5.5)
The Committee recommends that for resolving the problem of unfunctional District
level Blood Banks (DLBBs), the Department should take up the matter with the Drug
Controller General of India regarding licencing and operationlisation of these blood banks
on priority basis. The issues of shortage of manpower and lack of infrastructure should also
be taken up with the States. The Committee also recommends that the Department should
take special care of the underserved districts of Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Jharkhand.
(Para 5.7)
VI. Integrated Counseling and Testing Centres (ICTCs)
The Committee notes that the achievements vis-a-vis  the targets fixed for 2010-11,
2011-12 and 2012-13 leaves a lot to be desired in the implementation of the targets. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department needs to fine tune its ground level
machinery. The Committee therefore recommends that Department should focus on setting
monitorable targets and their realization to the maximum extent. The Committee desires
to be apprised of the targets fixed for 2013-14 and the measures put in place to monitor
progress in this regard. (Para 6.3)
VII. Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) Centre
The Committee recommends that the Department should ensure the achievement of
targets set for upgradation of 24 ART centres to ART Plus Centres in 2013-14 and due
diligence should be ensured that no delay should occur on this account. The Committee be
apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 7.4)
The Committee gathers from the information furnished by the Department that
there is a steady decline in overall prevalence of HIV/AIDS. However, a lot still remains
to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends that during NACP-IV , additional ART
Centres be established and high quality treatment be made available to the eligible people.
The Committee also recommends that pre-ART follow-up be strengthened and all people
eligible for treatment identified. (Para 7.6)
VIII. New Initiatives
(i) Setting up of National Blood Transfusion Authority (NBTA)
The Committee is not happy with the slow progress in establishing the National Blood
Transfusion Authority and the proposal is still on paper only. The Committee desires that
the Department should formulate its stand on the issue on a priority basis and take an
early decision. (Para 8.3)
(ii) Setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre (PFC)
The Committee notes that the project for setting up of Plasma Fractionation Centre

19
was approved in 2008. Almost 5 years have elapsed since then and there is no indication
that it will see the light of day in the near future. The Committee, therefore, impresses
upon the Department to make all out efforts for expediting submission of the report of Sub-
Committee of experts so that further follow-up action could be initiated without further
delay. An early decision is appreciated. (Para 8.6)
IX. Adolescence Education Programme (AEP)
The Committee is concerned to note that Adolescence Education Programme (AEP)
remains suspended in five States namely, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in
its 57
th Report on Demand for Grants (2012-13) of the Department that it should vigorously
take up with the States where the Programme is still under suspension and resolve their
apprehensions in view of the fact that HIV/AIDS usually attacks the vulnerable population
due to lack of awareness of the devastating effects the disease could have on them. The
Department may take up the matter with all concerned States and clarify their
apprehensions. The States also should understand the necessity of the programme.
(Para 9.4)
X. New Strategies
(i) Setting up of District AIDS prevention and Control Units (DAPCUS)
The Committee is of the opinion that setting up of the District AIDS Prevention and
Control Units function as a supportive structure below the state level and would fill up the
necessary gaps to coordinate the activities at the district level as DAPCUs are expected to
play a pivotal role in monitoring and coordination of delivery from the different facilities
in the district. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Department should
explore the possibility of expanding the same to more districts in the near future so as to
implement the programme more effectively. (Para 10.3)
(ii) Scheme of Link Workers in Rural Areas of Category A and B Districts
The Committee notes that the Link Worker Scheme is an intensive rural-based
intervention reaching out to the marginalized groups which remain uncovered even after
the expansion of urban based prevention programmes. The Scheme is being implemented
only in 155 districts as of now. The Committee recommends to the Department to assess
the need to cover the remaining districts and closely monitor the scheme as the success of
this scheme is crucial for achieving the goal of halting and reversing the epidemic of AIDS.
Effective implementation of this scheme can bring perceptible change. (Para 10.5)
(iii) Pr eferred Private Provider Scheme for management of Sexually Transmitted
Infections (STYI) among high risk groups
This is very good scheme which has the potential to penetrate to the lowest level
provided it is implemented with dedication. The Committee recommends close and strict
monitoring of the Preferred Private Providers Scheme to ensure that it is not misused for
financial benefits by the preferred private providers and strict norms should be put in place
for identifying the preferred private providers for management of sexually transmitted
infection. (Para 10.7)

20
XI. National Pediatric HIV/AIDS Initiative
The Committee is of the view that the Department needs to delve deeper on the
reasons for rising trends of HIV prevalence among pregnant women in the State like Bihar,
Gujarat, Uttar  Pradesh and Rajasthan. The Committee recommends that the Department
should prepare specific State-wise interventions in these States after analyzing the reasons
for increase in HIV prevalence in these States and if need be specific pilot projects for
interventions on PPP mode may be mooted with specific targets being fixed under these
projects. (Para 11.3)
The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department in constituting a
national task force under which there is a joint proposal to pilot this intervention for
children affected with AIDS (CABA). The Committee recommends that the Department
should expand similar initiatives to other affected districts which would help in
complementing and supplementing the Government’s efforts in its fight against combating
HIV/AIDS. (Para 11.5)
XII. Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
The Committee feels that Information, Education and Communication is the
backbone to ensure success of various schemes carried out by the Department. The
Committee would like the Department to orient IEC activities towards laying greater focus
on behavior change and strengthening the enabling environment. The Department should
also design more media campaigns to address stigma and discrimination attached with HIV/
AIDS. The Committee desires that more aggressive IEC activities are required to bring
perceptible change. (Para 12.3)
XIII. HIV/AIDS Bill
The Committee observes that much delay has already taken place in introducing the
AIDS Bill in Parliament. The Committee recommends that the Department should
proactively pursue the matter for getting the Bill vetted from the Ministry of Law and
Justice without any further delay so that the Bill may be introduced in the Parliament at
the earliest. The Committee does not understand the reasons why it should take more than
ten years to finalise a Bill when a decision was taken in 2002. The Bill is yet to be finalized.
The delay is not justifiable when the problem is enormous and India is third largest AIDS/
HIV affected Country. (Para 13.3)
XIV. Miscellaneous
The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to streamline the process
of procurement of HIV kits and ensure strict monitoring of the same so as to eliminate
delays in procurement thereof. (Para 14.1)

21
MINUTES

IX
NINTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Friday, the 5 th April, 2013 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
7. Shri D. Raja
8. Shri H. K. Dua
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
11. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
12. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
13. Dr. Monazir Hassan
14. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
15. Shri Mahabal Mishra
16. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
17. Shri Harin Pathak
18. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
19. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
20. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
21. Shri P.T. Thomas
22. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
23

24
***
Department of AIDS Control
1. Shri Lov Verma, Secretary
2. Ms. Aradhana Johri, Additional Secretary
3. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Additional Secretary (FA)
4. Dr. Shakuntala, Chief Controller of Accounts
***
I. Opening Remarks
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and briefed them about
the agenda of the meeting i.e., examination of Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the *    *    *
and taking of oral evidence of the Secretary of the *   *   * and AIDS Control in the forenoon
session.
II. ***
II. Oral Evidence of the Secretary, Department of AIDS Control
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other representatives of the
Department of AIDS Control with regard to the Demands for Grants (2013-14). The Secretary
made a power point presentation on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department inter alia
highlighting the various issues such as (i) National AIDS Control Programme (NACP)-III
achievements; (ii) declining trends of HIV epidemic in India (2007-11); (iii) Evidence of Programme
Impact on reduction in New Infections with Scale-up of Prevention Strategies (2000-11) and AIDS-
related Deaths with Scale-up of Anti-Retroviral Treatment (2007-11); (iv) Routes of HIV
Transmission, 2012-13; (v) HIV Concentration in High Risk Group (HRG) and Bridge Population;
(vi) Significant Expansion of Service Delivery; (vii) Emerging Vulnerabilities among Injecting Drug
User (IDU) and emerging vulnerabilities due to migration of trans-genders, truckers; (viii) Need
to ensure resources to fully address treatment requirements; (ix) goals and objectives of
NACP-IV, (x) key priorities and achievements in 2012-13 and targets for 2013-14; (xii) key
initiatives in care, support and treatment of AIDS; (xiii) IEC campaign and mainstreaming;
(xiv) strategic information management; (xv) Budget Estimate and Expenditure, etc. During the
course of the meeting, members raised a number of queries like decline in targets and achievements
of the number of Blood Component Separation Units; delay in procurement of HIV test kits and
services; status of land transfer for metro blood bank in Delhi; Adolescence Education Programme;
shortage of number of condoms; projects of National/State Blood Transfusion Council, education
and awareness about AIDS; measures initiated to remove stigma attached with AIDS; integration
of treatment of other diseases with AIDS; training of doctors in the treatment of AIDS; number
of children suffering from AIDS; link between AIDS and Narcotics; protection of generic
medicines; challenges facing AIDS Control; etc. The Secretary and other representatives of the
Department replied to some of the queries raised by the Members. He was then directed by the
Chair to furnish detailed written replies to the queries, which remained unanswered, soon.
(The Committee then adjourned at 2.00 
P.M. for lunch to meet again at 2.30 P.M.)
III. ***
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

25
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 23 rd April, 2013 in Room No. ‘67’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kirti Azad
6. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
7. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
Shri Pratap Shenoy, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e., consideration and adoption of *  *  * and Draft 67
th, 68 th, 69 th and
70th Reports on Demands for Grants (2013-14) pertaining to Departments of Health and Family
Welfare, AYUSH, Health Research and AIDS Control, respectively. He invited Members to share
their specific suggestions for improvements and incorporation in the Draft Reports.
II. Adoption of the Draft Reports
3. The Committee then considered and discussed the five draft Reports mentioned above. A
few changes were suggested by Members for incorporation in the Reports. After some discussion,
the Committee adopted all the five Reports with some modifications. The Committee, thereafter,
25
*** Relate to other matters.

26
decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Friday, the 26 th April, 2013. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence,
Shri D. Raja and Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Sanjay
Jaiswal, and in his absence, Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok
Sabha.
III. S tudy visit
4. * * *
5. The Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.