 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023/Sravana, 1945 (SAKA) 
REPORT NO. 
148 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
"MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND ITS MANAGEMENT IN 
CONTEMPORARY TIMES"  
PERTAINING TO 
 MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2023) 
 
  
  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
August, 2023/Sravana, 1945 (SAKA) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
"MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND ITS MANAGEMENT IN 
CONTEMPORARY TIMES"  
PERTAINING TO 
 MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  
 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th August, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th August, 2023) 
 
  
  
  
 
 

CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2.  PREFACE (ii)-(iii) 
3.  ACRONYMS (iv)-(v) 
4.  Chapter- I       
                INTRODUCTION 
 
1 – 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 – 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 - 37 
 
A. Present Status of Mental Health Issues in India 
B. National Mental Health Survey 2015-16 (NMHS – 2015-16) 
C. Treatment Gap 
D. Global Comparison 
E. Effect of COVID-19 on Mental Health 
F. Mental Health Issues in Children and Youth 
G. Rising Trends of Suicides in India 
Chapter-II   
                 MENTAL HEALTH POLICY & LEGISLATION 
A. National Mental Health Policy, 2014 
B. Analysis of the Implementation of National Mental Health Policy, 
2014 
C.  Mental Healthcare Act (MHCA), 2017 
D. Analysis of the Key Features of the Act. 
Chapter - III   
                 NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME AND MENTAL 
HEALTHCARE INFRASTRUCTURE 
A. National Mental Health Programme (NMHP) 
a. District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) 
B. Human Resource in Mental Health  
C. Awareness Generation Programmes in Mental Health  
D. Case Study: NIMHANS (National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neuro-Sciences) 
E. Budgetary Allocation to Mental Health 
F. Comparison: Budgetary Allocation to NIMHANS, Bengaluru and 
NIMH, US 
G. Sustainable Development Goals and Mental Health 
H. Way Forward 
5.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 38 - 56 
6.  MINUTES*  
*to be appended at the circulation stage 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
3. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel 
6. Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy 
8. Shri S. Selvaganabathy 
9. Dr. Santanu Sen 
10. Shri A. D. Singh  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Shri K. Navas Kani 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shri C. Lalrosanga 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Rao Munde 
22. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S.  
27. Dr. Jadon Chandra Sen  
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Director 
3. Shri Rajendra Tiwari                       Director 
4. Shri Saurav Trivedi   Secretariat Assistant 
 

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One-Hundred Forty-Eighth Report on the subject “Mental Health Care and its 
Management in Contemporary Times”.   
 
2. The primar y objective behind identifying the subject , “Mental Health Care and its 
Management in Contemporary Times ” by the Committee is to examine the landscape of mental 
healthcare in India, regulatory structure, the status of mental health infrastructure,  causes behind 
the high prevalence of mental health issues and the rising cases of suicides in the country.  
3. The Committee held  its first meeting on  the subject " Mental Health Care and its 
Management in Contemporary Times  " on 19 th October, 2022 and heard the views of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare . The Committee decided to issue a Press Release on the 
subject in November, 2022 to elicit feedback from the concerned stakeholders and the general 
public. In response thereto, several  memoranda were received. Continuing with the examination 
of the subject, the Committee heard  Ministry of Ayush, Department  of School Education and 
Literacy, Department of Biotechnology, Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities, Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi Regional Institute of Menta l Health (LGBRIMH) 
Tezpur, Assam and Central Institute of Psychiatry (CIP), Kanke, Ranchi , Following this, during 
its deliberations on the subject, the Committee held meetings with NGOs - Manas Foundation, 
New Delhi and Ashadeep, Guwahati . The Committee also heard several experts inclduing Dr. 
V.K. Paul, Member, NITI Aayog and Prof. Rajinder K. Dhamija, Director, Institute of Human 
Behaviour and Allied Sciences, New Delhi . The Committee also sought the written view of 
various AIIMS, NGOs and experts. Accordingly, the Committee  deliberated on the subject 
during the course of 5 meetings. The meetings  of the Committee were held on 19 th , October, 
2022, 3rd, 4th November, 2022, 28 th  and 29 th March, 2023.  The Committee also visited 
NIMHANS, Bengaluru in April, 2022 and LGBRIMH, Tezpur in Janurary, 2023 to understand 
the ground realities regarding the subject.  
4. During the finalization of its Report, the Committee relied upon the following 
documents/ papers:- 
(i) Background Note on " Mental Health Care and its Management  in 
Contemporary Times " received from the Department of Health and  Family 
Welfare; 
(ii)  National Mental Health Policy, 2014; 
(iii) Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 
(iv) Oral Evidences tendered by Secretaries, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, Department of School Education and Literacy , Department of 
Biotechnology, Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities , 
Ministry of Ayush; 
(v) Oral evidences tendered by stakeholders and their written submissions;  
(vi) Written submissions of various Organizations/Associations; 
(vii) Response of the Department of Health and Family Welfare on the issues raised 
in memoranda received by the Committee; 
(viii) Replies to the questionnaires received from the Department of  Health and 
Family Welfare;  

iii 
 
(ix) Written submissions of various AIIMS and NGOs; and 
(x) Other relevant documents pertaining to the subject. 
5. The Report is divided into three  chapters, viz: -  (i) Chapter 1 deals with the 
introduction to the subject, present status of mental health i ssues in India, effect of Covid-19 in 
India, rising trends of suicides in India  (ii) Chapter 2 focuses on National Mental Health Policy 
and Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 (iii) Chapter 3 deals with National Mental Health Programme  
(NMHP) and mental healthcare infrastructure. 
6. The Committee, in its meeting held on 31 st July, 2023, considered the draft Report 
and adopted the same. 
7. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations  and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body  of the Report and also reproduced 
at the end of the Report at ‘Observations/Recommendations -at a Glance’ . 
8. On behalf of the Committee and on my own behalf, I exte nd special thanks to 
Secretary (i) Department of Health and Family Welfare (ii) Directors of NIMHANS, Bengaluru, 
LGBRIMH, Tezpur and CIP, Ranchi . I also acknowledge the contribution of the stakeholders 
for their deep insight and valuable suggestions during the course of interactions. I further extend 
special appreciation to the officers of the Committee Section for their valuable  efforts in 
assimilating all relevant information and enabling the Committee in producing this quality 
Report.  
     
 
New Delhi 
31st July, 2023 
Sravana  9, 1945 (Saka) 
SHRI BHUBANESWAR KALITA 
Chairman,  
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
 

iv 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AIIMS 
ASHAs 
ANM 
BIMSTEC 
 
CBAC 
CEO 
CIDT 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
Accredited Social Health Activists 
Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation 
Community-Based Risk Assessment  
Chief Executive Officer 
Community Informant Decision Tool  
CSE 
CRPD 
CHCs 
CHO 
CMHA 
Civil Services Examination 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Community Health Centres 
Community Health Officer 
Central Mental Health Authority 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
DMHP 
DDRS 
District Mental Health Programme 
Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme 
DRPSC 
HWCs 
ICT 
Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
Health and Wellness Centres 
Information and Communication Tools 
IIT 
iGOT 
IHBAS 
INI 
IRDAI 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Integrated Government Online training 
Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences 
Institute of National Importance 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
LMICs 
LGBRIMH 
MHEs 
MHCA 
MHRB 
Low- and Middle-Income Countries 
Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health 
Mental Health Establishments 
Mental Healthcare Act 
Mental Health Review Board 
MHQ 
MNS 
MO 
NCRB 
NHRC 
Mental Health Quotient 
Mental, Neurological and Substance 
Medical Officer 
National Crime Records Bureau 
National Human Rights Commission  
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
NGO 
PTSD 
PHCs 
Non-Government Organisation 
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder 
Primary Health Centres 
NIMHANS 
NMHS 
NMHP 
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences  
National Mental Health Survey  
National Mental Health Programme 
NITI   
NMC 
National Institution for Transforming India 
National Medical Commission 
NSPS 
NIMH 
National Suicide Prevention Strategy 
National Institute of Mental Health 

v 
 
SAARC South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
SDGs 
SMHA 
SSC 
UPSC 
UNICEF 
WHO 
 
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
State Mental Health Authority 
Staff Selection Commission 
Union Public Service Commission 
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund 
World Health Organisation 
 
  

1 
 
Chapter-I 
Introduction 
1.1 WHO defines mental health as  “a state of mental well -being that enables people to cope 
with the stresses of life, realis e their abilities, learn well and work well, and contribute to their 
community.” India, a nation known for its rich cultural heritage and ancient wisdom, has long 
recognised the importance of mental health  and its impact on overall well- being. In 
contemporary times,  particularly post -COVID-19 pandemic, the management of mental health  
has gained significant attention as people have understood the importance of mental well -being 
in determining overall health . While contemporary approaches to mental health have evolved, it 
is important to acknowledge the profound insights offered by ancient Indian texts , which 
continue to resonate in the context of mental well -being. Throughout history, India has nurtured 
a holistic approach to health , recognising the inter-connectedness of the mind, body, and spirit 
that can be traced back to ancient texts like the Vedas, which provide spiritual essence to 
physical and mental health to lead fulfilling lives.  
1.2 Recently, mental health  has garnered significant attention in  India, reflecting a growing 
recognition of its importance in today's society. Prominent individuals from different walks of 
society, viz. sports, cinema etc ., have played a crucial role in promoting awareness regarding 
mental health concerns. By sharing t heir experiences with anxiety and stress, they have initiated 
meaningful conversations and helped diminish the stigma associated with mental health  
problems. Candid discussions about their struggles and the significance of seeking assistance 
have inspired individuals to prioritise  their mental well- being and consider professional help 
when necessary. These efforts have contributed to a broader understanding and acceptance of 
mental health issues in the country. 
1.3 The evolution of legislation and policy surrounding mental health  in India has been a 
journey of hits and misses. Often overlooked in the past, in recent years, there has been a 
growing recognition of its significance. The Mental Health  Act, 1987 was a prominent step 
forward, focusing on the right s and care of individuals with mental illness. However, its 
implementation was limited, leading to inadequate access to quality mental health care and the 
persistence of societal stigma. The Government of India rolled out Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 
to address gaps in the Act . The legislation aimed at prioritis ing mental health  as a fundamental 
right and aligning India's mental health policies with international standards. It emphasised upon 
the provision of affordable and accessible mental health care services and decriminalise  
attempted suicide. Despite the promising provisions , several challenges remain. There is a 
shortage of mental health  infrastructure, particularly in rural areas, and a lack of trained 
professionals. Additionally, stigma and discrimination persist, hindering effective intervention 
and support. However, these challenges provide an opportunity for India to forge a path forward, 
adopting a comprehensive and inclusive approach to mental health  management. By leveraging 
the people’s growing awareness about mental health, learning from the past, addressing gaps and 

2 
 
embracing the evolving perspectives of the present, India is moving towards a society that 
prioritises mental well-being and strives for the holistic well-being of its citizens. 
A. Present status of mental health issues in India 
1.4 Mental health-related issues are increasing, as evidenced by the abrupt and unprecedented 
challenges of contemporary times  – Disasters, environmental and geopolitical issues, global 
pandemics and economic crises. Modern- day living, i.e. fast -paced, highly demanding nature of 
modern life, often exposes individuals to various stressors that can significantly impact their 
mental well-being. Factors such as long working hours, high expectations, inte nse competition, 
financial pressures, information overload, and constant connectivity through technology can all 
contribute to heightened stress levels. 
1.5 In a country like India, migration is a large -scale phenomenon, often leading to mental 
health issues. Migrants often face stressors such as adapting to a new culture, language barriers, 
discrimination, financial difficulties, and social isolation. These factors can significantly impact 
an individual's mental well -being and increase the risk of developi ng mental health problems 
such as anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. 
1.6 Acknowledging the importance of high -quality, scientifically sound, and reliable 
information to enhance mental health policies and programs at the national and s tate levels, the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Mo H&FW) commissioned the National Institute of 
Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS) to conduct a National Mental Health Survey  
(NMHS) in a representative population. The Survey  aimed to examine priority mental disorders, 
estimate the treatment gap, assess service utilisation, disability, and socio -economic impact, and 
evaluate available resources and systems. The NMHS 2015 -16 was implemented in 12 states 
across six regions of India, including Nor th (Punjab and Uttar Pradesh), South (Tamil Nadu and 
Kerala), East (Jharkhand and West Bengal), West (Rajasthan and Gujarat), Central (Madhya 
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh), and North-east (Assam and Manipur). 
1.7 The Committee notes that the National Mental Health Survey 2015- 16 played a 
crucial role in highlighting the state of mental health in our country as it was arguably the 
first large-scale exercise in India to assess the prevalence of mental health morbidity and 
the availability of mental health care services across the country. It provided valuable 
insights into the state of mental health in India and offered a comprehensive overview of 
the challenges and gaps in addressing mental health issues. 
B. National Mental Health Survey 2015-16 (NMHS – 2015-16) 
1.8 India, one of the most populous countries in the world (approximately 17.7% of the world 
population), witnesses a significant burden from non- communicable diseases, including mental 
morbidities. According to National M ental Health Survey (NMHS), about 150 million Indians 
are affected by some type of mental illness. The Survey identified that the mental morbidity of 

3 
 
individuals above the age of 18 years was 10.6%, and the lifetime prevalence of mental disorders 
in the surveyed population was 13.7%. 
1.9 The Survey states that approximately 15% of Indian adults (aged 18 and above) require 
active interventions for one or more mental health  issues. The Survey  further highlights the 
coexistence of common mental disorders, seve re mental disorders, and substance use problems, 
with the middle -aged working population being particularly affected. Both adolescents and the 
elderly also face significant mental health  challenges, and urban metros are experiencing a 
growing burden of mental health problems. The impact of these issues on individuals' work, 
family, and social lives, as well as their economic consequences, is concerning. However, the 
current mental health systems suffer from weaknesses, fragmentation, and a lack of coordination, 
with deficiencies observed across all components at the state level. 
Figure 1: Prevalence of Mental Health issues and percentage of population affected Lifetime 
Prevalence 
 
 
C. Treatment Gap 
1.10 According to the National Mental Health Survey, despite years of research and a 
continued focus on improving health systems, changes seen in the mental health field are few 
and limited. The Survey says that the treatment gap associated with mental health is huge, and 
the reasons for this are several and  range from availability to affordability and are influenced by 
several factors. The treatment gap in India for mental disorders ranged between 70 to 92% for 
different disorders. 
13.7
4.7
20.9
0.6
1.4
5.6
5.3
3.7
1.9
1.3
0 5 10 15 20 25
Overall prevalance of any mental morbidity
Alcohol use disorder
Tobacco use disorder
Other substacnce use dsorder
Schizophrenia, other psychotic disorder
Mood (Affective) disorders 
Depressive Disorder
Neurotic & stress related disorders 
Phobic anxiety disorders
Other anxiety disorders
Weighted percent Source: (NMHS – 2015-16)

4 
 
Figure 2: Treatment Gap in Mental illness 
 
 
1.11 The Committee notes that most of the issues highlighted by the National Mental 
Health Survey 2015- 16 have remaine d almost the same even in 2023. There is still 
considerable scope to improve the treatment gap that results from the lack of mental health 
professionals, weak mental healthcare infrastructure, inadequate and inequitable access to 
mental health services, stigma and discrimination.  
1.12 The Committee also observes that while National Mental Health Survey 2015 was a 
welcome step, it still had scope to be more comprehensive, viz. the Survey, which was done 
only in 12 states out of 36 states/UTs in India, covered only about 40,000 people which is a 
tiny sample considering the population of the country. Secondly, the Survey relied on self -
reporting (and not clinic al analysis) of mental morbidities by the interviewees, which can 
be subject to recall biases and underreporting due to the stigma associated with mental 
health. Furthermore, the Survey was limited to collecting data on certain specific mental 
disorders, p otentially overlooking mild or moderate mental health issues like emotional 
breakdown, etc, that may still require support and intervention. Additionally, the Survey 
did not include specific vulnerable populations, such as homeless individuals, prisoners, 
and those living in institutions, which may have led to underestimating the prevalence of 
mental disorders. The Committee , therefore, recommends the Ministry to address these 
issues in its next National Mental Health Survey (NMHS) and conduct a comprehensi ve 
study of the mental health issues and mental healthcare landscape in India. 
 
85
73.6 75.5
70.4
86.3
91.8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Common 
mental 
disorder
Severe 
mental 
disorder
psychosis Bipolar 
affective 
disorder 
Alcohol use 
disorder 
Tobacco use
Treatment Gap (in %)

5 
 
D. Global Comparison 
1.13 As per WHO's World Mental Health Report- Transforming Mental Health for All – 2022, 
in 2019, an estimated 970 million people in the world were living with a mental disorder, 82% of 
whom were in LMICs (Low - and Middle-Income Countries). According to the Mental State of 
the World Report 2022, India is one of the most mentally distressed countries in the world. 
According to the report, 30.1% of Indians are  mentally distressed or are struggling with their 
mental health. According to the report, India has the highest mentally distressed population 
among its neighbouring countries.  
Figure 3: Comparision of Mentally Distressed Population: India and its Neighbours & BRICS 
countries 
 
1.14 Mental State of the World Report 2022 measured the mental well -being of the people of 
64 countries on the 300-point MHQ (Mental Health Quotient) scale. The mental Health Quotient 
is an aggregate metric of the mental well -being of the citizens of a country. The more the MHQ, 
the better the mental state of that country. The average MHQ score across the 64 countries in 
2022 was 64, as shown below. Across the spectrum of mental well -being, 27% of respondents 
were Distressed or Struggling, i.e. sub-zero MHQ score. 
Figure 4: MHQ Scale 
 
30.1
16.1
26.9 26.2
35.8
33.5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
India Sri Lanka Pakistan Bangaldesh South Africa Brazil
% of Mentally Distressed Population Source: Mental State of the World 
Report, 2022


6 
 
1.15 India, with a mental well-being score (MHQ) of 58.8, was ranked 56th in terms of mental 
wellness amongst 64 countries. Countries with the highest mental well -being scores were 
Tanzania, followed by Spanish-speaking countries like Panama and Puerto Rico. 
1.16 The Committee has noted India's unsatisfactory status in terms of mental well -
being, life satisfaction and happiness across the globe. The Committee  believes that it is 
crucial to recognise that the ultimate goal of development should be to improve people's 
lives and enhance their overall satisfaction and happiness. Therefore, for India's 
sustainable socio- economic growth, it is necessary to give the citizens sense of equality, 
inclusiveness, justice, social security and participation. 
E. Effect of COVID-19 on Mental Health 
1.17 In 2018, WHO highlighted India as the world's most depressed country and the recent 
COVID-19 pandemic has only exacerbated mental health issues amongst Indians. The COVID -
19 pandemic caused a significant impact on the mental health of people around the world, 
including in India. According to a Lancet study - "Global prevalence and burden of depressive 
and anxiety disorders due t o COVID -19", the pandemic caused a 27.6% increase in cases of 
major depressive disorder and a 25.6% increase in cases of anxiety disorders globally in 2020. 
The same study estimated an increase of about 35 per cent in the prevalence of anxiety and 
depression in India during the COVID-19 pandemic.  
1.18 Similarly, according to the Survey during the second wave of Covid- 19conducted under 
the 2021 report "How India perceives mental health" by Long Live Foundation, there was an 
increase in the prevalence of men tal illnesses and conversations around mental health. The 
Survey conducted in 9 cities also highlighted that 65% of the respondents recognised stress as a 
cause of mental illnesses.  
1.19 The COVID-19 pandemic has significantly impacted  people's mental health as it brought 
about numerous challenges that have affected people's mental well -being in different ways. 
Firstly, the fear and uncertainty surrounding the virus led to increased anxiety and stress among 
individuals. The constantly changing situation cr eated a sense of fear and worry about one's 
health and the well -being of loved ones and has taken a toll on the mental health of many 
Indians, leading to heightened levels of anxiety and panic. Secondly, strict lockdown measures 
and social distancing guidelines resulted in isolation and limited social interactions. The inability 
to meet friends and family, participate in social events, or even go to work or school led to 
loneliness, boredom, and sadness. Additionally, the pandemic has brought about economic  
hardships for many individuals in India. Loss of jobs, financial instability, and business closures 
created a sense of insecurity and stress regarding livelihoods and basic needs. The economic 
strain has added to the burden of mental health issues, causing feelings of helplessness, 
frustration, and depression. Furthermore, the disruption in routine and lifestyle changes, 
including work from home, remote learning, and increased screen time, has blurred the 
boundaries between personal and professional life. This constant merging of spaces and the 

7 
 
pressure to adapt to new ways of functioning have increased stress levels and led to burnout 
among individuals. 
1.20 The combination of fear, social isolation, economic hardships, and lifestyle changes has 
increased anxiety, stress, loneliness, and depression. Addressing the mental health consequences 
of the pandemic requires continued support, awareness, and accessible mental healthcare 
services to help individuals cope with the ongoing challenges and build resilience. 
1.21 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in its submission to the Committee, 
informed that realising the impact that COVID -19 and related lockdowns may have on the 
population's mental health; the Government took several initiatives to provide psy cho-social 
support. 
1.22   These initiatives included: 
i. Setting up of a  24/7 helpline  to provide psycho -social support, by mental health  
professionals, to the entire affected population, divided into different target groups 
viz children, adult, elderly, women and healthcare workers. 
ii. Issuance of  guidelines/ advisories on the management of mental health  issues, 
catering to different segments of society. 
iii. Advocacy through various media platforms  in the form of creative and audio- visual 
materials on managing stress and anxiety, and promoting an environment of support 
and care for all. 
iv. Issuance of detailed guidelines by the National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bengaluru- "Mental Health in the times of COVID-19 
Pandemic – “Guidance f or General Medical and Specialis ed Mental Health  Care 
Settings". 
v. Issuance of guidance document regarding Caring for Health  Care Warriors – Mental 
Health Support During COVID-19 
vi. Issuance of guidelines on Managing Mental Illness in Hospital Settings during 
COVID-19 
vii. All the guidelines, advisories and advocacy material can be accessed on Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare website under “Behavio ural Health – Psycho-social 
helpline” (https://www.mohfw.gov.in/). 
viii. Online capacity building of health workers by NIMHANS in providing psycho-social 
support and training through (iGOT)-Diksha platform. 
 

8 
 
1.23 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has apprised the Committee that building on 
the lessons learnt from NMHS 2015 – 16 and leveraging on it, the Ministry is working on NMHS 
2, which is proposed with the objectives viz. to estimate the prevalence of NMS disorders in a 
nationwide representative population; to identify the disability, socio -economic impact, 
pathways to care and service utilisation pattern and to characterise mental disorders/illness 
concerning vulnerable and special populations. NHMS -2 is proposed to be conducted in two 
Phases; Mental Health Systems Assessment and Characterising Vulnerability would be assessed 
across all States and UTs; under NMHS 2, Phase 1 (Oct 2022 – Mar 2024),  18 States / UTs and 
in Phase 2 (April 2024 – March 2025)  remaining 18 states would be covered. 
1.24 The Committee notes that the COVID-19 pandemic increased risks to mental health 
and psycho -social well -being and accentuated stress factors for all, especially children, 
adolescents, and caregivers. During the pandemic, people from all age groups, including 
children, experienced grief, uncertainty, and isolation, affecting their mental health and 
psycho-social well-being. The Committee, therefore, believes that the devastating impact of 
the COVID- 19 pandemic on mental health in India necessitates an immediate  and 
comprehensive countrywide mental health survey. A post -COVID-19 mental health survey 
is crucial to assess the prevalence and severity of mental health disorders among the Indian 
population. Such a survey will provide valuable insights into the demographic groups and 
regions most affected by the pandemic's mental health consequences. The Committee is of 
the firm opinion that the findings from the Survey will serve as crucial evidence for 
policymakers to take informed decisions related to mental health f unding, infrastructure 
development, and evidence -based interventions. Therefore, the Committee recommends 
that the National Mental Health Survey - 2, which is scheduled to be completed in 2025, 
should be expedited so that the impact of Covid-19 may be accurately ascertained.   
F. Mental Health Issues in Children and Youth 
1.25 WHO, in its "World Mental Health Report - Transforming Mental Health for All" 2022, 
states that around 8% of the world's young children (aged 5–9 years) and 14% of the world's 
adolescents (aged 10–19 years) live with a mental disorder. The report further states that children 
with mental health problems and cognitive impairments are four times more likely to become a 
victim of violence than others. The report points outs that adverse chil dhood experiences, 
including exposure to violence, increase the risk of developing a wide range of behavioural 
problems and mental health conditions, from substance use and aggression to depression, 
anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
1.26 The National Mental Health Survey (2015 -16) found that the prevalence of mental 
disorders in Indians aged 13- 17 years was 7.3% on average. However, the comparable 
prevalence among children in urban metros was much higher at 13.5%.  
1.27 UNICEF, in its written submission to the Committee, informed that -  In the context of 
children, adolescents and young people, risk factors for many common mental disorders are 

9 
 
heavily associated with social inequalities, gender -based and other forms of violence, abuse, 
exploitation, unhealthy lifestyles, poverty, lack of access to education or other essential services. 
On the other hand, factors such as supportive relationships with peers, families, and teachers, 
open, honest, and stigma-free conversations for children and young people are some of the major 
factors for positive mental health and well- being. Therefore it is of major importance that action 
is taken to improve the conditions of everyday life, beginning before birth and progressing into 
early childhood, older chil dhood and adolescence, and young age to promote a continuum of 
mental health well-being. 
1.28  The Committee notes the findings of "World Mental Health Report - Transforming 
Mental Health for All" and believes that childhood experiences significantly affect  
behavioural aspects. The Committee understands that behavioural aspects play a crucial 
role in mental health as they can significantly influence an individual's well- being, coping 
mechanisms, and overall mental state. The Committee, therefore, urges the G overnment to 
adopt a multi -faceted approach that involves collaboration between the Government, 
healthcare providers, educational institutions, and the community to address the 
behavioural aspects of mental health. The Government can invest in public aware ness 
campaigns to educate citizens about the importance of mental health and the role of 
behavioural aspects. These campaigns can promote healthy habits, coping skills, and ways 
to seek help when needed. The Committee further suggests that the Government w ork with 
employers to implement workplace wellness programs focusing on mental health. These 
initiatives can include stress management workshops, counselling services, and flexible 
work arrangements to reduce stress. Similarly, the implementation of mental  health 
education in schools can teach young individuals about behavioural aspects that contribute 
to mental well -being. This can equip them with the tools they need to manage their 
emotions and cope with challenges effectively. The Government should also invest in 
research to better understand the behavioural aspects that impact mental health and the 
effectiveness of different interventions.  
1.29 Furthermore, t he Committee is of the view that the mental health care services, 
surveys and programmes should be designed to have a dedicated section for children, 
adolescents and young people and also mental service providers need to be exclusively 
trained in understanding the developmental needs as well as vulnerabilities of the young 
age population. There is also a lack of comparable data and evidence on the mental health 
problems affecting children, adolescents and young people. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that in the NMHS -2, specific provisions should be made to generate evidence 
and data on mental health and psycho-social well-being of children, adolescents, youth and 
caregivers to understand the magnitude, trends, patterns and the prevalence of mental 
health and psycho -social problems among children, adolescents, youth and caregivers in 
India. 

10 
 
1.30 The Committee further recommends that a dedicated cadre of school counsellors in 
all schools under the "Manodarpan" initiative should be developed for this purpose. School 
management committees should be encouraged to have inclusive learning spaces f ocusing 
on students' social and emotional learning.  
G. Rising Trends of Suicides in India 
1.31 WHO, in its World Mental Health Report-  Transforming Mental Health for All – 2022, 
states that suicide affects people of all ages and their families from all co untries and 
backgrounds. Globally, there may be 20 suicide attempts for every one death, and yet suicide 
accounts for more than one in every 100 deaths. The report says that suicide is a major cause of 
death among young people. 
1.32 According to National M ental Health Survey 2015- 16, the annual suicide incidence rate 
in India was 10.6 per 1 lakh population. However, according to National Crime Records Bureau's 
(NCRB) "Accidental Deaths & Suicides in India" Report 2021, the suicide rate in India has 
increased to an alarming 12 per 1,00,000 population. 
1.33 According to the NCRB report following is the detail of numbers for suicides in India in 
2021 are as below: 
Si. No. Category Number of Suicides 
1. Self- employed 20,231 
2. Salaried 15,870 
3. Unemployed 13,714 
4. Students 13,089 
5. Business 12,055 
6. Private Sector 11,431 
7. Farming 10,881 (5,563 labourers + 5,318 farmers) 
1.34 The Report says that out of 5,318 farmers, 4,806 were those who used to cultivate their 
own land with or without the assistance of agricultural labourers, and 512 were those who used 
to cultivate on lease land or work on lease or on other's land with or without the assistance of 
agricultural labourers. As per the report, men were the overwhelming victims of suicide; of t he 
1,64,033 persons who committed suicide last year, 1,18,970 were men, and 45,026 were women. 
Similar to 2020, in 2021, daily wage earners, self -employed persons, and the unemployed had 
topped the suicide victims. While the report did not cite Covid- 19 directly as the reason behind 
the 14 per cent increase in suicide among daily wagers and 11 per cent among the unemployed, 
lack of livelihood and income during the lockdown was termed as one of the prominent factors 
responsible for the spurt in suicides. 
 
 

11 
 
Figure 5: Rising Suicides in India (2017-2021) in Lakhs 
 
1.35 Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences, in its submission, apprised that 
despite the  efforts put in by the Government of India, including the promotion of suicide 
prevention through the National Mental Health Programme (NMHP), decriminalisation of 
suicide under the provisions of Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 and other direct or indirect 
measures for suicide prevention, the trend of suicide in India has shown a steep rise. 
1.36 The Committee has also been apprised that India launched its National Suicide 
Prevention Strategy (NSPS) on November 21, 2022. This is the first policy in India to mak e 
suicide prevention a public health priority. The strategy primarily aims to reduce suicide 
mortality by 10% by 2030 compared with 2020. The NSPS aims to achieve this target by 
establishing effective surveillance mechanisms by 2025, establishing suicide prevention services 
through the District Mental Health Programme in all districts by 2027, and integrating a mental 
well-being curriculum in all educational institutions by 2030. The strategy includes an 
implementation framework for various activities aimed  at achieving its primary objective, 
involving multilevel stakeholders (ministerial stakeholders at the national level, governmental 
stakeholders at the state and district level, mental health institutes, and strategic collaborators). 
The strategy recognis es the crucial role of existing programmes run by various ministries in 
reducing the burden of suicide, either directly or indirectly. However, challenges exist that might 
impede its implementation in community settings. 
1.37 The Committee takes note the continuously rising number of suicides in the country. 
The Committee believes that feeling hopeless and low self -esteem pushes a person to take 
extreme steps to end life. The Committee is pained to observe that students and 
unemployed youth accounted for the highest number of suicides in India. The Committee 
notes that while more students committed suicide than farmers, the latter's suicides were 
129887 134516 139123
153052
164033
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Total Suicides in India (in Lakhs) Source: NCRB, Report, 2021 

12 
 
termed a national crisis. However, suicides by students hardly caught anyone's attention 
and were dealt with on a case-to-case basis.  
1.38 The Committee recommends the Ministry  to make provision under its 24/7 helpline 
to telephonically connect with youths who fail to qualify for competitive exams like UPSC -
CSE, NEET, SSC, JEE, etc., by few marks and counsel them against committing suicides. 
Furthermore, the Government should prioritise mental health awareness and education 
campaigns to eliminate the stigma surrounding mental health issues by conducting 
awareness programs in schools and colleges, providing information on available mental 
health resources, and promoting open discussions on mental well-being. 
1.39 The Committee also acknowledges the National Suicide Prevention Strategy (NSPS), 
which is a comprehensive plan that aims to reduce suicide mortality in the co untry by 10% 
by 2030. Through NSPS, the Committee recommends the Ministry to strengthen 
surveillance mechanisms to track factors causing suicides and trends and thus devise 
mitigation strategies. The Committee further recommends that short -term training courses 
should be formulated to strengthen the number of mental health workers and also further 
the capacity of existing mental health service providers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Chapter-II 
Mental Health Policy& Legislation 
 
2.1 Over the past decade, the Government of India has made significant changes to the 
country's legal and policy framework concerning mental health and disabilities. One major factor 
behind these changes was India's ratification of the UN Convention on Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (CRPD), which mandated aligning all legislation, policies, and programs with its 
provisions. In line with this, the Government implemented the Nati onal Mental Health Policy 
(NMHP) in 2014. The Parliament passed the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act in 2016 and 
the Mental Healthcare Act (MHCA) in 2017. These laws and the policy offer various rights, 
entitlements, and services to individuals with mental illness. 
 
A. National Mental Health Policy, 2014 
 
2.2 India's National Mental Health Policy, titled "New Pathway s, New Hope", was released 
in October 2014. It was a significant step towards addressing mental health issues in the country. 
The policy aims to provide a framework for promoting mental health, preventing mental 
disorders, enabling recovery from mental ill ness, and promoting destigmatisation and the 
provision of accessible and affordable mental health care services. National Mental Health 
Policy seeks to address mental health in a manner that takes into account the needs of all 
concerned stakeholders. It ad opts an inter -sectoral approach, acknowledging the role and 
influence of structural determinants, such as unemployment, homelessness, marginalisation, and 
exclusion, on mental health and well -being. It recognises the need for a 'holistic approach to 
alleviating distress' which addresses cross -cutting stigma, right- based approach, vulnerable 
populations, adequate funding, support for families, intersectoral coordination, institutional care, 
promotion of mental health, and research. 
 
2.3 The policy document recognises seven strategic areas that need intervention; these 
strategic areas include issues of concern, goals and objectives as mentioned in the National 
Mental Health Policy. The strategic areas are – (i) effective governance and delivery mechanism 
for mental health; (ii) promotion of mental health; (iii) prevention of mental health and suicides; 
(iv) universal access to mental health services; (v) increased availability of trained human 
resources for mental health; (vi) community participation and (vii) research on mental health.  
 
B. Analysis of the Implementation of the National Mental Health Policy 
 
2.4 The National Mental Health Policy establishes crucial strategic directions and offers 
actionable recommendations. However, despite almost a decade since its introduction, the 
policy's progress has been limited. Due to India's quasi -federal governance structure and 
healthcare being a concurrent subject, both the central and state governments share the 

14 
 
responsibility for implementing the policy. However, only a few states have embraced and 
implemented the outlined recommendations of the National Mental Health Policy. 
 
Effective governance and delivery mechanism for mental health:  
 
2.5 The National Mental Health Policy recommended developing and introducing evidence -
based policies, laws, and programs across various sectors. Aligning with the policy's vision, t he 
Government brought Mental Healthcare Act (MHCA) in 2017. However, there are concerns 
regarding the implementation of the MHCA. Recently, the National Suicide Prevention Strategy 
(NSPS) was enacted in accordance with the National Mental Health Policy and  MHCA 
provisions. However, the prompt and effective implementation of the NSPS remains to be 
determined. A significant concern surrounding the implementation of the MHCA and NSPS is 
the absence of budgetary allocations and the need for more capacity buildi ng for all stakeholders 
involved. 
Promotion of mental health 
 
2.6 The National Mental Health Policy (NMHP) recommended implementing prevention and 
promotion activities in various settings beyond healthcare facilities, including Anganwadi 
centres, classrooms, and workplaces. It emphasises the involvement of diverse stakeholders, such 
as policymakers, planners, and state governments, in conducting these activities. The policy also 
provides specific recommendations for addressing social determinants i mpacting mental health 
and well -being. It suggests designing and implementing interventions to tackle domestic 
violence, unemployment, discrimination, stigma, exclusion, food security, and access to 
healthcare and sanitation facilities. Similarly, the Mental Healthcare Act (MHCA) incorporates 
several provisions per the NMHP's recommendations. These provisions include ensuring access 
to mental healthcare treatment and facilities, facilitating social recovery through financial 
literacy and access to community  support systems. Despite the presence of these provisions in 
both the NMH and the MHCA, most of them still need to be implemented. 
 
Prevention of Mental Health and Suicides 
2.7 The National Mental Health Policy (NMHP) recommends implementing programs and 
policies to reduce suicide deaths and instances of self -harm. It suggests measures such as 
restricting access to lethal means, developing guidelines for responsible media reporting, 
decriminalising suicide, and training community members to identify individuals at risk of 
suicide. National Suicide Prevention Policy (NSPS) launched in 2022 was introduced, signalling 
efforts to address the recommendations outlined in the NMHP. However, it is too early to 
determine the current status of NSPS implementation. Se ction 115 of the Mental Healthcare Act 
(MHCA) decriminalised suicides by stating that individuals who attempt suicide should be 
considered under severe stress and provided with the necessary support instead of being charged 
under the Indian Penal Code. How ever, many stakeholders, particularly police personnel 

15 
 
working on the ground, largely remain unaware of these provisions and continue to file cases 
against individuals who have attempted suicide under Section 309 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Increased awareness of trained human resource 
2.8 The National Mental Health Policy (NMHP) recommends addressing the shortage of 
trained mental health professionals by integrating core principles of mental health care into 
training programs for other allied health professionals. It also suggests providing opportunities 
for community health workers, such as ASHAs and ANMs, to enhance their skills, including 
mental health support. Currently, National Mental Health Programme focuses predominantly on 
training specialists rather than laypersons, community workers, or allied healthcare 
professionals. 
2.9 The Committee, after analysing the implementation of the National Mental Health 
Policy (NMHP), is of the consensus that strategic objectives identified in the NMHP are yet  
to be translated into full action by responsible authorities and those in charge of 
implementation. To address  this issue, the Committee recommends formulating national 
and state-level action plan (s) to actualise the recommendations given in the NMHP.  
2.10 Furthermore, the Committee believes there is still scope for policy and 
programmatic interventions to effectively prioritise and address the underlying factors, 
viz., vulnerable groups, unemployed youth, women, and others contributing to mental 
health issues. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to integrate psycho -
social interventions targeted at specific vulnerable groups into schemes and programs, such 
as those related to social justice, women's empowerment, and child development. The 
Committee further recommends enhancing intersectoral collaborations and establishing 
synergy among different ministries, departments, and agencies while implementing NMHP. 
2.11 The Committee further believes that the policy should be evaluated and reviewed 
periodically due to the constantly evolving landscape of mental health issues and the 
subsequent difficulty in implementing an all -encompassing policy like the NMHP. This 
would result in incorporating evolving mental health issues in the NMHP, making the 
policy-relevant. 
C. Mental Healthcare Act (MHCA), 2017 
2.12 The Mental Healthcare Act (MHCA) was introduced by the Indian Government in 2017 
and officially implemented in May 2018. The Act comprises 16 chapters and 126 clauses and 
covers various provisions r elated to mental healthcare and the rights of individuals with mental 
illness. It addresses critical areas such as decriminalising suicide, advance directives, nominated 
representatives, mental health establishments, and involuntary admissions. Its purpose  was to 
replace the previous Mental Health Act of 1987 and align with India's commitments as a 
signatory to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). The MHCA is a 
strategic link between the National Mental Health Policy and state -led programs and 

16 
 
interventions. It can potentially bring significant transformative changes to India's mental health 
landscape by ensuring accessible and rights-based mental health services. However, even though 
the MHCA came into effect in 2018, five years  later, there is still much work to be done to 
implement the provisions of the Act effectively. 
2.13 According to the written submission of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the 
Objective of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 is to provide mental hea lthcare and services for 
persons with mental illness and to protect, promote and fulfil the rights of such persons during 
delivery of mental healthcare and services and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.Advance Directive – Every adult s hall have a right to make an advance directive in 
writing, specifying the way the person wishes how to be and how not to be cared for and treated 
for a mental illness. 
I. Nominated Representative – Every adult shall have a right to make an advance 
directive in writing, specifying the way the person wishes how to be and how not to be 
cared for and treated for a mental illness. 
II. Nominated Representative – Every adult shall have a right to appoint a nominated 
representative who shall provide support to the person with mental illness in making 
treatment decisions. 
III. Rights of mentally ill person – Every person who has mental illness shall have the right 
to access mental health care, community living, protection from cruel, inhuman and 
degrading treatment, equality and  non-discrimination, information, confidentiality, 
Restriction on the release of information in respect of mental illness, access medical 
records, personal contacts and communication, legal aid, make complaints about 
deficiencies in the provision of services. 
IV. “Mental illness”, “mental health care” and “determination of mental illness” have been 
defined. 
V. Coordination of different Departments of Government of India – Representatives of 
various Government Ministries/Departments are proposed to be nominated as members 
of the Central Mental Health Authority and State Mental Health Authorities. 
VI. It shall be the Duty to the appropriate Governments to plan, design and implement 
programme for mental health/mental illness. 
VII. The concerned Board shall review the decision of the medical officer or psychiatrist in 
charge of the mental health establishment regarding involuntary admission. 
VIII. Restrictions on: 
• Sterilisation of men and women. 
• Separation of mother and her child below three years of age. 
• Use of Electro-Convulsive Therapy on minors and on adults without anaesthesia 
• Psychosurgery without the informed consent of the person and approval from the 
concerned Board to perform the surgery. 
• Persons with mental illness shall not be chained in any manner or form whatsoever.  

17 
 
• The appropriate Govt. shall take all measures to ensure sensitis ation of different 
officers, including police and judicial officers.  
 
D. Analysis of Key Features of the Act 
2.14 Chapter III of the Indian  Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, focuses on advance directives; it 
mandates allowing individuals to express their preferences for treatment and care during a 
mental health crisis. While including advance directives is a positive step towards promoting 
patient autonomy and decision-making, certain aspects warrant critical examination. 
2.15 The Committee believes that the key challenge with implementing  of advance 
directives is the need for more awareness and understanding among healthcare 
professionals and the general public. I ndividuals may need to be made aware of the 
provision or help understand how to create an advance directive effectively. Therefo re, the 
Committee recommends the Government to  put in adequate efforts to educate and raise 
awareness about advance directives to ensure their meaningful utilisation. Furthermore, 
the Committee believes that mental health conditions and circumstances may change over 
time, leading to alterations in an individual's preferences for treatment. The Act does not 
explicitly address the issue of periodic review and updating of advance directives. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that regular review and the prov ision for modifying 
advance directives in response to evolving preferences and conditions should be considered 
to ensure their relevance and applicability. 
2.16 Chapter VII of the Act provisions for establishing the Central Mental Health Authority to 
oversee the implementation of the legislation and to advise the Government on matters relating 
to mental health and services in the country. Some of the functions of the CMHA include 
registration, maintenance of a register and supervision of all Mental Health E stablishments 
(MHEs) under the Central Government, drafting norms for the quality and provision of services, 
and maintaining a register of mental health professionals in the country. The CMHA, as 
mandated by the Act, was constituted in November 2018.  
2.17 The Committee acknowledges establishing the Central Mental Health Authority 
(CMHA). However, the Committee takes note of the largely inconspicuous presence and 
functioning of CMHA. The Committee observes that despite CMHA being a statutory body 
and almost five years after its establishment, there needs to be more public presence about 
its functioning and work done. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to 
develop a dedicated website for the authority and recommends the authority to release it s 
annual report comprising of its vision, objectives,  programmes implemented, achievements 
etc. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the present status and the budgetary 
allocation to the CMHA fund, which the Central Government primarily funds. 
2.18 Chapter VIII, Section 45 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 mandates that every state 
Government must establish an authority to be known as the State Mental Health Authority 

18 
 
(SMHA). Some of the SMHA's key functions include -  maintaining a register of  all Mental 
Health Establishments (MHEs) in the state, supervision of and reception of any complaints 
against services provided by MHEs, and maintaining and publishing the register of mental health 
professionals in the state. 
2.19 The Committee notes that, like CMHA, SMHA is crucial for implementing National 
Mental Health Programme across all states. The Committee further notes that though most 
of the States have established SMHAs, efforts  related to the appointment of ex -officio and 
non-official, appointment of CEOs, officers and other staff, development of mechanisms for 
complaints redressal and establishment of SMHA funds need further push in most of the 
States. The Committee, therefore,  recommends the Ministry to expedite the work -related 
completion of the aforementioned issues alongwith establishement of Mental Health Review 
Boards (MHRB), which still remain unconstituted in the majority of states. The Committee 
further recommends developing a tracker to track the implementation status of the 
establishment of SMHAs, MHRBs and other determinants governing the development of 
mental health infrastructure and human resources. 
2.20 Different chapters in the Mental Healthcare Act 2017 mandate for taking care of the 
mental health of pris oners. Chapter VI on "Duties of Appropriate Government" mentions 
training all medical officers in public healthcare establishments and all medical officers in 
prisons or jails to provide primary and emergency mental healthcare. Similarly, Mental Health 
Review Boards (MHRB) in Chapter XI have been mandated to inspect prisons or jails and seek 
clarifications from the medical officer in charge of health services in such prisons or jails. Clause 
103 in Chapter XIII on "Responsibilities of Other Agencies" also m andates that a prisoner with 
mental illness should be admitted to mental health establishment having a psychiatric ward in the 
prison's medical wing.  
2.21 According to ‘Prison Statistics India’ report by NCRB, as many as 9,180 inmates were 
reported to be suffering from mental illness, accounting for 1.7% of the total 5.54 lakh inmates 
lodged in various jails in the country as on December 31, 2021. In 2020, 7,524 inmates were 
reported to be suffering from mental illnesses. The report says the number of pris on deaths has 
increased from 1,887 in 2020 to 2,116 in 2021, having increased by 12.1%. Moreover, deaths 
due to natural causes increased from 1,642 in 2020 to 1,879 in 2021, having increased by 14.4%.  
2.22 The Committee understands the need to establish m ental health facilities in prison 
and ensure well-trained staff in such facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to provide adequate training to the prison staff regarding mental healthcare and 
to ensure that adequate mental healthcare  staff is stationed in the prison establishment to 
address the needs of the prison inmates.  
2.23 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to conduct periodic training 
programs through CMHA and SMHAs for police personnel, people associated with the 

19 
 
judiciary and also general health practitioners to sensitise them about their responsibilities 
and about the different provisions and issues concerning mental health of the MHCA.   
2.24 In Chapter V on Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Clause 21 states th at every person 
with mental illness shall be treated as equal to persons with physical illness in the provision of all 
healthcare and that every insurer shall make provision for medical insurance for treatment of 
mental illness on the same basis as is avai lable for treatment of physical illness. To implement 
this provision in the Act, IRDAI, on November 01, 2022, made it mandatory for all health 
insurance companies to cover mental illnesses. 
2.25 The Committee notes the provision in the Mental Healthcare Ac t for medical 
insurance for treating mental illness on the same lines as is available for treating physical 
illness. The Committee feels that the IRDAI ’s action to make it mandatory for the 
insurance companies will pave the way for significant improvement in the insurance 
scenario for mental illness. The Committee, however, recommends the Ministry to work in 
tandem with IRDAI and encourage the insurance providers to include more and more 
mental health issues in the insurance policies as the Committee feels that insurance policies 
traditionally are designed to cater to the in -patient procedures. Thus insurance providers 
might not be willing to include mental health procedures primarily out -patient, viz. 
counselling sessions.  
2.26 The Committee further recomm ends the Ministry to develop a mechanism for 
monitoring the insurance delivery for mental health issues; the Government should 
ascertain data on policies covering mental health issues, total claims received for mental 
issues, total claims cleared, rejectio n of policies and reasons for rejection. The Committee 
further recommends the Ministry to actively pursue IRDAI to discourage the insurance 
providers from excluding treatment for attempted suicide or self -injury as both of these 
may require treatment or hospitalisation.  
2.27 The Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 in Chapter in Chapter V on Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities, clause 19 states that every person with mental illness shall have a right to live in, be 
part of and not be segregated from society and not  continue to remain in a mental health 
establishment merely because he/she does not have a family or is not accepted by his family or is 
homeless or due to absence of community -based facilities. The Act further mandates that where 
a mentally ill person can not live with his family or relatives or where a mentally ill person has 
been abandoned by his family or relatives, the appropriate Government shall provide for or 
support the establishment of less restrictive community-based establishments, including half-way 
homes, group homes and the like for persons who no longer require treatment in more restrictive 
mental health establishments such as long stay mental hospitals. 

20 
 
2.28 Clause 20 of Chapter V states that every person with mental illness shall have a righ t to 
live with dignity and that every person with mental illness shall be protected from cruel, inhuman 
or degrading treatment in any mental health establishment. 
2.29 The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities under the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment, in its oral submission to the Committee, stated that the 
Department under the scheme Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS) is working on 
several projects for developing “Half Way Home” for Psycho-Social rehabilitation of treated and 
controlled persons with Mental Illness. The Department is also working on rehabilitating treated 
and controlled persons with mental illness through vocational training, reskilling, and 
counselling beneficiaries and families to facilitate integr ation into families and 
society/community. Furthermore, the Department apprised the Committee that more than 230 
projects have been undertaken to develop special schools for children with other disabilities 
(Intellectual disabilities, cerebral palsy, autism spectrum disorder, muscular dystrophy etc.).  
2.30 The Committee acknowledges the efforts put in by the Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities for establishing community -based 
establishments, including half -way homes, for persons who no l onger require treatment in 
mental health establishments. The Committee, however, recommends the Ministry to make 
concerted efforts to ensure that such patients who are treated and don’t require to stay in 
mental health establishments are not redesignated to old age or beggar homes.  
2.31 The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
to expedite the establishment of half -way homes/community -based establishments, 
particularly in states having high mental morbidities like Kerala,  Manipur, Tamil Nadu, 
Jharkhand, Bihar etc. Concerted efforts should be put in to establish vocational training 
centres in all districts for persons with mental illness; similarly, special employment 
exchange should be started so that people who are now fi t can secure livelihood and 
dignity. The Ministry should also work towards developing a portal for real -time display of 
half-way homes established in all states and UTs, their capacity and occupancy, the 
facilities provided and the mental healthcare professionals available. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
Chapter-III 
 National Mental Health Programme and Mental Healthcare Infrastructure 
3.1 The mental health infrastructure in India is a critical area that requires immediate 
attention and substantial improvement. Despite the increasing recognition of mental health issues 
in the country, the existing infrastructure remains woefully inadequate to meet the growing 
demand. One of the significant challenges is the scarcity of mental health professionals, 
including psychiatrists, psychologists, and counsellors, especially in rural areas where the need is 
often greater. This shortage severely limits access to quality care and leaves many individuals 
needing more support. 
3.2 Furthermore, there is a significant disparity in the distribution of mental health facilities, 
with urban areas having better access than rural and remote regions. This imbalance perpetuates 
inequities and denies vulnerable populations, such as those in poverty or marginalised 
communities, the opportunity to receive proper mental health care. The lack of financial 
resources allocated to mental health services also hinders the development and expansion of 
infrastructure, resulting in underfunded and understaffed facilities. 
3.3 According to the submission by t he Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, there are a 
total of 47 Government Mental Health Hospitals functioning in the country, including 03 Central 
Mental Health Institutions, namely (i) National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, 
Bengaluru, (ii) Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi and (iii) LokopriyaGopinathBordoloi 
Regional Institute of Mental Health, Tezpur, Assam. Department of Psychiatry has been 
provided in the new All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) to increase mental 
healthcare facilities in the country further. Similarly, many other Central and State Government 
hospitals also have Psychiatry Departments. 
3.4 According to the NITI Ayog – "In a recent report by the National Human Rights 
Commission (NHRC), it was observed that all Government mental hospitals are "in a deplorable 
condition" and are yet to adhere to the MHCA, 2017 guidelines". 
3.5 The Committee notes the remark of the NHRC that almost all the 47 Government 
mental health institutions functioning in the country  have failed to adhere to the MHCA 
guidelines. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to put concerted efforts to 
strengthen the infrastructure, capacity, and facilities and upgrade these institutions to 
generate more human resources. Furthermore, the Ministry should take m easures to 
enable these institutions to become centres of academic research and also participate in the 
public healthcare system. 
 
 

22 
 
 
A. National Mental Health Programme (NMHP) 
3.6 As per the information furnished by the Ministr y of Health and Family Welfare, the 
Government has been implementing the National Mental Health Programme in the country since 
1982 to facilitate the integration of mental health care with primary healthcare services. The 
Programme was revised in 1996 to i nclude the District Mental Health Programme (DMHP). 
Subsequently, the Manpower Development Scheme was added to the Programme in 2009 with 
the following components: 
3.7 Centre of Excellence (Scheme- A): Scheme-A includes financial support towards 
construction, technical & non- technical types of equipment, library and faculty salary to the 
existing Central and State Mental Health Institutions. A total of 25 Centres of Excellence have 
been established/ approved to date. The four kinds of PG seats are there -  Psychiatry, Clinical 
Psychologists, MSc in Psychiatric Nursing and MSc Social Worker. Under Scheme -A, about 
1,007 seats have been added in recent years --  55 in Psychiatry, 306 in Clinical Psychology, 251 
in Psychiatric Social Worker and 385 in Psychiatric Nursing.  
3.8 Strengthening/Establishment of PG departments in mental health specialities 
(Scheme-B): Scheme-B includes financial support towards capital works and faculty support to 
the existing Central and State Mental Health Institutions for strengthenin g/establishment of Post 
Graduate Departments in mental health specialities viz: Psychiatry, Clinical Psychology, 
Psychiatric Social Work and Psychiatric Nurse. A total of 47 PG Departments in 19 institutes 
have been established/ approved to date. These schemes are set to be completed by 2024. The 
Ministry is pursuing the States and the institutions to complete these schemes on time.  
a. District Mental Health Programme (DMHP): 
3.9 For improving coverage and accessibility of mental healthcare, district -level activities 
under the NMHP have been supported in 704 districts across all 36 states/UTs. A dedicated 
District Mental Health Programme team stationed at District Hospital has organised these 
district-level activities. As per the Guidelines of the Scheme, o ne Psychiatrist, one clinical 
psychologist, one psychiatric social worker, one psychiatric nurse, one community nurse, one 
monitoring and evaluation officer and one case registry assistant and one ward assistant are the 
staff of the District Mental Health Programme Team. The remaining districts would be supported 
for implementation of the DMHP in a phased manner based on the proposals submitted by the 
States/UTs in their Annual Programme Implementation Plans.   
 
 
 

23 
 
Services provided under DMHP 
S.No. Levels Services 
1. District 
Hospital 
Outpatient services, Assessment, Counselling/ Psyhco -social 
Interventions, Inpatient treatment services, Psychotropic Drugs  
2. CHC-level Outpatient services, Counselling services, Continuing care and 
support to persons with Severe Mental Disorders, Drugs, 
Ambulance services  3. PHC-level 
  
3.10 The Committee acknowledges the measures taken under NMHP and DMHP to 
integrate mental health services with Primary and Secondary health services. The 
Committee believes that quality mental health services if provided at the Primary and 
Secondary levels, will result in fewer cases requiring treatment at the tertiary level. Also, 
the capital expenditure for augmenting the primary and secondary mental health facilities 
is far lower than the budgetary requirements for developing tertiary mental healthcare 
infrastructure. Also, the expenditure (public and out -of-pocket) for treating mental 
illnesses is comparatively lower if mental issues can be screened early at the PHC and CHC 
levels (as shown in the pyramid below under 3.12). Therefore, the Committee recommends 
the Ministry to take appropriate measures and allocate sufficient funds to strengthen 
primary and secondary mental health services. For this, the Ministry should develop 
improved monitoring systems to oversee the functioning of the DMHP and to generate 
reliable data on the functioning of the DMHP. The data generated can be used to update/ 
upgrade the DMHP for better functioning. 
3.11  Furthermore, the Committee believes that at the primary level i.e. at in DMHP, 
along with the existing biomedical approach, equal focus, if not more, should be given to 
community-based care. The Committee believes t hat community -based care offers a 
person-centred and community -oriented approach to mental health, promoting 
accessibility, early intervention, holistic care, integration, reduced stigma, and continuity of 
support. It recognises the importance of addressing mental health within the broader social 
fabric and promoting well -being at the community level. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that under DMHP, the Ministry devise treatment/ rehabilitation/ counselling 
measures rooted in community -based care. The D MHP should work beyond the clinical 
services and also focus on awareness of mental health issues, mitigate stigma through its 
outreach activities, improve intersectoral action and build linkages with other health 
initiatives, viz. TB elimination programme to strengthen overall well-being.  
3.12 The Pyramid below indicates the frequency of the need for mental health services and the 
associated cost of treatment.  

24 
 
Figure 6: Frequency of the need for mental health services and the associated cost of treatment 
 
Care for Mental, Neurological and Substance Use (MNS) Disorders through Ayushman 
Bharat Health and Wellness Centres: 
3.13 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare's submission to the Committee apprised that 
Mental, Neurological and Substance Use (MNS)  disorders contribute to significant morbidity, 
disability and mortality among those affected and are associated with significant negative social 
and economic impact. The District Mental Health Program (DMHP) has been functional since 
2003 and provides esse ntial mental health care services through various public health facilities.  
The Ministry further elaborated that with the launch of Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness 
Centres, Care for Mental, Neurological & Substance Use (MNS) Disorders has been an integ ral 
part of Comprehensive Primary Health Care delivery, complementing the District Mental Health 
Program. The focus has been to assure 'care closer to home' and reduce stigma in the community 
associated with the disorder.A five-pronged approachis adopted: 
i. Community level Health  Promotion with  interventions for improving mental health 
literacy and enabling understanding of mental health, common symptoms, risk 
factors/causes of disorders, treatment, reduction of stigma and discrimination, and 
techniques such as psychological first aid and self-care. 


25 
 
ii. Early identification of probable patients, Community Based Risk Assessment (CBAC) 
use of the Community Informant Decision Tool (CIDT) by front -line health functionaries 
viz., ASHA and ANM/MPW. 
iii. Screening for disorder by Community Health Officer (CHO) at the SHC -HWC using 
standard screening tool, psycho- social management and referral to higher facilities as 
needed.  
iv. Diagnosis and initiation of treatment by Medic al Officer at PHC-HWC/UPHC-HW, 
teleconsultation services at AB -HWCs is leveraged by CHO and MO for diagnosis and 
drug prescription as well as specialist consultation. 
v. Supporting Treatment adherence through regular supplies of required drugs at AB -
HWC and regular follow-up care by the primary health care team. 
3.14 To ensure capacity building of the primary health care team inclusive MO, CHO, Staff 
Nurses, ANM and ASHA, 59 national and 437 state -level trainers have been created. As of 11th 
October 2022, out of the operational 1,21,649 AB -HWCs in the country, 23,505 AB -HWCs 
(19%) are already rendering MNS care services.  
3.15 The Committee acknowledges that with the launch of the Ayushman Bharat Health 
and Wellness Centres  (HWCs) scheme, Care for Mental, Neurological & Substance Use 
(MNS) Disorders has witnessed an augmentation at PHCs and CHCs under District Mental 
Health Program. To further leverage the network of HWCs, the Committee recommends 
the Ministry to ensure quality training is imparted to Community Health Officers and 
Medical Officers so that they are bei ng able to provide first -line mental health counselling 
and care either in person or by tele-consultation/ tele-medicine by leveraging the ICT tools. 
3.16 Furthermore, the Committee notes that 17 psychotropic and substance use 
medications are currently included in the National List of Essential Medicines, 2022; 13 are 
to be made available at the Primary level i.e. at HWCs for treatment of fundamental 
mental health issues. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should 
ensure essential medicines are available concerning mental health issues like depression 
and anxiety at HWCs.  
B. Human Resource in Mental Health  
3.17 As per the oral submission by the Director, NIMHANS, the number of psychiatrists in 
India currently is about 9000 and about 1000 psychiatrists graduate every year. However, the 
Director stated that the increase in the number of psychologists, social worker s and nurses is a 
little lower. According to the RCI, there are about 2,840 accredited clinical psychologists. She 
further apprised the Committee that one major issue is that according to the New Education 
Policy (NEP), the M. Phil. courses have been discontinued. These are the one -year M. Phil. 
Courses. Director IHABAS also voiced a similar concern and apprised the Committee that unlike 

26 
 
NIMHANS and other mental health institutions, which continue to have M. Phil. courses in 
Clinical Psychology and Psychiat ric Social Work, IHBAS has been instructed to stop its M.Phil 
courses owing to the directive by the NEP. He has apprised the Committee that this has affected 
the future of several candidates who have already taken/were in the process of taking admission 
for the course.  
3.18 According to the Indian Journal of Psychiatry, India has 0.75 Psychiatrists per 100,000 
population, while the desirable number is anything above 3 Psychiatrists per 100,000. However, 
these are only non- Government figures as Government does not maintain data regarding the 
number of mental health professionals in the country as per the answer given by the Government 
to a question in Lok Sabha on 01.04.2022. 
3.19 According to WHO's Mental Health Atlas Report, 2020 the global average for the  
number of Psychiatrists per 1 Lakh population is 1.7. The report also states that globally, the 
median number of mental health workers is 13 per 100 000 population. There continues to be 
extreme variation between World Bank income groups (from below two w orkers per 100 000 
population in low-income countries to over 60 in high-income countries). 
Figure 7: Breakdown of mental health workforce (per 1 Lakh population), by World Bank income group 
 
3.20 The Committee notes that the average of 0.75 mental health  professionals for every 
100,000 people is meagre and the lack of numbers is reflected on the ground where millions 
of people battling the range of mental health issues continue to suffer – not only because of 
stigma and ignorance but also because there ar e insufficiently trained mental health 
professionals. The Committee feels that if even the target is three Psychiatrists (per 100,000 
population) as the desired number, India needs 36,000 psychiatrists to reach that goal. So, 
currently, India is short of 27,000 psychiatrists. Not considering attrition and other factors, 
at the rate of 1000 new psychiatrists, it may take India another 27 years to achieve the 


27 
 
target. The scenario is more or less the same for other mental health professionals viz. 
psychologists, psychiatric social workers and nurses. 
3.21 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry not to terminate the 
Manpower Development Scheme in 2024 and continue it beyond, as it is vital to augment 
the availability of mental health professionals to achieve the set target within a decade. The 
Committee recommends the NMC (National Medical Commission) through the Ministry to 
actively explore the feasibility of augmenting the MD Psychiatry seats in the medical 
colleges. The Committee also suggests the Mi nistry to e xamine the possibility of 3 year 
DNB degree in Psychiatry and other mental health specialisation in private hospitals, 
Railway hospitals, PSU hospitals etc, through the National Board of Examinations. 
3.22 The Committee further recommends the Mi nistry to expedite the solution of the 
problem which has emanated due to the discontinuation of the M.Phil courses as per the 
New Education Policy. The Committee believes that Clinical Psychologist is an essential 
mental health resource and thus suggests t hat the Ministry may explore re- naming the 
course or any other alternative and thus relieve the candidates who have already joined for 
the course. 
C. Awareness Generation Programmes regarding Mental Health 
3.23 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare's presentation to the Committee stated that to 
generate awareness among the masses about mental illnesses, Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities are included as an integral part of the NMHP. Funds up to Rs. 4 
lakh per annum are provided to each District under the DMHP for IEC and awareness generation 
activities in the community, schools, colleges, work places, with community involvement. Under 
the DMHP, various IEC activities, such as awareness messages in local newspapers and radio, 
street plays, wall paintings, hoardings etc., are also undertaken. Through social media and 
advertisement also, awareness is created. 
3.24 The Committee is happy to note the district -centric approach of the Government in 
spreading awareness of mental health. Th e Committee believes that spreading awareness 
amongst the masses is the e asiest yet most effective way to reduce mental morbidity in the 
country. During the COVID -19 pandemic, the awareness of mental health issues did 
receive public attention and positive messages also got around and became visible. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to reach out, in a very big way, through 
all the interpersonal channels, electronic channels, social media, print media, meetings, all 
those community processes,  and community congregations. The Ministry, on the lines of 
the "Polio Campaign", may rope in popular personalities who have battled mental issues to 
spread awareness amongst the masses and encourage people to come out and seek help and 
treatment. The Comm ittee also recommends the Ministry to devise social media -specific 
campaigns, particularly for adolescents on social media platforms like, Facebook and 

28 
 
Twitter as these platforms though a potential source of mental health concerns, are also 
pathways of solutions to work with youngsters. 
D. Case Study: NIMHANS (National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences) 
3.25 For several decades, NIMHANS has undergone a remarkable transformation. Starting as 
a lunatic asylum in the nineteenth century, it evolved into the Mysore Government Mental 
Hospital in 1936. Subsequently, it further progressed to become the All India Institute of Mental 
Health in 1954, and in 1974, it finally attained its present status as NIMHANS. Notably, in 1994, 
the institution achieved t he distinction of a Deemed University and, in a significant recognition 
of its importance, was bestowed the status of an Institute of National Importance (INI) through a 
separate act of Parliament in 2013. This progression signifies the institution's growi ng stature 
and its tremendous strides in its development. 
3.26 NIMHANS plays a pivotal role in national policy and programming and is at the 
forefront of setting the agenda for mental health in India. The flagship District Mental Health 
Programme of the Government of India emerged out of the Bellary model of care piloted by 
NIMHANS. The Institute continues to provide the impetus to strategise, strengthen and bring 
innovation in institutional and community -based mental health care services nationwide. 
NIMHANS also contributed to the National Mental Health Policy and promotes/supports rights -
based mental health care. The Institute actively collaborates and networks with several 
Governmental, quasi-Governmental and non-Governmental agencies. 
3.27 Originally intended as a tertiary care referral centre for mental, neurological, and 
neurosurgical disorders, NIMHANS has become renowned for its high -quality care, attracting 
patients from all corners of India and beyond. Its therapeutic approach combines modern medical 
practices with traditional care and management systems. In the meeting held with representatives 
of NIMHANS on 27th April 2022 during the Committee's visit to the Institute, the Director 
NIMHANS apprised the Committee that annually, the Institute sees around 6 lakh patients. 
Below are the Patient Care Statistics of NIMHANS for 2021-22. 
Figure 8: Number of Patients seeking different services in NIMHANS 
Category Number of Patients 
OPD Footfall  465101 
Admissions 15781 
Emergency Care 38998 
Surgical Procedure 6691 
Clinical Services 976296 
Diagnostics 143656 
Lab Tests 1996891 
Rehabilitation Services 64291 
 Source: Nimhans Annual Report, 2021-22 
 

29 
 
3.28 The Committee commends NIMHANS, Bengaluru, for its exceptional services as a 
leading tertiary care hospital, teaching, and research institute in mental health and 
neurosciences. The Institute's unwavering commitment to providing comprehensive 
healthcare services, nurturing future professionals through robust teaching programs, and 
making groundbreaking contributions to research deserves utmost appreciation. 
3.29 To further enhance its impact and fulfil its visionary goals, the Committee 
recommends NIMHANS to focus on expanding outreach programs to underserved 
communities, fostering collaborative res earch initiatives with national and international 
institutions, and advocating for mental health awareness at the national level. The 
Committee believes that strengthening the training programs for mental health 
professionals and embracing technological ad vancements in the field will also be 
instrumental in advancing patient care and research capabilities.  
3.30 The Committee also recommends NIMHANS to explore the possibility of 
establishing offshore institute campuses, potentially in SAARC or BIMSTEC count ries, as 
a strategic move to enhance its international image and expand its global presence. By 
establishing such campuses, NIMHANS can further foster international collaborations, 
promote knowledge exchange, and contribute to advancing mental health and 
neurosciences in the region. By seizing this opportunity to create offshore institute 
campuses, NIMHANS can showcase India's leadership in mental health and neurosciences 
on a global stage, attract top -notch faculty and researchers from diverse backgrounds,  and 
elevate the Institute's reputation as a centre of excellence in the international community. 
This initiative will enrich NIMHANS' academic and research endeavours and contribute 
significantly to improving mental healthcare in neighbouring regions. 
3.31 During the visit to NIMHANS, the Committee was informed that India faces a 
considerable deficiency of trained mental health professionals. To address this issue, NIMHAHS, 
in its part, runs NIMHANS Digital Academy (NDA), through which it has introduced vari ous 
digital courses such as Diploma in Community Mental Health and Diploma in Primary Care 
Psychiatry. Nearly 10,000 Mental Health Professionals, Doctors, Nurses, Psychologists, and 
Social Workers have been trained by NDA; Certificate Courses in addiction, suicide gatekeeper 
training, perinatal mental health, neuro -developmental dementia, and psycho -social effects of 
COVID-19 have also been started. The Committee was also given to understand that a lot of 
primary Mental Health care can be taken care of by n on-specialist healthcare professionals by 
giving basic training to these professionals through initiatives like NDA; these trained 
professionals then through the network of TELEMANAS can deliver essential mental healthcare 
services to the remotest corner of the country. 
3.32 The Committee strongly recommends the Government to take significant steps 
towards expanding the NIMHANS Digital Academy (NDA) nationwide, as it presents a 
remarkable opportunity to revolutionise mental health education and training nat ionwide. 
By leveraging the digital platform, NDA can bridge the gap in mental health services and 

30 
 
ensure that quality training is accessible to mental health professionals in Primary Health 
Centers (PHCs), Community Health Centers (CHCs), and district hosp itals. To achieve 
this, the Government should allocate adequate resources to scale up NDA's infrastructure 
and content creation, ensuring seamless access to courses for mental health professionals in 
remote and rural areas. Additionally, mental health prof essionals should be given 
incentives and encouragement to take courses through NDA, much like Government 
officials participate in capacity-building courses under the Karmyogi Bharat program. 
3.33 The Committee further recommends the Government to collabora te with state 
Governments, medical institutions, and NGOs to enhance the reach and impact of NDA 
further. This partnership will enable a wider dissemination of knowledge and expertise, 
empowering mental health professionals with evidence- based practices an d the latest 
advancements in the field. Furthermore, the Government should focus on the localisation 
of content to cater to diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds, making the courses more 
inclusive and relevant for mental health professionals working in different regions of the 
country. By fostering a culture of continuous learning and professional development 
through NDA, mental health professionals in PHCs, CHCs, and district hospitals will be 
equipped with the necessary skills and knowledge to addre ss the growing mental health 
needs of the population effectively. 
3.34 NIMHANS started the Department of integrative medicine in 2019. It was the first of its 
kind initiative in the country; the Department focuses on translational research on integrating 
modern medicine with AYUSH systems of medicines viz. Ayurveda and Yoga. In the 
NIMHANS model, all the physicians, that is, a Yoga physician, Ayurveda physician as well as 
Psychiatrist, sit together to consult one patient; this helps in optimising the treatment to a 
particular patient instead of sending the patient to different departments and creating confusion 
in his mind regarding treatment procedures. Additionally, studies and research at NIMHANS 
have established that Ayurveda and Yoga in mild to moderate  depression can do standalone 
therapy. 
3.35 The Committee commends NIMHANS for its efforts in establishing the Departm ent 
of integrative medicine. It also wholeheartedly recommends adopting the NIMHANS model 
to foster seamless integration between modern medicine and traditional systems like 
Ayurveda and Yoga. By having Psychiatrists and physicians of traditional systems 
collaboratively consulting a patient, treatment plans can be optimised and tailored to the 
patient's needs. The Committee notes that Yoga a nd Ayurveda can be used as a standalone 
therapy for treating moderate depression. Therefore, the Committee recommends the 
Government to explore the concept of collaborative consultation as this approach ensures 
holistic care. Integrating these systems not only benefits the patients through different 
systems of treatment simultaneously but also capitalises on the strengths of each discipline, 
thereby advancing comprehensive healthcare practices. We encourage the Government to 

31 
 
champion this model, promoting g reater harmony and efficiency in our healthcare system 
while embracing the richness of our traditional healing practices. 
3.36 Department of Epidemiology, NIMHANS provides technical support to a program "Yuva 
Spandana" run by the Department of Youth Empowe rment and Sports, Government of 
Karnataka. It is a program to bridge the gap between youth, their families, and the ever -changing 
society to enable a smooth transition of youth from childhood to adulthood. This program plans 
to create safe spaces for youth  within their families and societies to express themselves and to 
raise general awareness about youth, their dilemmas, needs, and other concerns. Yuva Spandana 
focuses on youth aged between 15 -30 years. Under the program, centres called as Yuva -
Parivartakas and Yuva -Samalochakas are set up. Under the program, about 50 people in each 
District are trained to attend to the youth's problems, mainly related to relationship issues, 
education-related issues, interpersonal relationships, or their future. The progra m has benefitted 
more than 15 lakh youths across Karnataka. 
3.37 The Committee notes the rising trend of mental health issues, particularly in the 
country's youth population. It thus acknowledges the wonderful initiative "Yuva 
Spandana" of the Department o f Epidemiology, NIMHANS. The Committee recommends 
the Government to expand "Yuva Spandana" scheme throughout the country. By training 
20-30 dedicated individuals in each District, this transformative program will empower 
them to address the pressing mental  health challenges our nation's youth face. Under the 
scheme, these trained individuals can identify and respond to mental health concerns at 
their nascent stages through early intervention strategies, preventing potential crises and 
promoting timely, comp assionate support. Furthermore, the replication will ensure a 
youth-centric approach, recognising the unique needs and circumstances of young minds 
from diverse backgrounds. 
3.38 The Committee hopes the program's effectiveness will extend to remote and 
underserved regions of the country by integrating telemedicine services, breaking 
geographical barriers and fostering a robust mental health support network. Collaboration 
with local health centres, educational institutions, NGOs, and other stakeholders will create 
a web of care, ensuring a seamless continuum of support for youth in need. 
3.39 During the meeting, the Director, NIMHANS, apprised the Committee that the Institute 
sees about 150 patients daily in the emergency. However, the infrastructure in the I nstitute viz. 
number of beds is limited. So, the Institute is working with the Government of Karnataka on a 
hub and spoke model. As a positive effect of the COVID -19 pandemic, many smaller hospitals 
have strengthened; they have been provided ventilator beds, and the overall infrastructure has 
dramatically improved in such institutes. Under the hub and spokes model, NIMHANS aims to 
train healthcare professionals in such hospitals so that they can take care of patients who come 
with trauma or acute stroke. The Director further informed the Committee that many patients 
who come to NIMHANS do not need to come to NIMHANS as their mental illnesses can be 

32 
 
cared for by any hospital in their area of residence. The need is to mentor such hospitals and 
adequately train their staff to cater to patients suffering from mental issues.  
3.40 The Committee takes note of the "Hub and Spoke Model" suggested by NIMHANS 
and understands its importance in strengthening mental healthcare services in all  regions 
of the country. The Committee recommends the Government to adopt and expand the Hub 
and Spoke model for mental health care across the entire country, following the successful 
implementation of a similar model employed in cancer care by Tata Memorial Hospital. 
This approach can  potentially revolutionise mental health infrastructure and expertise, 
particularly in peripheral centres, and ensure better accessibility and quality of care. 
3.41 These hubs at prominent institutions with specialised expertise, resources, and state-
of-the-art facilities can serve as centres of excellence, offering mental health professionals 
comprehensive diagnostic, treatment, and training services. In North India, IHBAS, New 
Delhi can be  brought under Central Government and set up as a hub; similarly, 
LGBRIMH, Tezpur can be set up as a hub for East India,  CIP, Ranchi for Central India 
and NIMHANS, Bengaluru for South India. Furthermore, the Government should develop 
a network of spoke centres in rural and remote areas strategically connected to the hubs.  
These centres would act as primary care providers and offer essential mental health 
services while being supported and guided by the expertise available at the hubs.  The 
Committee also recommends the Government to grant status of “Institute of National 
Importance” to LGBRIMH, Tezpur and CIP, Ranchi.  
3.42 The Committee further recommends the Government to invest in advanced training 
programs for healthcare staff at the spoke centres  to facilitate the successful 
implementation of the Hub and Spoke model . This can be achieved through collaboration 
with hub institutions and other mental health organisations to conduct specialised 
workshops, skill-building sessions, and telemedicine consultations, enhancing the expertise 
of healthcare professionals at peripheral centres. 
E. Budgetary Allocation for Mental Health  
3.43  In India, the glaring lack of funding for mental health services has emerged as a pressing 
societal concern. Despite increasing recognition of the prevalence and impact of mental health 
issues, allocating resources to address this crisis remains woefully inadequate. The scarcity of 
funds has perpetuated a stark disparity between the magnitude of the problem and the available 
support systems. As a result, a significant portion of the population gr appling with mental health 
challenges is left without access to essential care and treatment. This scarcity not only hampers 
individuals' well -being but also burdens families, communities, and the healthcare system at 
large. Urgent action is imperative to rectify this situation and pave the way for a more 
compassionate and inclusive approach towards mental health in the country. 

33 
 
3.44  As per the Notes on Demands for Grants for 2023–24, the total BE for the MoHFW is Rs. 
89,155 crore of this Rs. 2,980 crore i s the BE for the Department of Health Research. The 
remaining Rs. 86,175 crore is the BE for the Department of Health & Family Welfare. 
3.45  In FY-24, under the MoHFW budget, allocations for mental health is - (i) National Institute 
of Mental Health and Neuro -Sciences, (NIMHANS), Bengaluru (Rs. 721 crore); (ii) Lokpriya 
Gopinath Bordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health, Tezpur (Rs. 64 crore) and (iii) the 
National Tele-Mental Health Programme (Rs. 134 crore).  
3.46 According to Budget documents of the M inistry of Health and Family Welfare, there has 
been about a 42% reduction in the Budget Estimate (BE) for the Tertiary Care Programme, 
declining from Rs. 500 crore in FY 2022–23 to Rs. 289.81 crore in 2023–24. 
3.47 The Committee expresses its concern rega rding the insufficient budgetary allocation 
for the development of primary, secondary, and tertiary mental health infrastructure and 
mental healthcare services. The Committee notes that a decrease in funding of tertiary care 
programs raises concerns about its potential impact on the tertiary components of the 
National Mental Health Programme (NMHP). The Committee fears that the reduced 
budgetary allocation would hamper the state of tertiary -level mental health institutions in 
the country. The Committee, aft er analysing the budget numbers, is of the consensus that 
the budgetary allocation falls woefully short of meeting the escalating demand for mental 
health care, and it hinders the improvement of the existing infrastructure. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to conduct an 
in-depth assessment of the current mental health infrastructure, identifying the gaps and 
deficiencies that need urgent attention. The Committee recommends the Government to 
allocate fund s to establish and enhance regional mental health centres, ensuring 
accessibility and adequate services in remote areas. Further additional funding should be 
provided to upgrade and equip existing mental health facilities with modern technologies 
and skilled personnel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
F.        Comparison: Budgetary Allocation to NIMHANS, Bengaluru and NIMH, US 
Figure 9: Union Government Budgetary allocation to NIMHANS from FY21-24 
 
 
Figure 10: Federal Budgetary allocation to NIMH, US from FY21-24 
 
 
3.48 The Committee notes that NIMHANS is India's premier mental health and 
neurosciences research institute. However, compared to NIMH in the United States, 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Budget in 
crores
NIMHANS, Bengaluru:  Budgetary allocations (in 
crores) (BE)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
budget in US 
dollars million 
NIMH, US Budgetary allocations (in USD millions)
1.budget as per constant FY-16 dollars
2. FY-24 is President's budget request

35 
 
NIMHANS receives relatively limited funding from the Indian Government. While the 
Indian Government does allocate funds to NIMHANS, it might not be sufficient to meet the 
growing demand for mental health services in the country. The Committee further notes 
that substantial funding allows NIMH to conduct cutting -edge research on mental health 
disorders, devel op innovative treatments, and support various research projects 
nationwide. Additionally, NIMH collaborates with numerous academic and medical 
institutions, fostering a robust mental health research ecosystem. On the other hand, 
NIMHANS, despite having an excellent reputation and expertise, faces challenges due to 
limited resources. While it strives to provide quality mental health services and research, 
the constraints on funding can hinder its ability to reach a broader population and invest in 
advanced research endeavours. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to 
significantly increase budgetary allocations to mental health institutions like NIMHANS 
and LGBRIMH, Tezpur, as adequate funding is crucial for research, infrastructure 
development, and expanding mental health services to underserved areas.  
Budgetary allocation for TeleManas (T-MANAS) Scheme 
3.49 National Tele Mental Health Programme (T -MANAS) was announced during the Union 
Budget 2022–23 and was launched in October 2022. T -MANAS is a two-tier system comprising 
State Tele- MANAS cells, which includes trained counsellors as first -line service providers at 
Tier 1 and mental health professionals at District Mental Health Programmes (DMHP) at Tier 2 
to provide secondary -level specialist care. In FY 2023–24, the BE allocation for T -MANAS is 
Rs.134 crore which means an 11% rise compared to BE 2022–23 i.e. 121 crore. 
3.50 The Committee notes that T-MANAS initiative is a promising step towards enhancing 
access to mental health services, especially in light of the shortage of trained mental health  
professionals and limited availability of primary mental health care services in the country. 
The program holds the potential to extend mental health care to remote regions. The 
Committee, however, recommends the Government to take adequate measures to address 
the concerns regarding the security, privacy, and management of personal and sensitive 
data, considering the absence of robust data privacy regulatory frameworks in the country. 
3.51 The Committee further believes that while T-MANAS is a valuable initiative, it cannot 
be viewed as a comprehensive solution for long -term mental health improvement, nor 
should it be the sole focus of the Government's efforts. Instead, investing in and enhancing 
community-based mental healthcare services is essential. Strengthening the District Mental 
Health Programme (DMHP) at the community level, as directed by the Mental Healthcare 
Act, 2017, and developing other community- based models of mental health is of utmost 
importance and should continue to receive appropriate budgetary allocations. T -MANAS 
can complement community -based approaches and help establish a more comprehensive 
and sustainable mental health support system for the people of the country. 
 

36 
 
G.         Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Mental Health 
3.52  The SDGs are a set of 17 global goals adopted by all UN Member States in 2015 to address 
various challenges, including poverty, inequality, climate change, environmental degradation, 
peace, and justice, among others. Mental health is an important part of overall health and well-
being, and it is essential for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
3.53 Mental health is directly linked to several of the SDGs, including: 
• SDG 3: Good Health and Well -being. This goal aims to ensure healthy lives and 
promote well -being for all at all ages. Mental health is a critical component of overall 
health and well-being, and it is essential for achieving this goal. 
• SDG 4: Quality Education. This goal aims to ensure inclusive and equitable quality 
education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. Mental health is essential 
for learning, and it is important to ensure that all children and youth have access to 
mental health services. 
• SDG 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth. This goal  aims to promote sustained, 
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent 
work for all. Mental health is important for productivity and well -being in the workplace, 
and it is important to create workplaces that are supportive of mental health. 
• SDG 10: Reduce Inequality.  This goal aims to reduce inequality within and among 
countries. Mental health is a major determinant of inequality, and it is important to 
address mental health disparities in order to achieve this goal. 
3.54  SDG India Index is a tool used to assess and track the progress of Indian states and union 
territories towards achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). It is a 
comprehensive framework that evaluates various aspects of sustainable development, including 
poverty eradication, gender equality, health, education, clean energy, climate action, and more.  
3.55  The Committee notes that mental health is a crucial element of human well -being and 
sustainable development, and it is increasingly gaining recognition as an essential 
component of the development agenda in India. The Committee believes that by including 
mental health parameters in the SDG India index, India can track its progress in this area 
and identify areas where more work needs to be done.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Government to include mental health parameters in future iterations of 
the SDG India Index.   
H.         Way Forward 
3.56    According to WHO, half of all mental health conditions start by 14 years of age. Young 
adults are unable to recognise the  causes and symptoms of mental health problems. As per the 
National Mental Health Survey 2016, an estimated 150 million persons need mental health 
interventions, from children to the elderly. 

37 
 
3.57 The Committee is of the consensus that promoting mental hea lth and ensuring 
accessible and effective mental health care is crucial for the overall well -being of 
individuals and society. Considering the burden amongst the population and children and 
adolescents in India, there are several steps that the Government and society can take to 
address mental health challenges and improve mental health care. Below are a few 
significant measures that can be taken at the Government and individual levels to 
strengthen mental healthcare delivery in India. 
1. Need to Increase funding: The Government should allocate more resources towards 
mental health, including funding for infrastructure, research, training progr ams, and 
awareness campaigns. 
2. Integration of mental health  into primary health care: Mental health services should 
be integrated into primary healthcare centres to ensure accessibility and early 
intervention. 
3. Policy Development: Develop and implement comprehensive mental health  policies that 
address prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and destigmatization.  
4. Mental health legislation: Effective enforcement of  MHCA, 2017 and other laws that 
protect the rights of individuals with mental health  conditions and ensure access to 
quality care.  
5. Human resource development: Invest in training and capacity building for mental 
health professionals to meet the growing demand for services. 
6. Awareness and Education:  Launch massive nationwide campaigns to raise awareness 
about mental health , reduce stigma, and promote help -seeking behaviours . School and 
college programs should be launched to i ncorporate mental health  education into the 
curriculum to enhance understanding, early identification, and emotional well -being. 
Also, community outreach programmes should be devised to provide information, 
support, and resources related to mental health. 
7. Telemedicine and Technology: Expand the use of telemedicine and Tele-Manas scheme 
to reach underserved areas and increase access to mental health professionals.  
8. Research and Collaboration:  Allocate resources for research on mental health , 
including epidemiology, intervention strategies, and the development of cultur ally 
appropriate approaches.  
9. Collaboration with NGOs and private sector:  Foster partnerships between the 
Government, non-Governmental organizations (NGOs), and the private sector to enhance 
mental health services and support. 
3.58     It is essential to approach mental health  holistically, considering the cultural, social, and 
economic factors influencing  mental well-being. By implementing these recommendations, the 
Government and society can work together to create a more supportive environment and improve 
mental health care in India. 
 

38 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
Present status of mental health issues in India 
The Committee notes that the National Mental Health Survey 2015 -16 
played a crucial role in highlighting the state of mental health in our country 
as it was arguably the first large -scale exercise in India to assess the 
prevalence of mental health morbidity and the availability of mental health 
care services across the country. It provided valuable insights into the state of 
mental health in India and offered a comprehensive overview of the challenges 
and gaps in addressing mental health issues. 
                   (Para 1.7)  
National Mental Health Survey 2015-16 (NMHS – 2015-16) 
The Committee notes that most of the issues highlighted by the National 
Mental Health Survey 2015 -16 have remained almost the same even in 2023. 
There is still considerable scope to improve the treatment gap that results 
from the lack of m ental health professionals, weak mental healthcare 
infrastructure, inadequate and inequitable access to mental health services, 
stigma and discrimination.  
 (Para 1.11)  
The Committee also observes that while National Mental Health Survey 
2015 was a welcome step, it still had scope to be more comprehensive, viz. the 
Survey, which was done only in 12 states out of 36 states/UTs in India, covered 
only about 40,000 people which is a tiny sample considering the population of 
the country. Secondly, the Survey re lied on self -reporting (and not clinical 
analysis) of mental morbidities by the interviewees, which can be subject to 
recall biases and underreporting due to the stigma associated with mental 
health. Furthermore, the Survey was limited to collecting data on certain 
specific mental disorders, potentially overlooking mild or moderate mental 
health issues like emotional breakdown, etc, that may still require support and 
intervention. Additionally, the Survey did not include specific vulnerable 
populations, suc h as homeless individuals, prisoners, and those living in 

39 
 
institutions, which may have led to underestimating the prevalence of mental 
disorders. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to address 
these issues in its next National Mental Health S urvey (NMHS) and conduct a 
comprehensive study of the mental health issues and mental healthcare 
landscape in India. 
 (Para 1.12) 
Global Comparison 
The Committee has noted India's unsatisfactory status in terms of 
mental well -being, life satisfaction and h appiness across the globe. The 
Committee believes that it is crucial to recognise that the ultimate goal of 
development should be to improve people's lives and enhance their overall 
satisfaction and happiness. Therefore, for India's sustainable socio- economic 
growth, it is necessary to give the citizens sense of equality, inclusiveness, 
justice, social security and participation.  
  (Para 1.16) 
Effect of COVID-19 on Mental Health 
The Committee notes that the COVID -19 pandemic increased risks to 
mental health and psycho-social well-being and accentuated stress factors for 
all, especially children, adolescents, and caregivers. During the pandemic, 
people from all age groups, including children, experienced grief, uncertainty, 
and isolation, affecting their men tal health and psycho -social well-being. The 
Committee, therefore, believes that the devastating impact of the COVID -19 
pandemic on mental health in India necessitates an immediate and 
comprehensive countrywide mental health survey. A post -COVID-19 mental 
health survey is crucial to assess the prevalence and severity of mental health 
disorders among the Indian population. Such a survey will provide valuable 
insights into the demographic groups and regions most affected by the 
pandemic's mental health consequences. The Committee is of the firm opinion 
that the findings from the Survey will serve as crucial evidence for 
policymakers to take informed decisions related to mental health funding, 
infrastructure development, and evidence -based interventions. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the National Mental Health Survey -2, which is 

40 
 
scheduled to be completed in 2025, should be expedited so that the impact of 
Covid-19 may be accurately ascertained.   
(Para 1.24) 
Mental Health Issues in Children and Youth 
The Committee notes the findings of "World Mental Health Report - 
Transforming Mental Health for All" and believes that childhood experiences 
significantly affect behavioural aspects. The Committee understands that 
behavioural aspects play a crucial role in  mental health as they can 
significantly influence an individual's well-being, coping mechanisms, and 
overall mental state. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government to 
adopt a multi -faceted approach that involves collaboration between the 
Government, healthcare providers, educational institutions, and the 
community to address the behavioural aspects of mental health. The 
Government can invest in public awareness campaigns to educate citizens 
about the importance of mental health and the role of behavi oural aspects. 
These campaigns can promote healthy habits, coping skills, and ways to seek 
help when needed. The Committee further suggests that the Government 
work with employers to implement workplace wellness programs focusing on 
mental health. These in itiatives can include stress management workshops, 
counselling services, and flexible work arrangements to reduce stress. 
Similarly, the implementation of mental health education in schools can teach 
young individuals about behavioural aspects that contrib ute to mental well-
being. This can equip them with the tools they need to manage their emotions 
and cope with challenges effectively. The Government should also invest in 
research to better understand the behavioural aspects that impact mental 
health and the effectiveness of different interventions.  
(Para 1.28) 
Furthermore, the Committee is of the view that the mental health care 
services, surveys and programmes should be designed to have a dedicated 
section for children, adolescents and young people and a lso mental service 
providers need to be exclusively trained in understanding the developmental 
needs as well as vulnerabilities of the young age population. There is also a 

41 
 
lack of comparable data and evidence on the mental health problems affecting 
children, adolescents and young people. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that in the NMHS -2, specific provisions should be made to 
generate evidence and data on mental health and psycho -social well-being of 
children, adolescents, youth and caregivers to unde rstand the magnitude, 
trends, patterns and the prevalence of mental health and psycho -social 
problems among children, adolescents, youth and caregivers in India. 
(Para 1.29) 
The Committee further recommends that a dedicated cadre of school 
counsellors in all schools under the "Manodarpan" initiative should be 
developed for this purpose. School management committees should be 
encouraged to have inclusive learning spaces focusing on students' social and 
emotional learning.  
(Para 1.30) 
Rising Trends of Suicides in India 
The Committee takes note the continuously rising number of suicides in 
the country. The Committee believes that feeling hopeless and low self -esteem 
pushes a person to take extreme steps to end life. The Committee is pained to 
observe that stud ents and unemployed youth accounted for the highest 
number of suicides in India. The Committee notes that while more students 
committed suicide than farmers, the latter's suicides were termed a national 
crisis. However, suicides by students hardly caught anyone's attention and 
were dealt with on a case-to-case basis.  
(Para 1.37) 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to make provision under its 
24/7 helpline to telephonically connect with youths who fail to qualify for 
competitive exams like UPSC -CSE, NEET, SSC, JEE, etc., by few marks and 
counsel them against committing suicides. Furthermore, the Government 
should prioritise mental health awareness and education campaigns to 
eliminate the stigma surrounding mental health issues by conducting 
awareness programs in schools and colleges, providing information on 

42 
 
available mental health resources, and promoting open discussions on mental 
well-being. 
(Para 1.38) 
The Committee also acknowledges the National Suicide Prevention 
Strategy (NSPS), which is a comprehensive plan that aims to reduce suicide 
mortality in the country by 10% by 2030. Through NSPS, the Committee 
recommends the Ministry to strengthen surveillance mechanisms to track 
factors causing suicides and trends and thus devise mitigation strategies. The 
Committee further recommends that short -term training courses should be 
formulated to strengthen the number of mental health workers and also 
further the capacity of existing mental health service providers. 
(Para 1.39) 
Analysis of the Implementation of the National Mental Health Policy 
The Committee, after analysing the implement ation of the National 
Mental Health Policy (NMHP), is of the consensus that strategic objectives 
identified in the NMHP are yet to be translated into full action by responsible 
authorities and those in charge of implementation. To address  this issue, the 
Committee recommends formulating national and state-level action plan (s) to 
actualise the recommendations given in the NMHP.  
(Para 2.9) 
Furthermore, the Committee believes there is still scope for policy and 
programmatic interventions to effectively prior itise and address the 
underlying factors, viz., vulnerable groups, unemployed youth, women, and 
others contributing to mental health issues. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to integrate psycho- social interventions targeted at 
specific vulnerable groups into schemes and programs, such as those related 
to social justice, women's empowerment, and child development. The 
Committee further recommends enhancing intersectoral collaborations and 
establishing synergy among different ministries, departments, and agencies 
while implementing NMHP. 
(Para 2.10) 

43 
 
 
The Committee further believes that the policy should be evaluated and 
reviewed periodically due to the constantly evolving landscape of mental 
health issues and the subsequent difficulty in imple menting an all-
encompassing policy like the NMHP. This would result in incorporating 
evolving mental health issues in the NMHP, making the policy-relevant. 
(Para 2.11) 
Mental Healthcare Act (MHCA), 2017 
The Committee believes that the key challenge with im plementing of 
advance directives is the need for more awareness and understanding among 
healthcare professionals and the general public. Individuals may need to be 
made aware of the provision or help understand how to create an advance 
directive effectively. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government 
to put in adequate efforts to educate and raise awareness about advance 
directives to ensure their meaningful utilisation. Furthermore, the Committee 
believes that mental health conditions and circumstances may change over 
time, leading to alterations in an individual's preferences for treatment. The 
Act does not explicitly address the issue of periodic review and updating of 
advance directives. The Committee, therefore, recommends that regular 
review an d the provision for modifying advance directives in response to 
evolving preferences and conditions should be considered to ensure their 
relevance and applicability. 
(Para 2.15) 
The Committee acknowledges establishing the Central Mental Health 
Authority (C MHA). However, the Committee takes note of the largely 
inconspicuous presence and functioning of CMHA. The Committee observes 
that despite CMHA being a statutory body and almost five years after its 
establishment, there needs to be more public presence abo ut its functioning 
and work done. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to 
develop a dedicated website for the authority and recommends the authority 
to release its annual report comprising of its vision, objectives,  programmes 
implemented, achievements etc. The Committee would also like to be apprised 

44 
 
of the present status and the budgetary allocation to the CMHA fund, which 
the Central Government primarily funds. 
(Para 2.17) 
The Committee notes that, like CMHA, SMHA is crucial for 
implementing National Mental Health Programme across all states. The 
Committee further notes that though most of the States have established 
SMHAs, efforts related to the appointment of ex -officio and non -official, 
appointment of CEOs, officers and other staff, development of mechanisms 
for complaints redressal and establishment of SMHA funds need further push 
in most of the States. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
expedite the work -related completion of the aforementioned issues alongwi th 
establishement of Mental Health Review Boards (MHRB), which still remain 
unconstituted in the majority of states. The Committee further recommends 
developing a tracker to track the implementation status of the establishment 
of SMHAs, MHRBs and other det erminants governing the development of 
mental health infrastructure and human resources. 
(Para 2.19) 
The Committee understands the need to establish mental health 
facilities in prison and ensure well- trained staff in such facilities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to provide adequate training 
to the prison staff regarding mental healthcare and to ensure that adequate 
mental healthcare staff is stationed in the prison establishment to address the 
needs of the prison inmates.  
(Para 2.22) 
The Committee further recommends the Ministry to conduct periodic 
training programs through CMHA and SMHAs for police personnel, people 
associated with the judiciary and also general health practitioners to sensitise 
them about their responsibilities and about the different provisions and issues 
concerning mental health of the MHCA.   
(Para 2.23) 

45 
 
The Committee notes the provision in the Mental Healthcare Act for 
medical insurance for treating mental illness on the same lines as is available 
for treating physical illness. The Committee feels that the IRDAI’s action to 
make it mandatory for the insur ance companies will pave the way for 
significant improvement in the insurance scenario for mental illness. The 
Committee, however, recommends the Ministry to work in tandem with 
IRDAI and encourage the insurance providers to include more and more 
mental he alth issues in the insurance policies as the Committee feels that 
insurance policies traditionally are designed to cater to the in -patient 
procedures. Thus insurance providers might not be willing to include mental 
health procedures primarily out-patient, viz. counselling sessions.  
(Para 2.25) 
The Committee further recommends the Ministry to develop a 
mechanism for monitoring the insurance delivery for mental health issues; the 
Government should ascertain data on policies covering mental health issues, 
total claims received for mental issues, total claims cleared, rejection of 
policies and reasons for rejection. The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to actively pursue IRDAI to discourage the insurance providers from 
excluding treatment for attempted  suicide or self-injury as both of these may 
require treatment or hospitalisation.  
(Para 2.26) 
The Committee acknowledges the efforts put in by the Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities for establishing community-based 
establishments, including half-way homes, for persons who no longer require 
treatment in mental health establishments. The Committee, however, 
recommends the Ministry to make concerted efforts to ensure that such 
patients who are treated and don’t require to stay in mental h ealth 
establishments are not redesignated to old age or beggar homes.  
(Para 2.30) 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment to expedite the establishment of half -way homes/community-
based establishments, particularly in states having high mental morbidities 

46 
 
like Kerala, Manipur, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Bihar etc. Concerted efforts 
should be put in to establish vocational training centres in all districts for 
persons with mental illness; similarly, special employment exchange should be 
started so that people who are now fit can secure livelihood and dignity. The 
Ministry should also work towards developing a portal for real-time display of 
half-way homes established in all states and UTs, their capacity and 
occupancy, the fa cilities provided and the mental healthcare professionals 
available. 
(Para 2.31) 
National Mental Health Programme and Mental Healthcare Infrastructure 
The Committee notes the remark of the NHRC that almost all the 47 
Government mental health institutions f unctioning in the country have failed 
to adhere to the MHCA guidelines. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Ministry to put concerted efforts to strengthen the infrastructure, 
capacity, and facilities and upgrade these institutions to generate more human 
resources. Furthermore, the Ministry should take measures to enable these 
institutions to become centres of academic research and also participate in the 
public healthcare system. 
(Para 3.5) 
National Mental Health Programme (NMHP) 
The Committee acknowl edges the measures taken under NMHP and 
DMHP to integrate mental health services with Primary and Secondary 
health services. The Committee believes that quality mental health services if 
provided at the Primary and Secondary levels, will result in fewer cases 
requiring treatment at the tertiary level. Also, the capital expenditure for 
augmenting the primary and secondary mental health facilities is far lower 
than the budgetary requirements for developing tertiary mental healthcare 
infrastructure. Also, the expenditure (public and out -of-pocket) for treating 
mental illnesses is comparatively lower if mental issues can be screened early 
at the PHC and CHC levels (as shown in the pyramid below under 3.12). 
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to tak e appropriate 
measures and allocate sufficient funds to strengthen primary and secondary 

47 
 
mental health services. For this, the Ministry should develop improved 
monitoring systems to oversee the functioning of the DMHP and to generate 
reliable data on the functioning of the DMHP. The data generated can be used 
to update/ upgrade the DMHP for better functioning. 
(Para 3.10) 
Furthermore, the Committee believes that at the primary level i.e. at in 
DMHP, along with the existing biomedical approach, equal focus, if not more, 
should be given to community -based care. The Committee believes that 
community-based care offers a person -centred and community -oriented 
approach to mental health, promoting accessibility, early intervention, holistic 
care, integration, reduced stigma, and continuity of support. It recognises the 
importance of addressing mental health within the broader social fabric and 
promoting well-being at the community level. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that under DMHP, the Ministry devise treatment/ rehabilitation/ 
counselling measures rooted in community-based care. The DMHP should 
work beyond the clinical services and also focus on awareness of mental 
health issues, mitigate stigma through its outreach activities, improve 
intersectoral action an d build linkages with other health initiatives, viz. TB 
elimination programme to strengthen overall well-being.  
(Para 3.11) 
Care for Mental, Neurological and Substance Use (MNS) Disorders through 
Ayushman Bharat Health and Wellness Centres 
The Committee a cknowledges that with the launch of the Ayushman 
Bharat Health and Wellness Centres (HWCs) scheme, Care for Mental, 
Neurological & Substance Use (MNS) Disorders has witnessed an 
augmentation at PHCs and CHCs under District Mental Health Program. To 
further leverage the network of HWCs, the Committee recommends the 
Ministry to ensure quality training is imparted to Community Health Officers 
and Medical Officers so that they are being able to provide first -line mental 
health counselling and care either in per son or by tele -consultation/ tele -
medicine by leveraging the ICT tools. 
(Para 3.15) 

48 
 
Furthermore, the Committee notes that 17 psychotropic and substance 
use medications are currently included in the National List of Essential 
Medicines, 2022; 13 are to be m ade available at the Primary level i.e. at 
HWCs for treatment of fundamental mental health issues. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure essential medicines 
are available concerning mental health issues like depression and anx iety at 
HWCs.  
(Para 3.16) 
Human Resource in Mental Health  
The Committee notes that the average of 0.75 mental health 
professionals for every 100,000 people is meagre and the lack of numbers is 
reflected on the ground where millions of people battling the  range of mental 
health issues continue to suffer – not only because of stigma and ignorance but 
also because there are insufficiently trained mental health professionals. The 
Committee feels that if even the target is three Psychiatrists (per 100,000 
population) as the desired number, India needs 36,000 psychiatrists to reach 
that goal. So, currently, India is short of 27,000 psychiatrists. Not considering 
attrition and other factors, at the rate of 1000 new psychiatrists, it may take 
India another 27 year s to achieve the target. The scenario is more or less the 
same for other mental health professionals viz. psychologists, psychiatric 
social workers and nurses. 
(Para 3.20) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry not to terminate 
the Manpower Development Scheme in 2024 and continue it beyond, as it is 
vital to augment the availability of mental health professionals to achieve the 
set target within a decade. The Committee recommends the NMC (National 
Medical Commission) through the Ministry to actively explore the feasibility 
of augmenting the MD Psychiatry seats in the medical colleges. The 
Committee also suggests the Ministry to examine the possibility of 3 year DNB 
degree in Psychiatry and other mental health specialisation in private 
hospitals, Railway hospitals, PSU hospitals etc, through the National Board of 
Examinations. 
(Para 3.21) 

49 
 
The Committee further recommends the Ministry to expedite the 
solution of the problem which has emanated due to the discontinuation of the 
M.Phil courses as per the New Education Policy. The Committee believes that 
Clinical Psychologist is an essential mental health resource and thus suggests 
that the Ministry may explore re -naming the course or any other alternative 
and thus relieve the candidates who have already joined for the course. 
(Para 3.22) 
Awareness Generation Programmes regarding Mental Health 
The Committee is happy to note the district -centric approach of the 
Government in spreading awareness of mental health. The Committee 
believes that spreading awa reness amongst the masses is the easiest yet most 
effective way to reduce mental morbidity in the country. During the COVID -
19 pandemic, the awareness of mental health issues did receive public 
attention and positive messages also got around and became visible. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to reach out, in a very big 
way, through all the interpersonal channels, electronic channels, social media, 
print media, meetings, all those community processes, and community 
congregations. The Ministry, on the lines of the "Polio Campaign", may rope 
in popular personalities who have battled mental issues to spread awareness 
amongst the masses and encourage people to come out and seek help and 
treatment. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to d evise social 
media-specific campaigns, particularly for adolescents on social media 
platforms like, Facebook and Twitter as these platforms though a potential 
source of mental health concerns, are also pathways of solutions to work with 
youngsters. 
(Para 3.24) 
Case Study: NIMHANS (National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-
Sciences) 
The Committee commends NIMHANS, Bengaluru, for its exceptional 
services as a leading tertiary care hospital, teaching, and research institute in 
mental health and neuroscienc es. The Institute's unwavering commitment to 
providing comprehensive healthcare services, nurturing future professionals 

50 
 
through robust teaching programs, and making groundbreaking 
contributions to research deserves utmost appreciation. 
(Para 3.28) 
To furt her enhance its impact and fulfil its visionary goals, the 
Committee recommends NIMHANS to focus on expanding outreach 
programs to underserved communities, fostering collaborative research 
initiatives with national and international institutions, and advoc ating for 
mental health awareness at the national level. The Committee believes that 
strengthening the training programs for mental health professionals and 
embracing technological advancements in the field will also be instrumental in 
advancing patient care and research capabilities.  
(Para 3.29) 
The Committee also recommends NIMHANS to explore the possibility 
of establishing offshore institute campuses, potentially in SAARC or 
BIMSTEC countries, as a strategic move to enhance its international image 
and e xpand its global presence. By establishing such campuses, NIMHANS 
can further foster international collaborations, promote knowledge exchange, 
and contribute to advancing mental health and neurosciences in the region. 
By seizing this opportunity to create offshore institute campuses, NIMHANS 
can showcase India's leadership in mental health and neurosciences on a 
global stage, attract top -notch faculty and researchers from diverse 
backgrounds, and elevate the Institute's reputation as a centre of excellence in 
the international community. This initiative will enrich NIMHANS' academic 
and research endeavours and contribute significantly to improving mental 
healthcare in neighbouring regions. 
(Para 3.30) 
The Committee strongly recommends the Government to take 
significant steps towards expanding the NIMHANS Digital Academy (NDA) 
nationwide, as it presents a remarkable opportunity to revolutionise mental 
health education and training nationwide. By leveraging the digital platform, 
NDA can bridge the gap in mental  health services and ensure that quality 
training is accessible to mental health professionals in Primary Health 

51 
 
Centers (PHCs), Community Health Centers (CHCs), and district hospitals. 
To achieve this, the Government should allocate adequate resources to scale 
up NDA's infrastructure and content creation, ensuring seamless access to 
courses for mental health professionals in remote and rural areas. 
Additionally, mental health professionals should be given incentives and 
encouragement to take courses through NDA, much like Government officials 
participate in capacity-building courses under the Karmyogi Bharat program. 
(Para 3.32) 
The Committee further recommends the Government to collaborate 
with state Governments, medical institutions, and NGOs to enhance t he reach 
and impact of NDA further. This partnership will enable a wider 
dissemination of knowledge and expertise, empowering mental health 
professionals with evidence-based practices and the latest advancements in the 
field. Furthermore, the Government sh ould focus on the localisation of 
content to cater to diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds, making the 
courses more inclusive and relevant for mental health professionals working 
in different regions of the country. By fostering a culture of continu ous 
learning and professional development through NDA, mental health 
professionals in PHCs, CHCs, and district hospitals will be equipped with the 
necessary skills and knowledge to address the growing mental health needs of 
the population effectively. 
(Para 3.33) 
The Committee commends NIMHANS for its efforts in establishing the 
Department of integrative medicine. It also wholeheartedly recommends 
adopting the NIMHANS model to foster seamless integration between modern 
medicine and traditional systems like Ayurveda and Yoga. By having 
Psychiatrists and physicians of traditional systems collaboratively consulting a 
patient, treatment plans can be optimised and tailored to the patient's needs. 
The Committee notes that Yoga and Ayurveda can be used as a standal one 
therapy for treating moderate depression. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends the Government to explore the concept of collaborative 
consultation as this approach ensures holistic care. Integrating these systems 
not only benefits the patients through d ifferent systems of treatment 

52 
 
simultaneously but also capitalises on the strengths of each discipline, thereby 
advancing comprehensive healthcare practices. We encourage the 
Government to champion this model, promoting greater harmony and 
efficiency in our  healthcare system while embracing the richness of our 
traditional healing practices. 
(Para 3.35) 
The Committee notes the rising trend of mental health issues, 
particularly in the country's youth population. It thus acknowledges the 
wonderful initiative "Y uva Spandana" of the Department of Epidemiology, 
NIMHANS. The Committee recommends the Government to expand "Yuva 
Spandana" scheme throughout the country. By training 20- 30 dedicated 
individuals in each District, this transformative program will empower th em 
to address the pressing mental health challenges our nation's youth face. 
Under the scheme, these trained individuals can identify and respond to 
mental health concerns at their nascent stages through early intervention 
strategies, preventing potential crises and promoting timely, compassionate 
support. Furthermore, the replication will ensure a youth -centric approach, 
recognising the unique needs and circumstances of young minds from diverse 
backgrounds. 
(Para 3.37) 
The Committee hopes the program's effectiveness will extend to remote 
and underserved regions of the country by integrating telemedicine services, 
breaking geographical barriers and fostering a robust mental health support 
network. Collaboration with local health centres, educational institutions, 
NGOs, and other stakeholders will create a web of care, ensuring a seamless 
continuum of support for youth in need. 
(Para 3.38) 
The Committee takes note of the "Hub and Spoke Model" suggested by 
NIMHANS and understands its importance in strengthen ing mental 
healthcare services in all regions of the country. The Committee recommends 
the Government to adopt and expand the Hub and Spoke model for mental 
health care across the entire country, following the successful implementation 

53 
 
of a similar model e mployed in cancer care by Tata Memorial Hospital. This 
approach can potentially revolutionise mental health infrastructure and 
expertise, particularly in peripheral centres, and ensure better accessibility 
and quality of care. 
(Para 3.40) 
These hubs at pro minent institutions with specialised expertise, 
resources, and state -of-the-art facilities can serve as centres of excellence, 
offering mental health professionals comprehensive diagnostic, treatment, and 
training services. In North India, IHBAS, New Delhi can be brought under 
Central Government and set up as a hub; similarly, LGBRIMH, Tezpur can 
be set up as a hub for East India, CIP, Ranchi for Central India and 
NIMHANS, Bengaluru for South India. Furthermore, the Government should 
develop a network of sp oke centres in rural and remote areas strategically 
connected to the hubs. These centres would act as primary care providers and 
offer essential mental health services while being supported and guided by the 
expertise available at the hubs. The Committee also recommends the 
Government to grant status of “Institute of National Importance” to 
LGBRIMH, Tezpur and CIP, Ranchi.  
(Para 3.41) 
The Committee further recommends the Government to invest in 
advanced training programs for healthcare staff at the spoke c entres to 
facilitate the successful implementation of the Hub and Spoke model. This can 
be achieved through collaboration with hub institutions and other mental 
health organisations to conduct specialised workshops, skill- building sessions, 
and telemedicin e consultations, enhancing the expertise of healthcare 
professionals at peripheral centres. 
(Para 3.42) 
Budgetary Allocation for Mental Health 
The Committee expresses its concern regarding the insufficient 
budgetary allocation for the development of primar y, secondary, and tertiary 
mental health infrastructure and mental healthcare services. The Committee 

54 
 
notes that a decrease in funding of tertiary care programs raises concerns 
about its potential impact on the tertiary components of the National Mental 
Health Programme (NMHP). The Committee fears that the reduced 
budgetary allocation would hamper the state of tertiary-level mental health 
institutions in the country. The Committee, after analysing the budget 
numbers, is of the consensus that the budgetary a llocation falls woefully short 
of meeting the escalating demand for mental health care, and it hinders the 
improvement of the existing infrastructure. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to conduct 
an in -depth assessment of the current mental health infrastructure, 
identifying the gaps and deficiencies that need urgent attention. The 
Committee recommends the Government to allocate funds to establish and 
enhance regional mental health centres, ensuring acces sibility and adequate 
services in remote areas. Further additional funding should be provided to 
upgrade and equip existing mental health facilities with modern technologies 
and skilled personnel. 
(Para 3.47) 
Comparison: Budgetary Allocation to NIMHANS, Bengaluru and NIMH, US 
The Committee notes that NIMHANS is India's premier mental health and 
neurosciences research institute. However, compared to NIMH in the United 
States, NIMHANS receives relatively limited funding from the Indian 
Government. While the  Indian Government does allocate funds to 
NIMHANS, it might not be sufficient to meet the growing demand for mental 
health services in the country. The Committee further notes that substantial 
funding allows NIMH to conduct cutting-edge research on mental health 
disorders, develop innovative treatments, and support various research 
projects nationwide. Additionally, NIMH collaborates with numerous 
academic and medical institutions, fostering a robust mental health research 
ecosystem. On the other hand, NIMH ANS, despite having an excellent 
reputation and expertise, faces challenges due to limited resources. While it 
strives to provide quality mental health services and research, the constraints 
on funding can hinder its ability to reach a broader population and invest in 
advanced research endeavours. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 

55 
 
Government to significantly increase budgetary allocations to mental health 
institutions like NIMHANS and LGBRIMH, Tezpur, as adequate funding is 
crucial for research, infr astructure development, and expanding mental 
health services to underserved areas.  
(Para 3.48) 
Budgetary allocation for TeleManas (T-MANAS) Scheme 
         The Committee notes that T-MANAS initiative is a promising step 
towards enhancing access to mental health services, especially in light of the 
shortage of trained mental health professionals and limited availability of 
primary mental healthcare services in the country. The program holds the 
potential to extend mental healthcare to remote regions. The Committee, 
however, recommends the Government to take adequate measures to address 
the concerns regarding the security, privacy, and management of personal 
and sensitive data, considering the absence of robust data privacy regulatory 
frameworks in the country. 
(Para 3.50) 
               The Committee further believes that while T -MANAS is a valuable 
initiative, it cannot be viewed as a comprehensive solution for long-term 
mental health improvement, nor should it be the sole focus of the 
Government's efforts. Instead, investing in and enhancing community-based 
mental healthcare services is essential. Strengthening the District Mental 
Health Programme (DMHP) at the community level, as directed by the 
Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, and developing other community-ba sed models 
of mental health is of utmost importance and should continue to receive 
appropriate budgetary allocations. T -MANAS can complement community -
based approaches and help establish a more comprehensive and sustainable 
mental health support system for the people of the country. 
(Para 3.51) 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Mental Health 
                The Committee notes that mental health is a crucial element of 
human well-being and sustainable development, and it is increasingly gaining 

56 
 
recognition as an essential component of the development agenda in India. 
The Committee believes that by including mental health parameters in the 
SDG India index, India can track its progress in this area and identify areas 
where more work needs to be done. Th e Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Government to include mental health parameters in future iterations of 
the SDG India Index.   
(Para 3.55) 
Way Forward 
              The Committee is of the consensus that promoting mental health and 
ensuring accessible and effective mental health care is crucial for the overall 
well-being of individuals and society. Considering the burden amongst the 
population and children and adolescents in India, there are several steps that 
the Government and society can take to address mental health challenges and 
improve mental health care. Below are a few significant measures that can be 
taken at the Government and individual levels to strengthen mental 
healthcare delivery in India. 
(Para 3.57) 
 