PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 37
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 NOVEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED 
IN THE TWENTY-NINTH REPORT ON DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE TWENTY-NINTH REPORT ON DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS 2008-09 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 25 TH NOVEMBER, 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 25 TH NOVEMBER, 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2009/AGRAHAYANA, 1931 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—15
CHAPTER I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government .................................................................................. 2—5
CHAPTER II R ecommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................. 6—7
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee ...... 8—14
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................ 15
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 16—17
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 19—22
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 23 —28

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat
8. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
10. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss
LOK SABHA
11. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
12. Shri Ashok Argal
13. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
14. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
15. Dr. Chinta Mohan
16. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
17. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
18. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
19. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
20. Shri N. Kristappa
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Datta Meghe
23. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
26. Shri M.K. Raghavan
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Shrimati Meena Singh
29. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh
31. Shri Ratan Singh

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do
hereby present this Thirty-seventh Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on
the Recommendations contained in the Twenty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand
No.48) of the Department of Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the
year 2008-09.
2. The Twenty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on
30th April, 2008. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the Report,
received from the Department of Health Research were considered by the Committee at its meeting
held on the 12th November, 2009.
3. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on
the 12th November, 2009.
AMAR SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
November 12 , 2009 Department-related Parliamentary
Kartika  21, 1931 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Twenty-ninth Report on Demands for Grants (Demand No. 48)
of the Department of Health Research for the year 2008-09.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
2.3, 2.5, 3.3, 3.4, 3.5, 7.2, 11.2, 11.3, Total–8 (Chapter-I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies: 6.2, 8.2, 10.1, Total–3 (Chapter-II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 1.4, 1.5, 1.7, 3.7, 4.3, 5.2, 9.2, Total–7
(Chapter-III)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: Total–Nil (Chapter-IV)

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH
HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observations
2.3 The Committee is not convinced with the clarification given by the representatives of the
Department. The Committee is unable to understand that in which manner the Department will
manage the expenditure on various activities out of meagre allocation of Rs.420 crores against the
projected demand of Rs.1613 crores. The Committee has all reasons to apprehend that the
proposed major infrastructure upgradations as well as the new activities proposed to be started by
the Department are going to be affected badly. The Committee desires that constraints of funds
should not come in the way of the infrastructure upgradation as well as the proposed new
activities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should not hesitate in asking
for an enhanced allocation at R.E. stage so that the Research and Development activities are not
affected for want of funds.
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee will be kept in mind while preparing the Revised
Estimates for 2008-09 of the Council later this year.
Recommendations/Observations
2.5 The Committee observes that the allocation for 2007-08 under Plan will be fully utilized by
the Indian Council of Medical Research. The actual expenditure under Non-Plan is likely to exceed
the sanctioned Budget Grant. The additional expenditure will be met from the Council’s
Miscellaneous Receipts.
Action Taken
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare released an amount of Rs.144.15 crores (Plan),
Rs.90.00 crores (Non-Plan), and Rs.32.50 crores (NER) for the year 2007-08 which has been
completely utilized by ICMR during the year 2007-08. Besides, an additional (RE) amount of
Rs.90.00 crores (Plan) was also released to ICMR for the year 2007-08 which was also utilized
by the ICMR during the year 2007-08.
INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH (ICMR)
Recommendations/Observations
3.3 The Committee notes that management of communicable diseases, fertility control, maternal
and child health care, nutritional deficiencies and disorders, cancer, AIDS etc. have been a serious
cause of concern in the health sector. Some of the above problems have posed a serious threat
to a larger section of population of the country. This is the right time that the ICMR should gear
itself for a greater role in undertaking and coordinating the health research undertaken by the
2

3
different institutes/agencies as also it should take all out efforts for minimizing the causalities as
a result of the diseases referred to above particularly due to the non-communicable diseases,
nutritional deficiencies, maternal and child mortality etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the ICMR should not leave any stone unturned in the matter of management and control of
the above diseases.
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all the Divisions of ICMR
for information and compliance.
3.4 The Committee takes note of the following activities proposed to be taken up during 2008-09.
(i) Intramural activities being undertaken by the 30 Institutes of the Council, including
works of a capital nature and infrastructural facilities such as equipment, consumables
etc.; and
(ii) Extramural research activities being undertaken at different medical colleges, hospitals
and research all over India with funds provided by the Council.
Action Taken
Matter of record.
Recommendations/Observations
3.5 The Committee is hopeful that the set targets would be achieved by ICMR and there would
be optimum and judicious utilization of funds allocated for the above mentioned purposes. The
Committee recommends that the additional funds, if any, required for achieving the set targets
should be made available to the Council at the R.E. stage.
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance.
ADV ANCED TRAINING IN RESEARCH IN MEDICINE AND HEALTH
Recommendations/Observations
7.2 The Committee notes that some very important activities are envisaged to be undertaken
under the above Scheme of Advanced Training in Research in Medicine and Health. However, only
Rs.5.50 crores has been earmarked for the purpose. The Committee impresses upon the
Department to ensure proper implementation of all the activities referred to above. The Committee
apprehends that this meager allocation of funds to the tune of Rs.5.50 crores would not be
sufficient to meet the requirement of this scheme and in that case the Department should go for
enhancement of the funds at R.E. stage.
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
MISCELLANEOUS
Recommendations/Observations
11.2 Committee’s attention has been drawn by CAG Report No. 2 of 2007 which is a

4
Performance Audit on National Institute of Malaria Research functioning under the Indian Council
of Medical Research. Following are the main observations made by CAG in its Report:—
➢ NIMR did not Mosquito Fauna Surveys in the malaria endemic areas to know the
prevalence of different mosquito species and to develop cost effective strategies to
control malaria.
➢ Of the 74 projects with potential for technology development, NIMR developed only
tow technologies during 2001-02 to 2005-06 and could not transfer any of these two
technologies.
➢ Collaboration among NIMER, National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme and
State Programme Officer was inadequate.
➢ One third of the 51 scientists of NIMR were not involved in any project for a period
ranging from one to five years. Only 15 training programme for State Government
health officials were conducted over a period of five years. No annual action plan for
conducting training was prepared.
11.3 The Committee would like to be apprised about the reaction of ICMR on the
above-mentioned observations of CAG and follow-up action thereon.
Action Taken
The reactions of the ICMR to the observation of the CAG are, given below:—
(a) Mosquito Fauna Survey— Between 2001—06 NIMR conducted surveys in 27 districts
in 4 ecological zones. This was in excess of the target of 20 districts in the Tenth
Plan period.
(b) Malaria parasite Bank— The activity of the Malaria Parasite Bank is ongoing in nature.
It has so far accumulated 735 isolates of malaria parasite from different parts of the
country.
(c) Technology Development— A number of technologies developed by NIMR currently
form a part of the national efforts for malaria control. Some of these technologies are
described below:—
(i) Insecticide treated nets: MVBDCP is now using this technology in the
control of malaria in rural India. ITN is now a major intervention strategy
for malaria control in the country.
(ii) Larvivorous fishes: Guppy and Gumbusia fishes are used by the NVBDCP
all over the country in the control of malaria.
(iii) Based on multicentric trials, Biolavicides have been introduced in selected
urban areas for control of immature stages of mosquitoes.
(iv) The technology of bioenvironmental control of malaria was transferred to
Marmugao Port Trust in Goa.
(v) Alpha beta arteether: This is the best ant malarial drug used in the treatment
of drug resistant and p. falcuparum malaria cases. NIMR was partner with
CDRI in the development of this drug. The drug is exported to>30
countries (marketed by Themis Chemicals) It is widely used by NVBDCP
and private sector in malaria treatment.

5
(vi) Dip-stick: NIMR tested dip-sticks at many locations through its field
stations. This is the best non-microscopic method for the diagnosis of
malaria. Dip-stick is used by NVBDCP in malaria diagnosis for early
detection and prompt treatment.
(vii) Bulaquine an antimalaria drug developed by the CDRI (marketed by Primal
Co.) was tested to study replacing pattern of P. vivax.
It also needs to be stressed that development of any new technology requires to be
preceded by several studies on multiple locations and only after extensive testing and validation can
the technology be made part of the control programme. A period, of 5 years may not be adequate
to develop the technology and ensure its viable application.
(d) The activities of the Institutes of the ICMR can be classified into two broad headings,
namely Intramural and Extramural. There is no in-house requirement within ICMR that
requires each of its scientists to compulsorily undertake an Extramural project.
The current efforts of National Institute of Malaria Research at undertaking training
programmes will be increased substantially once its office functioning from different locations are
shifted to its own building at Dwarka.

6
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
INTER-SECTORIAL CO-ORDINATION IN MEDICAL BIOMEDICAL AND HEALTH
RESEARCH
Recommendations/Reservations
6.2 The Committee hopes that all the activities falling under the Inter-sectoral coordination in
Medical, Biomedical and Health Research would be well taken care of by the Department. The
Department should ensure that any administrative/procedural formalities will not affect, in any way,
proper and optimum utilization of funds allocated for the purpose. The Committee would also like
to be apprised of the activities undertaken under this Scheme during 2008-09 and the extent of their
success vis-a.-vis  their envisaged targets.
Action Taken
A progress report on achievement of the targets set will be furnished after close of financial
year 2008-09.
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION IN MEDICAL AND HEALTH RESEARCH
Recommendations/Observations
8.2 The Committee observes that International cooperation in Medical and Health Research is a
very important activity to be undertaken by the Department. Exchange of information and research
work at international level will boost health care services of the country as also help in tackling
health related problems. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should not
lose any opportunity in this direction. The Committee would like to be intimated about the activities
undertaken as well as the break-up of funds spent thereon under this Scheme during 2008-09.
Action Taken
A progress report on achievement of the targets set will be furnished after close of financial
year 2008-09.
COORDINATION IN THE FIELD OF HEALTH RESEARCH WITH GOVERNMENTS,
ORGANISATIONS AND INSTITUTIONS
Recommendations/Observations
10.1 The scheme seeks to coordinate between organizations and institutes under the Central/State
Governments in the areas of promotion of special studies in medicines and health. For this purpose
the Department will have to coordinate with a number of Departments like Department of Science
and Technology, Department of Bio-technology. Department of Agricultural Research and Education,
Department of Space, Department of Environment and Forests, Disaster Management Authority etc.
The Committee feels that coordination with various Government Department/agencies in the field
6

7
of health research is the most important activity entrusted to the Department. A number of
Government Department/agencies are engaged in research activities in the field of health care and
for getting better results and health care facilities, proper coordination and exchange of information
with the Government Departments/agencies is a must. The Department will have to make all out
efforts for effective coordination and monitoring with all the Government Departments/agencies
engaged in the field of health research. The Committee would like to be informed of the efforts
made by the Department in this regard as also the outcome of such efforts.
Action Taken
A report on efforts made as well as the result thereof on this regard will be furnished after
close of the financial year 2008-09.

8
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
INTRODUCTION
Recommendations/Observations
1.4 The Committee feels that appointment of a full-fledged Director General, ICMR-cum-
Secretary, Department of Health Research is very important, for, the Department, being the nodal
agency for promotion of Health Research, should be headed by a scientist of repute and
perpetuation of bureaucratic hold over the Department would defeat the very purpose for which
the Department of Health Research has been created. The Committee, accordingly, urges upon the
Department to finalize appointment of DG, ICMR-cum-Secretary, Health Research at the earliest.
Action Taken
The post of DG, ICMR-cum-Secretary, DHR has already been advertised and the
applications received against the advertisement have been sent to Cabinet Secretariat for placing it
before the Search Committee under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary.
Comments of the Committee
More than two years have passed since the Department of Health Research was
created on the 17th September, 2007. The Committee hopes that by now the exercise of
appointment of Director General, ICMR-cum-Secretary, Health Research must have been
completed. If not, the very objective for setting up the Department of Health Research
would be defeated.
Recommendations/Observations
1.5 On a specific query about the appropriateness of medical education also being brought
under the purview of the Department of Health Research, the Committee has been given to
understand that Health Research and Medical Education have for long been two distinct areas on
account of functional and administrative reasons. The Committee is, however, not inclined to agree
with the contention of the Department. The Committee would like to point out that both agricultural
education and agricultural research have been placed under one Department i.e. the Department of
Agricultural Research and Education in the Ministry of Agriculture. On the same analogy there
should not be any difficulty in placing both medical education and health research under the same
Department. The Committee strongly feels that this arrangement would be necessary for the sake
of better coordination between the different agencies involved in research work and medical
educational institutions not only providing clinical material for research but also engaged directly/
indirectly in such projects. Duplication of work undertaken by the different institutions/agencies in
the field of medical education and health research can also be made easily avoidable. The
Committee is of the view that medical education and health research cannot be placed in two
distinct areas. Instead both are complementary to each other in many ways. The Committee also
feels that with the merger of two separate Departments of Health and Family Welfare, the
8

9
jurisdiction of the Department has been expanded manifold. Besides, many Central Government
Hospitals, Premier Medical educational institutions and autonomous bodies, a very large number of
central and centrally sponsored schemes are being administered/supervised by the Department of
Health and Family Welfare.
Action Taken
As a proposal had been taken up with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for grant of
extension of the services of 18 Scientists, it was considered to initiate the process of filling the
vacancies falling vacant due to retirement of these 18 Scientists after receipt of the decision of the
Ministry on the proposal. As such necessary action to advertise the vacancies is now being taken.
In this connection it is also relevant to bring out that in view of the flexible complimenting scheme
being applicable in ICMR Scientists cadre the Scientists holding higher posts, on retirement will be
vacating the lower posts of Scientists ‘B’ and Scientists ‘C’. As such most of the vacancies are
to be filled at lower level.
A Status note on the existing staff strength against the sanctioned posts categories-wise, in
ICMR at Annexure-I.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee notes with a sense of dismay that the reply of the Department does
not address the issue raised by the Committee i.e. placing both medical education and
health research under one Department and instead gives information regarding filling up
the vacancies of scientists. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to
use care and circumspection while framing replies to the observations of a Parliamentary
Committee in future.
Recommendations/Observations
1.7 The Committee, therefore, recommends that both the medical education and Health Research
should be kept under one Department i.e. the Department of Health Education and Research on the
lines of the Department of Agricultural Research and Education for better coordination and also for
avoiding duplication of work amongst various institutions/agencies engaged in Medical Education
and Research.
Action Taken
Medical education is being regulated under IMC Act-1950 through a statutory autonomous
body MCI. The policy issues, which remain with the Ministry, relate to Manpower Planning for
Health Sectors and coordination of measures to enable MCI to work in coordination with Ministry
of HRD etc. In this context, a merger of medical education and research is not considered feasible.
Moreover, the Department of Health Research was created as a separate Department in order to
ensure a thrust to Medical Research in the country. However, since the two departments are in the
same Ministry, there would be no difficulty in coordination.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is not satisfied with the comments furnished by the Ministry that
merger of medical education and research is not feasible as medical education is being
regulated under the Indian Medical Council Act through a statutory autonomous body, the
Medical Council of India. The Committee feels that it would be more appropriate if all the
premier medical educational institutions and autonomous bodies like Medical Council of

10
India, Pharmacy Council of India, Nursing Council of India and the proposed Central
Councils for Paramedical and Allied Medical Sciences Education are brought under the
jurisdiction of the newly created Department of Health Research. This arrangement will not
only be effective for the purpose of coordinated efforts between medical education and
health research but also for the purpose of equitable distribution of workload among all the
Departments of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its earlier recommendation that both medical education and the health research
need to be brought under the jurisdiction of one Department for the purpose of effective
and coordinated efforts in this area.
INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH (ICMR)
Recommendations/Observations
3.7 The Committee appreciates the achievements of the ICMR in the field of health research.
However, the Committee feels that this is an area of immense possibilities. A lot remains to be done
to fully tap the health research sector. The Committee would like to have an idea about the ongoing
research projects under ICMR, along with their present status, funds allocated/utilised. The
Committee would also like to be apprised about the number of persons including doctors from
different medical colleges, working on research projects that have approached ICMR for financial
support during the last three years along with details of those who have been denied financial
support and the grounds therefor.
Action Taken
The required details of the Extramural projects are given in the enclosed statement
(Annexure-II). A decision to accept or reject any proposal is taken on the recommendation of the
Project Review Committee whose members are eminent scientists in the respective fields. The
reasons for rejection of proposals are not maintained centrally in a compiled form by the ICMR.
The research currently underway is in respect of the following:—
Communicable Diseases
(i) Vector Borne Diseases like Tuberculosis, Malaria and other infection Diseases
(ii) Leprosy
(iii) Diarrheal Diseases
(iv) Clinical Studies-impact of Lactic Acid in Bacteria in Children.
(v) Leptospirosis
(vi) Parasitic Diseases Fungal Infections Hepatitis, Measles Chikungunia, HIV VIRUS its
vaccination trials
Reproductive Health and Nutrition
(i) Fertility Regulation
(ii) Operational Research
(iii) Infertility and Reproductive Disorders.
(iv) Male Infertility
(v) Infertility Disorder

11
(vi) Genomics of Male Infertility
(vii) Reproductive Tract infections
(viii) Maternal Health and Child Health
(ix) Adolescent Reproductive Health.
(x) Community Studies on Vitamins Deficiencies
Non-Communicable Diseases
(i) Oncology
(ii) N ational Cancer Registry projects
(iii) Cervical Cancer
(iv) Breast Cancer
(v) Cardiovascular Diseases
(vi) Jai Vigyan Mission Mode Neuro Sciences i.e. Mental Health
(vii) Gastro
(viii) Geratics
(ix) Renal Transplantation
(x) Oral Health
(xi) Environmental Health
(xii) Diabetes
Basic Medical Sciences
(i) Tumour Biology
(ii) Pathology
(iii) Thyroid Cancer
(iv) Chlamydiasis
(v) Genetics
(vi) Genomics and Molecular Medicines
(vii) Pharmacology
(viii) Physiology
(ix) Traditional  Medicine
(x) Hematology cytogenetic
The total expenditure of Rs.150 crores has been incurred during the years of extramural research
projects being funded by the Council.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee takes note of the feedback received from the Department about the
status of ongoing research projects under ICMR. Information about the present project

12
status of ongoing projects, funds allocated/utilized therefor as well as the reasons for
rejection of projects has not been forthcoming from the Department. The Committee
appreciates the fact that members of the Project Review Committee are eminent scientists.
However, that does not justify the non maintenance of centralized information by ICMR.
Not only this, the Committee also views with serious concern the status of ongoing projects.
During 2005-06, out of total 402 projects received, 89 projects continue to be in process,
for 2006-07, out of total 476 projects, as many as 164 projects are in process. For 2007-08,
position is more discouraging as out of total 400 projects received, 281 projects continue to
be in process. The Committee apprehends that there may be projects under process even
prior to 2005-06. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for projects continuing to
remain under process for such a long period. The Committee would appreciate if a
comprehensive assessment of the approval mechanism of research projects by ICMR is
made by the Department so as to ensure the removal of existing hurdles. One must not
forget that the objective behind setting up a separate Department is for giving a thrust to
medical research in the country.
PROMOTION, CO-ORDINATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF BASIC APPLIED AND
CLINICAL RESEARCH
Recommendations/Observations
4.3 The Committee feels that promotion and co-ordination of basic, applied and clinical research
is one of the very important activities of the Department. The Committee impresses upon the
Department that any financial/procedural constraints should not hamper, in any way, this activity
of the Department. The Council should make all possible efforts for better monitoring and co-
ordination of health research. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the break-up of the
funds released and utilized and the achievements made under this Scheme. The additional funds,
if any, required for this activity should be made available at RE stage.
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee had sought specific information about the break-up of the funds
released and utilized and the achievements made under the scheme of Promotion, Co-
ordination and Development of Basic Applied and Clinical Research. The Committee is
deeply disturbed by the casual approach indicative in its reply. It seems that no action
worth-mentioning has been initiated so far and Rs.50.00 crore earmarked for the scheme
have remained unutilized. The Committee can only emphasize that both clinical trials and
operational research are very crucial for our country and the nodal Department has to carry
on the mandated task in this regard.
PROMOTION AND GUIDANCE ON RESEARCH GOVERNANCE ISSUES
Recommendations/Observations
5.2 The Committee notes that though an amount of Rs.20.00 crores has been allocated for
establishment of Tripartite Research Policy and implementation/coordination mechanism, the
modalities are yet to be worked out. The Committee urges upon the Department to expedite the
finalization of the modalities so that the allocation made for various activities under this scheme
could be utilized optimally and judiciously.

13
Action Taken
Modalities are being finalized in consultation with the ICMR.
Comments of the Committee
The Committee is constrained to observe that the establishment of Tripartite
Research Policy and implementation/co-ordination mechanism for the three Departments is
yet to start. More than one year has passed but the modalities are still being finalized;
resulting in allocated funds of Rs.20.00 crores remaining unutilized. Position in 2009-10
remains unchanged. The Committee urges upon the Department to make concerted efforts
for getting this initiative, very vital for research projects originating in the three
Departments, started.
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS AND SIKKIM
Recommendations/Observations
9.2 The Committee observes that as per the policy of the Government of India, 10% of the
budgetary allocations have been earmarked for NE Region and Sikkim. The Committee supports this
policy thrust. However, the Committee has noted from its past experiences that utilization of funds
earmarked for the N.E. Region and Sikkim leaves much to be desired. The Committee therefore
recommends that the funds allocated for taking care of health services/research in North-eastern
Region and Sikkim should be utilized properly and optimally. The Committee would also like to be
enlightened as to what specific measures have been taken by the Department to ensure optimum
and judicious utilization of allocated funds.
Action Taken
Following measures are envisaged for the optimal utilization of the allocations earmarked for
the North East region.
Infrastructure :
1. Regional Medical Research Centre, Dibrugarh
a. Capital works
(i) Setting up of a state of art laboratory building;
(ii) Animal facility;
(iii) Additional laboratory blocks.
b. Equipment
(i) Procurement of Electron microscope;
(ii) Procurement of Nucleic acid detection system;
(iii) Procurement of Microbial culture detection system;
(iv) Procurement of genomic work station;
(v) Procurement of Lab-on-chip system;
(vi) Procurement of Oligo synthesizer etc.
Expansion of scientific activities in the region
1. Expansion of Cancer registry programme to
(i) Meghalaya

14
(ii) Arunachal Pradesh
(iii) Nagaland
(iv) Tripura
2. Initiation of new projects
(i) Sikkim (Fish borne infection, early detection of resistant TB, cancer liver)
(ii) Meghalaya (HSV-2 prevalence, Paragonimiasis, Measles, An. Dirus sibling
species)
(iii) Arunachal Pradesh ( Cancer liver, HSV-2 prevalence, Paragonimiasis, Measles,
An. Dims sibling species)
(iv) Mizoram (Cancer lung, HSV-2 prevalence, Paragonimiasis, malaria and HIV ,
An. Dims sibling species)
(v) Manipur (Cancer lung, HSV-2 prevalence, Paragonimiasis, malaria and HIV ,
TB and HIV , An. Dims sibling species)
(vi) Nagaland (Paragonimiasis, drug abuse/FSW and HIV , An. Dims sibling
species)
(vii) T ripura (Malaria, An. Dims sibling species)
(vii) Assam (Paragonimiasis, An. Dims sibling species, HSV-2 prevalence, malaria,
multi-drug resistant TB, An. Dims sibling species, measles etc.)
Comments of the Committee
While seeking to be enlightened about the specific measures for the optimum
utilization of the funds earmarked for NE Region and Sikkim, the Committee had inter alia
meant to be apprised of the mechanism in place to ensure that the allocated funds did not
remain idle and were indeed utilized optimally. While the Committee appreciates the
envisaged projects for the Region under reference, it would still like to be intimated about
the action plan to ensure that the envisaged projects are implemented within a designated
timeline so that the funds allocated are utilized optimally for the intended purpose.

15
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Nil
15

16
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
INTRODUCTION
More than two years have passed since the Department of Health Research was
created on the 17th September, 2007. The Committee hopes that by now the exercise of
appointment of Director General, ICMR-cum-Secretary, Health Research must have been
completed. If not, the very objective for setting up the Department of Health Research
would be defeated. (Para 1.4)
The Committee notes with a sense of dismay that the reply of the Department does
not address the issue raised by the Committee i.e. placing both medical education and
health research under one Department and instead gives information regarding filling up
the vacancies of scientists. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to
use care and circumspection while framing replies to the observations of a Parliamentary
Committee in future. (Para 1.5)
The Committee is not satisfied with the comments furnished by the Ministry that
merger of medical education and research is not feasible as medical education is being
regulated under the Indian Medical Council Act through a statutory autonomous body, the
Medical Council of India. The Committee feels that it would be more appropriate if all the
premier medical educational institutions and autonomous bodies like Medical Council of
India, Pharmacy Council of India, Nursing Council of India and the proposed Central
Councils for Paramedical and Allied Medical Sciences Education are brought under the
jurisdiction of the newly created Department of Health Research. This arrangement will not
only be effective for the purpose of coordinated efforts between medical education and
health research but also for the purpose of equitable distribution of workload among all the
Departments of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, therefore,
reiterates its earlier recommendation that both medical education and the health research
need to be brought under the jurisdiction of one Department for the purpose of effective
and coordinated efforts in this area. (Para 1.7)
INDIAN COUNCIL OF MEDICAL RESEARCH (ICMR)
The Committee takes note of the feedback received from the Department about the
status of ongoing research projects under ICMR. Information about the present project
status of ongoing projects, funds allocated/utilized therefor as well as the reasons for
rejection of projects has not been forthcoming from the Department. The Committee
appreciates the fact that members of the Project Review Committee are eminent scientists.
However, that does not justify the non maintenance of centralized information by ICMR.
Not only this, the Committee also views with serious concern the status of ongoing projects.
During 2005-06, out of total 402 projects received, 89 projects continue to be in process, for
2006-07, out of total 476 projects, as many as 164 projects are in process. For 2007-08,
position is more discouraging as out of total 400 projects received, 281 projects continue to
be in process. The Committee apprehends that there may be projects under process even
prior to 2005-06. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for projects continuing to
remain under process for such a long period. The Committee would appreciate if a
comprehensive assessment of the approval mechanism of research projects by ICMR is
16

17
made by the Department so as to ensure the removal of existing hurdles. One must not
forget that the objective behind setting up a separate Department is for giving a thrust to
medical research in the country. (Para 3.7)
PROMOTION, CO-ORDINATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF BASIC APPLIED AND
CLINICAL RESEARCH
The Committee had sought specific information about the break-up of the funds
released and utilized and the achievements made under the scheme of Promotion, Co-
ordination and Development of Basic Applied and Clinical Research. The Committee is
deeply disturbed by the casual approach indicative in its reply. It seems that no action
worth-mentioning has been initiated so far and Rs.50.00 crore earmarked for the scheme
have remained unutilized. The Committee can only emphasize that both clinical trials and
operational research are very crucial for our country and the nodal Department has to carry
on the mandated task in this regard. (Para 4.3)
PROMOTION AND GUIDANCE ON RESEARCH GOVERNANCE ISSUES
The Committee is constrained to observe that the establishment of Tripartite
Research Policy and implementation/co-ordination mechanism for the three Departments is
yet to start. More than one year has passed but the modalities are still being finalized;
resulting in allocated funds of Rs.20.00 crores remaining unutilized. Position in 2009-10
remains unchanged. The Committee urges upon the Department to make concerted efforts
for getting this initiative, very vital for research projects originating in the three
Departments, started. (Para 5.2)
NORTH-EASTERN AREAS AND SIKKIM
While seeking to be enlightened about the specific measures for the optimum
utilization of the funds earmarked for NE Region and Sikkim, the Committee had inter alia
meant to be apprised of the mechanism in place to ensure that the allocated funds did not
remain idle and were indeed utilized optimally. While the Committee appreciates the
envisaged projects for the Region under reference, it would still like to be intimated about
the action plan to ensure that the envisaged projects are implemented within a designated
timeline so that the funds allocated are utilized optimally for the intended purpose.
(Para 9.2)

MINUTES

21
III
THIRD MEETING
(2009-10)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 12th November, 2009 in Committee
Room ‘A’,  Ground Floor, Parliament House Annex, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Dr. Radhakant Nayak
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shrimati V asanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ashok Argal
7. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
8. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
11. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi
12. Shri N. Kristappa
13. Dr. Tarun Mandal
14. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
15. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
16. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
17. Shri M.K. Raghavan
18. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
19. Shrimati Meena Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Additional Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them
of the agenda of the meeting. The Committee then considered the draft 36th and 37th Reports on
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) furnished by the Departments of AYUSH and Health Research on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the 28th and 29th Reports on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of those Departments. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Reports.

22
3. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the 35th, 36th and 37th Reports may be
presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the
25th November, 2009. The Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his
absence Shrimati Viplove Thakur and Dr. Radhakant Nayak to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha
and Dr. Tarun Mandal and in his absence Dr. Jyoti Mirdha to lay the Reports on the Table of the
Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
*** Relates to other matters.

23
ANNEXURES

25
ANNEXURE-I
STATUS NOTE ON EXISTING STAFF STRENGTH AGAINST
THE SANCTIONED POSTS CATEGORY-WISE IN ICMR
As per Schedule-II of Health Research Scientists Cadre of Indian Council of Medical
Research Rules, 2007 the following Group ‘A’ posts stand included as authorized strength of
Scientists: in ICMR:—
Sl. No. Designation Scale of Pay No. of posts
1. Scientist ‘B’ Rs. 8000-275-13500 380
2. Scientist ‘C’ Rs. 10200-352-15200 192
3. Scientist ‘D’ Rs. 12000-375-16500 77
4. Scientist ‘E’ Rs. 14300-400-18300 57
5. Scientist ‘F’ Rs. 16400-450-20000 1
6. Scientist ‘G’ Rs. 18400-500-22400 25
7. Addl. Director Rs. 22400-525-24500 1
General
T
OTAL = Rs.733
2. The above authorization is subject to variation dependent on workload and Director General,
ICMR is empowered to allocate posts to different Institutes/Centres or Headquarters of ICMR.
3. Promotion from one grade to the next higher grade in the cadre upto the grade of Scientist
‘G’ is to be made under the flexible complementing Scheme. As such the existing Strength of
Scientists may vary against the authorized strength, shown above within the total number of
authorized posts of Scientists.
4. The-existing staff strength and the number of vacancies in various grades is as under:—
Post Authorized Strength Posted Strength Vacancies
Scientist ‘B’ 380 326 54
Scientist ‘C’ 192 158 34
Scientist ‘D’ 77 52 25
Scientist ‘E’ 57 44 13
Scientist ‘F’ 1 1 0
Scientist ‘G’ 25 21 4
Addl. Director 1 1 0
General
T
OTAL = 733 603 130

26
Necessary action to fill up the vacant posts in various grades is in process.
5. With regard to the future expansion it is brought out that the position is yet to be examined
in consultation with various Divisions of Indian Council of Medical Research. The proposal
regarding Additional Posts for future expansion will be taken up with Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare separately.

27
27
ANNEXURE-II
PROJECTS RECEIVED IN 2005-06 TO 2007-08 OTHER THAN FELLOWSHIPS
2005-06 In process Ongoing Rejected Completed W ithdrawn T otal
Received
Medico 40 106 30 9 – 185
Non-Medico 49 93 55 14 6 217
T
OTAL (Received) 89 199 85 23 6 402
2006-07 In process Ongoing Rejected Completed W ithdrawn T otal
Received
Medico 89 112 25 – – 226
Non-Medico 75 113 55 3 4 250
T
OTAL (Received) 164 225 80 3 4 476
2007-08 In process Ongoing Rejected Completed W ithdrawn T otal
Received
Medico 145 22 19 1 – 187
Non-Medico 136 36 41 – – 213
TOTAL (Received) 281 58 60 1 0 400

28
EXTRA-MURAL DIVISION-WISE (HEALTH-SECT OR) 2005-06 TO 2007-08
PLAN + F.W. (Rs.)
Year NCD ECD BMS+TRM P&I MPU IHD RHN T otal
2005-06 102,283,885 140,092,163 90,952,381 3,154,341 7,388,609 424,048 79,179,281 423,474,708
2006-07 152,060,799 160,344,393 138,748,600 4,568,426 8,047,132 434,618 99,786,123 563,990,091
2007-08 120,598,591 120,734,718 128,490,944 3,962,853 8,483,081 466,669 139,213,360 521,950,216
TOTAL: 374,943,275 421,171,274 358,191,925 1 1,685,620 23,918,822 1,325,335 318,178,764 1,509,415,015
TOTAL: Rs. 150.00 crores

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.