 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/Pausha, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
169 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
164TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2025-26 (DEMAND 
NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2025) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2025/Pausha, 1947 (Saka) 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-NINTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
164TH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2025-26 (DEMAND 
NO. 47) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH RESEARCH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE) 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2025) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2. PREFACE ii 
3. ACRONYMS iii - iv 
4. REPORT v - vi 
 Chapter–I  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry 1 - 42 
 
Chapter–II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Ministry 
43 - 48  
 
Chapter–III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the  
Committee 
49 - 65 
 Chapter–IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 66 - 78 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A GLANCE 79 - 84 
6. MINUTES* -- 
 To be appended at a later stage

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  -  Chairman  
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
4. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
5. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
10. Shri Rameswar Teli 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri  
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar     Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth. Under Secretary 
  

ii 
 
       
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, hereby present this 169th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the G overnment 
on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 164th Report on Demands for Grants 
2025-26 (Demand No. 47) of the Department of Health Research (DHR), Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare.  
2. The 164th Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha on 12th March, 2025 and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on  12th March, 2025 . The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report was r eceived from the Department  in the Month of 
August, 2025.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 94 recommendations in the 164th Report, out of which 50 
recommendations have been accepted by the Department and have been categorized under 
Chapter-I. There are 6 recommendations that the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Department‘s replies that have been categorized under Chapter -II. Ther e are 19 
recommendations/ observations, in respect of which replies of the Department have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and 
has been categorized under Chapter -III. While 19 recommendations/observations in respect of 
which final reply of the Government has not been received, has been categorized under Chapter - 
IV. 
4. The Committee, in its meeting held on 9 December, 2025 considered the Draft Report and 
adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI              PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
9th December, 2025          CHAIRMAN 
Pausha, 1947 (Saka)          Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
                 Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
  

iii 
 
                          ACRONYMS 
 
AMR Antimicrobial Resistance 
ABSL3 Animal Biosafety Level 3 
AE Actual Expenditure 
AAR Age Adjusted Incidence Rates 
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist  
BSL-3 Biosafety level 3 
CSSS Central Secretariat Stenographer Service 
CS Central Sector 
CPWD CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CoE Centre of Excellence 
CoRE Centres of Research Excellence 
CDSCO Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
DHR    Department of Health Research 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DDG Deputy Director General 
DISHA Demography Integrated Surveillance for Health Assessment 
DDESS Development and Environmental Surveillance Systems 
DoH&FW Department of Health and Family Welfare 
DIAMONDS     ( DHR-ICMR) Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services 
EAR Estimated Average Requirement 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FRBM Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
HPV  Human Papillomavirus 
HTA Health Technology Assessment 
HTAIn Health Technology Assessment in India 
HEPR Health emergency preparedness and response 
IDA Institute for Defense Analyses 
IEC Information Education Communication 
ISA International Solar Alliance 
ITRC India tuberculosis Research Consortium 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IHME Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation 
ISTC International Science and technology Center 
IHCI India Hypertension Control Initiative 
IRCS Indian Red Cross Society 
IHCI India Hypertension Control Initiative 
IPEA International Preliminary Examination Authority 
IKS Indian knowledge Systems 
IISF India International Science Festival 
InDIAB The Indian Diabetes Study 
LRAC Local Research Advisory committee 
MBA    Management by Activities 
MRUs Multi-disciplinary Research Units 
MRHRUs    Model Rural Health Research Units 

iv 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MDVAS    Mega-dose Vitamin A Supplementation 
MoSPI Ministry of Statistics and Planning Implementation 
MIDAC Medical Innovations Development Acceleration Company 
NCDIR National Centre for Disease Informatics and Research 
NRI Non-resident Indian 
NICHDR    National Institute of child Health and Development research 
NIRBI National Institute for Research in Bacterial Infections 
NIE National Institute of Epidemiology 
NIV National Institute of Virology 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NITVAR National Institute of Translational Virology & AIDS Research 
NCDs Non-communicable diseases 
NCVBDC    National Centre for Vector Borne Disease Control 
NIRDHDS    National Institute for Research in Digital Health and Data Science 
NCRP National Cancer Registry Program 
OCI Overseas Citizen of India 
PIO Persons of Indian Origin 
PHFI Public Health Foundation of India 
PM-ABHIM Prime Minister-Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission 
PCT Patient Care Technician 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PCT Patient Care Technician 
RDA Recommended Dietary Allowances 
RMRC Regional Medical Research Centre 
RMNCH Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, Child, Adolescent Health and Nutrition 
SSE Social Stock Exchange 
SUGAM Portal System for Unmanned Gateways Approval of Manufacturers 
STW Standard Treatment World 
SFC    Standing Finance Committee 
TSA Transportation Security Administration 
TAEI-SMART TN-Stroke Mobilization & Rapid Treatment 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UIP Universal Immunization Programme 
VRDLs     Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories 
WINGS Women and Infant Integrated Interventions for Growth 
WHO World Health Organization 
WASH Water and sanitation hygiene  

v 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 1 64th Report on Demands for Grants 202 5-26 
(Demand No. 4 7) of the  Department of Health Research (DHR), Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the DHR in respect of the recommendations 
contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para numbers 1.2.3, 1.3.7, 1.3.8, 1.4.1, 1.4.2, 1.5.1, 1.6.2, 2.1.4, 2.4.5, 2.4.7, 
2.6.4, 3.1.1, 3.2.5, 3.2.6, 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.5.4, 3.5.5, 3.6.4, 3.7.11, 3.7.12, 3.8.10, 
4.5.4, 4.5.5, 4.5.6, 4.5.7, 4.5.8, 4.5.10, 4.6.3, 4.7.1, 4.8.3, 4.8.4 4.9.2, 4.10.2, 
4.10.4, 4.12.1, 4.12.2, 4.13 .2, 4.13.3, 4.13.4, 4.16.2, 5.1.3, 5.2.1, 5.4.1, 5.5, 5.5.1, 
5.6.1, 5.9.1, 5.10.1 and 5.10.2 of the Report. 
       Total–50 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not 
desire to pursue in view of the Governmen t's replies: Para Numbers 1.3.6, 2.4.4, 
3.7.6, 3.7.14, 3.8.8 and 4.14.1 of the Report. 
         Total–6 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and where the Committee makes further 
recommendation: Para Numbers 1.3.4, 1.6.4, 2.2.6, 2.2.7, 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.3.4, 
2.3.5, 2.3.6, 2.4.3, 2.5.3, 2.6.6 , 3.7.3, 3.7.4, 3.7.13, 3.8.5,  4.11.1, 4.14.2 and 5.1.4  
of the Report. 
       Total–19 (Chapter-III) 
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Para Number s 1.5.2, 2.1.5, 2.2.5, 2.2.8, 2.2.9, 
2.6.5, 3.2.7, 3.9.3, 4.7.2, 4.9.3, 4.9.4, 4.10.3, 4.15.1, 4.15.2, 5.3.1, 5.7.1, 5.8.1, 
5.11.1 and 5.13.1 of the Report. 
Total –19 (Chapter IV) 

vi 
 
3.   The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
1.1 Mandate of DHR 
Recommendation 
1.1.1 The Committee takes note of the allocation of a new Business to DHR in the form of 
Health Technology Assessment which will promote evidence -based decision making across the 
healthcare spectrum. An allocation of business suggests enhanced responsibility for managing the 
specific allocation, impacting its policy formulation, its implementation as well as coordination 
with other ministries. This also translates into additional financial implications like need for 
increased budgetary allocation to cover the new responsibilities, including staff recruitment, 
infrastructure development, etc. Accordingly, it is expected that DHR takes appropriate measures 
to continue to execute this crucial role and is also able to secure and utilise adequate allocation of 
funds for the work. 
(Para 1.2.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.1.2 Department of Health Research (DHR) has been taking appropriate steps to enhance the 
funds for HTA. The BE for the attached office for year 2024 -25 was 10 crores and RE was 
enhanced to 17.80 Crores. The BE allocation for year 2025-26 is 18.75 Crores. 
1.2 Human Resource Management 
Recommendation 
1.2.1 The Committee, even though aware of the funding limitations, is not fully convinced of 
the adequateness of a consolidated stipend of Rs.1.2 lakhs per month for 3 years for a selected 
researcher under the Scheme to attract professionals from abroad. The Com mittee feels that the 
Department should consider keeping the window open to enhance the quantum of stipend, at 
least based on the project proposals presented and the remuneration the person is receiving in the 
foreign country. The same flexible approach sh ould be adopted in case of the quantum of grant, 
the Committee desires.  Accordingly, to address the intricate issue of brain drain, India must 
adopt a comprehensive strategy that includes enhancing higher education, strengthening research 
infrastructure, and implementing policies to improve the standard of living. These measures 
would encourage skilled Indian professionals to return from abroad and undertake domestic 
health research projects.  A unified and long -term approach is essential for India to reta in and 
recover its most valuable asset—human capital. 
(Para 1.3.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2.2 Under HRD scheme component of NRI/PIO/OCI Research Support, in addition to the 
stipend, research grants of upto Rs 20 lacs/year for a maximum of 5 years are also provided to the 

2 
 
Fellows. Government has been able to successfully align the output of the scheme with the goal 
of attracting and retaining the diaspora researchers within India.  There have been some fellows 
of the scheme who have taken up regular positions in academic and research institutions in India. 
1.2.3 Apart from the Department of Health Research Initiative for encouraging the Indian 
diaspora to engage in research, VAIBHAV Fellowship is being implemented by th e DST. The 
VAIBHAV Fellowship aims at improving the research ecosystem of India‘s Higher Education 
and Scientific Institutions by facilitating academic and research collaborations between Indian 
Institutions and the best institutions in the world through m obility of faculty/researchers from 
overseas institutions to India. 
Key Features of the VAIBHAV Fellowship Programme: 
● Knowledge Verticals: The programme focuses on 18 identified knowledge verticals, 
including quantum technology, health, pharmaceuticals, el ectronics, agriculture, energy, 
computer sciences, and material sciences, among others. 
● Eligibility: The fellowship is open to outstanding scientists and technologists of Indian 
origin (NRI)/ (PIO)/ (OCI) who are actively engaged in research activities in their 
respective countries. 
● Collaboration Duration: Selected fellows will have the opportunity to work in 
collaboration with Indian Higher Educational Institutions (HEIs),  universities, and 
public-funded scientific institutions. 
● They may spend up to two mo nths per year, for a maximum of three years, at an Indian 
institution of their choice. 
1.2.4 The Hon‘ble Committee suggestions on enhancing higher education, strengthening 
research infrastructure and implementing policies to improve the standing of living of researchers 
have been taken due cognizance. DHR has already started working towards these through its 
various measures,  some of which are as follows: 1) To increase the pool of trained medical 
researchers, a Young Medical Faculty -PhD Support programme h as been started by DHR since 
2024. Recently, Expressions of Interest were invited from Institutes of National Importance 
(INIs), having their own MD -PhD or post MD-PhD degree program and who are willing to come 
on board this Medical PhD program, so that th e fellowships can be supported for the integrated 
Medical PhD programme.  2) A liberal equipment and consumables grant is provided in HRD 
scheme to strengthen research infrastructure. 3) DHR has also been implementing different 
schemes like MRU/MRHRU, PM -ABHIM, VRDL, etc towards strengthening of research 
infrastructure, their outlays have been improved in recent years. 4) The stipend amounts of 
JRF/SRF have been revised and increased in 2024 and the House Rent Allowance (HRA) Support 
component has also been added to women and young scientists in HRD scheme. 
 
 

3 
 
 
Recommendation 
1.2.5 Further, the Department should look into the possibility of involving private sector which 
can contribute through competitive pay packages, which would be well within t heir realm as 
promotion of PPP. 
(Para 1.3.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2.6 As part of this effort, DHR is in the process of establishing the Medical Innovation 
Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC): a special purpose vehicle envisioned as a strategic 
institutional mechanism to drive biomedical innov ation through effective public -private 
collaboration. Through this proposed section 8 company, we plan to engage Indian talent in 
Health Research in the private sector in contributing to the national health priorities of India.   
1.3 Landmarks in Health Research in India 
Recommendation 
1.3.1 While going through the major landmarks in Health Research in India in the last decade, 
the Committee notices that the India has done considerably well in the field of Communicable 
Diseases, commensurate to its own needs as well as to contributing the global knowledge pool. 
The Committee is appreciative of this achievement. The India Disease Burden Study, mentioned 
by the Department as a breakthrough initiative, provided  crucial insights into the shifting burden 
of diseases in India, highlighting the growing prevalence of Non -Communicable diseases 
(NCDs). Going by the indicators provided by the Study, India‘s efforts in the area of NCDs needs 
further impetus. 
(Para 1.4.1of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.3.2 ICMR research in NCD continued to expand and strengthen its diverse portfolio, 
addressing critical and contemporary health challenges. The primary focus remains on the 
prevention, diagnosis, and management of chronic condi tions, including Oncology, 
Cardiovascular Diseases, Mental Health, Neurological Sciences, Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolic 
Syndrome, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Diseases, Gastroenterology, Geriatrics, Oral Health, 
Orthopedics, and Nephrology & Urology, wi th efforts directed toward the prevention, diagnosis, 
and management of chronic health conditions. 
1.3.3 Additionally, research activities have continued in the fields of Otorhinolaryngology , 
Hematology, Anesthesiology, and Disability, Rehabilitation, and Assistive Technology. Other 
key areas of focus included Trauma, Accidents and Injuries, Environmental and Occupational 
Health, Climate Change, Tobacco, and Chronic Disease Health Research. M ultidisciplinary 

4 
 
studies in Toxicology, Anatomy, Anthropology, Nanomedicine, and Traditional Medicine also 
highlighted ICMR‘ commitment to advancing innovation in healthcare and biomedicalsciences. 
1.3.4 Some of the achievements i.e. Initiatives of the Nat ional importance of the past year may 
be highlighted as: 
(i) Cancer care: 
a.  CARE-Clinical Pharmacology –ICMR‘s CARE- Clinical Pharmacology initiative 
focused on therapeutic monitoring of anti -cancer drugs such as sunitinib and 
docetaxel, showing that dru g monitoring improved patients‘ quality of life (QOL) 
and reduced treatment costs.  
b.  PFOS (PREVALL): ICMR, in collaboration with Tata Memorial Center -
ACTREC, developed a powder for oral suspension (PFOS) of 6 -mercaptopurine 
(PREVALL), which helps in acc urate dosing for children undergoing treatment 
for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia (ALL). Since children aged 1 –10 often face 
difficulties swallowing tablets, this liquid formulation of 6 -MP helps in 
overcoming this issue and ensures better treatment outcome s. The product, 
expected to benefit approximately 10,000 children annually, was patented and 
launched on November 25, 2023. 
(ii) Cardiovascular Disease 
a. PACT-HF Trial – This trial, aimed at preventing repeat hospital admissions and 
death in Heart Failure patients, recruited 1,693 patients, with a 97% follow-up rate 
and a 9% mortality rate at six months. 
b. The India Hypertension Control Initiative (IHCI) – IHCI has successfully 
expanded to 154 districts, enrolling over 5.1 million hypertensive patients ac ross 
22,000 health facilities, including 16,000 Health & Wellness Centers. Nearly half 
(47%) of the registered patients have achieved BP control. 
c. STEMI Care Pathway: Implemented in districts of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh,  this initiative demonstrated that STEMI 
patients can be diagnosed at CHC level via tele -ECG and  receive life saving 
thrombolytic therapy. The model has since been upscaled to the entire state of 
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and 4 districts of Andhra Pradesh. 
(iii) Stroke and Neurological Research 
a. INSTRuCT Clinical Trials – The Indian Stroke Clinical Trial Network 
(INSTRuCT) was established to create a cutting -edge stroke clinical trial 
infrastructure in India. Initially, INSTRuCT Phase I undertook two clini cal 
trials across 30 centers. The network expanded in Phase II, encompassing 

5 
 
58 centers. Currently, four clinical trials are ongoing under this network, 
each addressing distinct aspects of stroke care and treatment. 
b. FeSSH Trial – (Fever, hyperglycemia, swallowing and hypertension  
management in acute stroke: Stepped wedged cluster randomized trial with 
cross-sectional data collection): Baseline data were collected across 20 
centers, with 12 centers transitioning to the intervention phase. A total of 
3,022 eligible patients were identified from a screened population of 4,818. 
c. SMRUTHI India – The Strategic Multimodal Intervention in At -Risk 
Elderly Indians for the Prevention of Dementia (SMRUTHI India) aims to 
establish a prospective longitudinal cohort o f elderly individuals with 
multiple risk factors (CAIDE ≥ 6) and develop a validated multimodal ―care 
bundle‖ intervention in four MRHRU field areas. 
(iv) Diabetes Research 
a. Indian Diabetic Risk Score: The Indian Diabetic Risk Score was evaluated 
and found to be a cost-effective tool for screening diabetes in Asian Indians. 
b. INDIAB Study: The INDIAB study provided state -specific obesity 
prevalence data for better policy planning of the nationalprogram and 
suggested age -specific HbA1c cut -offs to minimiz e over -diagnosis of 
diabetes, especially in elderly individuals. The survey was completed in 30 
states/ UTs, with follow -up studies completed in  Arunachal Pradesh and 
Tamil Nadu and the data is being analyzed. The study in the Union 
Territories has also been completed. 
c. Dietary Recommendations: ICMR‘s research also highlighted the 
importance of dietary changes for diabetes management. The data 
recommended reducing carbohydrates and increasing protein intake for 
Type 2 diabetes (T2D) remission and preventi ng progression from pre -
diabetes to T2D. 
d. Young Diabetes Registry: ICMR‘s Young Diabetes Registry reported 
critical data on the prevalence of Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes, along with 
complications such as retinopathy, neuropathy, and nephropathy. This 
registry also documented a high incidence of co -morbidities such as 
autoimmune thyroid disease and hypertension in diabetic patients. 
Recommendation 
1.3.5 Accordingly, the Committee observes that the policies, priorities and funding for health 
research in the country should be optimally aligned with its actual health needs rather than with 
the global research agenda. Hence, India should prioritise research o n under-studied diseases in 

6 
 
the country, such as cardiovascular, respiratory diseases, etc. along with research on public 
health, healthcare infrastructure/systems and implementation of clinical medicine. The 
Committee feels that alignment of health resear ch with the National Health Policy & Priorities 
would be cardinal in this direction and hence recommends, accordingly. 
(Para 1.4.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.3.6 In addition to Extramural and Intramural projects, a separate program has been 
established to fund projects addressing National Health Research Priorities, which are directly 
monitored by the Director General (DG) of ICMR. These priorities with relevant re search 
questions, identified by the Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) and approved by the Governing 
Council (GC), are determined based on feedback from multiple stakeholders. National Health 
Research Programme (NHRP) is being implemented as a mission -mode initiative with directed 
research efforts toward 12 areas of pressing national importance. 
1.3.7 In June 2023, total 16 projects were decided under areas of communicable diseases – TB, 
Vector Borne Diseases, and Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR); under non -communicable diseases 
– Cancer, Mental Health, and Ambulatory Care; under reproductive, child health, and nutrition – 
Anemia, Childhood Malnutrition, and Neonatal Mortality; and other areas such as Acute 
Emergency Care and Oral Health. NHRP proposals came into mission mode and funding initiated 
for proposals in 2024. Additionally, Primary Health Care was included in this list based on a 
request from NITI Aayog, recognizing its importance in delivering care for all these conditions. 
The duration of these projects  will be a maximum of four years, extendable by one year with the 
approval of the competent authority. As of date 30 NHRP projects in different health research 
priorities are being carried out. 
1.4 Role of public-private partnerships (PPPs) in Health Research Funding 
Recommendation 
1.4.1 The Committee reckons that since the Government is always under compulsion to 
apportion the limited financial resources amongst the varied needs of the country, it would be 
prudent to leverage the financial resources, technological expertise and innovation  capabilities of 
the Private sector in furthering the needs of the health sector, especially in research. The 
Committee holds the view that when 102 cutting edge research and innovation outcomes, 
produced in collaboration with the Private sector, are dovet ailed with policy initiatives and wide 
access infrastructure of the Government, it can change the health care landscape of India. Taking 
into account the fact that promotion of public -private partnership is one of the businesses 
allocated to DHR as per the  Allocation of Business Rules of the Government of India. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should consider adopting more measures to secure 
the participation of the Private sector in the health sector in the Country with tailor made 
collaborative and mutually beneficial outreach measures.  

7 
 
(Para 1.5.1 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.4.2 The Department of Health Research (DHR) gratefully acknowledges the Hon'ble  
Committee's recommendation to enhance Public -Private Partnerships (PPPs) in health research. 
DHR fully concurs that leveraging private sector innovation, resources  and technical expertise, 
when effectively integrated with public sector infrastructure and policy, can drive transformative 
progress in India's healthcare ecosystem. 
1.4.3 Promoting PPPs is both a strategic priority and a core mandate under the allocation of 
Business Rules for DHR. Such partnerships are vital to, improving equity, efficiency, 
accountability and quality in healthcare. Recognizing that public resources alone are insufficient 
to meet growing health demands, the Ministry remains committed to fostering an enabling 
environment for responsible and mutually beneficial collaborations. 
1.4.4 In line with this vision, DHR has initiated and continues to strengthen targeted measures 
to promote structured and impactful private sector engagement. 
1. MedTech Development under MDMS: 
Through the Medical Device and Diagnostics Mission Secretariat 
(MDMS), ICMR facilitates PPPs for the development, validation, and 
commercialization of indigenous medical technologies. Schemes like these enable 
collaboration between public institutions and private manufacturers. While ICMR 
provides scientific expertise, private partners contribute technical capabilities, 
manufacturing infrastructure, and market access, fostering a synergistic ecosystem 
for MedTech innovation. 
2. Support for Innovation and Research in Health Technologies (SIRTH) under 
MDMS: 
The SIRTH schem e, operating under MDMS, encourages public -private 
collaborations for translational research and product development. Public 
institutions offer scientific validation, while private partners from startups to 
established companies lead prototyping, scale -up, and commercialization. These 
collaborations often include joint IP agreements and co -funding models, helping 
bridge the gap between laboratory research and market -ready health 
solutions.Since December 2023, ICMR in collaboration with NITI Aayog and 
CDSCO has developed a platform MedTech Mitra for facilitation of public private 
medtech innovators. Over 400 innovators have been benefitted through the 
platform as of now.  
 

8 
 
 
 
1.5 Emerging Technologies and Ethical Concerns related to Health Research  
Recommendation 
1.5.1 The Committee recognises the importance of adoption of new technologies, innovation 
and constant endeavour for development of new drugs and treatment methods. Clinical trials are 
an inalienable data generating component of this continuing quest. The regulatory architecture 
now in place in the Country are taken note of, however, the Committee would like to emph asise 
the need to ensure ‗informed‘ consent of the participants of clinical trials which should invariably 
include sharing of information beforehand about how the data generated out of the trial would be 
used or shared. It is important to ensure that the p articipants fully understand the risks and 
benefits of a study, management of sensitive personal information and balancing the need for 
research advancement with individual privacy rights. Digitalization and sharing of patient 
information bears privacy imp lications that needs to be addressed and fixed with appropriate 
provisions. 
(Para 1.6.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.5.2 ICMR emphasizes the primacy of informed consent, underscoring that the rights, safety, 
and well-being of research participants must remain the highest priority. This principle is clearly 
articulated in the National Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical and Hea lth Research involving 
Human Participants, 2017 published by ICMR. The New Drugs and Clinical Trials (NDCT) 
rules, 2019 also gives a format of preparing informed consent documents. In case of clinical 
trials, ethics approval is provided only after scrutinizing the informed consent documents; both in 
English and the relevant regional language. Funds released by ICMR for the research project are 
conditional to the valid ethics approval documents.  
1.5.3 In alignment with these guidelines, it is standard resea rch practice that the Principal 
Investigator (PI) and the designated study staff responsible for obtaining informed consent are 
adequately trained prior to the initiation of any study. Patient information sheets are prepared in 
languages that are comprehen sible to potential participants and they are given ample 
opportunities to clarify the doubts, if any. The patient information sheet clearly describes the 
risks and benefits of participating in the study, the voluntariness of participation and that there 
will be no negative impact of non-participation or withdrawal from the trial.   
1.5.4 It is ensured that all the clinical trials that are conducted and coordinated by ICMR follow 
the principles of ethics and written informed consent is appropriately obtained . It is also ensured 
that confidentiality of data is maintained by the study team. Data collected digitally is always 
anonymized and personal identifiers such as name are not collected. 

9 
 
 
 
1.6 Projected Demand and Actual Allocation  
Recommendation 
1.6.1 The Committee perceives research in health to be of pivotal importance. Solution based 
core research aligned with the goals associated with the national health priorities would be way 
forward of DHR. The Committee notes that DHR has taken cognisance of the  Viksit Bharat aim 
and has accordingly established goals related to the field of Health Research. As part of which the 
Department has envisaged a structured approach towards the attainment 6 goals of specific 
activities in 5 year period of 2024-2029. However, the Committee notes with concern that the gap 
between the funds sought by DHR is getting widened since 2024 -25. This gap between the 
projected demand and allocation of funds has increased from Rs. 575.09 crore during 2024 -25 to 
Rs. 1069.34 crore during  2025-26. From the submissions of the Department, it is but natural to 
infer that their activities, including the ones towards the attainment of the Viksit Bharat goals, are 
going to be adversely affected by the dearth of funds. The Committee notes in this  regard that the 
fund utilisation by DHR reflects a decent percentage of 87 and above over the years, hence, it is 
imperative that DHR has enough justification to lay claim for higher budgetary allocation. At the 
same time, the Committee appreciates the counter balancing efforts on the part of the Department 
to manage their project with the allocated funds. 
(Para 2.1.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.6.2 The projected BE for 25 -26 for the Umbrella Scheme was Rs.216.10 Cr (MRU scheme 
Rs. 93.64 Cr and MRHRU Sch eme Rs. 122.46 Cr). The BE allocated for the Umbrella Scheme 
was Rs.150.18Cr and the same was distributed by the Department between the two schemes as 
Rs. 91.65 Cr for MRU Scheme and Rs.58.53 Cr for MRHRU scheme. The major chunk of funds 
sought for the MRU  Scheme would be utilized for recurring and non -recurring expenses on the 
existing MRUs and for setting up of 08 units of proposed CoREs. Similarly major chunk of 
MRHRU Scheme funds would be utilized for the purpose of meeting expenditure on account of 
enhancement in the cost of construction of buildings for MRHRUs, meeting the recurring and 
non-recurring expenses of the existing MRHRUs and for establishing 3 new MRHRUs during 
2025-26. Proposals for revision in the cost of construction of buildings under MR HRU Scheme 
and for setting up of Centers of Research Excellence (COREs) in the existing MRUs and MRUs 
in Private Medical colleges have been submitted for seeking in -principle approval of Department 
of Expenditure. Requirements of funds for the umbrella sch eme would be re-assessed in the light 
of outcome of the above -mentioned proposals submitted to Department of Expenditure and 
suitable funds requirement would be sought at RE stage accordingly. 
1.6.3 While continuing to strive for achievement of Viksit  Bharat Strategic Goals with the 
allocated funds, DHR has been prioritizing its overall activities including the ones towards 

10 
 
attainment of Viksit Bharat goals which can be seen through department‘s efficiency in funds 
expenditure and overall higher budget ary allocation of the department. Henceforth, in the next 
16th finance Commission period an enhanced allocation of budget for the Department activities 
will be sought. 
1.7 Budget Utilisation Trends under different schemes/ projects 
Recommendation 
1.7.1 The Committee is of the view that the underutilisation of allocated funds and indication of 
under spent funds under different heads as ‗Savings‘ makes a reflection over the working of 
DHR. As per the Committee, savings happen only when an activity is curta iled than originally 
conceived plan. The Committee, therefore, to do away the reflection mounting due to unutilised 
funds, recommends that DHR should enhance the implementing capability of the executing 
agency and the absorption capacity of the scheme/proj ects/programme to ensure its completion 
without time and cost overruns and achieving the set objectives as per plan. 
(Para 2.4.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.2 The savings of Department of Health Research for the Financial Year (FY) 2023 -24 were 
₹1121127 thousand with respect to the total Budget Allocation of ₹29800200 thousand while the 
savings for the FY 2024-25 were ₹77711 thousand with respect to the Total Budget Allocation of 
₹33920700.  Hence, there has been a drastic decline in the percenta ge of savings from 3.76% 
(FY2023-24) to 0.23% (FY 2024-25). 
1.7.3 The Department has implemented a regular monitoring strategy for different projects 
under its schemes. Monitoring and handholding is done by nodal scientists/officers implementing 
the schemes and senior officials viz. Secretary DHR and DG ICMR, Joint Secretaries, Sr DDG, 
ICMR also periodically conduct the reviews of the schemes‘ implementation.  
1.7.4 To enhance the awareness about the Schemes and to harness the potential benefits 
webinars, awareness activities, workshops and capacity building are being conducted on a regular 
basis.  
1.7.5 For wider dissemination and publicity of the Call for proposals different social media 
platforms like X (Twitter Handle) and Linked -In etc are also used apa rt from the conventional 
method of publishing Advertisement for Call for Proposal on DHR and ICMR Websites. 
1.7.6 To enhance the participation and for creating opportunities for potential scientists and 
researchers who can contribute to the landscape of be tter health outcomes for India, Guidelines 
are amended from time to time. A larger number of fellowships for Long term and Short Term 
International Training Fellowships were granted in 2024-25.  

11 
 
1.7.7 All due efforts as mandated by Government of India (GoI ) have been made to support 
NER States through various schemes of the DHR.  Special calls for proposals were also invited in 
2024-25 for North east. 
 
 
Recommendation 
1.7.8 The Committee notes that allocation made for the Department of Health Research is done 
keeping in mind the FRBM limits. However, it has also been bought before the Committee those 
certain financial restrictions associated with last quarter/month  of a finan cial year hamper  the 
progress of a research project/programme. Research involves organic development which cannot 
be shackled with financial stipulations. Hence, the Committee hopes the Department would seek 
their allocation management with Ministry of Fin ance, accordingly. In this regard, seeking the 
guidance of the good office of Principal Scientific Advisor would not be inappropriate. 
(Para 2.4.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.7.9 The observations of the Hon‘ble Committee are  noted. The guidance of Principal 
Scientific Advisor will be taken on case basis. 
1.8 Health Technology Assessment- Attached office.  
Recommendation 
1.8.1 The Committee observes with concerns that the Department has failed to utilise the 
increased RE of Rs. 17.80 crore  from Rs.10 crore of BE for FY 2023 -24, as the AE is only Rs. 
7.11 as on 31stJanuary, 2025. Further, the Department has also been allocated with an increased 
amount to the tune of Rs. 18.75 crore in BE 2025 -26 under the Head for the activities, which 
includes HTA attached office and Centre for Evidence for Guidelines. The Centre for Evidence 
for Guidelines was approved by Department of Expenditure in July, 2024 under HTA, as a pilot 
project for a period of three years. Accordingly, the Committee opines that  the Department 
should treat it with the importance it commands and utilise the funds allocate d, efficiently and 
effectively. 
(Para 2.6.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.8.2 The BE for the attached office for year 2024 -25 was 10 crores  and RE was enhanced to 
17.80 Crores and utilization by 31st March 2025 was 17.49 crores about 98.26 %. 

12 
 
1.8.3 Six scientists from ICMR have been deputed to work in the Centre for Evidence based 
Guidelines since Mar 2023. The Centre is currently working on development of three evidence -
based guidelines: 
• Evidence based guidelines for the use of stem cell therapy 
• Guidelines for prevention, screening, diagnosis, treatment, and palliation of lung 
cancer   
• Empirical use of antibiotic in various clinical conditions 
1.8.4 In September 2024, the Centre established 28 Technical Resource Centers (TRCs) across 
the country to assist in evidence synthesis by conducting systematic reviews and meta -analyses, 
thereby enabling consistent, high -quality guideline developm ent. In March 2025, the Centre 
established five Technical resource hubs (TRHs) across the country that will oversee the work of 
technical resource centres. They will critically appraise systematic reviews and evidence profiles 
submitted by TRCs, provide tr aining and capacity -building for guideline development group 
(GDG) members in the Evidence to Decision (EtD) framework. The Principal Investigators of 
TRCs and TRHs have been selected based on their expertise in evidence synthesis and guideline 
development. In addition, six project scientists have been recruited in the month of Dec 2024 in 
the Centre for Evidence based guidelines to assist in the Centre‘s activities. With the 
establishment of the hubs, the Centre will develop more evidence -based guidelines in the 
financial year 2025-26. 
1.9 Overview of Budget Allocation for DHR Schemes  
Recommendation 
1.9.1 The Committee takes into account the overview of Budget Allocation for DHR Schemes 
and status of expenditure for the FY 2024 -25 and 2025 -26 which stipulates that the BE of Rs 
507.25 core for 2024-25 was brought down to Rs. 460.91 core at RE, the reductions being under 
Human Resource and Capacity Development and National One Health Mission. The Department 
has stated the usual and ordinary argument that ‗revision at RE stage was by taking into account 
the existing expenditure trends‘. In the opinion of the Committee the ‗existing expenditure  
trends‘ are set by none other than DHR. So, the reduction in RE funds can be viewed as self -
inflicted and is something that could have been avoidable. The Committee hopes that DHR 
would be able to achieve optimal and rational utilisation of the RE amount by enhancing the 
professional efficiency of implementing agencies and increasing the absorption capacity of 
projects/schemes/programmes. 
(Para 3.1.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.9.2 Reasons for reduction RE under National One Health Mission: 
During the RE  2024-25, ICMR has proposed the reduction of Rs.  25 Crores under RE 
2024-25 under NOHM - GIA due to less number of project proposals under NOHM 

13 
 
1.9.3 Reasons for reduction:  Human Resources and Capacity Development:  
• There was a delay by NTA in conducting Biomedical Research Eligibility Test 
(BRET) examination, therefore the JRF fellows have not joined. And also due to 
restructuring and revisio n of guidelines in the start up grant program of HRD 
Scheme, fresh batch of Start -up Grant program could  not start projects before the 
end of this FY 2024 -25. New call for proposals for Start -up grants has been taken 
and projects are under approval.  
• There was a revision of Guidelines of Short -term Studentship and now the 
fellowship is given over three years to increase effectiveness of the scheme. This has 
led to lower first year allocation. 
• Due to restructuring and rationalization of some components of the Grant -in-aid 
scheme, a few calls could not be made in the 2024-25.  
1.9.4 The recommendations of t he Hon‘ble Committee to achieve optimal and rational 
utilisation of the RE amount by enhancing the professional efficiency of implementing agencies 
and increasing the absorption capacity are noted for compliance. 
1.10 Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs)  
Recommendation 
1.10.1 The Committee notes that the VRDL Scheme to establish Viral Research &  Diagnostic 
Laboratories (VRDLs) that began in 2013 has traversed well over time and now -a-days there is a 
network of 165 VRDLs in the country. The Committee appreciates the work done by DHR in this 
regard, especially during the initial years of the Scheme  when the States and medical colleges 
were not showing the desired level of interest. However, when the time of reckoning came during 
the COVID pandemic and in case of other smaller out breaks like Monkeypox, Zika, and Nipah, 
the Government realised the importance of this diagnostic infrastructure which is the result of the 
tenacity exhibited by DHR in case of establishing VRDLs. The Committee appreciates  the 
optimal utilisation of funds under the Scheme right since the year 2013 -14 despite the fact the 
scheme has never been allocated the estimated cost for a particular planned period. Further, the 
Scheme has been reviewed twice during the span of its existence till now, at an interval of about 
4 years. Since the last review was in 2012-22, it is the time for next review. The Committee notes 
that new Standing Finance Committee (SFC) is being prepared for the 16th Finance Commission 
period with enlarged scope and the Committees hopes the VRDLs would emerge in new 
incarnation for extending infectious/Viral Rese arch & Diagnostic Services of global standards. 
The Committee hopes that DHR would take concrete measures for strengthening of VRDLs that 
could not be taken up for support in Covid years and for converting 6 of them into Infectious 
Disease Research and Development Labs (IRDLs).  
 (Para 3.2.5 of the Report) 

14 
 
Action Taken 
1.10.2  The Department of Health Research  (DHR) appreciates the Hon‘ble Committee‘s 
acknowledgment of its ongoing efforts. In alignment with the Hon‘ble  Committee‘s 
recommendations, a new SFC / EFC proposal for the 16th Finance Commission period will be 
formulated as per the budget projections, with an expanded scope and enhanced objectives. As 
part of this initiative, DHR aims to establish one Infectious  Diseases Research & Diagnostic 
Laboratory (IRDL) in each State and Union Territory, with a focus on strengthening diagnostic 
capacities in Bacteriology, Mycology, and Parasitology in addition to established virology 
facilities. These IRDLs will serve as r eferral laboratories for their respective States/UTs, 
contributing significantly to improved disease surveillance and diagnostic support. 
Recommendation 
1.10.3. The Committee is of the view that one aspect, other than adding new infrastructure, that 
should be taken further, is continued improvement in quality systems in public health laboratories 
for viral diagnosis, which has been added during the last review. On ce the infrastructure is in 
place, their effective sustenance and relentless qualitative advancement becomes all important to 
reap the intended benefits. Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends the continuation of 
the Scheme during the 16th Finance Commission period keeping such objectives like 
strengthening of existing VRDLs, their upgradation, prodigious ability to detect more pathogens, 
etc. DHR, leveraging the excellent utilisation pattern of funds till now under the scheme, shall 
also seek adequ ate funds for the Scheme in tune with expanded scope for the period of 16 th 
Finance Commission. 
(Para 3.2.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.10.4. The DHR concurs with the recommendation to continue and upgrade the VRDL Scheme 
through the upcoming Finance Commission. We are formulating a comprehensive SFC proposal 
to: Strengthen existing VRDLs by upgrading infrastructure and enhancing human resource 
capacity, expand pathogen detection capabilities to address emerging and re -emerging diseases 
and facilitate the upgradation of VRDLs into IRDLs to integrate research and advanced 
diagnostics holistically covering all four verticals of the infectious patho gens, and outbreak 
investigation under the tag of VRDL at a higher level of biosafety where feasible. This approach 
will ensure that VRDLs remain at the forefront of infectious disease surveillance and response in 
India. 
1.11 Development of Tools to prevent outbreaks of Epidemics 
Recommendation 
1.11.1. The Committee reckons that the Scheme ‗Development of Tools to prevent outbreaks of 
Epidemics‘ is a need based one, establishing a separate budget line that aims to provide constant 
support to public health institutions for surveillance & diagnosis during outbreaks and develop 

15 
 
preparedness and response for infectious diseases. The Committee notes the fund utilisation 
under the scheme for the period for which data has been submitted to the Committee. As per the 
submission of DHR, all funds earmarked for the 15thFinance Commission period has been 
released, the last tranche of Rs. 3.49 crore available for the period has been given for 2025 -26. 
However, the Committee notes that DHR is preparing a proposal for enhancing the budget of the 
scheme by Rs. 6.5 crore a pprox. for 2025 -26.However, despite the lower availability of 
earmarked funds, the Committee observes that DHR asked for a higher amount of Rs. 10.00 
crore, however, against projected demand of Rs. 10.06 crore, only an amount to the tune of 
Rs.3.49 crore h as been earmarked in BE 2025 -26. The Committee perceives that there could be 
more activities to be undertaken by DHR in this Scheme than for which funds have been 
allocated. The Committee believes that the Scheme would get commensurate amount at RE stage. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends enhanced allocation for the Scheme on the lines of the 
proposal of DHR awaiting submission to the M/oF. The Committee hopes that utility of the 
Scheme for human survival in precarious times makes the case for continuan ce of the Scheme 
during the 16th Finance Commission period also.  
(Para 3.3.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.11.2 DHR is thankful to the Hon‘ble  Committee‘s recognition of the critical importance of the 
Scheme ―Development of Tools to Prevent Outbreaks of Epidemics‖ and acknowledges the 
recommendations regarding enhanced budget allocation. Rapid mobilization of personnel and 
resources during any o utbreak requires financial flexibility, which the current remaining funds 
cannot support adequately. Sufficient financial resources are required to handle potential 
outbreaks effectively. DHR has already submitted all requisite details regarding revised co st 
estimate for the 15th Finance Commission period, and the shortfall in the current Budget 
Estimates (BE) for 2025–26, and our projected demand. Given the ongoing commitments and the 
need for preparedness against unexpected outbreaks, an additional Rs. 6. 57 crores are required to 
ensure sustained and effective implementation of the scheme‘s objectives. 
 
1.12 Development of Tools to prevent outbreaks of Epidemics  
Recommendation 
1.12.1 The Committee opines that technology, besides preventing the spread of the epidemic, 
can also educate, warn and empower the person working on the ground and the persons who need 
to be aware of the situation for significantly reducing the impact of the epid emic on the common 
masses. In this context, also keeping in mind, the recommendations of the NITI Ayog‘ Pandemic 
Preparedness and Emergency Response Framework and in sync with the objectives of the 
National One Health Mission, it is imperative that Scheme ‗Development of Tools to prevent 
outbreaks of Epidemics‘ continues and containing the relevance for the future. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends suitable revamping of cherished objectives/targets of the schemes and 

16 
 
adequate allocation for the scheme du ring last year of 15 th Finance Commission and ensuing 
years of 16th Finance Commission. 
 (Para 3.3.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.12.2 ―Development of tools to prevent outbreak of Epidemics‖ - several related projects are 
being funded and has been initiate d with multiple stakeholders departments/ and central 
institutions of National One Health Mission & undergoing related to component 3 & 4 of SFC of 
NOHM , projects are funded under following components: 
1.12.3 Developing and assessing the feasibility of various tools (AI tools, NGS, diagnostic 
algorithms for detection/discovery of emerging novel pathogens in humans, animals and 
environment and establish metagenomic pipelines for novel pathogen discovery 
1.12.4 Develop protocols, tools and framework for integrated disease surveillance at the animal -
human environment interface for emerging diseases. 
1.12.5 The emphasis on aligning with the NITI Aayog‘s Pandemic Preparedness and Emergency 
Response Framework and the objectives of the National One Health Mission is timely and 
strategic. Integrating these frameworks with ongoing efforts under the ‗Development of Tools to 
Prevent Outbreaks of Epidemics‘ scheme will indeed enhance our national capacity for early 
detection, rapid response, and community-level resilience. 
1.12.6 The objectives and targets of the schemes will be revised in alignment with the 
recommendations of NITI Aayog‘s Pandemic Preparedness and Emergency Response 
Framework, and in coherence with the goals  of the National One Health Mission. Accordingly, 
the budgetary provisions for the scheme ―Development of Tools to prevent outbreaks of 
Epidemics‖ will be enhanced, with appropriate allocations planned for the upcoming years under 
the 16th Finance Commissi on. In view of the ongoing commitments under the final year of the 
15th Finance Commission and the continued need for preparedness against unforeseen outbreaks, 
a revised cost estimate with an additional requirement of ₹6.57 crore is submitted to Ministry of 
Finance for consideration. 
1.13 Establishment of Multi -Disciplinary Research Units in Government Medical 
Colleges (MRUs)  
Recommendation 
1.13.1 The Committee finds that for 2025 -26, under the sub -scheme of Establishment of 
Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs) in Government Medical Colleges and Research 
Institutes, DHR asked for an amount of Rs 93.64 crore while the DHR has been allocated Rs. 
91.65 crore. During 2025 -26 DHR proposes to expand the scope of the MRU scheme by 
introducing the scheme to Private Medical Colleges and Research Institutes. In addition, the well 
performing existing MRUs are proposed to be upgraded to Centres of Research Ex cellence 
(CoREs) to augment the Research Capacity to a higher level. The Committee notices that the key 
areas of Health Research priorities by MRUs are well in alignment with the actual health needs of 

17 
 
the country. The Committee is in agreement with the pr oposal of DHR to extend the benefits of 
the Scheme to the Private sector and to expand the scope of the Scheme which is certainly a 
futuristic & progressive measure. The Committee hopes that recalibrations of the Scheme would 
definitely enhance the research capacity to a higher level. 
(Para 3.5.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.13.2 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted for compliance. 
Recommendation 
1.13.3 The Committee observes that not much has been said by the Department about the 
Scheme being considered for extension during the period of the 16th Finance Commission 
period. In this regard, the Committee expresses its apprehension over the capacity of the State 
governments to take over the liability of the MRUs after the end of the 15 th FC period, if the 
scheme is not continued. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Scheme should be 
extended up to the period of 16th Finance Commission with appropriate expanded scope like 
handholding to meet the recurring as well as non-recurring expenses of the existing MRUs.  
(Para 3.5.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.13.4 As per the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, Health Research is the subject 
matter of the Central Government. Accordingly at the time of extension of the scheme into t he 
15th Finance Commission, it has been decided that the MRUs shall continue to be funded and 
administered by the Central Government as against the earlier provision of transferring them to 
state after 5 years. This is also intended to provide continuity to the efforts of Central Government 
in the field of bio-medical research and strengthen the health research infrastructure created so far. 
1.14 Establishment of Model Rural Health Research Units (MRHRUs)  
Recommendation 
1.14.1 The Committee notes that during 2025 -26 the target under the  of Model Rural Health 
Research Units (MRHRUs) is to establish the remaining 03 MRHRUs out of the total sanctioned 
11 MRHRUs. Further, need for Recurring and non - Recurring expenditure based on requirements 
reported by the existing MRHRUs are also to be met. The Committee also notes that during the 
15th Finance Commission period, two important activities, namely, (i) Creation of clinical trial 
networks and (ii) Undertaking of Multi -centric Resear ch Projects. The Committee recommends 
that DHR should leave no stone unturned in achieving the objectives of the sub -scheme i.e. 
creation of infrastructure for transfer of technology to the rural level for improving the quality of 
health services to rural population and to ensure an interface between the new technology 
developers, health systems operators & the beneficiaries in rural areas. The Committee is of the 
considered view that the scheme contains visionary goals and the complete attainment of which 
would ensure the success of game changing initiative like the National One Health Mission. The 

18 
 
Committee, therefore, feels that the Scheme deserves appropriate and adequate funding. The 
Committee, however, finds that for 2025 -26, while DHR demanded Rs. 122 .46 crore, only an 
amount of Rs. 58.53 crore has been allocated indicating a shortfall of Rs. 63.93 crore which is a 
sorry state of affairs. Though this allocation is higher an allocation compared to the RE of Rs. 
18.01 crore for 2024 -25, the Committee wis hes to highlight that the wide gap between the 
projected demands and BE allocation made during 2025 -26 is a matter of concern. The wide gap 
points towards the possible compromise that the Department will have to make to contain their 
proposals within the l imited allocated amount. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that the 
Department must approach the Ministry of Finance to reconsider their allocation at the RE stage. 
(Para 3.6.4) of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.14.2 The Department of Health Research (DHR) /Model Rural Health Research Units 
(MRHRUs) is thankful for the valuable observations made by the Committee and concurs with its 
recommendations. For the upcoming Standing Finance Committee (SFC) proposal, in addition to 
the existing objectives of the MRHRU scheme, several additional objectives are being considered. 
These include: Firstly, Conducting annual population-based health surveys across all MRHRUs to 
monitor the evolving health profile of rural populations, Secondly, Undertaking implementation 
research on health issues of both local and national significance that  will include community 
based intervention studies, Thirdly: Establishing life course -based population cohorts to enable 
long-term (10 -year) follow -up of individuals and families across gen erations, with the aim of 
studying health transitions, disease patterns, and intergenerational determinants of health; Fourth: 
Strengthening the capacity of MRHRUs through strategic partnerships with institutions that have 
demonstrated excellence in popula tion-based research, and jointly undertaking studies with such 
partner institutions. 
1.14.3 In alignment with this expanded vision, MRHRUs are envisaged to function as population 
laboratories that promote intersectoral research and function as parallel bod ies that will facilitate 
objectives of ongoing national programmes. 
1.14.4 Accordingly, DHR is in agreement that more financial allocation be considered for the 
MRHRU scheme to support its broadened mandate and future vision. 
1.15 Research Governance – Health Technology Assessment  
Recommendation 
1.15.1 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the HTAIn Scheme has been getting the 
allocation which is being sought for it by DHR since 2022 -23. The utilisation of funds has also 
been cent per cent. The Committee has been given to understand that the Health Technology 
Assessment (HTA) is a multidisciplinary process that systematically evaluates the medical, 
social, economic and ethical aspects of health care technologies. The Committee,  however, 
recommends that DHR would undertake concrete steps to ensure that HTA technologies are safe, 

19 
 
effective and cost - effective, ultimately providing the best value for patients. By conducting 
rigorous HTA, the Committee believes that the DHR can make  informed decisions about 
healthcare interventions, ensuring that every rupee spent maximises health outcomes for the 
people of India. 
(Para 3.7.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.15.2 The HTA scheme has been evaluating health technologies which are safe eff ective and 
cost effective and recommending for implementation in State and Central government programs. 
The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted. 
Recommendation 
1.15.3 The Committee recognises  the critical need for HTA to expand its scope and span. 
Adding HTA into the allocation of Business of DHR as well as creating an attached office is a 
step in the right direction, provided the decision is backed up with adequate infrastructure which 
includes the all -important human resource component. Attracting talent from the healthcare 
fraternity for contributing to the HTA initiative is also important in humongous proportion. 
(Para 3.7.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.15.4 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted. 
1.16 Health Emergency Preparedness and Response (HEPR) Trust Fund   
Recommendation 
1.16.1 The Committee observes that the new component of PM -ABHIM Scheme,  provides 
strategic handholding support to innovators enrolled with ICMR under the MedTech Mitra 
Initiative. It is an appreciative step taken by DHR so that the innovators are assisted in their 
efforts to transfer their genuine technologies for the betterm ent of the people and provide fillip to 
the national health priorities in the process. The component is expected to take off during the year 
2025-26 wherein fund has been allocated for the purpose. The Committee observes that this is a 
brilliant initiative  to promote research and innovation in the country where the Government is 
extending a hand holding to the innovators and making clear their intent to attract and support 
talent to health care sector. The Committee hopes that as MedTech Mitra initiative catches up, the 
Department will come up a further expansion of scope of the Scheme based on the feedback 
received from the innovators and for this the establishment of a symbiotic relationship with the 
beneficiaries is essential as suggested by the name of the Scheme itself. 
(Para 3.8.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken 

20 
 
1.16.2 Under the MedTech Mitra initiative, a total of 155 specialized meetings, including 
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) Meetings and individual mentoring meetings, have been 
conducted to provide end-to-end support for medical device innovators across critical domains: 
1.16.3 Through this structured engagement, the initiative has successfully supported over 400 
innovators, offering guidance on regulatory pathways, clinical evaluation and uptake of new 
products. A dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) will be set up through HEPR Trust Fund 
bringing in further expertise into the scheme.  
 
 
1.17 Budgetary allocation of ICMR  
Recommendation 
1.17.1 The Committee finds that allocation of funds to ICMR has gradually increased from Rs 
2198.00 crore in 2022 -23 to Rs. 3125.50 crore for 2025 -26 albeit with the fillip fuelled by funds 
on account of Viksit  Bharat @2047 goals on behalf of which the RE was also scaled up during 
2024-25. Though the projected demand for 2025 -26 was to the tune of Rs. 3907.00 crore. The 
utilisation gap required to be taken care of the Committee feels that ICMR has good track of 
actual utilization trends at BE stage, the Ministry of Finance had allocated funds as per projected 
demand in ensuing 114 years. Regarding the utilisation of funds, the Committee reckons that 
ICMR has established a robust monitoring and management system u nder its DG to ensure the 
optimal utilization of allocated funds and enhance project efficiency. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends for enhancing the executing capacity of implementing agency and absorption 
capacity of projects/schemes under ICMR. 
(Para 4.5.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.17.2 DRPSC has recommended enhancing the professional efficiency of implementing 
agencies and increasing the absorption capacity of projects/schemes/programmes. We thank the 
committee for their insightful comments. DHR, along with ICMR will ensure multi -sectoral 
training in program management and implementation and focus on efficient, effective practices 
while conducting multi-sectoral projects.   
Recommendation 
1.17.3 The Committee takes cognisance of the six goals crystallised to be achieved towards 
Viksit Bharat @2047 and the funds earmarked towards the attainment of each goal. Further, a BE 
hike of Rs. 393.37 crore has been provided to ICMR for 2025 -26 compared to the last year and 
the major portion of this money has been earmarked for activities towards the attainment of goals 
that inter -alia includes development of indigenous affordable health technologies by creating 

21 
 
affordable solutions such as synthetic organs, gene therapy, and therapeutic vaccines, initiatin g 
focussed research to tackle antimicrobial resistance, childhood malnutrition, noncommunicable 
diseases, and mental health issues; plan emphasizes digital health solutions by leveraging 
artificial intelligence to build gold-standard datasets and operationalizing the National Institute of 
Digital Health and AI; and Pandemic preparedness through strengthened surveillance systems 
and the development of effective countermeasures. 
(Para 4.5.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.17.4 ICMR- DHR will be implementing all six goals of Viksit Bharat @2047 and the plan of 
utilization of funds earmarked towards its attainment has been provided in detail. 
 
Recommendation 
1.17.5 The Committee observes that ICMR -DHR shall take measures to effici ently utilise the 
sums allocated to them in general and specifically for the goals under Viksit Bharat @2047 and 
even seek additional funds which they originally demanded from the Ministry of Finance. In the 
opinion of the Committee, if DHR -ICMR is able to  pace up the effective implementation of 
undertaken schemes and programmes as per scheduled timeframe in tune with the projected 
demand of Rs. 3907 crore, the DHR could be in a better position for placing genuine claim of the 
remaining curtailed funds to t he tune of Rs. 781.5 crore at the RE stage. The Committee is in 
agreement for allocation of the whole amount projected by DHR during 2025-26.  
(Para 4.5.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.17.6 ICMR- DHR will be implementing all six goals of Viksit  Bharat @2047 and the plan of 
utilization of funds earmarked towards its attainment has been provided in detail. 
Recommendation 
1.17.7 The Committee also recognises shift in the nature of research from majorly Descriptive to 
predominantly Discovery, Develo pment and Delivery oriented. There are 1242 projects covered 
under Extramural research for Rs. 2000.00 crore, 108 projects under Intramural Research for a 
total of 1600 core and 27 projects under National Health Priorities for Rs. 500.00 crore. The 
Committee observes this shift to solution-based research as a welcome measures and the effective 
implementation, thereof, would certainly serve the humankind by improving the health of the 
common masses at affordable rate/cost. 
(Para 4.5.7 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.17.8 We thank the Hon‘ble Committee for its encouraging remarks. 

22 
 
Recommendation 
1.17.9 The Committee is of the considered view that with the robust monitoring mechanism in 
place like the real -time digital fund tracking, along with internal and external financial audits to 
ensure transparency and accountability, ICMR would adequately utilise the enhanced fund of 
about Rs. 393.00 crore in consonance with the action plan put in place.  
(Para 4.5.8 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.17.10 The grant disbursal mechanisms for different research proposals have been 
integrated in the portal. The financial monitoring has been done periodically through the Finance 
Division headed by Senior Financial Advisor of ICMR and by the finance manager of all 
schemes at DHR.  
1.17.11 The consolidated Utilization Certificate (UC) and Statement of Expenditure (SoE) 
for different project proposals are also sought for releasing further grants. The TSA expenditures 
are also monitored on EPMS portal. This has enhanced  the monitoring capacity and effective 
utilization of funds. 
1.17.12   Internal Audit by ICMR: ICMR through its Internal Audit unit of the ICMR 
audits all 27 ICMR institutes and divisions on a calendar basis and reports of the audits are 
submitted to the C AG. Besides internal audits, regular monitoring of the expenditure is being 
monitored on a weekly basis by DG, ICMR and other senior officials.  
Recommendation 
1.17.13  The Committee finds that though ICMR receives government funding, the 
Council also has avenues of generating income of its own. The Committee desires that DHR 
should furnish the details of revenue, if any, currently received by ICMR in the form of royalties 
from their patents. The Committee is of the firm opinion that ICMR 115 shall explore ways to 
generate its own income under available provisions and if needed suggest further enabling 
provisions that can be incorporated. For the present, the Committee observes that ICMR shall be 
allowed to retain the revenues that ICMR generate rather than depositing all of it to the 
Consolidated Fund of India. Further, the Committee is of the opinion that since ICMR is 
generating its own income, the same should be reflected in the Demand No 47 on the similar 
lines of Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources ( IEBR) for PSUs. The Department shall also 
furnish the details, if any, of foreign funding for national programmes as sought by the 
Committee. 
(Para 4.5.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.17.14    The Committee recommendation that ICMR shall be allowed to retain the revenues that 
ICMR generates rather than depositing all of it to the Consolidated Fund of India is a welcome 

23 
 
move. The revenue so generated is being appropriately recorded by ICMR Accoun ts section and 
shall be reflected in the Demand No 47. 
1.17.5 ICMR has recently released the Technology Transfer and Revenue sharing guidelines 
with an aim to explore revenue generation not only from the patent royalties but also from 
services such as prec linical studies, material transfer etc. The annual revenue earned by ICMR 
institutions from the transfer of technologies from the F.Y 2020 -21 to 2024 -25 is approximately 
174 Cr. Rs. 
1.18 Research/contribution/achievement of ICMR to Public Health Programmes/Policies. 
Recommendation 
1.18.1 The Committee takes note of the contribution/achievement of ICMR to public health 
programmes/policies and recommends that ICMR should continue to research projects of 
national health priorities and ultimately translating re search projects into Actionable Public 
Health Programmes. The Committee recommends DHR to give incentives to ICMR so that 
ICMR undertake large scale epidemiological and clinical studies to generate high quality 
evidence for timely policy and programmatic i nterventions. Needless to say, ICMR should 
translate health research into practical guidance by developing Standard Treatment Workflows 
(STW) and formulating Disease Management Guidelines and Modern and Advanced Training 
Modules for healthcare providers. 
(Para 4.6.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.18.2 ICMR has Standard Treatment Workflows (STW) for common and serious diseases 
which are helpful to the doctors at primary, secondary and tertiary levels. There are 4 volumes of 
Standard Treatment workflows, thes e broad guidelines are advisory, and are based on expert 
opinions and available scientific evidence.  
1.18.3 Besides that DHR has a newly established initiative called ―Centre for Evidence based 
Guidelines‖ functional since Mar 2023. The Centre is currentl y working on development of three 
evidence-based guidelines: 
• Evidence based guidelines for the use of stem cell therapy 
• Guidelines for prevention, screening, diagnosis, treatment, and palliation of lung 
cancer   
• Empirical use of antibiotic in various clinical conditions  
 
1.18.4 Further, DHR is actively supporting Institutes for advancing health care through module 
development and facilitating biomedical training. This ranges from modern biology techniques to 
virtual autopsy, plastination techniques, digital psychiatry, nutritiona l management of diseases 
and creating evidence digitally through appropriate health research methodologies. 

24 
 
1.19 Research infrastructure in rural and underserved areas  
Recommendation 
1.19.1 The Committee is very appreciative of the efforts and the results  made by ICMR to 
translate research findings are into actionable public health programmes as well as in augmenting 
research infrastructure in rural and underserved areas. Research findings are unworthy unless the 
evidence-based knowledge gained are convert ed into public health programmes/policy. In this 
complex process, the nation needs the assistance of science, infrastructure, resources, individuals 
and community. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that ICMR, as the fountainhead 
institution, should get  all the assistance, small or big, possible for marching towards National 
Health Research Priority. 
(Para 4.7.1of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.19.2 DHR is actively engaging Program Division consultations in the form of frequent 
meetings and consultation for adoption of the evidence based knowledge.  
1.19.3  Besides that DHR has an initiative called ―Centre for Evidence based Guidelines (CEG)‖ 
functional since Mar 2023. T he CEG is mandated to systematically review available evidence, 
apply the GRADE methodology, and develop robust guidelines. It also engages in training 
sessions and workshops to enhance expertise in systematic reviews and evidence synthesis.  
1.20 Findings of ICMR on COVID effects 
Recommendation 
1.20.1  The Committee feels that ICMR should proactively continue to play the role of dispelling 
misconceptions about health -related matters through their welldocumented research that may 
carry negative implications for society at large. Studies of social relevance may be taken up suo 
motu and the research findings be 116 published in lucid language discernible to the masses for 
their knowledge and keen faith. Dispelling such misconceived notions like specific covid 
vaccines had increased the likelihood of unexplained sudden death among adults aged 15 -25 
years, should be the part of efforts towards building a well informed and properly guided 
population in matters of health. 
(Para 4.8.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.20.2 ICMR aims to dispel misconceptions that COVID -19 vaccines have increased the 
likelihood of sudden cardiac death by conducting research studies in a systematic way. ICMR 
NIE conducted a study titled ―Factors associated with unexplained sudden deaths among a dults 

25 
 
aged 18 -45 years in India – A multicentric matched case –control study‖ at 47 tertiary care 
hospitals located across 19 states/UT of India during May - August 2023. This study was then 
published in a peer reviewed journal and details of which are avail able in 
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10793826/. This is made available for all to read and 
dispel misconceptions regarding vaccines. 
1.20.3 ICMR agrees with the suggestions of the Hon‘ble Committee and will continue to generate 
scientific evide nce to dispel misconceptions related to various public health policies / 
interventions. 
Recommendation 
1.20.4 The Committee notes that the study about sudden deaths has been published in the Indian 
Journal of Medical Research. It is the suggestion of the Committee that DHR should give wider 
publicity to the outcomes of such studies in the public interest through s ocial media platforms, 
community newsletters, blogs, etc., which would be the ideal use of these platforms to reach out 
to the whole population. On such platforms, medical esotericism can be replaced with clear and 
concise language which would help put the apprehensions/concerns of the masses to rest.  
(Para 4.8.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.20.5 As stated by the Hon‘ble Committee efforts will be taken to provide wider publicity of the 
outcomes of the sudden death study conducted by ICMR NIE through social media platforms, 
community newsletter etc. It will also be disseminated in simple language for easy 
understanding. In this regard, a National Media tour was organized in first week of July 2025 in 
ICMR National Institute of Epidemiology (NIE) Chennai and wide coverage was given in the 
national and local press to the ICMR study. 
1.21 Air pollution as major health risk factor 
Recommendation 
1.21.1 The Committee reckons air pollution as a health hazard that has emerged as a major 
challenge. The efforts initiated by ICMR to study the health implications of air pollution are 
taken note of. However, it is apparent that we have rather unchartered paths to travel in this 
direction. Earlier, air pollution was thought of as a threat in a handful of big cities like Delhi. But 
now, even small towns are affected. However, the Committee is aware that the control of air 
pollution warrants multi-agency involvement. So, the Committee feels strongly that air pollution 
is a subject that needs intervention akin to the Mission, where inter -departmental/organisational 
coordination is ensured through an institutionalised structure. The Committee recommends that 
DHR-ICMR should come up with an effective plan to research more about the ill effects of air 
pollution and make available ways to counter its adverse effects. The action taken in this 
direction shall be intimated to the Committee. 

26 
 
(Para 4.9.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.21.2  ―ICMR‘S Task Force Study on Epidemiology of Chronic Respiratory Illness in Select 
Population Groups in India CRISPI Project‖ is ongoing in 9 centers (ICMR -NIIRNCD, Jodhpur 
,ICMR-NIE, Chennai, ICMR -NIOH, Ahmedabad, ICMR-NIREH, Bhopal, NEIGRIHMS, 
Shillong, ICAM -Kolkata, ROHC(S), Bengaluru, NIHFW, New Delhi, SRH University, 
Dehradun) The study proposed to examine the effect of air pollutants on natural history of 
Chronic Respiratory Illness in geographical, socioeconom ic and culturally diverse settings. This 
study will help ascertain prevalence as well. This study will help create an inventory of pollutants 
in various land use pattern scenarios and spatio -temporal profile of CRI will be created for the 
first time in India. 
1.21.3 Health Advisory on Air Pollution by National Centre for Disease Control, Directorate 
General of Health Services, MoHFW are regularly issued depending on the air pollution levels. 
These address the increasing health concerns as a consequence of air pollution across the country. 
MoEFCC has also conducted a 20 city study to correlate excess mortality with air pollution in 
which ICMR‘s institute NIOH and NIREH have participated as study centers.  
1.22 DHR-ICMR Advanced Molecular Oncology Diagnostic Services (DIAMOnDS) 
Scheme 
Recommendation 
1.22.1 The Committee is aware that rising incidence of cancer among the population, especially 
among the youth, in recent times, is alarmingly high. The government is taking measures to battle 
the menace, which enc ompasses initiatives for prevention, detection and treatment including 
palliation. The Committee understands that DIAMOnDS is a Scheme aimed to set up 
oncopathology labs for providing basic as well as high -end advanced diagnostic services to 
cancer patients and research facilities for basic, translational and clinical research. Early detection 
is the best approach in the treatment of cancer and the Committee notes that this sets apart the 
DIAMOnDS scheme as a vital one. The Committee also acknowledges and a ppreciates the 
spread of Regional Hubs and Centres across the country.  
(Para 4.10.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.22.2 The total number of DIAMOnDS hubs/centres established are 25, including 4 regional 
hubs, 19 DIAMOnDS  centres, one data management centre at ICMR -NCDIR, Bengaluru, and 
one quality assessment centre at ICMR -NICHDR, Delhi. In the financial year 2025 -26, 3 more 
new centres will be established 
Recommendation 

27 
 
1.22.3 Having said that, the Committee also expresses its c oncern on the fact that as per the data 
of ICMR - National Centre for Disease Informatics and Research (NCDIR), Age Adjusted 
Incidence Rates (AAR) for all sites of cancer are higher in the North Eastern Region. The NER is 
burdened with most incidences of c ancer compared to other areas of the country, as well as 
inadequate cancer treatment facilities. The Committee finds that there is only one DIAMOnDS 
Centre in Imphal that is for the whole of NER. In this regard, the Committee, in its 137th DFG 
2022-23 Report, has already recommended for setting up of more oncopathology labs in the NER 
and the Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation as the Committee feels that there is a 
pressing need to understand the distinctive cancer patterns of this region, ide ntify priorities for 
targeted research and develop appropriate programmes to address the lack of requisite public 
health measures in the region. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that ICMR -DHR should 
embark on a study on these lines, at the earliest, if not undertaken so far. 
(Para 4.10.4 of the Report) 
 
 
Action Taken 
1.22.4 The total number of DIAMOnDS hubs/centres established are 25, including 4 regional 
hubs, 19 DIAMOnDScentres, one data management centre at ICMR-NCDIR, Bengaluru, and one 
quality assessment centre at ICMR-NICHDR, Delhi.There are 3 centres in the NER  
1. RIMS Imphal, Manipur 
2. Cachar Cancer Hospital, Silchar,Assam and  
3. Dr.B Baroooh Cancer Institute, Guwahati, Assam 
1.22.5   The ICMR‘s National Cancer Registry P rogramme (NCRP) has been in existence since 
1982 and functions through Population and Hospital Based Cancer Registries (PBCR and HBCR) 
across different states in India. As of now there are 38 PBCRs. More than 268 Hospital Based 
Cancer Registries have been registered under NCDIR –NCRP. These different registries are at 
different geographical locations. It deals with various cancer sites in the body. Data from the 
registry is utilized to estimate the incidence, prevalence and mortality of various cancers. Dat a is 
also utilized to understand the geographical variations in cancer incidence along with 
pathological sites. Currently more than 1000 cancer projects are running in cancer under ICMR.  
1.23 AI for early detection of cancers 
Recommendation 
1.23.1  The  Committee, while acknowledging AI as a viable technique in the arena of early 
cancer detection, is apprehensive about its possible drawbacks. To make AI a success the basic 
requirement is large amount of quality data, algorithms to examine the voluminous data with 
precision & accuracy for efficient diagnosis and last but not the least comes the ethical concerns. 

28 
 
To overcome these impediments, the Committee feels that Government needs to invest in R&D, 
requires active collaboration across disciplines, formu lation of standards guidelines, capacity 
building of clinicians and researchers to make successful use of technology of AI in medical 
field, which is at a nascent stage now. The Committee is also concerned to note that in case of 
cancer treatment the outco mes are not in sync with global standards as advanced targeted 
therapies by making use of genomics and proteomics is not widely done in India. The 
Committee, accordingly, advocates for cutting edge research in the field of genomics and 
proteomics and also suggests that the outcome of these studies be made available to common 
citizens so that early detection and cure of cancer reaches the common population.  
(Para 4.12.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.23.2 ICMR Ethical Guidelines for the Application of Artificial intelligence in Biomedical 
research and healthcare, 2023, provides an ethical framework for conducting AI -based research. 
As AI is significantly impacting the early detection of cancer by enhancing the speed, accuracy, 
and reliability of various screening and detection methods . AI algorithms can analyze medical 
images, such as mammograms and CT scans, and identify subtle signs of cancer that may be 
missed by the human eye. Furthermore, AI is being used to analyze tissue samples, predict cancer 
development, and personalize treatment plans.  
Research in genomics and proteomics 
1.23.3 ICMR has funded many projects in the field of genomics and proteomics for cancer. Few 
among them are: 
a) ―Identification of non -invasive microRNA and proteomic biomarkers in plasma 
for early detection of Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Indian 
patients‖. The research output of the study revealed the importance of specific 
CD44 and HA variants in plasm a of HNSCC patients during its development as a 
potential non-invasive molecular biomarker of the disease. 
b) "Genetic Polymorphisms and Genomic Determinants of Acute Normal Tissue 
Toxicity after Radiotherapy for Head and Neck Malignancy‖. This research is  
helpful in understanding the role of genetic polymorphisms in radiation -induced 
acute toxicity. The findings provide a valuable contribution toward improving 
personalized care in radiotherapy for head and neck cancer patients. 
c) "Diagnostic Application o f Genomic and Epigenetic profiling of Circulating free 
DNA in Gall bladder Carcinoma". The study has identified circulating biomarkers 
that could enable early, non -invasive detection of Gall Bladder Cancer, reducing 
reliance on invasive tissue biopsies. De velopment of a blood -based liquid biopsy 
test incorporating the validated biomarkers to improve early-stage diagnosis. 

29 
 
d) "Evaluation of prognostic and therapeutics biomarkers in meningiomas"; ―Tumor 
microenvironment-modulation therapy in breast -cancer-subtypes and Single -cell 
genomics based patient stratification for improved low -dose immunotherapy: 
Preclinical and Clinical study‖; " Mapping the genomic landscape of Indian 
Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia (JMML) patients by whole genome 
sequencing; and The rapeutic potential of Diosmin/Diosgenin against prostate 
cancer: a proteome-based study . 
Recommendation 
1.23.4 The Committee is given to understand that other than pure medical knowledge upskilling 
physicians & clinicians in areas like prompt engineering as such is quite a herculean task. 
Accordingly, the Committee recommends ICMR -National Institute of Cancer Prevention and 
Research (ICMR -NICPR) to undertake measures to help smooth incorporation of AI into the 
medical field, especially in the field of prev ention, detection and treatment of Cancer. The 
Committee further recommends that the DIAMOnDS Scheme may be recalibrated to include 
these measures during the period of the 16th Finance Commission.  
(Para 4.12.2 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.23.5   ICMR-IISc Centre for Medical Image Datasets (MIDAS) is focused on strengthening the 
India AI ecosystem in India by providing high -quality, standardized datasets for medical 
imaging. It is playing a crucial role in AI -driven healthcare innovation, supporting res earchers, 
startups, and clinicians in developing reliable AI solutions while ensuring fair, ethical, and 
clinically relevant AI applications. The imaging datasets for oral cancer and dural based lesions 
are available. ( https://midas.iisc.ac.in/collections/b6e37308-a61d-461e-9704-cb7d733c6b24). 
Also, the recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted. 
1.24 Public-Private partnerships in medical research  
Recommendation 
1.24.1 The Committee observes the move of DHR -ICMR to set up a Section 8 Company, 
MIDAC, to foster innovation in medical field by handholding healthcare innovators. This move 
would help them to overcome the challenges of developmental stages and get their 
technology/product to the market. The Committee feels that along with promoting scientific 
talent, it is equally important to create avenues for the researchers and innovators to market their 
products/findings. Regulatory frameworks, a technology/product has to g o through during 
developmental stages, has been put in place to ensure the quality, safety and effectiveness of the 
product. However, many a times, innovators find traversing this labyrinth more difficult than 
discovering the product itself. Hence, it is o nly appropriate that the developmental stages, a new 

30 
 
technology/product has to go through, before it can be commercially made available, are 
christened as ‗Valley of Death‖.  
(Para 4.13.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.24.2  In response to the Hon‘ble  Committee's recommendations, the Department of Health 
Research has envisioned several focused interventions under MIDAC, including the MedTech 
Mitra initiative, to directly address the challenges faced by healthcare innovators: 
i)   Establishment of MIDAC as a Section 8 Company: MIDAC is proposed to be 
established as a not -for-profit corporate entity under the Companies Act, 2013, 
with the core mandate to facilitate the translation of research into commercially 
viable products. MIDAC will act as a central platform to address barriers in 
clinical validation, intellectual property management, regulatory navigation and 
technology transfer. 
ii)  Bridging the "Valley of Death": Recognizing the developmental void many 
innovations face, MIDAC will provide structur ed handholding, grant support and 
validation infrastructure. Through dedicated sub -schemes like Validation and 
Evaluation Support to Medical Innovations (VESMI)  and Biomedical Product 
Development and Management (BPDM) , MIDAC will fund innovations from 
early-stage concept through to regulatory-ready status. 
iii) MedTech Mitra Platform Operationalization: Under MIDAC, the MedTech Mitra 
platform will be scaled up to assist startups, SMEs and academic innovators by 
providing expert guidance on regulatory pathwa ys, clinical trials and IP filing. It 
will facilitate access to ICMR‘s trial networks and regulatory support from 
CDSCO and engages in capacity building to empower innovators in navigating 
technical and legal requirements. 
iv) Support for Regulatory Compli ance and Risk De -Risking: MIDAC enables 
accelerated clinical validation and performance evaluation, especially for 
diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines, which often stagnate due to lack of 
regulatory clarity or infrastructural support. The platform will also assist in pre -
submission regulatory guidance and post -market surveillance studies, enhancing 
trust and product quality. 
v) Enhancing Public -Private Partnerships: MIDAC has formalized collaborations 
with industry and research organizations to promote t ranslational research through 
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP), a key mechanism to bridge resource and 
expertise gaps. 

31 
 
1.24.3  The establishment of MIDAC and the expansion of MedTech Mitra will represent a direct 
and comprehensive response to the Committee's observations. These initiatives are strategically 
designed to de -risk innovation, overcome regulatory hurdles and enable faster access of 
indigenous medical technologies to the market; thereby transforming the ―Valley of Death‖ into a 
bridge to success for Indian healthcare innovators. 
Recommendation 
1.24.4  The Committee endorses the importance of setting up a dedicated entity to handhold the 
healthcare innovators in their research to market journey. The choice of a Section 8 company also 
prima facie looks apt to the Committee as the elimination of profit motive helps in concentrating 
on the goals effectively, though there are other statutory benefits as well. The Committee desires 
the DHR to furnish the details of the rationale for setting up of MIDAC as a Section 8 Company. 
(Para 4.13.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.24.5 In alignment with the Hon‘ble  Committee's endorsement, the Department of Health 
Research (DHR) has strategically proposed establishment of the Medical Innovations 
Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC) as a Section 8 Company under the Companies Act, 
2013, for the following key reasons: 
a) Non-Profit Mandate Aligned with Public Health Goals: MIDAC is envisioned not 
as a revenue -generating enterprise but as a mission -driven enabler to bridge the 
gap between biomedical research and public access to affordable technologies. A 
Section 8 structure ensures legal and institutional alignment with public health 
imperatives, free from commercial pressures, thus maintaining scientific integrity, 
equity and transparency. 
b) Flexibility and Operational Autonomy:  As a Section 8 Company, MIDAC can 
function with greater agility and efficiency than traditional government 
departments, allowing quick decision -making in areas such as IP licensing, 
contract execution, hiring technical experts and fund mobilization. It offers a 
suitable legal platform to form multi-sectoral partnerships with academia, industry 
and international donors; critical for translational research. 
c) Statutory and Financial Advantages: MIDAC can receive grants, donations, CSR 
funds and equity -free investments and is eligible for tax exemptions under 
Sections 12AA and 80G of the Income Tax Act. These benefits make MIDAC an 
attractive and credible partner for private stakeholders and philanthropic 
institutions seeking to invest in public health innovation. 

32 
 
d) Precedents from Other Strat egic Government Initiatives: Successful Section 8 
entities such as BIRAC (DBT), iDEX (Defence)and IN -SPACe (ISRO) 
demonstrate the effectiveness of this model in driving sectoral innovation.MIDAC 
draws inspiration from these to address the unique challenges of India‘s healthcare 
innovation ecosystem; particularly for technologies with limited immediate 
commercial demand but high national health value. 
e) Institutional Synergy and IP Stewardship:  Operating under the aegis of DHR, 
MIDAC complements ICMR‘s rese arch mandate by facilitating clinical 
validation, IP protection and technology transfer —functions which require an 
independent but closely aligned organizational entity.It allows the management of 
IP rights, royalties and industry licensing with profession al autonomy, enabling 
reinvestment into innovation and ecosystem development. 
f) Accountability and Governance: MIDAC will be governed by a Board of 
Directors, including senior officials from DHR, MoHFW and independent experts, 
ensuring transparency, accountability and strategic alignment with national health 
priorities. 
1.24.6 Establishing MIDAC as a Section 8 Company allows the Department of Health Research 
to institutionalize a mission -oriented, flexible and collaborative platform dedicated to advancing 
health innovations. This model ensures the focus remains on public good rather than profit, 
aligning perfectly with the goals endorsed by the Committee and ensuring effective 
implementation of India‘s biomedical innovation strategy. 
Recommendation 
1.24.7  The Committee notes that proposal for MIDAC has got in -principle by DHR approval of 
Department of Expenditure, M/oFinance. Though Rs 200.00 cr. was sought for MIDAC in BE 
2025-26, but the fund was not allocated as the final approval for MIDAC is yet to be received. 
The Committee is of the firm opinion that if MIDAC is incorporated with the stated objective, as 
presented before the Committee by Secretary, DHR, it would be a path breaking measure. 
Accordingly, the Committee strongly recommends that DHR shall pursue the final approvals for 
MIDAC fervently and that the M/o Finance should allocate the required funds for the company 
on high priority. 
(Para 4.13.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.24.8   We thank the Hon‘ble Committee for its support. 
1.25 ICMR Data Repository  
Recommendation 

33 
 
1.25.1 The Committee notes the involvement of ICMR in validating the safety and effectiveness 
of traditional Indian medicines. The Committee, however, feels that the greatest drawback of 
traditional Indian medicines is the lack of scientific evidence for treatmen ts of various diseases, 
leading to concerns about safety and efficacy. Under the guidance and handholding of ICMR, the 
scientific validation, which the traditional Indian medicines is deprived of, can be rectified. The 
Committee recommends ICMR to take up effective steps in the direction of the scientific 
validation of data documented in IKS Repository since the Government has plans rolling in to 
transform the national digital repository into Indian knowledge systems. 
(Para 4.16.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.25.2  ICMR has already taken steps and initiative  in validating the safety and effectiveness of 
traditional Indian medicines. Under a recent initiative made in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Ayush, more than 12 clinical studies on AYUSH medicines using integrative medicine approach 
have been initiated. Under this collaboration,   Ayush-ICMR advanced center for Integrative 
health Research at four AIIMS (New Delhi, Rishiskesh, Jodhpur, Nagpur) have been  established. 
Beside this few other clinical tria ls on validation of Ayush medicines have been completed and 
few others clinical trials on AYUSH medicines validati on are in progress including a  major 
clinical trial on anemia in women.   Apart from above more than 50 publications have been made 
by ICMR on the Quality Parameters and Evidence on Safety of Indian Medicinal Plants.   
1.25.3 ICMR, National Institute of Traditional Medicine located in Belagavi, Karnataka is the 
premier Institute of ICMR family that has been working on generating scientific eviden ce for 
traditional and integrative medicine (TM & IM).   It has infrastructure and expertise in different 
aspects of validation of IKS that includes the validation cycle consisting of Documentation of use 
Ethnobotany & Ethnomedicine, Ethnopharmacognosy, Nat ural Product Chemistry, Safety & 
Toxicity, Bioinformatics, Microbiology, Molecular Biology and Immunology, Preclinical 
Pharmacology (efficacy), Clinical Research and Clinical Trials in TM and IH. Therefore, it is 
working on filling up evidence gaps that ex ist in the cycle of validation with respect to Indian 
Traditional Medicines. Some of the areas that the institute is working on are lifestyle conditions 
(like diabetes and arthritis), metabolic conditions (like obesity, anaemia), difficult to treat 
diseases (like cancers) and viral diseases.  Currently, the Institute is conducting clinical and 
community trials with selected Ayurvedic and Traditional Medicine based formulations for 
osteoarthritis, obesity and anaemia. This is to generate evidence for IKS that  can be seamlessly 
integrated into the conventional healthcare system. 
1.25.4 Further, studies on several other traditional medicine formulations are underway at 
different levels, especially for antimicrobial resistance, viral hepatitis, diabetes and funga l 
infections.  
1.25.5 ICMR-NITM Belagavi has made a network of Clinical Research sites suitable for taking 
up research for validation of TMs and for Integrative Health. 

34 
 
1.25.6 ICMR-NITM is also carrying out capacity building of AYUSH professionals and also  
allopathy/conventional) modern medicine professionals to gear them up for taking clinical 
research on validation of TM for Integrative health and wellbeing.  The institute routinely 
conducts stakeholders meetings with the top officials across various domai ns of AYUSH and 
leading Medical Colleges and Hospitals like AIIMS as well. Through the efforts of ICMR 
institutes led by ICMR-NITM, it's collaborators, partners and mentee institutes and facilities, it is 
expected that there will be a rapid surge in valida tion of IKS in medicine and health in tune with 
the Viksit Bharat vision. 
1.26 Affordable Healthcare 
Recommendation 
1.26.1   The Committee reiterates its recommendation expecting the D/o H& FW and DHR to 
take concrete steps to reduce the cost of healthcare to save the household from huge financial loss 
on account of treatment of critical illness. The Committee finds that the plethora of measures 
being taken by the Government has limited succe ss in making the healthcare affordable, 
therefore, the Committee recommends the Government to continue to make its efforts to reduce 
the cost of healthcare especially treatment of cancer and implants of heart diseases, spine & brain 
to a larger extent so t hat the middle class and the poor section of the society may be protected 
from scourge of poverty. The Committee opines that the Department should popularize the 
‗Affordable Medicine and Reliable Implants for Treatment‘, Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya 
Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) and set up Medico Technical Institute to make the healthcar e 
more affordable.  
(Para 5.1.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.26.2   Health Technology Assessment in India (HTAIjn), an attached of DHR, HTAIn has 
played a crucial role in optimizing healthcare costs and quality under Ayushman Bharat PMJAY, 
benefiting crores of people. HTAIn provided cost evidence for 1573 Health benefit packages and 
supported revision of 857 Health Benefit packages of the Ayushman Bharat -Pradhan Mantri Jan 
Aarogya Yojana. HTA also recommended that the cost of these packages be utilized by CGHS 
and other insurance companies. Additionally, HTAIn‘s evidence -based recommendations have 
been incorporated into national clinical guidelines, including those for cervical cancer, to enhance 
healthcare quality and accessibility. 
1.26.3   Cost effectiveness of the anti -cancer drug, Trastuzumab recommended that using it for 
six months was cost effective compared to one year. This evidence was used to revise the 
Standard Treatm ent Guidelines for Trastuzumab package at National Health Authority that 
resulted in an annual cost saving of INR 416 crores. 

35 
 
1.26.4   Through Health Technology Assessment (HTAIn), cost -effective innovations are 
identified and scaled within public health programs e.g., Safety -Engineered Syringes, cervical 
cancer screening kits.  
1.26.5   Additionally, Medical Innovations Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC), a  
Section-8 not-for-profit company is being proposed under DHR, to foster innovation and de -risk 
biomedical research critical to public health, especially in areas where commercial interest may 
be limited. MIDAC will support the development and scale -up of indigenous devices, 
diagnostics, vaccines, and therapeutics through innovative public -private partnerships, funding, 
validation, and regulatory facilitation. 
1.26.6   The Hon‘ble Committee‘s recommendations regarding publicizing of the Schemes are 
noted. 
1.27 Animal Labs  
Recommendation 
1.27.1 As part of the evolution of medicines, vaccines, inject ables, ointments and other pharma 
products animal trial has been a historically established global practise. Unfortunately, due to the 
approach adopted by animal right activist in setting up of testing labs with facilities of trials on 
animals has suffered  immensely. The impact can be assessed when one compares the research 
and the outcome of the vaccine labs in Indonesia vis -a-vis CRI, Kasauli. Lack of proper animal 
testing facilities has resulted in a setback to research in India. The Committee advocates for a 
balanced approach so that the process of research and trials through animal testing labs is not 
adversely affected. The Committee also recommends that setting up of animal testing labs in 
India should be established more in number and made easier and  rationally regulated, then and 
only then ICMR can develop these implants at cheaper rate. 
(Para 5.2.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.27.2 Considering the growing demand from academic/research institutes/pharma  and biotech 
industries, the need to create a state -of-the-art resource facility for pre -clinical research of trials 
on animals was ascertained. ICMR has established National Animal Resource Facility for 
Biomedical Research (NARFBR), a state -of-the-art infrastructural facility for pre -clinical animal 
experimentation under one roof for basic, applied and regulatory research in the country. The 
NARFBR houses canines, equines, primates, rodents, small ruminants breeding, quarantine, 
experimentation, independent houses and containment facilities for all.  
1.27.3 ICMR-DHR-Large Animal House Facility, Center of Excellence at Andhra Pradesh 
Medical Technology (AMTZ), health and medical technology zone is built in a 10,000 sq. ft 
space as per GLP norms in compliance with ISO 14644 -1 for Class 8 and Class 7, with the n on-
classified area maintained with the highest standard of material and process flow. The Large 

36 
 
Animal House Facility (LAHF) has the capacity to conduct research studies with two different 
species of large animals in a separate containment with respective isolation, holding, and 
quarantine rooms. ICMR -DHR (LAHF) is a full service Pre -clinical CRO offering drug 
development & discovery services to pharmaceutical & biotech companies across the globe in 
accordance with OECD - GLP, AAALAC & IND guidelines. LAHF offers a full battery of 
services in the areas of  In vivo & In vitro  toxicity studies LAHF offers Pharmacological 
investigations, Pharmacokinetic &toxicokinetic  studies,Genotoxicity  screening, Analytical 
services. LAHF provides regulatory and non -regulatory IND enabling preclinical development 
services capable of screening & evaluating molecules for various pharmacological & therapeutic 
properties. Specifically for oncology, our scie ntists can provide design & development of 
syngeneic / xenograft models for evaluation of anti -cancer agents. LAHF can customize In vivo 
DMPK studies to help profiling the drug candidate in both rodent and non -rodent animal 
models.The facility has Beagle D og models, swine models, sheep and Goat models, and small 
animal studies (rabbit, mice, rat etc) for experimentation in different studies.  
1.27.4 Besides this large facility, there are other ICMR institutes which have animal facility for 
utilizing animals  for their own use and providing it to other institutes in the country for 
biomedical research, as under:  
1.27.5 National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad has the animal facility, the feed preparation 
facility, the breeding and maintenance facility. The facility is utilized to provide animal support 
in research studies to NIN‘s nutritional research and also to provide laboratory animals in 
biomedical research to other institutes in the country.  
1.27.6 National institute for Research in Reproductive and Child Health, Mumbai has the facility 
that undertakes animal breeding, management, care and husbandry practices. The facility houses 
different laboratory animals viz. mice, rats, rabbits and nonhuman primates like marmosets and 
bonnet monkeys. The facility is engaged in the production of quality animals by undertaking 
various quality control programs and preventive measures. The facility has an Individual 
Ventilated Caging System (IVC) to house rodents to prevent cross-contamination. 
1.27.7 Vector Control Research Centre (VCRC), Puducherry has the facility of breeding colonies 
of BALB/c mice ( Mus musculus ), Mongolian gerbils ( Meriones unguiculatus ) and 
multimammate rats (Mastomyscoucha).  
1.27.8 Besides that, other ICMR institutes like National JALMA for Lepr osy and other 
Mycobacterial Diseases, Agra; National Institute of Immunohaematology, Mumbai also have 
animal care facilities. 
1.28 Elimination of Tuberculosis  
Recommendation 
1.28.1 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that ICMR should oversee a 
countrywide screening programme to be done through portable x -ray machines to detect 

37 
 
tuberculosis at an early stage in consultation with the State Governments. Suitable advisories 
need to be issued to all States so that scourge of TB is eliminated from India within a stipulated 
time.  
(Para 5.4.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.28.2 In reference to Para 5.4.1, regarding the recommendation of ICMR to oversee a 
countrywide TB screening pro gram through portable X -ray machines in consultation with State 
Governments, the following points are submitted: 
1.28.3 Despite achieving the highest -ever case notifications with 26.07 lakh TB cases reported 
under national program, approximately 10% cases (2.5 lakh cases) are still missed, continuing the 
chain of transmission in the community. The National TB Prevalence Survey revealed that 
nearly1/3rd of TB patients identified were asymptomatics, underscoring the limitations of 
symptom-based screening alon e.  Also, during the recent 100 -Day TB Elimination Campaign, 
39.6% of TB cases (2.85 lakh out of 7.19) were asymptomatics who were primarily identified 
through increased use of upfront chest X -ray examination coupled with molecular testing. This  
has reaffirmed the crucial role of chest X -ray imaging in systematic TB screening. The WHO 
also recommends the systematic screening of high risk individuals using mobile handheld X -ray 
integrated with artificial intelligence (AI) tools. 
1.28.4 In this regard, ICMR has been actively validating the portable handheld X -ray devices 
and has encouraged domestic manufacturing to enhance supply, promote competitiveness and 
reduce costs. To date, five such devices have been validated by ICMR and are being used in field 
settings. Additionally, DHR -ICMR has recommended three AI -based tools for real -time 
interpretation of chest X -rays in settings where expert radiological opinion is scarce. 
Complementing these advances, ICMR has also validated and recommended cost -effective, true 
point-of-care molecular tests, providing an opportunity to scale up molecular diagnostics 
enabling faster and reliable confirmation of TB cases. 
1.28.5 Building on these developments and the success of the 100 -Day Intensified TB 
Elimination Campaign across 347 districts in 33 states using the portable handheld X -rays (n=84) 
provided by the ICMR, the MoH&FW is now expanding community -based Active Case Finding 
(ACF) initiatives to all districts in the country where systematic screening of high -risk and  
vulnerable populations is prioritized. These portable devices have been found acceptable in 
communities and easy to operate in remote and hard -to-reach areas. Active community 
engagement, with the involvement of local health workers such as ASHA workers i n the ACF 
strategy, will significantly aid in the early detection of TB cases and identification of missed 
cases, effectively breaking the chain of transmission. 
1.28.6 A continuous ACF monitoring mechanism, data management system, and periodic review 
at both State and Central levels through the national TB program are essential to ensure robust 
oversight, accountability, and progress towards the country‘s TB elimination goals. 

38 
 
1.29 Testing facilities for medical devices 
Recommendation 
1.29.1 The Committee came across that India with its huge population needs to have its own 
indigenous medical devices industry. The Committee is of the opinion that adequate testing 
facilities for medical devices are not available within the country. As an exampl e, ICMR even 
though it certifies radiological devices like x -rays etc. but lacks any testing laboratory for testing 
of such devices. Such laboratories to check radiological devices are available with the Atomic 
Energy Regulatory Board (AERB). The Committee  recommends for an integrated and 
collaborative approach between CSIR, AERB, DBT, FSSAI Labs and other such institutions may 
be evolved so that their respective strength could be used instead of duplicating such facilities 
and at the same time facilitating industry.  
(Para 5.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.29.2 The Department of Health Research fully concurs with the Committee's view on the 
urgent need for a coordinated and resource -efficient national testing ecosystem for medical 
devices. 
1.29.3 Role of MIDAC in Building a Collaborative Testing Network: The proposed Medical 
Innovations Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC) will establish a networked framework 
of collaborative testing laboratories in partnership with: 
1.29.4 Public sector institutions: CSIR labs, AERB, DBT -affiliated labs, FSSAI testing centers 
and MoHFW-ICMR, CDSCO approved labs. 
1.29.5 Private sector partners: NABL -accredited labs and validated industry facilities. This 
integrated ecosystem will be mapped and managed through a centrali zed access platform under 
MIDAC, enabling seamless routing of device validation and testing based on domain expertise 
and infrastructure availability. 
1.29.6 Avoidance of Duplication and Optimal Use of Existing Infrastructure: MIDAC will 
utilize existing national infrastructure for device testing rather than replicating facilities, thereby 
reducing redundancy and maximizing cost -efficiency. For example, radiological device testing 
will continue to rely on AERB's specialized infrastructure, while other biological and engineering 
validation tasks may be delegated to CSIR or DBT, ICMR laboratories as appropriate. 
1.29.7 Development of Validation Protocols and Standards: MIDAC will coordinate with 
regulatory agencies including CDSCO and BIS to ensure that common  validation protocols are 
adopted across the network. This effort will help standardize testing practices, reduce timelines 
and provide confidence to industry innovators, especially MSMEs and startups. 

39 
 
1.29.8 Industry Facilitation and Cost -Effective Access : MIDAC will act as a single -window 
facilitator for medical device innovators seeking validation support. Fee-based access models will 
be developed for industry while ensuring subsidized support for strategic or public health -priority 
innovations. This will ensure MIDAC future self-sustainability. 
1.29.9 DHR, through MIDAC, is committed to establishing a nationally integrated, collaborative 
and non-duplicative laboratory network to support testing of  medical devices. This will promote 
self-reliance, reduce regulatory bottlenecks and significantly facilitate the growth of India‘s 
indigenous medical device industry, as envisioned by the Hon‘ble Committee. 
Recommendation 
1.29.10 Besides, the Committee also recommends that the procedure/protocol for 
registration of medical devices/drugs should be made more transparent, user -friendly 122 and 
time bound to facilitate the growth of Industry in these areas. The procedure should be clearly 
made evident on the website of the department concerned along with allocation o f nodal officers 
to guide the medical devices/pharma industry.  
(Para 5.5.1 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken 
1.29.11 To guide the medical devices/ pharma industry and to address the challenges faced 
by the innovators and empower the MedTech ecosystem, NITI Aayog, Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organization (CDSCO) and ICMR have joined hands to create a common platform as 
‗MedTech Mitra‘ for providing handholding support to innovators for clinical evaluation, 
regulatory facilitation and uptake of new products . It aims to foster development of affordable 
and accessible indigenous Medical devices and In-vitro diagnostics by providing strategic holistic 
handholding to MedTech innovators for technology development, evaluation and HTA leading to 
uptake of new products. 
1.29.12 The scope of facilitation services proposed to be offered by ‗MedTech Mitra for 
Fostering product development through Engineers and Clinicians partnership are as follows: 
● ICMR shall provide handholding support to innovators for regulatory faci litation, pre -
clinical and/or clinical evaluation, Guidelines & Health Technology Assessment (HTA) 
and uptake of new products. 
● To act as ‗Information source‘ for: Applicable Standards; Testing and/or Manufacturing 
facilities; Funding Opportunity & I.P. Advisory 
1.29.13 Impact So Far: 
❖ 450 + queries received from start-ups, companies, institutes, and individuals 

40 
 
❖ 340+ queries addressed through 30 Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) meetings 
❖ 20+ technologies received test license as a step for regulatory approval processes 
❖ 20+ technologies recommended for Testing support in compliance with standards at 
ICMR-CAR-AMTZ center 
❖ 35+ technologies recommended for clinical study protocol drafting and/or clinical 
evaluation 
9 technologies recommended for Health Technology Assessment 
1.30 Fresh areas of Research by ICMR 
Recommendation 
1.30.1 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by ICMR to overcome the acute M.I. in 
young population, infertility, ageing problems, early puberty, refractive errors at early a ge, 
premature greying of hair, rare diseases like Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, Rabies and Tetanus 
and the findings of its research in recent hair loss cases in Buldhana. The Committee understands 
that the research project and findings thereof would lead to  policy/programme formulation that 
would prevent the identified aberrations. The Committee further hopes that AMR surveillance 
network and guidelines issued by ICMR would create awareness on rising levels of antimicrobial 
resistance in Indian population.  
(Para 5.6.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.30.2 ICMR AMR Surveillance Network has been expanded to secondary level hospitals, which 
has enhanced its reach and impact beyond tertiary care. Regular training and workshops on the 
basics of Antimicrobial suscept ibility testing, antimicrobial stewardship and data management 
systems have been conducted in over 60 hospitals across the country. Regular awareness 
exercises are carried out on social media and other platforms.  
1.30.3 ICMR has undertaken several researc h initiatives, including the AMR network 
comprising 21 tertiary care hospitals, which publishes an annual report. Additionally, an 
Antimicrobial Stewardship (AMS) implementation project has been initiated in these 21 
hospitals, all of which have developed their own antibiotic policies.   
1.31  Incentivizing CSR into Health Research Projects 
Recommendation 
1.31.1 The Committee takes note that ICMR has made revision in its Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) Guidelines allowing CSR funds to be directed toward private sector 
partners for collaborative research projects. The Committee recommends ICMR to strive to 
secure alternative funding sources for critical healthcare research and development initiatives, 
thereby enhancing social impact. The Committee is in agreement with the DHR that 
establishment of a Section 8 company, namely Medical Innovations Development Acc eleration 

41 
 
Company (MIDAC), will serve as a dedicated entity to accelerate R&D, facilitate funding, and 
drive commercialization of innovative healthcare solutions. The establishment of the MIDAC, 
which will serve as a dedicated platform for accelerating res earch translation, fostering public -
private partnerships, and promoting the commercialization of innovative healthcare solutions.  
(Para 5.9.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.31.2 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted for compliance. 
1.31.3 ICMR has framed guidelines for the CSR funds utilization and in the process of engaging 
the PSUs towards utilization of CSR funds for research on developing medical countermeasures 
where private companies are not motivated enough to take R&D due to small market size.  
1.31.4 As recommended by the Hon‘ble Committee, MIDAC will be established as a section 8 
company under the ambit of DHR which will be a promising platform to accelerate public private 
partnerships for promoting development and commercializatio n of healthcare solutions. MIDAC 
is expected to open up alternative funding sources for ICMR/DHR to foster critical healthcare 
research and development initiatives, thereby enhancing social impact. 
 
1.32 Priority area in National Health Research Programme (NHRP) 
Recommendation 
1.32.1 The Committee takes note of the funding details of various projects in priority area under 
NHRP and the timelines of the implementation. The Committee desires that each project under 
NHRP must be completed within the stipulated  timeframe and serve the humankind as per 
originally conceived objectives. Moreover, the Committee would like to know the details of 
beneficiaries and organizations seeking the grant, the status of progress made towards the 
implementation of the health res earch projects and the outcome of the completed projects. DHR 
may submit quarterly report to the Committee about the progress of ongoing health projects 
under NHRP. The Committee also desires to know the quality assessment of the findings  of the 
health projects report. 
(Para 5.10.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.32.2 In ICMR, a total of 30 National Health Research Priority (NHRP) projects are currently 
ongoing. These large multi -centric projects span from discovery to delivery research covering 
important areas of national health priorities. There are 4 NHRP projects cu rrently ongoing in 
child health, 3 in cancers and 2 each in anaemia, mental health, antimicrobial resistance, vector 

42 
 
borne disease and health systems. Other important areas in which NHRP projects are currently 
ongoing include Tuberculosis, maternal health, emergency care, and elderly health.  
1.32.3 Currently these 30 NHRP projects are at different stages such as protocol development to 
the hiring of the staff. Some of the projects have progressed towards the research tools designing 
and pilot testing in the fields.  
1.32.4 Projects in the second year are engaged in the process of data collection and some of them 
are at the stage of data analysis. As the projects will progress physically and financially, the 
details will be provided.  
1.32.5 ICMR has impleme nted a comprehensive monitoring framework for each NHRP. 
Monitoring is conducted every three months, followed by a Technical Advisory Committee 
meeting at the six -month mark, chaired by the Director General of ICMR. Additionally, the 
ICMR Project Monitoring Committee conducts site visits for each NHRP. 
1.32.6 The recommendations are noted for compliance. Summary sheet of the 30 NHRP projects 
are enclosed at Annexure A. 
Recommendation 
1.32.7 The Committee would further like to know the constitution of the decision making body 
granting fund for health research projects under NHRP. The Committee also wants to know 
whether the progress of health research projects or after the completion of the pr oject under 
NHRP have ever been assessed/audited by the Third Party i.e. globally recognised scientists with 
domain experts in their respective field. 
(Para 5.10.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
1.32.8 The decision-making body that grants and allocates funds for projects under the NHRP 
consists of subject matter experts, domain specialists, and stakeholders who have a thorough 
understanding of the public health issues addressed in the project. This decision -making body is 
formally approved by the competing aut hority of ICMR. Since the NHRP projects have been 
initiated in the past two years, they have reached the formative and co -development stages of 
interventions suitable for the objectives of the projects and regular yearly assessments are being 
conducted to monitor their progress. Additionally, the overall progress of these projects is 
planned to be evaluated and audited by recognized scientists and domain experts upon 
completion of the projects. 

43 
 
CHAPTER–II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
2.1 Human Resource Management  
Recommendation 
2.1.1 The Committee takes note of the program envisaged by the Department to attract Non -
resident Indians (NRIs), Persons of Indian Origin (PIO), Ove rseas Citizens of India (OCI) 
serving abroad back to India. At the same time, the Committee expresses its concerns about 
continuing Brain Drain, the exodus of trained, proficient and talented Indian professionals to 
developed countries. India's brain drain  is caused by a lack of higher education options, research 
funding and facilities, pay & perks that is lower than global standards in both the public and 
private sectors and fewer opportunities in terms of career progression, especially in specialized 
fields. Other facilitative factors like environment of equity, transparency, protection of ownership 
of genuine research outcomes, delayed systemic response, etc also add to contributing factors.  
(Para 1.3.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.1.2 DHR‘s HRD scheme component of NRI/PIO/OCI Research Support is one part of the 
larger umbrella of efforts of the Government of India to engage the Indian Diaspora in 
contributing to the Indian research ecosystem.  
2.1.3 The Department of Science and Technol ogy (DST), Ministry of Science and Technology 
has formulated several schemes to provide attractive avenues and opportunities to Indian 
Researchers, who are residing in foreign countries to work in Indian Institutes and Universities. 
2.1.4 The Department of  Science and Technology (DST) through the Innovation in Science 
Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) Faculty Scheme and the Department of Biotechnology 
(DBT) through Ramalingaswami re -entry Fellowship provide attractive avenues and 
opportunities to Indian researchers of high calibre, who are residing in foreign countries, to work 
in Indian Institutes/Universities of their respective interest and domain. DST also implements a 
VAIBHAV (Vaishvik BharatiyaVaigyanik) Fellowship Programme exclusively for India n 
Diaspora [Non -Resident Indian (NRI)/ Overseas Citizen of India (OCI)] to undertake 
collaborative research in Indian Institutions. Ramanujan Fellowship of the Anusandhan National 
Research Foundation (ANRF) is another scheme for brilliant Indian scientists  and engineers 
aiming to return to India from abroad for undertaking competitive R&D. VAJRA (Visiting 
Advanced Joint Research) Faculty Scheme of ANRF is a dedicated program exclusively for 
overseas scientists and academicians including NRI/ OCI to work as adjunct/ visiting faculty for 
a specific period of time in Indian Public funded academic and research institutions to bring a 
strong international connect to the R&D ecosystem of India. The Council of Scientific & 

44 
 
Industrial Research (CSIR) has been implem enting ―Senior Research Associateship (SRA)‖ 
scheme which is primarily meant to provide temporary placement for a period of three years only 
to highly qualified Indian scientists, engineers, technologists, and medical personnel returning 
from abroad and no t holding any employment in India. This apart, CSIR has also established 50 
positions of Scientists/Technologists to be filled laterally from eminent Scientists/Technologists 
of Indian Origin (STIO). The position has been designated as Outstanding Scientist. 
2.1.5 Through an online and transparent projects selection and grant management process, 
DHR ensures an environment of equity and openness in its funding support. The secretariat has 
also improved upon its response time through strengthening of schemes‘ PMU. 
2.2 Budget Utilisation Trends under different schemes/ projects  
Recommendation 
2.2.1 The Committee takes into account the reasons stated by the Department for ‗savings‘ of 
funds in the last three years. On the delay in the execution of tendering for construction activities 
for establishing four regional National Institutes of Virology, the  Committee finds that the 
expected date of completion is between December 2025 and July 2026. Regarding, the 
establishment of Regional Research Platform, the Committee observes that MoUs have been 
signed by ICMR with Nepal, Thailand and Myanmar. MoU on Cooperation in the Field of Health 
and Medicine has been renewed with Bangladesh in June 2024 and implementing agreement with 
MoH Maldives is under process. On both the issues, the Committee hold the Department to 
adhere to the deadline and not end up again s urrendering the fund as ‗savings ‘for the current 
financial year. 
(Para 2.4.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.2.2 ICMR has signed MOUs with Nepal, Thailand and Myanmar.  A MoU  on Cooperation in 
the field of Health and medicine has been renewed with Bangladesh in June 2024. 
2.2.3 Under SEAR Regional Research Platform is ICMR is conducting multiple multi -centric 
studies 
(i) ICMR HQ, in coordination with ICMR -NIRT and SEAR member states (Bhutan, 
Indonesia, Nepal, and Sri Lanka), developed the CRITIC -SEARRP study —a 
"Comprehensive intervention strategy to improve retention in the TB infection 
cascade of care for high -risk groups using a person -centered approach". ICMR is 
funding the Indian site and also funding the procurement of equipment‘s and lab 
materials. 
(ii) ICMR has procured handheld X-ray machines, Cy-TB tests, and molecular TB tests, 
which are being delivered to Bhutan, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, and Nepal in 

45 
 
accordance wi th procurement agreements. The first review meeting on CRITIC 
project was held on 17th March 2025 in New Delhi. 
(iii) Multiple Capacity building workshops & hands -on trainings conducted with 
participation from SEAR countries.  
2.3 Grant in aid Scheme for inter-sectoral convergence for health research    
Recommendation 
2.3.1 The Committee reckons that the component Grant in aid Scheme for inter - sectoral 
convergence for health research aims to bring modern health technology to the masses through 
public health services. The Committee finds that the scheme has received the full quantum of 
funds demanded by DHR since 2022 -23. In 2022 -23, the funds were slash ed at RE stage and in 
2023-24 & 2024 -25 the funds have been even enhanced at the RE stage. Regardless of all this, 
the funds have been underutilised over the years. The reasons quoted for sub -optimal utilisation 
include receipt of less viable proposal for funding research projects, proposals received from NE 
regions as well as others were not fulfilling the conditionalities of the scheme guidelines and non- 
completion of codal formalities. In the opinion of the Committee, these reasons point out lack of 
full and true intent from DHR towards effective implementation of the Scheme. The Committee 
recommends that DHR shall take appropriate measures to anchorage the potential genuine 
beneficiaries of the Scheme to submit viable projects, and all boxes get green s ignal under the 
scheme. 
(Para 3.7.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.3.2 In F.Y. 2022 – 23 the funds were slashed at RE stage. In this year 100% of the funds were 
utilised in general head but N.E. allocated budget remained unutilised  due to less viable research 
projects for funding under N. E. region. 
2.3.3 In 2023-24 the funds were enhanced at the RE stage for the utilisation under the general 
head which was utilised maximumly.  Out of savings of Rs. 3.16 crore, savings of Rs. 2.50 c rore 
occurred under budget reserved for N.E. As the proposals submitted from N.E. region for 
consideration for funding under the scheme was very few and the quality of proposals was not up 
to the marks.  Hence the budget reserved for N.E. region remained unutilised. 
2.3.4 Saving of Rs. 0.52 crore in general head was due to non -receipt of codal documents 
within the due time. Without the fulfilments of required codals, some new research projects were 
not initiated hence not funded by DHR. 
2.3.5 In view of abo ve appropriate measures were taken and in F. Y. 2024 -25, the expenditure 
trends the A.E was as expected (100% of R.E.) 

46 
 
2.3.6 In future also appropriate measures would be taken for all boxes to get green signal under 
the scheme.   
2.4 Research Governance – Health Technology Assessment 
Recommendation 
2.4.1 Regarding the reflection of funds allocated for HTA, the Committee observes that the 
allocation of funds for Research Governance – HTAIn is not separately reflected in the Demand 
No 47, unlike HTA -Attached Office which has been properly shown under the ‗Establishment 
Expenditure of the Centre‘ in the Demand No 47. Accordingly, the Committee, recommends that 
considering the importance of the Research Governance, the allocation for the purpose may be 
shown separately, like all the other important schemes/ sub -schemes i.e. the allocation of funds 
under Research Governance – HTAIn be reflected separately in Demand No 47. 
(Para 3.7.14 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.4.2 HTA attached office budget has been reflected in Demand No.47 under Establishment 
Expenditure of the Centre‘. The Budget for HTA scheme in the 15th Finance commission period 
is under 3103 as a sub scheme under the Umbrella scheme Human Resource and Capacity 
Development. 
2.5 Prime Minister's Ayushman  Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM - ABHIM) 
Bio-Security preparedness  
Recommendation 
2.5.1 The Committee understands that the National One Health Mission is a priority initiative 
undertaken by DHR which constitute an integral component of the Missio n under the PM -
ABHIM Scheme. The allocation of funds for the scheme component for 2025 -26 is Rs. 124.14 
crore which is an enhancement of Rs. 74.18 crore over the last year‘s RE. The Committee notes 
that the objectives for DHR under the Mission inter alia i nclude development of monoclonal 
antibodies, vaccines, therapeutics of emerging and re -emerging viral infections. The Committee 
desires that DHR should coordinate their efforts with those of ICMR and effectively achieve their 
targets under the Mission in a time bound manner. The Committee is given to understand that the 
development of monoclonal antibodies can reduce the cost of cancer treatment. However, long 
patent periods of these drugs developed in overseas countries stand in the way of their local 
production. Hence, if the National One Health Mission, which is a multi -ministry endeavour can 
address this issue, it could be immensely soothing to the cancer patients 
(Para 3.8.8 of the Report) 
 
 

47 
 
Action Taken 
2.5.2 The development of Biomedical co untermeasures under component ― Plug and play 
vaccine platforms, diagnostics, capacity for development of high quality therapeutic 
monoclonals‖ as per SFC of NOHM within our country is underway for following: 
● Vaccine development studies for Kyasanur Forest Disease (KFD) and H5N1 (Avian flu) 
for humans and animals have been initiated.  
● Development of Nipah monoclonals is underway. 
● Development of new diagnostics using molecular, serological and CRISPR -CAS based 
technology by ICMR institutes are also underway f or emerging and re -emerging viral 
infections. 
2.5.3 Monoclonal antibodies: 
Monoclonal antibodies improved the efficacy, reduced immunogenicity, and improved 
pharmacokinetics but these treatments often come with high price tags due to complex 
manufacturing processes and extensive research and development costs. As a result, 
accessibility and affordability issues arise, limiting patient access and hindering market 
expansion. Efforts to address pricing concerns, such as the introduction of bio  similars 
and reimbursement strategies, are under process to reduce the cost and make it accessible 
for cancer patients. Howev er, cancers and their treatment  do not fall within the mandate 
of National One Health Mission. 
2.6 Patent-protection to Innovators   
Recommendation 
2.6.1 The Committee has been given to understand that reducing the duration of patents is one 
of the options for making healthcare more affordable in India as once the duration of patents is 
over, Indian manufacturers can produce the drugs at a lower cost. So th e reduction of Patent 
duration can reduce the cost of treatment of diseases like cancer through cheaper drugs like 
antibody-based drugs which would certainly bring down the out of pocket expenditure of 
patients.  Since the subject matter of Patent and IP i s under the Ministry of Commerce the 
Committee, therefore, recommends for an inter -ministerial consultation for a viable solution in 
the matter.  The Committee desires that ICMR -DHR to look into the matter and have an 
interministerial discussion at the earliest. 
(Para 4.14.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
2.6.2 Based on the recommendations of the Hon‘ble  Committee regarding decreasing the 
duration of patents as a strategy to make healthcare technologies affordable and accessible in 
India, it may please be noted that the patent terms are governed by The World Trade 
Organization (WTO), by the Trade -Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) 

48 
 
agreement. This agreement sets out minimum requirements for the protection of intellectual 
property rights including a patent term of 20 years that all WTO member countries are obligated 
to incorporate into their national legislation. India has been a member of the WTO since 1995 and 
has been committed to aligning its laws with its provisions and therefore decreasing the patent 
duration for making healthcare affordable and accessible may not be feasible in lig ht of the 
national laws and international treaties. However, other suitable mechanisms as recommended by 
the Committee are noted for exploring suitable avenues for making the healthcare technologies 
affordable and accessible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

49 
 
CHAPTER–III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
3.1 Human Resource Management  
Recommendation 
3.1.1 The Committee expresses displeasure that the posts of Scientists of various grades in 
DHR have been lying vacant now for an unacceptably long time. Though DHR makes continuing 
efforts to fill up these posts, but all have been in vain. It is understood that  these posts were 
created in 2017 for specific roles within DHR but seem to have never been populated. The 
Committee has also been appraised in this context that contractual appointments of Scientists are 
being made in DHR which does affect the continuity of the implementation of the programmes 
on their sudden departure from the Department. In the considered opinion of the Committee, 
DHR has to walk the extra mile to fill up these posts on regular basis. One of the obvious ways to 
achieve is to make the con ditions of service and/or remuneration more attractive to ensure that 
appointed scientists are to stay in DHR instead of deserting. Quicker/shortened recruitment 
process may be another avenue to be explored. Notwithstanding this, the Committee takes strong  
exception to the posts remaining vacant for so long and, therefore, the Committee recommends 
that urgent measures other than ordinary procedure to be taken to fill up the vacant posts. Further, 
Committee would like to put on record that adoption of stop g ap management like contractual 
appointments to so significant posts of Scientists is totally unacceptable and ad -hoc approach and 
practice of contractual appointment should be discontinued. Contractual appointments to such 
posts that inherently warrant con tinuity as a critical prerequisite for their effectiveness would 
jeopardise the very success of the tasks for which the scientists are engaged.  
(Para 1.3.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.1.2 The Department of Health Research (DHR) presently has 62 sanction ed posts out of 
which there are 22 posts of scientists, which are classified as follows along with their vacancy 
position: 
Name of the post Sanctioned strength Incumbency position Vacancy position 
Scientist F 2 0 2 
Scientist E 4 0 4 
Scientist D 7 0 7 
Scientist C 7 2 5 
Scientist B 2 0 2 
Total 22 2 20 
 
 

50 
 
3.1.3 The 22 posts of scientist can be further distributed among three divisions of DHR as 
follows: 
Name of the division No of posts 
of Scientists 
Classification of posts Posts created in 
DHR Secretariat 06 Scientist C-02 
Scientist D-02 
Scientist E-02 
December 2017 
HTAIn Attached 
office 
12 Scientist F-2 
Scientist E-2 
Scientist D-4 
Scientist C-4 
September 2023 
Ethics Committee 04 Scientist D-1 
Scientist C-1 
Scientist B-2 
June 2023 
  
3.1.4 It is submitted that no scientist has been appointed on contractual basis against the above 
regular posts of Scientists. The appointment of regular scientists in DHR is done on Deputation 
(including short term contract basis) basis and is a continuous process.  
 3.1.5 However, contractual scientists have been engaged in the various programs and schemes 
of the Department such as Health Technology Assessment, Establishment of Multi -Disciplinary 
Research Units/ Model Rural Health Research Units, Viral Research an d Diagnostic 
Laboratories, etc as well as for implementation of The Assisted Reproductive Technology 
(Regulation) Act, 2021 and The Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021.  
 3.1.6 As observed by the Hon‘ble Committee, the Department will continue to make efforts for 
filling up the vacant positions of Scientists in DHR and the recommendations of the committee to 
take urgent measures for filling up the vacant posts are noted for compliance.  
Further Recommendation 
3.1.7 The Committee takes cognisance of the reply of the Government regarding measures 
taken to fill up vacant regular posts of Scientists in DHR , h owever, the absence of any 
specific steps taken is conspicuous. Hence, the Committee recommends that the Department 
shall furnish a much more sp ecific response about the tangible action being taken to fill up 
vacant regular posts of Scientists in DHR . The Committee is of the view that in case change 
of nature of posts from D eputation to Direct Recruitment  is not possible  at all, change of 
their tenures, introduction of more flexibility in the recruitment and service condition rules, 
attractive remuneration and quicker career progression, reduc tion of  bureaucratic 
procedures involved in selection  process, etc , can be tried out  in the first instances . The 
Committee does understand that functional necessities may require the contractual 
engagements that the Department is undertaking in their various programs and schemes.  

51 
 
But the Committee strongly feels that  the Department, as the nodal body for research 
activities, in the all -important health sector in India, should have a permanent cadre of 
Scientists and that should be an acknowledged priority.  The Committee further hopes that 
DHR give due consideration to observation/recommendations made by the Committee.  
3.2 Emerging Technologies and Ethical Concerns related to Health Research  
Recommendation 
3.2.1 The Committee notes that the Government has taken a key step in setting up ICMR -
National Institute for Research in Digital Health and Data Science and entrusting it with the task 
of developing India -specific AI-based solutions for strengthening the healthc are system with an 
overarching goal of achieving Universal Health Coverage. The Committee finds research in 
Digital Health and Data Sciences as one of the areas that can be prioritized for collaboration with 
domain leading private sector organizations. The Committee observes that the Department should 
explore the possibility to further augment the efforts in this direction. The Committee in this 
connection recommends that adequate money is allocated to ICMR-NIRDHDS for its new 
responsibility. In this regard , the Committee emphasizes the all -important need to protect data, 
personal as well as research based, while developing AI based solutions. 
(Para 1.6.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.2.2 ICMR- National Institute for Research in Digital Health and Data Science (NIRDHDS) 
aims to drive digital health innovation by advancing data -centric research and enabling fair, 
efficient, and AI -driven healthcare, and translating research into impactful di gital solutions and 
policy through responsible adoption.  
3.2.3 Strategic partnerships are envisioned with the State, National, and International partners, 
including IndiaAI (MeitY), ANRF, relevant line ministries, and leading private partners.  
3.2.4 NIRDHDS aims for AI -enabled innovation by focusing on AI development, establishing 
high-quality datasets, setting up validation frameworks, and disseminating policy -level 
information via a state-led collaborative model to ensure equitable healthcare.   
3.2.5 Aligned with the committee's recommendations, the institute has established three 
dedicated working groups to ensure data privacy and security, promote the responsible and 
ethical development of AI solutions, and foster effective collaborations with stakeho lders. The 
following are the objectives of the working groups. 
1. To establish secure, scalable, and context -aware systems for health data collection, 
curation, and governance to support responsible AI development. 
2. To develop standardized frameworks for AI ri sk classification, continuous monitoring, 
and integration into healthcare regulatory and policy systems. 

52 
 
3.2.6 To build targeted capacity across stakeholder groups through structured training, 
stakeholder-specific strategies, and sustained cross-sector collaboration. 
Further Recommendation 
3.2.7 The Committee is appreciat ive of the fact that in alignment with its 
recommendation, the Department has established working groups to ensure data privacy 
and security, promote the responsible and ethical development  of AI solutions, and fosters 
effective collaborations with stakeholders. But the Department has not responded with 
regard to steps taken to seek adequate fund for ICMR-NIRDHDS for its new responsibility 
of developing India-specific AI-based solutions for strengthening the healthcare system with 
an overarching goal of achieving Universal Health Coverage. The Co mmittee, therefore, 
recommends the DHR to approach the Ministry of Finance for allocating adequate amount 
of money to ICMR-NIRDHDS to undertake significant Research projects pertaining to 
Digital Health and Data Science. The Committee understands that developing India specific 
AI-based solution is the need of the hour  for achieving Universal Health coverage that 
further requires strengthening of healthcare system. 
 
3.3 Health Research Funding  
Recommendation  
3.3.1 Further, the Committee is given to understand that the Department, keeping the limited 
allocation in mind, are compelled to redefine their priorities like assigning preference to National 
Health Priority and high -impact research projects, adopting PPP mode  for product development, 
regular monitoring, reviewing & reallocation funds for ongoing projects and essential programs, 
etc. The counter balancing measures of the Department points to the crunch of funds they are 
facing. In this regard, the Committee una nimously affirm that health research is fundamental to 
the future development of the country's health care system and should remain a  priority sector. 
Hence, the Committee fully appreciates the efforts of DHR in their recalibration of projects and 
funds to attain optimal results and extends full in their efforts in securing additional fund. 
(Para 2.2.6  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.3.2 The Department is grateful to the Hon‘ble Committee for appreciating its efforts. 
Further Recommendation 
3.3.3 While the Committee is aware and acknowledges the efforts of the Department to 
recalibrate high-impact research projects and funds to attain optimal results, the 
Committee is of the considered view that health Research is a commitment  to the future 
consolidation and expansion of health care system .  In this regard, the Committee would 
like to reaffirm its recommendation that the Department should approach the Ministry of 
Finance to secure additional funds as health research is fundamental to the development of 

53 
 
the country's health care system. Moreover, the Department should share with the 
Committee its efforts to secure more funds and the response of t he Ministry of Finance 
thereto.   
Recommendation  
3.3.4 The Committee, in its 127 th Report on Demand for Grants for 2021 -22 of DHR had 
recommended that at least 5% of the budget of the DoH&FW should be allocated to DHR. The 
Committee also recommended the Department to set an aim to allocate 5% of the Total Hea lth 
Budget for health research in the next two years. The Committee is displeased to note that even 
after a lapse of four years none of the above recommendations of the Committee has been 
complied with. Accordingly, the Committee expresses its disappointme nt and strongly reiterates 
its earlier recommendation and lends its support to the Department in its pursuance with Ministry 
of Finance in procuring enhanced allocation. 
(Para 2.2.7  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.3.5 The observations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted. The matter will be pursed with the 
Ministry of Finance based on requirements during the RE stage. 
Further Recommendation 
3.3.6 The Committee while taking into cognizance of the response of the Department , 
would like to be informed about the Projected Demand and the actual fund received at the 
RE stage along with the reason for allocation of lesser fund than projected demand raised 
by the Department, if any,  by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee desires that DHR 
should project its requisite demand with proper justification citing previous allocation and 
actual expenditure and outcome of the research projects undertaken in the past and 
expanded scope of the ongoing research projects and implication of research projects to be 
undertaken. 
3.4 Scheme-wise Projected Demand and Allocation (2025-26) 
Recommendation 
3.4.1 The Committee finds that the demand for funds by DHR has mainly been under the 
heads (i) Health Technology Assessment – Attached Office, (ii) Establishment of Model Rural 
Health Research Units (MRHRUs), (iii) Development of Tools to prevent outbreaks of epidemics 
and (iv) ICMR. Since the lion‘s share of the allocation to DHR goes to ICMR, the gap between 
the projected demand and allocated amount also is the widest under that head in terms of 
quantum of funds allocated, i.e ., Rs 781.5 crore. For Development of Tools to prevent outbreaks 
of epidemics also the allocated funds are just about one th ird of the projected demand made. But 
for Health Technology Assessment – Attached Office, only Rs. 18.75 crore has been allocated 
against a projected demand made for Rs. 220.25 crore, which is less than 10% of the projected 

54 
 
demand. HTA has been included as an Attached Office from last year but, to utmost surprise to 
the Committee, HTA is already being subjected to severe curtailment of funds. 
(Para 2.3.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.4.2 The concern of the Hon‘ble Committee is greatly appreciated. 
Recommendation 
3.4.3 The Committee observes that drastic slashing of the funds as sought by the DHR is 
unacceptable in the absence of compelling reasons. Accordingly, the Committee recommends 
that DHR should make all efforts to convince the Ministry of Finance to se cure funds for such 
game changing schemes. Further, as already recommended, it is the firm view of the Committee 
that the Government/Ministry of Finance should attach more importance to health research. The 
Committee expects the Department to calibrate the ir Demands based on statics and expert 
opinion, straighten out all administrative infirmities associated with project submissions before 
approaching the Ministry of Finance for higher budgetary allocation under specific scheme. 
(Para 2.3.2  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.4.4 The concern of the Hon‘ble Committee is greatly appreciated. The Department will 
seek an additional budget from the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. 
Further Recommendation 
3.4.5 The recommendation of the Committee was on slashing of the funds as sought by the 
DHR for game changing schemes/projects without any compelling reasons . While the 
Department has been appreciative about the concern expressed by the Committee, the DHR 
has not been forthcoming with the steps ad opted to address the issues raised by  the 
Committee. Hence, the Committee reiterates its rec ommendation that the DHR share with 
the Committee the tangible steps taken to revisit their Demands based on practicality  by 
straightening out all administrative inf irmities associated with project submissions before 
approaching the Ministry of Finance for higher budgetary allocation under various 
schemes at the RE Stage.  The DHR must provide sustainable justification and Ministry of 
Finance for seeking higher budgetary allocation. 
 
Recommendation 
3.4.6 The Committee notes that DHR has got an increased allocation in BE to the tune of 
509.05 crore in BE for 2025 -26 compared to the RE of Rs. 3391.64 crore during 2024 -25, which 
itself saw a hike compared to the BE for th e year of Rs. 3301.73 crore. It is also noted that DHR 
has identified the activities on which the increased funding is to be utilised. Expanding the scope 
of MRU Scheme to cover Private Medical Colleges, upgradation of well performing MRUs to 

55 
 
Centres of Re search Excellence (CoREs), integration of ICMR‘s Capacity Development 
Programme into DHR‘s own HRD Scheme, revision of guidelines for Start -up Grant, increase in 
quantum of stipend/fellowship for Women Scientist Programme and Young Scientist 
Programme, strengthening of VRDLs, host of initiatives under PM-ABHIM, National One Health 
Mission activities, MedTech Mitra, implementation of DHR -ICMR strategic goals, etc, feature 
among the key areas where the enhanced funding is to be required for optimum utilisatio n to 
achieve the cherished output as per standard rate of return. 
(Para 2.3.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.4.7 Matter of record.  
Further Recommendation 
3.4.8 The Committee notes and appreciates that DHR has identified the activities on 
which the increased funding is to be utilized under different schemes/projects  viz. 
expanding the scope of MRU Scheme to cover Private Medical Colleges, upgradation of 
well performing MRUs to Centers of Research Excellence (CoREs ), integration of ICMR’s 
Capacity Development Programme into DHR’s own HRD Scheme, revision of guidelines 
for Start -up Grant,  National One Health Mission activities, MedTech Mitra, 
implementation of DHR -ICMR strategic goals, etc ., w here the enhanced fundin g is to be 
required for optimum utilization to achieve the cherished output as per standard rate of 
return.  The Committee would like to be updated on the steps involved in materializing the 
said activities and funds required and time framed proposed for achieving objective in each 
and every Schemes/Projects. 
Recommendation 
3.4.9 The Committee considers the resilient monitoring mechanism and a periodic review a 
prudent strategy to have linkage amongst the scope, budget & timeline of any 
project/scheme/programme and ensuring successful implementation thereof. Such reviews should 
take into account the emerging information, changing priorities or unforeseen circumstances, 
often requiring modifications to timelines, budgets, strategies, or resource allocati ons. The 
Committee is pleased to observe that the Department has oriented their activities to utilise their 
enhanced allocation. Accordingly, the Committee views the plans made by DHR positively and is 
optimistic about the results coming out in tune with the plans chalked out. 
(Para 2.3.5  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.4.10 The Department is grateful to the Hon‘ble Committee for appreciating its efforts. 
Further Recommendation 
3.4.11 The Committee would like to be appraised on the physical outcomes of the 
monitoring mechanism and regular review related to the scope, budget & timeline of 

56 
 
various schemes/projects under the Department , which in turn will assist the Committee in 
gaining a boarder view on the hurdles, if any, associated with a particular  scheme/project. 
This will also highlight success stories of DHR as well.  
Recommendation 
3.4.12 The Committee, however, finds that under some schemes, the fund s sought by DHR for 
the year 2025-26 have been curtailed citing the reason that only the remaini ng amount approved 
by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) for the 15th Finance Commission period has been 
allocated. The Committee finds the given reason untenable as it comes in the way of much 
needed continuance of the beneficial activities of the schem es beyond the 15th Finance 
Commission period. In the opinion of the Committee such situations would qualify as the cliched 
instance of ‗red tape‘ induced financial rigidity coming in the way of development. Accordingly, 
the Committee recommends that situat ions where genuine need for funds cannot be met due to 
procedural pre-requisites shall be avoided in future. Further, the Committee wants to be apprised 
about the results of the recalibrated activities/targets under each scheme. 
(Para 2.3.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.4.13 In the case of MRU and MRHRU schemes the funds sought for the F.Y. 2025-26 have not 
been curtailed by citing the reason mentioned in para 23 above. 
3.4.14 For the Grant -in-aid Scheme (GIA), the reduction of Rs 7.46 Crores  is on account of 
merging of the scheme with the extramural grants component of ICMR. In the light of this, the 
budget of extramural grants has been increased by ICMR, whereas, the GIA scheme allocation 
has been reduced without any compromise in its object ives to fund multi disciplinary health 
research projects across different research institutes.  
Further Recommendation 
3.4.15 The Committee finds the response of the Department to be incomplete and not in 
consonance with letter and spirit of the Committee’ s recommendations. In its 
recommendation, the Committee has pointed out that DHR, through their documents 
submitted to the Committee as part of the examination of DFG 2025 -26, had mentioned 
that only the remaining amount approved by the Standing Finance Co mmittee (SFC) for 
the 15 th Finance Commission period has been allocated in case of Schemes like 
Establishment of Network of Viral Diagnostic & Research Laboratories for Managing 
Epidemics, Development of Tools to prevent outbreaks of epidemics, etc. and as cribed this 
fact as reason for reduced allocations for schemes during 2025 -26. The reply of the 
Department mentions only the MRU and MRHU Schemes wherein such circumscribing of 
funds may not have occurred, but fails to touch upon other Schemes wherein the said 
reasons have been cited for reduction of funds. Accordingly, the Committee wants a 
detailed scheme-wise reply in this matter. Further, the Committee would like to reiterate its 
view that adequate fund must be ensured for all those beneficial activities for all Schemes to 

57 
 
warrant continuance and to avoid administrative delay beyond the period of 15 th Finance 
Commission.  
3.5 Budget Utilisation Trends under different schemes/ projects  
Recommendation 
3.5.1 The Committee observes that the utilisation  of funds by the Department during 2022 -
23, 2023-24 and 2024 -25 has been 87.64%, 98.78% and 91.94%, respectively, compared to the 
RE funds, which is reasonably appreciative. Utilisation under Secretariat head has been 
consistently lower than expected. Furt her, uptake of funds under International Cooperation has 
been abysmal. The   Committee expects the Department to optimally utilize the earmarked 
budgetary allocation under full proof monitoring mechanism.  
(Para 2.4.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.5.2 The budget utilization has been 99.39% in respect of Secretariat expenditure vs RE 24-
25. 
Further Recommendation 
3.5.3 The recommendation of the Committee had focused on the relatively less er 
utilisation of funds seen under the Head ‘Secretariat’ during the last three years. It is 
encouraging to note that during 2024 -25 the utilisation has been almost optimal.  However, 
it remains a fact that the funds sought by the Department ha s been higher during the said 
years and the BE have been consistently  reduced at RE stage. Accordingly, the Committee 
is still of the opinion that the Department can plan their allocation and utilisation of funds 
for the Secretariat in a prudent manner.  Further, the Committee also finds that after fund 
utilisation being ‘almost nil ’ for International Cooperation  during 2022 -23 and 2023 -24, 
during 2024 -25 the allocation itself was drastically reduced. The Committee wants to be 
apprised of  in detail  on the modification of objectives , if any, under International 
Cooperation and the reason for reduced allocation under the head since 2024 -25. The 
Committee desires that DHR should furnish its response on this aspect  of the 
recommendation of the Committee.  
3.6 Establishment Expenditure of the Centre 
Recommendation 
3.6.1 The Committee takes cognisance of the fact that there have been actual ‗savings‘ on 
account of rented office premises for DHR. Further, there has been unspent money initially kept 
to fill up vacant posts in the Department, which is an unpleasant and avoida ble situation. The 
Committee understands that the implications of key posts of Scientists remaining vacant, 
therefore, has already recommended for filling up the vacant posts at the earliest. Further, the 
Committee is of the view that DHR should acquire an  office premise of its own and shall take 

58 
 
initiatives in this direction. Having own premises can save recurring expenditures and would 
perhaps add to the stature and importance associated with the Department. For the meantime, the 
Committee expects that DH R would be utilising the fund allocated for capital assets in terms of 
office fixtures and equipment that are prerequisites for hassle-free concentration on the fulfilment 
of the critical roles assigned to DHR. 
(Para 2.5.3  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.6.2 The observations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted for compliance. 
Further Recommendation 
3.6.3 The Committee is pleased to note that the DHR is taking steps for compliance 
towards creation of assets in the form of HR as well as in terms of office fixtures and 
equipment based on Committee’s recommendation. The Committee would like to be 
intimated about the further initiatives taken in this regard.  The Committee would also like 
to be apprised of appropriation of fund on formation of capital assets which is all the more 
necessary for efficient and effective functioning of DHR. 
3.7 Health Technology Assessment- Attached office. 
Recommendation 
3.7.1 The Committee, however, wants DHR and the Ministry of Finance to treat the HTA 
Scheme with the pivotal role it commands on account of the fact that fruition of its objectives can 
bring to the effectiveness of health research in India. The Committee d esires that DHR should 
take into consideration the importance of such a dedicated platform for accelerating translational 
research and technology development. 
(Para 2.6.6 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.7.2 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted. 
Further Recommendation 
3.7.3 The Committee is of the firm view that HTA Scheme contains the capacity for 
accelerating translational research and technology development that would in turn  
strengthen the health infrastructure in the country. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended for assuring due  significance to such dedicated platform, however, t he 
response of DHR  finds mentions that the recommendation of the Committee has been 
noted. The Committee expects the DHR to come forward with a comprehensive reply in the 
matter giving details of the action proposed or taken in respect of the HTA Scheme as 
recommended by the Committee in order to achieve the cherished objectives.  
3.8 Human Resource Development for Health Research 

59 
 
Recommendation 
3.8.1 The Committee recognises  the importance of the component of ‗Human Resource 
Development for Health Research‘ as an important initiative to foster talent in health research. 
Trainees are encouraged to develop and take up research projects for addressing critical national 
and local health problems. The Committee believes that the Scheme is poised for a change after 
expanding its scope by integrating with the ICMR‘s capacity development programs. The 
Committee finds that the scheme has received the full quantum of funds as demanded b y DHR 
since 2022 -23. The Committee, however, expresses concerns that the funds has been 
underutilised, therefore, reduced at RE stage taking into account the existing expenditure trends. 
The Committee is displeased to note such reasons -as less viable prop osal for funding research 
projects, non-completion of codal formalities required under the scheme guidelines for release of 
funds, no international fellowship was granted, etc. The Committee firmly believes that these 
reasons indicate inadequate hand holdi ng by DHR to the intended beneficiaries who could very 
well be the harbingers of India‘s future in the health sector. 
(Para 3.7.3 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.8.2 To enhance the awareness about the HRD Scheme and to harness the potential benefits of 
the different components of the HRD, impetus is being given on enhancement of participation of 
young researchers and faculty members of academic and research institutions.  In this regard 
webinars and awareness activities are being conducted on a regular basis and HRD Scheme team 
is reaching out to applicants in addressing the queries related to the HRD Schemes and the 
application process. An online queries resolution system is also developed by DHR for helping 
applicants.   
3.8.3 For wider circulation and publi city of the Call for proposals different social media 
platforms like X (Twitter Handle) and Linked -In etc are also used apart from the conventional 
method of publishing Advertisement for Call for Proposal on DHR and ICMR Websites. 
3.8.4 To enhance the part icipation and for creating opportunities for potential scientists and 
researchers who can contribute to the landscape of better health outcomes for India, a larger 
number of fellowships (65) for  Long term and Short  Term International Training Fellowships 
were granted in 2024-25. Also, the Guidelines of HRD schemes have been amended and scope of 
inclusion has been broadened in case of Start Up Grant for Induction into Biomedical Research 
Scheme.  
3.8.5 A flexible approach has been adopted by the HRD team fo r handholding of applicants in 
terms of improving quality of proposals - opportunity is being provided to the applicants for 
incorporation of the suggested changes by the expert members of the Technical Evaluation 
Committee.  HRD Scheme team is also providi ng Hand Holding Support to the applicants by 
conducting Grant Writing Workshops so that the quality of the research proposals could be 
enhanced.  

60 
 
3.8.6 DHR provides support to the fellows in terms of procedural matters such as submission of 
ethical clearan ce, if required, some extra time is given to the fellows for submission ethical 
clearances of the project. 
Further Recommendation 
3.8.7 The response of the DHR plainly lists out certain steps  taken for handholding 
researchers for securing grants, fellowships and other support under the HRD Scheme. It 
does not mention since when these measures have been employed. The Committee is the 
opinion that if they have been operational for some  time now, then their effectiveness needs 
to be explained . The recommendations of the Committee in this regard were made taking 
into account the perennial underutilization of funds under HRD Scheme and were intended 
to attract more talented researchers to take benefit of the Scheme  and contribute to 
nation’s prog ress. Accordingly, considering the importance of the outcomes the HRD 
scheme, the Committee wants DHR to furnish a more cogent reply in this regard  clearly 
indicating measures taken/planned to improve the existing underutilization of funds for the 
Scheme understanding the inadequacies of the extant measures. In the considered opinion 
of the Committee, a n out of the box thought process coupled with robust mechanisms to 
gather feedback primarily from the beneficiaries and also other stakeholders may produce 
better results. 
Recommendation 
3.8.8 The Committee is unable to believe that there are not enough potential beneficiaries for 
such a bright scheme in India. The Committee considers it the duty and responsibility of DHR to 
educate and proactively handhold the beneficiaries to assist them to fo rmulate viable proposals. 
The Committee shall be keen to know the efforts, other than the ordinary and customary steps, 
taken by DHR for facilitating the beneficiaries to submit viable proposals and to properly 
complete the requisite codal formalities. The  Committee expects that avoidable procedural 
matters would be eliminated when the integration of the scheme with ICMR‘s capacity 
development programs materialise. 
(Para 3.7.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.8.9 To enhance the awareness about the HRD Scheme and to harness the potential benefits of 
the different components of the HRD, impetus is being given on enhancement of participation of 
young researchers and faculty members of academic and research institution s. In this regard 
webinars and awareness activities are being conducted on a regular basis and HRD Scheme team 
is reaching out to applicants in addressing the queries related to the HRD Schemes and the 
application process. An online queries resolution syst em is also developed by DHR for helping 
applicants.   

61 
 
3.8.10 For wider circulation and publicity of the Call for proposals different social media 
platforms like X (Twitter Handle) and Linked -In etc are also used apart from the conventional 
method of publishing Advertisement for Call for Proposal on DHR and ICMR Websites. 
3.8.11 To enhance the participation and for creating opportunities for potential scientists and 
researchers who can contribute to the landscape of better health outcomes for India, a larger  
number of fellowships (65) for Long term and Short Term International Training Fellowships 
were granted in 2024-25. Also the Guidelines of HRD schemes have been amended and scope of 
inclusion has been broadened in case of Start Up Grant for Induction into  Biomedical Research 
Scheme.  
3.8.12 A flexible approach has been adopted by the HRD team for handholding of applicants in 
terms of improving quality of proposals - opportunity is being provided to the applicants for 
incorporation of the suggested changes b y the expert members of the Technical Evaluation 
Committee. HRD Scheme team is also providing Hand Holding Support to the applicants by 
conducting Grant Writing Workshops so that the quality of the research proposals could be 
enhanced.  
3.8.13 DHR provides support to the fellows in terms of procedural matters such as submission of 
ethical clearance, if required, some extra time is given to the fellows for submission ethical 
clearances of the project. 
Further Recommendation 
3.8.14 The Committee reiterates its prior recommendation, underscoring the critical 
objectives of the HRD Scheme, and urges DHR to provide a more comprehensive response. 
The response should explicitly outline the steps not already taken or in place but tangible 
proposals to address the persistent underutilization of funds, based on a clear assessment of 
shortcomings in the current measures. From the Committee's perspective, embracing 
innovative approaches paired with strong feedback mechanisms that prioritize input from 
beneficiaries and incorporate views from other stakeholders may hold the potential to 
deliver significantly improved results. 
3.9 Research Governance – Health Technology Assessment 
Recommendation 
3.9.1 The Committee notes that a new HTA Scheme has been formulated for implementation 
during the 16 th Finance Commission period and shall await the details of the new scheme be 
furnished. It is the firm view of the Committee that the new scheme is something that is to be 
taken up with very high in priority for the necessary a pprovals. At the same time, the Committee 
expects the Department to come up with more Research Hubs & Centers under the new scheme 
to cover the unserved areas in the Country, especially areas like the UTs of Jammu & Kashmir, 
Ladakh, and the NER. 
(Para 3.7.13 of the Report) 

62 
 
Action Taken 
3.9.2 A new Concept Note has been drafted for a new separate HTA scheme and has received 
suitable comments from Department of Expenditure. The recommendations of the Hon‘ble 
Committee have been noted. 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.9.3 The Committee is pleased to note that a new separate HTA Scheme is in the works. 
However, the Committee would like to be inter alia  appraised of the specific action 
taken/proposed with respect to its recommendation for setting up more research hubs in 
the underserved and remote areas of the County as well as the expected time by which the 
new HTA Scheme will be operational.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of 
response of the Ministry o f Finance (Department of Expenditure) to the new Concept Note 
drafted for a new separate HTA Scheme. 
3.10 Prime Minister's Ayushman Bharat Health Infrastructure Mission (PM - ABHIM) 
Bio-Security preparedness 
Recommendation 
3.10.1 The Committee notes that though the RE for the PM -ABHIM Scheme was Rs.137.21 
crore during 2024 -25, a demand for Rs 221.32 crore was made by DHR for the scheme during 
2025-26 which has been provided fully. The Committee finds that 2025 -26 would be last year  of 
the PM-ABHIM Scheme and all the deliverables have not yet been achieved and hence the funds 
provided is crucial to the success of the scheme. The Committee, however, expresses concern that 
during 2022 -23 considerable amount of funds remained unspent as  the civil construction 
activities under the Scheme to build important institutions like the National Institute of One 
Health, Zonal National Institutes of Virology, BSL -3 Laboratories could not be started as the 
tendering process could not be completed. D uring 2023 -24 also the inept tendering and 
procedural formalities were pointed out as the reason for unspent funds. It was indeed 
disappointing that such cliched reasons could plague even priority Schemes like PM -ABHIM. 
The Committee notes that the fund ut ilization of 2024 -25 looks better as there is optimum 
utilisation of funds. The Committee cautions DHR to take up effective implementation of this 
component of the Scheme during 2025 -26, that being the last year of the scheme. As additional 
funds to the tu ne of Rs. 84.11 crore has been allocated, therefore, scaled up efforts should be 
made to complete all pending construction work within the time periods set for the purpose and 
the construction agencies should be directed to take the projects with all serio usness that the 
projects deserve. The Committee is also of the firm opinion that the number of mobile BSL -3 
laboratories needed to be reviewed and upwardly revised to have more inclusivity and cover 
remote and undeserved area. 
(Para 3.8.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken 

63 
 
3.10.2 For the construction activities, necessary support is being provided to CPWD and HITES. 
Regular review meetings are also being undertaken with these agencies. 
3.10.3 02 mobile BSL-3 labs ready and already deployed at ICMR -NIV, Pune & ICMR-RMRC-
Gorakhpur. Nipah Virus (in Kerala - Sept, 2023 & July -August 2024) : Mobile BSL -3 lab 
deployed for on -site diagnostics. Seropositivity detected in bats near the outbreak site. MBSL -3 
laboratory was utilized for the onsite diagnosis for early contain ment of outbreak reducing the 
turnaround time to diagnosis to just 4 hours. 
3.10.4 02 more are in process of procurement and planned to be deployed at North-East (difficult 
to reach area) and Central India. 
Further Recommendation 
3.10.5 The Committee does not find the reply to be as comprehensive as it should have been 
on its recommendation on (PM -ABHIM) Bio-Security preparedness. The action taken on 
the aspect of civil construction including that of critical national Institutes has been 
mentioned as a one liner response as if the construction agencies have the sole responsibility 
in this regard and in case if the y falter again, as in the past, DHR should be prepared for 
delays in the implementation of PM -ABHIM Scheme. Further, the reply does not clearly 
mention about how many more  MBSL-3 laboratories are planned to be increased.  The 
Committee is not convinced whether 02 more mobile labs would be sufficient to cater to all 
the currently underserved and remote areas of the country. Accordingly, the Committee 
reiterates its recommendation and wants a comprehensive answer from DHR touching 
upon all aspects of the recommendation.  
3.11 HPV vaccines 
Recommendation 
3.11.1 The Committee, like the majority of the people in the Country, is hopefully waiting for 
the results of the trial related to the development of single dose HPV Vaccine under the guidance 
of ICMR. The success of the trials could provide a major fillip to HPV  immunisation in India as 
there is only multiple dose vaccines available at present which although provide protection. 
However, multiple doses have practical inconveniences, like keeping track of the dosage 
schedule, etc. The Committee is of the view that introduction of a single dose vaccine would 
considerably increase successful vaccination percentage as the vaccination schedule can be 
completed with one shot. This, in turn, will have a commensurate impact on the reduction of 
incidence of cervical cancer,  which is a leading cause of cancer among women. Further, a 
homegrown vaccine can drastically bring down the cost of vaccination. This factor can accelerate 
the consolidation of the HPV vaccine in the Universal Immunization Programme. Hence, the 
Committee observes that the development of single dose HPV vaccine should be completed as 
per the set schedule. The Committee observes that HPV vaccine can be a path breaker in breaking 
the vicious cycle of the cancer of the cervix. A countrywide campaign supported by the Central 
Government is needed to ensure that 100% administration of HPV vaccine is done among all 

64 
 
girls with monitoring by ICMR. Steps be also taken to substantially reduce the price of the 
vaccine so that the high price does not become a hindrance in this programme.  
(Para 4.11.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.11.2 In order to address these issues, ICMR is conducting a study titled "Antibody Response 
following One Dose of Cervavac® as compared to One Dose of Gardasil  ® Vaccine in Healthy 
Girls Aged 9 -14 Years: A Non -inferiority, Multicenter, Double -blind, Randomized Controlled 
Trial" across three sites in India - Noida, Pune and Kolkata. Enrollment of trial participants has 
been completed (504 participants) and follow ups are currently ongoing. Expected date of 
completion of two year follow up is March 2027, following which the results of the trial will be 
made available. 
Further Recommendation 
3.11.3 Though the Committee appreciates the sharing of information about trials of single 
dose HPV Vaccine being carried out in the country, it does not find the reply of the 
Government to have adequately addressed  all the issues highlighted in the 
recommendation. Need for a country wide campaign promoting HPV Vaccine  and the cost 
aspects should have been addressed in the reply. Though the Committee comprehends that 
cost of the vaccine may also depend upon the path the trials take, it would remain a vital 
factor that would decide the acceptance of the vaccine in India ; may be even its full-fledged 
inclusion in the Universal Immunisation Programme of the Government. Being single dose 
is also important for the successful completion of vaccination schedule as it would be less 
challenging logistically in our  administrative and infrastructure milieu. In view of this, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation and wants a complete answer on all facets of the 
recommendation. 
3.12 Patent-protection to Innovators   
Recommendation 
3.12.1 The Committee notes that as per India Patent Act,  1970, Patents generally grant 
exclusive rights to innovators for a period of 20 years from the filing date. Hence, patent life 
available for exploitation of IP by innovator including innovator of monoclonal antibodies, may 
be increased by earlier grant of patent. 
(Para 4.14.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.12.2 Recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee has been noted. 
 
Further Recommendation 

65 
 
3.12.3 The Committee perceives early award of patents by completing the process es 
involved in granting exclusive rights to innovate for a period of 20 years from the filing date 
in a quicker manner as an important measure. The action taken by the DHR in this regard 
is to be intimated in a comprehensive manner and hence the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation.  
 
3.13 Affordable Healthcare 
Recommendation 
3.13.1 The Committee takes note of the programme  ANANT MUSKAAN, multi -site 
Implementation research on Primary School -based tooth brushing and oral health education in 
India to develop and implement a school -based tooth brushing and oral health education scalable 
delivery model with high coverage (≥80%) for improving oral health amongst primary school 
children. The Committee finds the response of the Ministry does not spell out as to how the study 
under ANANT MUSKAAN programme can contribute towards accessible and affordable health 
care. The Committee, ho wever, desires that ANANT MUSKAAN programme may also be 
popularized in the remote areas of the country, especially in rural, semi -urban, urban, tribal and 
hilly areas. 
(Para 5.1.4 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
3.13.2 The Anant Muskaan, ICMR's National Health  Research Priority Program, is aimed at 
upstream interventions of forming a habit of daily brushing, appropriate brushing technique and 
awareness of the importance of oral health in school children for prevention of oral diseases. 
These interventions are m uch more affordable than out of pocket expenditure for expensive oral 
diseases treatment in the country in view of the huge burden of oral diseases in the country. This 
program is currently encompassing all the schools, both public and private, as well as in both 
urban and rural areas of 7 districts of the country. Once this implementation model is developed 
in these 7 districts, it has the potential of expansion in other districts or hilly tribal areas. 
Further Recommendation 
3.13.3 The Committee notes that Anant Muskaan, ICMR's National Health Research 
Priority Program encompasses all the schools, both public and private, as well as in both 
urban and rural areas of 7 districts of the country.  The Committee, however, desires to  
know the details of findings/success of the scheme in the 7 districts of the country where the 
program has been put in place. The Committee also w ants to know in detail the action plan 
along with timeline related to the expansion of the said program in other di stricts or hilly 
tribal areas of the country. 
  

66 
 
CHAPTER-IV  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
4.1 Role of public-private partnerships (PPPs) in Health Research Funding 
Recommendation  
4.1.1 The Committee notes that while on the one hand DHR acknowledges the importance of 
Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) for the development of innovations and informs that ICMR 
has successfully completed several projects under PPP mode, there is an absence o f an 
institutional mechanism for PPP. In view of the submission of DHR and the fact that promotion 
of PPP is one of the businesses allocated to DHR as per the Allocation of Business Rules of the 
Government of India, the Committee recommends that DHR should  come out with an 
institutionalised mechanism for promoting PPP. 
 (Para 1.5.2 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
4.1.2 Department of Health Research (DHR) acknowledges and appreciates the Hon'ble 
Committee's observation regarding the need for an institutional me chanism to strengthen Public -
Private Partnerships (PPPs) in health research. While DHR and ICMR have successfully engaged 
with the private sector through project -specific collaborations (MDMS, HTAIn etc.), the 
Department concurs that a dedicated, structure d, and sustainable framework is essential for 
scaling and systematizing PPP initiatives across the health research ecosystem. 
4.1.3 As part of this effort, DHR is in the process of establishing the Medical Innovation 
Development Acceleration Council (MIDAC): a special purpose vehicle envisioned as a 
strategic institutional mechanism to drive biomedical innovation through effective public -private 
collaboration. 
4.1.4 Vision and Institutional Role of MIDAC 
4.1.5 MIDAC is conceived as a flagship initiati ve under DHR to foster translational biomedical 
research, accelerate product development, and enable commercialization of indigenous 
technologies. It directly aligns with DHR's mandate under the Allocation of Business Rules 
(1961), which includes inter -sectoral coordination and the promotion of PPPs in health and 
biomedical research. 
4.1.6 MIDAC's vision is to leverage the collective strengths of government, academia, industry, 
and startups to address India's pressing public health challenges through innova tion and 
indigenous product development. Its mission is to systematically support the transformation of 

67 
 
research leads -originating from ICMR, academia, and industry -into validated, market -ready 
health technologies through an institutionalized PPP model. 
4.1.7 Role of MIDAC in Promoting PPP in Biomedical Innovation 
4.1.8 MIDAC's institutional framework will operationalize PPPs across four interlinked 
domains: 
1. Translational Research and Product Development 
MIDAC will identify promising innovations, originating from ICMR and the 
broader research ecosystem, and forge PPPs to co -develop these into diagnostics, 
therapeutics, vaccines, and medical devices. PPPs will help bridge resource gaps, provide 
technical expertise, and ensure scalability of innovations for public health deployment. 
2. Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer 
MIDAC will serve as a centralized hub for managing ICMR's intellectual assets, 
facilitating patent filing, licensing, and royalty management. It will foster strategic 
collaborations with industry partners for the commercialization of public -funded 
innovations-thus creating a strong innovation-to-market pipeline under a PPP framework. 
3. Pre-Clinical and Clinical Validation 
To address critical bottlenecks in biomedical R&D, MI DAC will support 
validation infrastructure (labs, networks, panels), performance evaluation protocols, and 
field feasibility studies. It will enable industry partners, startups, and government agencies 
to jointly conduct evaluations required for regulatory  approvals and programmatic 
adoption. 
4. MedTech Mitra Platform 
MIDAC will also operationalize the MedTech Mitra platform, developed in 
collaboration with NITI Aayog, ICMR, and CDSCO, to provide comprehensive 
handholding to innovators. Through targeted PPP s, the platform will support startups and 
SMEs in navigating product development, clinical trials, and regulatory pathways, 
thereby enhancing market readiness and reducing import dependency 
4.1.9 National Impact and Forward Path 
4.1.10 As the nodal entity for biomedical innovation and translational research under DHR, 
MIDAC will be central to realizing the vision of a Viksit Bharat by 2047. It will: 
1.  Institutionalize PPPs as a core mechanism to drive health innovation; 
2.  Maximize returns from ICMR's annual investment of over 3,000 crore Rs; 

68 
 
3.  Advance the goals of the One Health Mission by supporting rapid development of 
countermeasures for emerging infectious threats; 
4.  Promote self-reliance in medical technologies and reduce import dependency. 
 
4.1.11 DHR is currently in the advanced planning stage for the operationalization of MIDAC 
and is actively consulting with relevant stakeholders to finalize its governance, funding structure, 
and implementation roadmap. 
4.2 Projected Demand and Actual Allocation 
Recommendation  
4.2.1 It is the firm view of the Committee that Health research has to be accorded higher 
priority by the Government than being given during recent years. Accordingly, the assurance of 
the Ministry of Finance to consider granting Rs.600.00 crore in RE for 2025 -26 is not enough. 
The Committee, accordingly, strongly recommends that the total funds as projected by DHR may 
be allocated as additional fund in the BE 2025 -26 itself and if not so, surely atleast at RE stage. 
This is being recommended under the premise th at DHR would continue to walk the talk and 
execute their schemes and programmes as per the book. The Committee desires that DHR should 
pursue with the Ministry of Finance with due diligence so that budgetary allocation to DHR must 
match with the projected demand. 
(Para 2.1.5 of the Report) 
Action Taken  
4.2.2 The observation of the Hon‘ble Committee is noted. The Department will raise an 
additional budget from the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage 
4.3 Health Research Funding  
Recommendation  
4.3.1 The Committee observes that the BE 2025-26 of Department of Health Research (DHR) 
at Rs 3900.69 crore is just 3.91 % of the Total Health Budget. Also, DHR got only 4.06% of the 
BE allocation of Department of Health & Family Welfare (DoH&FW) 2025 -26, i.e., Rs 
95,957.87 crore. Further, the Committee observes that over the last five years, there has been no 
major change in the quantum of budgetary allocation for health research, which is still only 
0.02% of the GDP. The Committee understands that public fundin g is the primary source of fund 
for meeting the expenditure on health research in India, therefore, the crucial role of healthcare 
research in advancing public health is undeniable. The Committee expresses anguish over low 
budgetary allocation to health re search as in the opinion of the Committee, for a country of 
almost 1.5 billion people, the existing trend of quantum of budgetary allocation over the years is 
abysmally low.  
(Para 2.2.5 of the Report) 

69 
 
 
Action Taken  
4.3.2 The observation of the Hon‘ble  Committee is noted. The matter will be pursued with 
the Ministry of Finance based on requirements during the RE stage. 
Recommendation  
4.3.3 Further, the Committee also found that no major financial documents of the Government 
of India like the Economic Survey outline the specific allocation of fund for Health Research in 
India. Hence, the lowly 3.91% of allocation for research in health sector , in comparison to the 
Total Health Budget, gets drowned in the larger, more projectable figures of DoH&FW. In the 
considered opinion of the  Committee, the change in approach of the Government towards 
according more impetus to Health Research should begin from highlighting the money allocated 
over the years for Health Research prominently in important financial documents and indicators. 
Such indicators reflect the importance being accorded by the Government to the health sector and 
help in understanding the trajectory of growth in the health research. 
(Para 2.2.8  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.3.4 The observations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted. The matter will be pursued with 
the Department of Economic Affairs for the possibility of including the alloca tion of fund for 
Health Research in India, in the Economic Survey. 
Recommendation  
4.3.5 Considering global standards with respect to investment in health research, the Committee 
recommends that the Government must aim to invest at least 0.1% of the GDP in  the next five 
years. 
(Para 2.2.9  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.3.6 The observations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted. The Department will raise an 
additional budget from the Ministry of Finance at the RE stage. 
4.4 Health Technology Assessment- Attached office. 
Recommendation 
4.4.1 The Committee notes that Health Assessment Technology - Attached office was 
approved in May 2023 to implement the HTA scheme. The Committee perceives this move as an 
attempt to accord a certain higher degree of importan ce to the implementation of the HTA 
Scheme. On the drastic scaling down of the allocation demanded by DHR for HTA Scheme for 
the year 2025-26 the Committee notes that it was due to the delay in approval of the proposal for 
the establishment of Medical Inno vations Development Acceleration Company (MIDAC). 

70 
 
Accordingly, the Committee exhorts DHR and the Ministry of Finance to accelerate the 
remaining procedure for final approval as MIDAC has already been given in principle approval. 
(Para 2.6.5  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.4.2 The draft  Memo for Committee on Establishment Expenditure (CEE), draft Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) of MIDAC have been circulated for Inter Ministerial Consultations and 
also inter ministerial consultations on the drafts were held in May 2025. Based on the inputs 
being received, drafts are being modified and finalized. 
4.5 Viral Research & Diagnostic Laboratories (VRDLs)   
Recommendation 
4.5.1 The Committee further recommends the establishment of VRDLs in remote and less 
accessible areas which remains uncovered as on date, namely, places in the Northeast, Ladakh 
and Lakshadweep. In case medical colleges or eligible institutions are not available, these 
locations shall be covered by giving special provisions in the norms of the Scheme, if required. 
Proposed expansion  of the scope of the Multidisciplinary Research Units (MRUs) Scheme to 
cover Private Medical Colleges/Research Institutes could provide a cue in this direction. 
(Para 3.2.7  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.5.2 The Department of Health Research (DHR) fully concurs with the need to expand 
diagnostic coverage to underserved and remote regions. To this end, DHR will actively 
encourage the submission of proposals from areas currently lacking adequate diagnostic 
infrastructure. Proposals have already been received from Leh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, and 
Nagaland, and are presently under consideration. Efforts are underway to relax existing norms 
and introduce special provisions to enable the inclusion of district hospitals , with the aim of 
strengthening diagnostic services and promoting research in these uncovered regions and North -
eastern states. 
4.6 North-Eastern Areas 
Recommendation 
4.6.1 The Committee acknowledges the presence of VRDLs (Viral Research &  Diagnostic 
Labs), MRUs (Multidisciplinary Research Units), and MRHRUs (Model Rural Health Research 
Units) in the NER. But, while looking at the map on the network of Health Technology 
Assessment in India Resource hubs and Regional Resource Centres in the country, the 
Committee could find only a single Resource hub in the NER. The Committee in its earlier report 
has already recommended for more Resource Hubs for the NER and would reiterate its 
recommendation once again. But the Committee also take note of t he fact that funds remained 
unutilized owing to less number of proposals received from NE states under the Scheme Human 
Resource Development and Gants -in-aid General schemes and in the opinion of the Committee 
this points to the need of specific and tailor  made handholding required in case of North Eastern 
areas. 
(Para 3.9.3  of the Report) 

71 
 
Action Taken 
4.6.2 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee will be considered and Resource centres 
for HTA will be established in NER regions. 
4.6.3 The Centre for Evidence based guidelines at DHR has established one Technical resource 
hub (TRH) and two Technical resource centres (TRCs) in the NER: 
4.6.4 Technical Resource Hub (established March 2025): NIPER, Guwahati  
4.6.5 Technical resource centres (established Sep 2024): 1. Dept. of Pharmacology, AIIMS 
Guwahati.  2. Dept. of Ophthalmology, AIIMS Guwahati 
4.6.6 Under HRD & GIA Schemes, all due efforts as mandated by GOI have been made to 
support these NER States through various schemes of the DHR.  E ven special calls for proposals 
were invited during 2024 -25. In spite of all best efforts, the target is still to be achieved due to 
lower quality of proposals and lower number of participants. 
4.6.7 Workshop on Grant Writing  aimed at encouraging participa tion in grant and fellowship 
opportunities has been conducted for researchers and institutions in the North Eastern States of 
India. Webinar also conducted for the North Eastern States and disseminated the DHR HRD 
Schemes.  
4.6.8 To provide support to the researchers in North east regions through the DHR scheme, a 
provision of 10% share in the budget (2025 -26) of the scheme has been earmarked.  Department 
would make all efforts to hand hold, train and upgrade infrastructure in the region so as to ensure 
the benefit of the schemes is passed on to the NER States. 
4.7 Research infrastructure in rural and underserved areas 
Recommendation 
4.7.1 ICMR should also strive to the future, through measures like enabling guidelines allowing 
CSR funds to be directed toward private sector partners for collaborative research projects, listing 
of ICMR on the Social Stock Exchange (SSE) to secure alternative funding sources for critical 
healthcare R&D initiatives, appropriately incentivizing the ASHA workers to contribute  more 
towards health research, particularly through activities in rural areas, like house-to-house surveys, 
disease surveillance, and community-based data collection, etc. 
(Para 4.7.2  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.7.2 ICMR has recently revised its CSR funding guidelines. ICMR is engaging the PSUs for 
those research projects, where some medical countermeasures are required for Indian citizens, 
however, due to absence of larger market incentives, private companies are not  easily interested 
in R&D. Currently KFD Vaccine development is being explored under CSR. 

72 
 
4.7.3 The process of listing ICMR on the Social Stock Exchange is in process. 
4.7.4 The suggestion of incentivizing the ASHA workers is duly noted. 
4.8 Air pollution as major health risk factor 
Recommendation 
4.8.1 The Committee took into consideration the observation of the Emission Gap Report 2020 
UN Environment Programme which has observed that India has seen over 6% more Green House 
Gas Emission than previous year.  The Committee, therefore, feels that it is high time for India to 
establish an Environmental Health Regulatory Agency for Comprehensive and Cohesive 
Environmental Governance to control detrimental health effects of exposure to air, water and soil 
pollutants to prevent wide range of non -communicable diseases. The Committee, in this 
connection, recommends DHR to undertake a detailed study of the Report and come forward with 
necessary course of research to overcome the challenges as highlighted in the Report. 
(Para 4.9.3  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.8.2 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted for compliance. 
Recommendation 
4.8.3 The Committee is of the considered view that ICMR should conduct in -depth research 
into correlation between air pollution and the diseases that is caused by various air pollutants. 
The Committee desires that DHR should formulate policy or programme keeping  in view the 
findings of ―The impact of air pollution on deaths, disease burden, and life expectancy across the 
states of India: the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017‖. 
(Para 4.9.4  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.8.4 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted for compliance. 
Recommendation 
4.8.5 The Committee further finds that other than the current focus of breast and lung 
cancers, the Scheme proposes to expand to other biomarkers during the 16 th Finance Commission 
period. The Committee observes that this as a welcome step and has to be pursued in all 
earnestness. Adequate funds need to be sought and provided for the efficient functioning of the 
Scheme which can positively impact the quality of life of patients affected by one of the more  
difficult diseases to treat. 
(Para 4.10.3  of the Report) 
 

73 
 
Action Taken 
4.8.6 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee have been noted. 
4.9 Clinical trials 
Recommendation 
4.9.1 The Committee finds that clinical trials in India are done with lot of reluctance and if 
trials are done with reluctance, the outcome would not be result -oriented. ICMR being the apex 
institution should essay the role of the guide and facilitator in sharin g their grants, in kind or 
cash, as encouragement for the fellow clinicians to put in their concerted efforts. Doctors and 
clinicians who are actively involved in the ICMR research should be incentivized appropriately. 
The Committee recommends the Ministry  of Finance to grant higher budgetary support to ICMR 
is for encouraging in-depth as far as health research projects. The Committee is of the considered 
view that research is the cornerstone of future development in the healthcare system of this 
country and should not take a back seat. The Committee wishes the premium Institute to pave the 
way for other small organisations engaged in health research through appropriate incentives so 
that such organizations are motivated to produce better results. 
(Para 4.15.1  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.9.2 The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) concurs with the views expressed and 
recognizes the need to reduce hesitancy around conducting clinical trials. To address this, ICMR 
has established a network of medic al institutions that possess the expertise, experience, and 
commitment necessary for conducting high -quality clinical trials. Currently this network, named 
Indian Clinical Trial and Education Network (INTENT) encompasses 75 sites spread across the 
country.  
4.9.3 These designated study sites receive comprehensive support, which may include research 
grants, assistance with data management, procurement of clinical trial liability insurance, and 
technical and scientific guidance throughout the conduct of the trials. 
4.9.4 Additionally, ICMR facilitates capacity building by organizing educational initiatives 
such as webinars and workshops focused on various aspects of clinical trial conduct. 
Recommendation 
4.9.5 The Committee desires that physicians may be given some incentives to encourage their 
participation in clinical trials. The Committee is of the view that the incentives in kind can be 
provided to encourage clinicians to participate in clinical trials. The Committee is of the view that 
the provision of hiring adequate trained manpower dedicated for the purpose of operationalizing 
clinical trials will boost the research ecosystem. Ongoing training as well as exposures to best 
practices in clinical trials can enhance their productivity. An appreciation letter or certificate may 

74 
 
be issued to the investigators if they complete the study as per proposed timelines and follow all 
acceptable standards of good clinical practice. 
(Para 4.15.2 of the Report) 
4.9.6 Action Taken 
4.9.7 The recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted for compliance. 
4.10 National Antibiotic Policy   
Recommendation 
4.10.1 The Committee observes that there is rampant usage of antibiotics leading to Anti -
microbial resistance. It is a matter of great concern that rapid/massive use of antibiotics has 
resulted in a countrywide problem of microbial/drug resistance. Nowadays, Anti biotics are 
misused, abused and overused. Immediate steps to control this trend need to be taken as the long -
term effects of the drug resistance will cripple the health of the citizens of the country. To restore 
our natural immune system and our gut health  indiscriminate usage of antibiotics needs to be 
stopped. Suitable interventions in the curriculum of medical colleges need to be done to sensitise 
our doctors on the ill effects of overuse of antibiotics. Therefore, the Committee recommends 
DHR, in tandem  with Ministry/Department concerned to formulate National Anti -Biotic Policy 
covering all aspects of misuse of Antibiotics and its prevention and with the intent of restoring 
the Nations Immune Health. 
(Para 5.3.1 of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.10.2 The Centre for Evidence‑Based Guidelines at the DHR in collaboration with DGHS, 
NHSRC and DoHFW has initiated the evidence‑based guidelines for the empirical use of 
antibiotics to reduce antibiotic misuse and overuse. 
4.10.3 In May 2024, the Steering Group  assigned the development of evidence -based guidelines 
for the country across twelve priority disease conditions, with a well‑defined scope for each 
syndrome: 
a)      When to initiate empirical therapy 
b)      Choice of empirical agent(s) 
c)      Duration of therapy 
d)      When to change the antibiotic 
 
4.10.4 The guidelines will harmonize prescribing practices by delineating precise criteria for 
therapy initiation, antimicrobial selection, treatment duration and subsequent modification, 
thereby obviating empiric uncertainty and unwarranted administration. By mandating predefined 
junctures for de‑escalation or discontinuation, anchored in clinical response and microbiological 
data, the framework will avert unnecessarily protracted courses driven by conventi on rather than 

75 
 
clinical necessity. In aggregate, these interventions are anticipated to attenuate empirical 
overprescriptionand safeguard the long‑term efficacy of antimicrobials. 
4.11 Vision for health security of next generation 
Recommendation 
4.11.1 The Committee takes note that upgradation of a total of 80 VRDLs, establishment of 
BSL-3 Laboratories by upgradation of 5 viral disease diagnostic laboratories to bio -safety level-
3& deployment of 2 mobile BSL -3 laboratories and establishment of 4 regional  national institute 
of virology and establishment of the National Institute of One Health (NIOH). The Committee 
believes that these arrangements would lead to early detection of pathogens during outbreak, 
expanding India‘s diagnostic capabilities at the St ate levels, extending essential on -sight 
diagnostic services especially in remote and hard to reach areas, efficiently countering the threats 
posed by pandemics/epidemics in future and instrumental in early detection and response to 
epidemics and pandemics , respectively, provided the institutional mechanism work efficiently 
and effectively at the nick of the time. 
(Para 5.7.1  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.11.2 The Department of Health Research (DHR) appreciates the Hon‘ble  Committee‘s 
recognition of the critical importance of strengthening the VRDL network, establishing BSL -3 
and mobile BSL -3 laboratories, and setting up regional centres of NIV and NIOH. These 
initiatives are pivotal for enhancing early pathogen detection d uring outbreaks, expanding 
diagnostic capacities at the State level, and providing essential on -site diagnostic services, 
particularly in remote and hard -to-reach areas. Collectively, they will significantly bolster India's 
ability to detect and respond promptly to epidemics and pandemics in the future.  
4.11.3 48 VRDLs are being supported for recurring operating liabilities. Additionally, 10 
VRDLs have been strengthened and upgraded to IRDLs, and another 10 VRDLs are in the 
pipeline for upgradation to IRDLs.  
4.11.4 Five VRDLs are being upgraded with BSL -3 facilities at AIIMS Raipur, AIIMS 
Rishikesh, AIIMS Rajkot, AIIMS Bibinagar and GMC Kota. Two mobile BSL -3 vans have 
already been procured and deployed at NIV Pune and RMRC Gorakhpur, and procureme nt of 
two additional mobile BSL-3 vans is under pipeline.  
4.12 Incentive to ASHAs 
Recommendation 
4.12.1 The Committee is in agreement with DHR that ASHAs can be incentivized for 
contributing more towards health research, through activities like house -to-house surveys. The 
extensive grassroots presence makes ASHA ideal for bridging the gap between research an d 

76 
 
public health implementation, the Committee opines. Accordingly, the Committee recommends 
DHR to encourage and incentivise the ASHAs and peripheral health institutions to contribute 
more towards health research through activities like house-to-house surveys, disease surveillance, 
and community- based data collection. The Committee also recommends that the ASHA workers 
should be incentivised from the allocation made to DHR and should be in addition to the regular 
remuneration of ASHAs. 
(Para 5.8.1  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.12.2 Considering that the core mandate of MRHRUs is primarily focused on population -based 
studies, especially implementation research, it is agreed upon that MRHRUs activity will require 
substantial community engagement and community mobilization. In this context, the involvement 
of ASHA workers and peripheral health institutions in research activities will be a strategic 
inclusion as ASHAs, being deeply familiar with the community, are well -positioned to facilitate 
research participa tion. Furthermore, as key record -keepers of various ongoing health 
programmes, ASHAs can serve as valuable sources of data ranging from basic demographic to 
the prevalence of specific health conditions thereby assisting researchers in identifying eligible 
households or individuals for inclusion in studies. 
4.13 Effects of cell phone and mobile tower radiations on human health 
Recommendation 
4.13.1 The Committee recommends DHR to undertake conclusive study on the linkage 
between exposure to radio frequency radiation and potential health effects including effect on cell 
growth, cell differentiation, DNA, immune system, hormonal effects, reproduction, neurological, 
cardiovascular systems, blood brain barrier, stress proteins, skin, sleep disorder etc. and the 
findings thereof may be furnished to the Committee for information. The Committee hopes that 
DHR would take concrete steps in the matter in the interest of humankind. 
(Para 5.11.1  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.13.2 In response to the Hon‘ble  Committee‘s recommendation, we wish to inform that several 
in vitro  and in vivo  studies have already been conducted under ICMR support to evaluate the 
biological effects of radiofrequency radiation (RFR) emitted from mobile phones. These studies 
demonstrated adverse effects on reproductive hormones, immune signaling, metabolic functions, 
and oxidative stress in cellular and animal models.  
4.13.3 Studies are underway to assess the 5G impacts on reproductive behavior, hematological 
parameters, and skin integrity. Additionally, A systematic review is currently underway to 
identify evidence gaps. 
 

77 
 
4.14 Impact of packaged foods on human health & Policy  Measures to enhance 
informed food choices 
Recommendation 
4.14.1 The Committee expresses concern over pre -packed foods/UPFs consumption that 
becomes a contributing factor in the growing overweight obesity and diet related non -
communicable diseases, (NCDs). The Committee takes note the findings of the Household 
Consumption Expenditure Survey (HCES, 2024) concluding that the monthly per capita 
expenditure on beverages and processed food has risen from 8.98 per cent and 7.9 per cent (2011-
12) to 11.09 per cent and 9.84 per cent (2022 -23) in urban and rural areas, respective ly. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Government to resort to stricter guidelines on 
targeting marketing and advertising of unhealthy foods for children. The Committee takes into 
account that the Food Safety Standards Authority of India (FS SAI) is taking steps to introduce a 
Front of Pack labelling System to indicate the healthiness of the pre -packaged foods. The 
Committee hopes that measures so undertaken will not only help the consumer make informed 
food choices but also compel the food in dustry actors to reformulate their products to achieve 
better rating. 
(Para 5.13.1  of the Report) 
Action Taken 
4.14.2 As the Hon‘ble Committee has observed, India is witnessing a surge in 
overweight/obesity and diet related non -communicable diseases. Alth ough obesity and NCDs 
have a multi -factorial aetiology, unhealthy diets and low physical activity remain the main 
modifiable risk factors. India is witnessing a worrying shift in its food habits, with ultra -
processed foods (UPFs) becoming a regular part of  daily diets, not only in urban areas but also in 
rural areas. A 2024 policy brief by ICRIER and WHO revealed that spending on UPFs surged 
from $900 million in 2006 to nearly $38 billion in 2019. 
(https://icrier.org/pdf/Ultra%20Processed%20Food%20-Policy-brief.pdf) 
4.14.3 And the Household Consumption Expenditure Survey (2022 –23) shows processed foods 
now make up about 10% of food spending in both rural and urban households  
(https://mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/publication_reports/HCES%20FactSheet%202023-24.pdf 
) 
4.14.4 This growing reliance on processed packaged, nutrient -poor foods is one of the causes 
that is fuelling an alarming rise in obesity, diabetes, and heart disease. The Indian Council of 
Medical Research–National Institute of Nutrition (ICMR –NIN) in its recent ly released Dietary 
Guidelines for Indians has introduced two important guidelines – ‗Minimize the consumption of 
high fat, sugar, salt (HFSS) and ultra -processed foods (UPFs)‘ and for the first time, include 
reading food label as an important guideline to  promote healthy food choices 
(https://www.nin.res.in/dietaryguidelines2024.html). 

78 
 
4.14.5 ICMR-NIN also supports introduction of strong, mandatory Front -of-Pack Nutrition 
Labelling (FOPNL) system, backed by allied regulations such as strict limits on salt, sugar, and 
fat content in foods, marketing restrictions for unhealthy foods (especially those targeted at 
children), and better public awareness. 
4.14.6 The Food Safety and Standards Autho rity of India (FSSAI) has been working on 
introducing FOPNL, aimed at helping consumers make healthier food choices. After wide 
stakeholder consultations, FSSAI launched a study by Indian Institute of Management (IIM), 
Ahmedabad on Consumer Preferences for  Different Nutrition Front of Pack Labels in India 
(https://www.fssai.gov.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/IIMA_FoPL_Report_22_02_2022.pdf). Based 
on this report, FSSAI launched a draft regulation on the Indian Nutrition Rating (INR) in 2022 —
a star -based system that rates the overall nutritional quality of packaged foods 
(https://comments.fssai.gov.in/Bestviewwl.aspx?NOTIFICATION_ID=4123). It was placed in 
public domain and received several comments from various stakeholder groups. A committee 
was constituted by FSSAI including a few ICMR_NIN scientists. The committee reviewed the 
comments and submitted a report.  In addition, NIN also conducted a study on acceptability, use 
and ability of various formats of food labels to influence the consumer food choices. The same 
was shared with FSSAI and presented to the CEO, FSSAI in 2023 
(https://www.nin.res.in/survey_reports/fopnl_report.pdf). 
4.14.7 Other recent efforts under the ‗Let‘s Fix Our Food‘ Initiative – a consortium of several 
scientific, policy, professional an d multi-lateral organizations being led by ICMR -NIN has been 
strongly advocating for initiatives like immediate introduction of FOPNL systems, placing 
restrictions on marketing and advertising of unhealthy foods to children and adolescents, 
simultaneously intensifying nutrition education and food literacy and taxation of HFSS foods. 
 
************* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
1. The Committee takes cognisance of the reply of the Government regarding measures 
taken to fill up vacant regular posts of Scientists in DHR , h owever, the absence of any 
specific steps taken is conspicuous. Hence, the Committee recommends that the Department 
shall furnish a much more sp ecific response about the tangible action being taken to fill up 
vacant regular posts of Scientists in DHR . The Committee is of the view that in case  change 
of nature of posts from D eputation to Direct Recruitment  is not possible  at all, change of 
their tenures, introduction of more flexibility in the recruitment and service condition rules, 
attractive remuneration and quicker career progression, reduc tion of  bureaucratic 
procedures involved in selection  process, etc , can be tried out  in the first instances . The 
Committee does understand that functional necessities may require the contractual 
engagements that the Department is undertaking in their various programs and schemes.  
But the Committee strongly feels that the Department, as the nodal body for resear ch 
activities, in the all -important health sector in India, should have a permanent cadre of 
Scientists and that should be an acknowledged priority.  The Committee further hopes that 
DHR give due consideration to observation/recommendations made by the Committee.  
(Para 3.1.7) 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES AND ETHICAL CONCERNS RELATED TO HEALTH 
RESEARCH  
2. The Committee is appreciative of the fact that in alignment with its 
recommendation, the Department has established working groups to ensure data privacy 
and security, promote the responsible and ethical development of AI solutions, and fosters 
effective collaborations with stakeholders. But the Department has not responded with 
regard to steps taken to seek adequate fund for ICMR-NIRDHDS for its new responsibili ty 
of developing India-specific AI-based solutions for strengthening the healthcare system with 
an overarching goal of achieving Universal Health Coverage. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends the DHR to approach the Ministry of Finance for allocating adeq uate amount 
of money to ICMR-NIRDHDS to undertake significant Research projects pertaining to 
Digital Health and Data Science. The Committee understands that developing India specific 
AI-based solution is the need of the hour for achieving Universal Health  coverage that 
further requires strengthening of healthcare system. 
(Para 3.2.7) 
HEALTH RESEARCH FUNDING  
3. While the Committee is aware and acknowledges the efforts of the Department to 
recalibrate high-impact research projects and funds to attain optimal results, the 
Committee is of the considered view that health Research is a commitment  to the future 

80 
 
consolidation and expansion of health care system .  In this regard, the Committee would 
like to r eaffirm its recommendation that the Department should approach the Ministry of 
Finance to secure additional funds as health research is fundamental to the development of 
the country's health care system. Moreover, the Department should share with the 
Committee its efforts to secure more funds and the response of t he Ministry of Finance 
thereto. 
(Para 3.3.3) 
4. The Committee while taking into cognizance of the response of the Department , 
would like to be informed about the Projected Demand and the actual fund received at the 
RE stage along with the reason for allocation of lesser fund than projected demand raised 
by the Department, if any,  by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee desires that DHR 
should project its requisite demand with proper justificat ion citing previous allocation and 
actual expenditure and outcome of the research projects undertaken in the past and 
expanded scope of the ongoing research projects and implication of research projects to be 
undertaken. 
(Para 3.3.6) 
SCHEME-WISE PROJECTED DEMAND AND ALLOCATION (2025-26) 
5. The recommendation of the Committee was on slashing of the funds as sought by the 
DHR for game changing schemes/projects without any compelling reasons. While the 
Department has been appreciative about the concern expressed by the Committee, the DHR 
has not been forthcoming with the steps ad opted to address the issues raised by  the 
Committee. Hence, the Committee reiterates its rec ommendation that the DHR share with 
the Committee the tangible steps taken to revisit their D emands based on practicality  by 
straightening out all administrative infirmities associated with project submissions before 
approaching the Ministry of Finance for higher budgetary allocation under various 
schemes at the RE Stage.  The DHR must provide sus tainable justification and Ministry of 
Finance for seeking higher budgetary allocation. 
(Para 3.4.5) 
6. The Committee notes and appreciates that DHR has identified the activities on 
which the increased funding is to be utilized under different schemes/projects viz. 
expanding the scope of MRU Scheme to cover Private Medical Colleges, upgradation of 
well performing MRUs to Centers of Research Excellence (CoREs), integration of ICMR’s 
Capacity Development Programme into DHR’s own HRD Scheme, revisi on of guidelines 
for Start -up Grant,  National One Health Mission activities, MedTech Mitra, 
implementation of DHR -ICMR strategic goals, etc ., wh ere the enhanced funding is to be 
required for optimum utilization to achieve the cherished output as per standa rd rate of 
return.  The Committee  would like to be updated on the steps involved in materializing the 
said activities and funds required and time framed proposed for achieving objective in each 
and every Schemes/Projects. 
(Para 3.4.8) 

81 
 
7. The Committee woul d like to be appraised on the physical outcomes of the 
monitoring mechanism and regular review related to the scope, budget & timeline of 
various schemes/projects under the Department, which in turn will assist the Committee in 
gaining a boarder view on th e hurdles, if any, associated with a particular scheme/project. 
This will also highlight success stories of DHR as well. 
(Para 3.4.11) 
8. The Committee finds the response of the Department to be incomplete and not in 
consonance with letter and spirit of the Committee’s recommendations. In its 
recommendation, the Committee has pointed out that DHR, through their documents 
submitted to the Committee as part of the examination of DFG 2025 -26, had mentioned 
that only the remaining amount approved by the Stand ing Finance Committee (SFC) for 
the 15 th Finance Commission period has been allocated in case of Schemes like 
Establishment of Network of Viral Diagnostic & Research Laboratories for Managing 
Epidemics, Development of Tools to prevent outbreaks of epidemic s, etc. and ascribed this 
fact as reason for reduced allocations for schemes during 2025 -26. The reply of the 
Department mentions only the MRU and MRHU Schemes wherein such circumscribing of 
funds may not have occurred, but fails to touch upon other Scheme s wherein the said 
reasons have been cited for reduction of funds. Accordingly, the Committee wants a 
detailed scheme-wise reply in this matter. Further, the Committee would like to reiterate its 
view that adequate fund must be ensured for all those beneficial activities for all Schemes to 
warrant continuance and to avoid administrative delay beyond the period of 15 th Finance 
Commission. 
(Para 3.4.15) 
BUDGET UTILISATION TRENDS UNDER DIFFERENT SCHEMES/ PROJECTS  
9. The recommendation of the Committee had foc used on the relatively lesser 
utilisation of funds seen under the Head ‘Secretariat’ during the last three years. It is 
encouraging to note that during 2024 -25 the utilisation has been almost optimal.  However, 
it remains a fact that the funds sought by the Department has been higher during the said 
years and the BE have been consistently reduced at RE stage. Accordingly, the Committee 
is still of the opinion that the Department can plan their allocatio n and utilisation of funds 
for the Secretariat in a prudent manner.  Further, the Committee also finds that after fund 
utilisation being ‘almost nil’ for International Cooperation during 2022 -23 and 2023 -24, 
during 2024 -25 the allocation itself was drastic ally reduced. The Committee wants to be 
apprised of  in detail on the modification of objectives, if any, under International 
Cooperation and the reason for reduced allocation under the head since 2024 -25. The 
Committee desires that DHR should furnish its response on this aspect of the 
recommendation of the Committee. 
(Para 3.5.3) 
ESTABLISHMENT EXPENDITURE OF THE CENTRE 
10. The Committee is pleased to note that the DHR is taking steps for compliance 
towards creation of assets in the form of HR as well as in terms of office fixtures and 

82 
 
equipment based on Committee’s recommendation. The Committee would like to be 
intimated about the further initiatives taken in this regard.  The Committee would also like 
to be apprised of appropriation of fund on formation of capital assets which is all the more 
necessary for efficient and effective functioning of DHR. 
(Para 3.6.3) 
HEALTH TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT- ATTACHED OFFICE 
11. The Committee is of the firm view that HTA Scheme contains the capacity for 
accelerating translational research and technology development that would in turn  
strengthen the health infrastructure in the country. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended for assuring due significance t o such dedicated platform, however, t he 
response of DHR  finds mentions that the recommendation of the Committee has been 
noted. The Committee expects the DHR to come forward with a comprehensive reply in the 
matter giving details of the action proposed or taken in respect of the HTA Scheme as 
recommended by the Committee in order to achieve the cherished objectives. 
(Para 3.7.3) 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT FOR HEALTH RESEARCH 
12. The response of the DHR plainly lists  out certain steps taken for handholding 
researchers for securing  grants, fellowships and other support under the HRD Scheme. It 
does not mention since when these measures  have been employed. The Committee is the 
opinion that if they have been operational for some  time now, then their effectiveness needs 
to be explained . The recommendations of the Committee in this regard were made taking 
into account the perennial underutilization of funds under HRD Scheme and were intended 
to attract more talented researchers to take benefit of the Scheme  and contribute to 
nation’s progress . Accordingly, considering the importance of the outcomes the HRD 
scheme, the Committee wants DHR to furnish a more cogent reply in this regard clearly 
indicating measures taken/planned to improve the existing underutilization of funds for the 
Scheme understanding the inadequacies of the extant measures. In the considered opinion 
of the Committee, a n out of the box thought process coupled with robust mechanisms to 
gather feedback primarily from the beneficiaries and also other stakeholders may produce 
better results. 
(Para 3.8.7) 
13. The Committee reiterates its prior recommendation, underscoring the critical 
objectives of the HRD Scheme, and urges DHR to provide a more comprehensive response. 
The response should explicitly outline the steps not already taken or in place but tangible 
proposals to address the persistent underutilization of funds, based on a clear assessment of 
shortcomings in the current measures. From the Committee's perspective, embracing 
innovative approaches paired with strong feedback mechanisms that prioritize input f rom 
beneficiaries and incorporate views from other stakeholders may hold the potential to 
deliver significantly improved results. 
(Para 3.8.14) 

83 
 
RESEARCH GOVERNANCE – HEALTH TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT 
 
14. The Committee is pleased to note that a new separate HTA Scheme is in the works. 
However, the Committee would like to be inter alia  appraised of the specific action 
taken/proposed with respect to its recommendation for setting up more research hubs in 
the underserved and remote areas of the Co unty as well as the expected time by which the 
new HTA Scheme will be operational.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of 
response of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to the new Concept Note 
drafted for a new separate HTA Scheme. 
(Para 3.9.3) 
PRIME MINISTER'S AYUSHMAN BHARAT HEALTH INFRASTRUCTURE MISSION 
(PM- ABHIM) BIO-SECURITY PREPAREDNESS 
15. The Committee does not find the reply to be as comprehensive as it should have been 
on its recommendation on (PM -ABHIM) Bio-Security preparedness. The action taken on 
the aspect of civil construction including that of critical national Institutes has been 
mentioned as a one liner response as if the construction agencies have the sole responsibility 
in this regard and in case if the y falter again, as in the past, DHR should be prepared for 
delays in the implementation of PM -ABHIM Scheme. Further, the reply does not clearly 
mention about how many more  MBSL-3 laboratories are planned to be increased. The 
Committee is not convinced whether 0 2 more mobile labs would be sufficient to cater to all 
the currently underserved and remote areas of the country. Accordingly, the Committee 
reiterates its recommendation and wants a comprehensive answer from DHR touching 
upon all aspects of the recommendation. 
(Para 3.10.5) 
HPV VACCINES 
16. Though the Committee appreciates the sharing of information about trials of single 
dose HPV Vaccine being carried out in the country, it does not find the reply of the 
Government to have adequately addressed all the iss ues highlighted in the 
recommendation. Need for a country wide campaign promoting HPV Vaccine and the cost 
aspects should have been addressed in the reply. Though the Committee comprehends that 
cost of the vaccine may also depend upon the path the trials t ake, it would remain a vital 
factor that would decide the acceptance of the vaccine in India ; may be even its full-fledged 
inclusion in the Universal Immunisation Programme of the Government. Being single dose 
is also important for the successful completio n of vaccination schedule as it would be less 
challenging logistically in our administrative and infrastructure milieu. In view of this, the 
Committee reiterates its recommendation and wants a complete answer on all facets of the 
recommendation. 
(Para 3.11.3) 
 

84 
 
PATENT-PROTECTION TO INNOVATORS   
17. The Committee perceives early award of patents by completing the processes 
involved in granting exclusive rights to innovate for a period of 20 years from the filing date 
in a quicker manner as an important measure. The action taken by the DHR in this regard 
is to be intimated in a comprehensive manner and hence the Committee reiterates its 
recommendation. 
(Para 3.12.3) 
AFFORDABLE HEALTHCARE 
18. The Committee notes that Ana nt Muskaan, ICMR's National Health Research 
Priority Program encompasses all the schools, both public and private, as well as in both 
urban and rural areas of 7 districts of the country.  The Committee, however, desires to  
know the details of findings/success of the scheme in the 7 districts of the country where the 
program has been put in place. The Committee also w ants to know in detail the action plan 
along with timeline related to the expansion of the said program in other districts or hilly 
tribal areas of the country. 
(Para 3.13.3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

85 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare on the 164th Report has been given hereunder: 
 
 
 
 
53%
7%
20%
20%
Status of Action taken by the Ministry in repect 
of 164th Report of the Committee
Recommendations/ Observations 
accepted by the Government
Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's 
replies
Committee has made further 
recommendations
Final replies of the Government 
have not been received