      DRAFT/CONFIDENTIAL        
                                                                                       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana 1943 (SAKA) 
REPORT NO. 
131 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 128th 
REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2021-22 (DEMAND NO. 4) OF 
THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  December, 2021) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
                                                             
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana 1943 (SAKA) 
 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 128th 
REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2021-22 (DEMAND NO. 4) OF 
THE MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  December, 2021) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 (i)  
2. PREFACE 
 
(ii) 
3. ACRONYMS 
 
(iii) - (v) 
4. REPORT 1 - 71 
 Chapter–I –  Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry 
 
2-23 
 Chapter–II –  Recommendations/Observations which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of replies of the 
Ministry 
 
24-35 
 Chapter–III –  Recommendations/Observations in respect of 
which replies of the Ministry have not b een accepted by the 
Committee 
 
36-69 
 Chapter–IV- Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
final replies of the Ministry have not been received 
 
70-71 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  
GLANCE 
72 – 77 
6. MINUTES 78 – 80 
7. ANNEXURES 81 - 85 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri A.K. Antony     
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri A. D. Singh  
8. Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
14. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
15. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
16. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
17. Shrimati Kavitha Malothu 
18. Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
19. Shri Arjun Lal Meena 
20. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
21. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
22. Shri K. Navaskani 
23. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil 
24. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
25. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
26. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
27. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri J. Sundriyal  Joint Secretary 
Shri V.S.P.Singh  Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                    Additional Director 
Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
(i)  

PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Thirty -First Report of the Committee on Action Ta ken by 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in One Hundred Twenty Eighth 
Report on Demands for Grants 2021-22 (Demand No. 4) of the Ministry of AYUSH.  
2. The One Hundred Twenty Eighth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on 
the Table of Lok Sabha on 17 th March, 2021.  Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Ministry on 16th June, 2021.   
3.  The Committee made a total of 53 recommendations in its 128 th Report. Out of the 53 
recommendations, a total number of 21 recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry, 
has been categorized under Chapter I and there are a total number of 10 recommendations, which 
the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry‘s replies, has been categorized 
under Chapter II. A total number of 19 recommendations/ observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been acce pted by the Committee and the Committee has made 
further recommendations thereon, has been categorized under Chapter III while a total number of 
3 recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not been 
received, has been categorized under Chapter IV. 
4. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on 
the 1st  December, 2021. 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
1st  December, 2021 
Agrahayana,  13,  1943 (Saka) 
 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary                                                                                           
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
ADRs Adverse Drug Reactions 
AGNIi Accelerating Growth of New India‘s Innovation 
AIIA All  India Institute of Ayurveda 
AIPGET All India Post Graduate Entrance Test 
ANM Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
ASSOCHAM  Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India 
ASU Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani 
ASU&H Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy 
ASUDCC Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee 
ASUDTAB Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board 
AVCC AYUSH Virtual Convention Centre 
AWCs Angandwadi Centres 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathy 
BCC Behavior Change Communication 
BE Budget Estimates 
BHU Banaras Hindu University 
BOC Bureau of Outreach & Communication (New name of DAVP) 
CARI Central Ayurveda Research Institute 
CBOs Community Based Organisation 
CCIM Central Council of Indian Medicine 
CCRAS Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
CCRS Central Council for Research in Siddha 
CCRUM Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 
CCRYN Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy 
CCT Certificate of Completion of Training 
CEMCA Commonwealth Educational Media Centre for Asia 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CHC Community Health Centres 
CHO Community Health Officer 
CII Confederation of Indian Industry 
CME Continuing Medical Education 
COE Centre of Excellence 
CoPP Certificate of Pharmaceutical Product 
CRS Community Radio Stations 
CSMCARI Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar 
DGFT Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
DHs District Hospitals 
DoE Department of Expenditure 
DoPT Department of Personnel & Training 
DPM Deputy Project Manager/ District Programme Manager 
DPS Drug Policy Section 
DTL Drug Testing Laboratories 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee  
EMR Extra Mural Research 
FAAMS Forum for Assessment of AYUSH Market Size 
FICCI Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry 
FITM Forum on India Traditional Medicine 
FIZ It is the name of a company based in Germany 
FY Financial Year 
GAPs Good Agricultural Practices 
 
(iii) 

GFCPs Good Field Collection Practices 
GMP Good Manufacturing Practices 
HEFA Higher Education Funding Agency 
HG Herbal Gardens 
HMIS Health Management Information System 
HPL Homoeopathy Pharmacopoeia Laboratory 
HWC Health and Wellness Centres 
HWC Health Care Workers 
HWCs Health Wellness Centres 
IC Independent Charge 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IDY International Day of Yoga 
IEC's Information Education and Communication 
IGNOU Indira Gandhi National Open University 
IIMs Indian Institutes of Management 
IIPA Indian Institute of Public Administration 
IITs Indian Institute of Technology 
IMPCL Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Ltd 
IPD In-Patient Department 
IPGT&RA Post-Graduate Teaching & Research in Ayurveda 
IPvCs Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Centres 
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
ITAM Institute of Traditional and Alternative Medicine 
ITRA Institute of Teaching & Research in Ayurveda 
JFMCs Joint Forest Management Committees 
LDC Lower Division Clerk 
LSHTM It is the name of a company based in UK 
MAPGRs Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Genetic Resources 
MDNIY Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga 
MoA Ministry of AYUSH 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MPCDAs Medicinal Plants Conservation and Development Areas 
MPs Medicinal Plants 
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals 
NAM National AYUSH MISSION 
NCB Naturopathy Certification Board 
NCH National Commission for Homeopathy  
NCISM National Commission for Indian Systems of. Medicine 
NEET National Eligibility Entrance Test 
NEIAH North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy 
NEIFM North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine 
NFDC National Film Development Corporation 
NGOs Non Governmental Organisation 
NHP National Health Policy 
NIA National Institute of Ayurveda 
NIH National Institute of Homoeopathy 
NIMHANS National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences 
NIN National Institute of Nutri 
NIS National Institute of Siddha 
NISR National Institute of Sowa-Rigpa 
NIUM National Institute of Unani Medicine 
 
(iv) 

NMPB National Medicinal Plants Board 
NPvCC National Pharmacovigilance Coordination Centre 
NRDC National Research Development Corporation 
NRDR National Raw Drug Repository 
NRIUMSD National Research Institute of Unani Medicine for Skin disorders 
OPD Out Patient Department 
PCIM&H Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Medicine and Homeopathy 
PCIMH Pharmacopoiea Commission of Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy 
PHC Primary Health Centres 
PHFI Public Health Foundation of India  
PHI Public Health Initiatives (AYUSH and Public Health) 
PIPs Programme Implementation Plans 
PLIM Pharmacopoiea Laboratory of Indian Medicine 
PMBJAP Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Jan Aushadhi Pariyojana 
PMJAY Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana 
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
PMU Project Monitoring Unit / Programme Management Unit 
PPP Public Private Partnership  
PPvCs Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
PSUR Periodic Safety Update Reports 
QCI Quality Council of India 
RARI Regional Ayurveda Research Institute 
RAV Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth 
RBSK Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram 
RCFCs Regional-cum-Facilitation Centres 
RCT Randomized Controlled Trial 
RE Revised Estimate 
RIS Research and Information System 
RRDRs Regional Raw Drug Repositories 
RRIUMs Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine 
RT-PCR Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction 
SAAP State Annual Action Plan 
SAS Swasthya Assessment Scale 
SCRI Siddha Central Research Institute 
SCRU-CCRS Siddha Clinical Research Unit – Central Council for Research in Siddha 
SGOS Sectoral Group of Secretaries 
SHGs Self Help Groups 
SIU Staff Inspection Unit 
SMPB State Medicinal Plants Boards 
TWG Technical Working Group 
UC Utilization Certificates 
UDC Upper Division Clerk 
UKZN University of Kwazulu Natal 
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UTs Union Territories 
VCSMPP Voluntary Certification Scheme for Medicinal Plants Produce 
WCD Women and Child Development 
WHO World Health Organisation 
YCB Yoga Certification Board 
 
(v)

1 
 
REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 128 th Report on on Demands for Grants 2021-
22 (Demand No. 4) of the Ministry of AYUSH.  
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the Report followed by the replies of the Ministry to the question 
prepared by the Secretariat. They have been categorized as follows:  
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: Paras 
1.8, 1.9, 2.3, 2.10, 2.11, 2.19, 2.24, 3.14, 3.19, 3.33, 3.42, 3.46, 3.71, 3.83, 3.90, 
3.93, 4.9, 4.13, 4.24, 4.26 and 4.27 
       Total–   21 (Chapter-I)  
(ii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of replies of the Ministry: Paras    2.28, 2.31, 3.5, 3.7, 3.27, 3.28, 3.30, 
3.69, 4.22 and 4.5  
         Total– 10 (Chapter-II)  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee: Paras 1.13, 1.14, 2.17, 2.32, 3.10, 3.15, 
3.16, 3.34, 3.39, 3.49, 3.52, 3.54, 3.64, 3.76, 3.82, 3.89, 4.7, 4.11 and 4.30 
       Total–  19 (Chapter-III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: Paras 3.44, 3.92 and 4.29 
        Total- 3  (Chapter-IV) 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER–I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
I.  KEY INITIATIVES 
Recommendation 
1.1 The Committee takes cognizance of the myriad functional areas of the Ministry of 
AYUSH, its key initiatives and the emergence of AYUSH in public healthcare system. The 
Committee is appreciative of the work done by the  Ministry for management of Covid 19. The 
efforts have not only generated genuine interest but also a lot of trust in the Indian Systems of 
medicine. Renewed interest in AYUSH system of medicine had led the country on the path of 
rediscovery of glorious pa st. The Committee is of the firm belief that even though Covid -19 
pandemic has caused havoc world over, it has provided a golden opportunity for the AYUSH 
Systems to emerge as a strong alternative system of medicine.  
(Para 1.8 of 128th Report) 
Action Taken 
Budget Section 
1.2 The observation of the Committee has been noted.  This Ministry will continue to strive 
hard to achieve further glory in providing AYUSH system. 
Recommendation 
1.3 The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Ministry to increase the 
presence of AYUSH systems in public health which includes creating AYUSH departments in 
defense and railway hospitals; granting soft loans and subsidies for the establishment of private 
AYUSH hospitals and clinics; building world -class institutes for both teaching and research in 
AYUSH systems; building digital infrastructure like AYUSH GRID for better access and reach 
etc. by the Ministry to promote and popularize the AYUSH system at district level. The 
Committee believes that it is high ti me the AYUSH system is encouraged by recognizing its 
importance and allocating adequate funds for its development and strengthening to enable it to 
regain its lost glory. 
(Para 1.9) 
Action Taken 
Budget Section 
1.4 The Ministry is grateful to the Committee for taking note of various initiatives taken by 
this Ministry to provide public health through AYUSH System of Medicine. 
1.5 Further, to explore the possibilities of higher grants in the AYUSH sector, adequate 
Budgetary provision is a pre -requisite.  There fore, as advised by the Committee, Ministry of 
Finance has been suitably apprised of the Committee‘s concern for allocating adequate Budget to 

3 
 
AYUSH Ministry to achieve its mandate in letter and spirit, vide Secretary (AYUSH)‘s D.O. 
letter No.H-11013/9/2021-Budget dated29.04.2021. 
NAM 
1.6 Ministry is implementing Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission 
(NAM) through States/UTs and supporting their efforts to increase the presence of AYUSH 
system in public health through different activities of NAM guideline and providing financ ial 
assistance to the respective State/UT Governments as per the proposals received in their State 
Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). Under NAM, Ministry has supported 104 units of setting up of 
upto 50 bedded integrated AYUSH hospitals in different State/UT Gov ernments and also 
assisted 4448 numbers of Dispensaries & Sub -centres for upgrading as AYUSH Health & 
Wellness Centres (HWCs). So that public may avail the AYUSH health facilities from these 
established hospitals as well as AYUSH HWCs. 
ADS  
1.7 Ministry of AYUSH has taken initiatives for the integration of AYUSH under the health 
establishments of Ministry of Railways. Defence and Home Affairs as detailed below:  
1.  Ministry of Railways: Ministry of AYUSH and Ministry of Railways signed a MoU for 
the establishment of AYUSH wings at 05 zonal railways Hospitals. Ministry of Railways has 
promised to create 25 contractual posts of Ayurveda, Unani Siddha and Homoeopathy Medical 
Officers.  
2.  Ministry of Defence:  
i.  Ministry of AYUSH and Ministry of Defence sig ned a MoU to start Ayurveda units at 
the Palliative care centre, Base Hospital Delhi Cantt, Research & referral Hospital. Delhi 
Cantt, Air force Hospital Hindon and 05 ECHS polyclinics in Delhi —NCR.  
ii.  Hon'ble Prime Minister during the meeting on 21.08 .2020 regarding Reforms in Medical 
education desired inter -alia to explore desirability of utilization of AYUSH systems of 
Medicine in health care services of Armed Forces. Accordingly, Ministry of AYUSH has 
proposed following:- 
a.  Ayurveda units may be e stablished in all major health establishments of Ministry 
of Defence including Hospitals/ Rehabilitation Centres/ palliative Care Centres 
etc.  
b.  A permanent mechanism for procurement of Ayurveda medicines may be 
developed to ensure uninterrupted supply of Ayurveda Medicines for all the 
Ayurveda units under the Health Establishments of Ministry of Defence.  
c.  Ayurveda doctors and supporting staff such as Pharmacists, Masseurs, therapists 
etc. may be recruited by the Ministry of Defence.  
d.  Ayurveda ho spitals may be empanelled to provide healthcare facilities to the 
troops and their families.  

4 
 
e.  On the line of 19 AIIMS established by the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare and in line with the directions of Hon'ble Prime Minister during the 
meeting on 21.08.2020 regarding Reforms in Medical education, department of 
Ayurveda may be started in Armed Forces Medical College, Pune and Army 
college of Medical Science, Delhi Cantt., with the provisions of Professors/ 
Associate Professors and Assistant Professors in different subjects of Ayurveda.  
iii.  A meeting between Defence Secretary and Secretary AYUSH is scheduled on 16.04.2021 
to discuss the methodology of the integration of AYUSH under the health establishments 
of Ministry of Defence.  
3.  Ministry of Home affairs : Ministry has taken up the matter with Ministry of Home 
Affairs for the integration of Ayurveda and other traditional systems of medicine. Ministry has 
provided all the technical know -how sought by the Ministry of Home Affairs from time to time. 
However. matter is still pending with Ministry of Home Affairs.  
Champion Services Sector Scheme for Medical value Travel:- 
1. Under the scheme Ministry has invited proposals for the establishment of AYUSH Super 
Specialty hospitals and Day care centers and Skill Development in AYUSH Sector.  
2.  Financial assistance has been provided to the autonomous bodies under the aegis of 
Ministry of AYUSH to develop their digital infrastructure under establishment of 
AYUSH Grid component of the scheme. 
 
II.    MACRO ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
Recommendation 
1.8 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the sharp shortfall in allocation of the 
Ministry as compared to the projected demand, despite its repeated recommendation for 
increasing the budgetary allocation of the Ministry, keeping in view the scope, reach and value 
AYUSH can add to the health of the people. Given its indigenous/traditional element, cost 
effectiveness and a safe alternative to modern system of medicine, the Ministry of AY USH, 
through its schemes and strategies, can help AYUSH system of healthcare to emerge as a 
valuable system of medicine in healthcare delivery. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that 
budgetary constraints should not be allowed to act as a stumbling block to achieve the mission 
objectives to position AYUSH system as the primary and preferred system of healthcare in India. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate budgetary support be provided to the 
Ministry as and when required by it. 
(Para 2.3) 
Action Taken 
1.9 The Concerns of the Committee has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance, vide 
Secretary (AYUSH)‘s D.O. letter No.H -11013/9/2021-Budget dated29.04.2021  for providing 
adequate budgetary support to this Ministry. 

5 
 
Recommendation 
1.10 The Committee expresses it concern over shortfall in the allocation of funds to Ministry 
of AYUSH in both the Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes. The reason behind 
lower allocation could be the fact that PM Vrikshayush has not been approved ye t. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should address all the administrative 
exigencies and complete all the ground work including identifying land for planting of medicinal 
plants etc., before the newly conceptualized PM Vrikshayush Yoj ana is approved. Preparatory 
exercises beforehand will give the scheme much needed head start and will significantly help in 
achieving the desired objectives of the scheme. The Committee, however, expects the Ministry of 
Finance to provide adequate fund for Central Sector Scheme at R.E. stage.  
(Para 2.10) 
Action Taken 
NMPB 
1.11 National Medicinal Plants Board has already worked on PM VRIKSH AYUSH Yojana 
for the following points: 
i. NMPB has identified the State implementing agencies (SIAs) for implementation 
of cultivation activities on farmers land. 
ii. The state Implementing agencies have identified land in the states for cultivation 
of Medicinal Plants. 
iii. Farmers Produce Organisations (FPOs)/Farmers Producer Companies (FPC) have 
been identified by the SIAs   
iv.  Clusters of Famers have been identified by the concerned states implementing 
agencies for first year implementation. 
v. Draft guideline has been prepared by NMPB. 
vi.  Cultivation model has been designed. 
 
1.12 Region specific Medicinal plants have been identifi ed for cultivation of Medicinal plants 
along with their cost of cultivation/hectare. 
Budget  
1.13 The Concerns of the Committee has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance, vide 
Secretary (AYUSH)‘s D.O. letter No.H -11013/9/2021-Budget dated29.04.2021  for providing 
adequate budgetary support to this Ministry. 
Recommendation 
1.14 The Committee is anguished to note shortfall of funds for NAM. The Committee 
apprehends that the components of NAM aiming to strengthen AYUSH facilities including 
AYUSH hospitals, HWCs, dispensaries, institutions, Drug Testing labs, pharmacies etc. would be 
severely affected. The Committee, is of the view that a vital scheme like NAM should not be made 
to suffer due to shortage of funds and therefore required funds may be allocated at the RE stage. 
(Para 2.11) 

6 
 
Action Taken 
NAM 
1.15 The Ministry is implementing Centrally sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission 
(NAM) through State/UT Governments and providing financial assistance to them for 
development and promotion of AYUSH system as per the proposals received in their State 
Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). Further, it is  stated that based on the SAAP/ Supplementary 
SAAP received from the State/UT Governments, Ministry will approach for more demands of 
fund at RE stage. 
Recommendation 
1.16 The Committee observes that the allocation for Ministry of AYUSH is 4.17% of the 
Health Budget as against 3.26% of the Health Budget in 2020-21 and the increase witnessed this 
year is negligible. The Committee has been recommending, time and again, that at least 5% of 
the total Health Budget should be earmarked for Ministry of AYUSH. Thou gh the percentage of 
allocation to the Ministry of AYUSH in comparison to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
has marginally improved and crossed 4 percent mark but this is not adequate. To establish 
Ayush as an effective alternative system of medicine, budgetary resources will have to be 
comparatively increased to provide a level playing field. The Committee believes that AYUSH 
systems of medicine are the treasure of country’s traditional knowledge systems which need to be 
re-discovered and promoted. At a time, when the whole world is dealing with pandemic Covid -
19, the vital role of Indian Systems of Medicine owing to their effective prophylactic usage 
cannot be underestimated. Needless to say, the AYUSH Systems are integrative and economical 
systems of medicine which need financial support so as to tap its full potential and proliferation 
at Panchayatlevel. The Committee, accordingly, reiterates its earlier recommendation of 
increasing budget of AYUSH Ministry to at least 5% of the budget of Health Minis try at the RE 
stage 2021 -22 itself. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Finance may consider to 
allocate 10% of the Health Budget to Ministry of AYUSH from the next financial year 
henceforth. 
(Para 2.19) 
Action Taken  
1.17 The Concerns of the Committee has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance, vide 
Secretary (AYUSH)‘s D.O. letter No.H -11013/9/2021-Budget dated29.04.2021  for providing 
adequate budgetary support to this Ministry. 
 
Recommendation 
1.18 The Committee observ es that utilization trends of the funds allocated to the Ministry in 
the last five years has been encouraging i.e. 98.88% in 2016 -17, 99.19% in 2017 -18, 94% in 
2018-19, 98.74% in 2019-20. However, out of Rs. 2322.08 crores allocated in RE 2020 -21, only 
Rs. 1634.87 crores have been spent till 16th February, 2021 which comes to 70.44%. The 

7 
 
Committee hopes that the remaining funds would be utilized by the Ministry in this financial year 
to achieve the physical targets set for the year. 
(Para 2.24) 
Action Taken  
1.19 The Budget allocation of Rs.2122.08 crore for the year 2020 -21 was enhanced to 
Rs.2322.08 crore at the RE stage and the expenditure incurred by this Ministry during the year 
2020-21 is Rs.2287.98 crore (Provisional) which is 98.53 % of R E and 107.82% of BE for the 
year 2020-21. 
III. SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation  
1.20 The Committee is in agreement with the submission of the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH 
and opines that since 10% of the total HWCs are targeted to be developed by Ministry of 
AYUSH, therefore, 10% of the total allocation for HWCs under Ayushman Bharat should be 
allocated to Ministry of AYUSH. Shortfall, if any, on this account may be met at the RE Stage. 
(Para 3.14) 
Action Taken  
1.21 Union Cabinet has approved Rs.2209.58 Crore to develop 12,500 AYUSH HWCs in 
phased manner from the year 2019 -20 to 2023 -24 out of which Rs. 420.70 Crore was allocated 
for the year 2021 -22. Budget Estimate for the year 2021 -22 is Rs. 553.80 Crore under National 
AYUSH Mission includin g HWCs. However, if additional budget is required, the same may be 
augmented at RE stage. 
Recommendation 
1.22 The Committee finds that valuable inputs/findings have come out in the mid -term 
appraisal which would help the Ministry to streamline and strength en NAM. The Committee is 
also glad to note that upon the recommendations of NITI Aayog that administrative set up for 
AYUSH needs more independent and dedicated resource, the Ministry of AYUSH has proposed 
for continuation of NAM and for further strengthen ing of the State and District Programme 
Management Units in States/UTs. The Committee also notes that the Ministry of AYUSH is in the 
process of formulating a model procurement policy to guide States for procurement of drugs. 
The Committee urges the Minist ry to do proper monitoring of the different components of NAM 
so that the problem areas are identified and taken care of. The Committee understands that the 
observations/recommendations of the evaluation is a healthy exercise to ameliorate the 'Key 
Concern Areas' and facilitate the smooth implementation of the scheme. The Committee 
recommends that necessary corrective measures should be taken by the Ministry in the light of 
the recommendations of the evaluating agency. The Committee also recommends that the  third-
party evaluation undertaken by NITI Aayog must also be completed within a fixed time frame so 
that necessary follow up action could be initiated at the earliest. 
(Para 3.19) 

8 
 
Action Taken 
NAM 
1.23 The continuation of NAM from the year 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 has already been approved 
by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), wherein the recommendations of the third -party 
evaluation undertaken by NITI Aayog are also incorporated. The Ministry of AYUSH conve ned 
various review meetings with State/UT Governments and appraised them on the necessity of 
creating independent administrative set up of AYUSH with dedicated resources for more 
effective implementation of NAM. Time to time, the State Governments has also  been reminded 
through various communications to have their focused attention on appropriate administrative set 
up for AYUSH in the States/UTs. In order to support for effective implementation of the 
Mission, it is proposed in the note for Expenditure Fina nce Committee (EFC) for continuation of 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM) beyond 31.03.2021 to further 
strengthen the State Program Management Units (SPMU) and District Program Management 
Units (DPMU) in the States/UTs. Detailed Te rms of Reference for the SPMU and DPMU has 
already been circulated to the States/UTs. States/UTs will be requested to strengthen the SPMU 
and DPMU further to ensure synergy of inputs between modern medicine system and AYUSH 
for planning, implementation of AYUSH initiatives. 
 
Recommendation  
1.24 The Committee notes that while India is second to China in the herbal trade, China is 
having 6 times more business on herbs/herbal products as compared to India. The Committee 
appreciates that the Ministry, recogniz ing the big opportunity in the international trade has 
established Forum for Assessment of AYUSH Market Size (FAAMS) at NMPB and through 
'Invest India' team. The Committee recommends the Forum to play a proactive role in assessing 
the markets size so that the volume of exports of products could be substantially enhanced in the 
international market. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to make all out efforts to 
establish India as the largest exporter of herbal products beating China and for this a roa d map 
may be drawn. To achieve this, the Committee feels that both quantity and quality of raw 
materials and finished products need to be focused upon.  
(Para 3.33) 
Action Taken 
 
NMPB 
1.25 NMPB envisages to get the assessment of consumption and supply  status of medicinal 
plants in the country. This assessment will help the Ministry in designing strategies for the 
growth of herbal sector and contributes significantly towards the growth of herbal sector in the 
country. In view of this, a forum was consti tuted comprising representatives from Ayurvedic 
Drug Manufactures Association (ADMA), Association of Manufacturers of Ayurvedic Medicine  
(AMAM), Association of Herbal and Nutraceutical Manufacturers of India (AHNMI), Ayurvedic 
Medicine Manufacturers Organi zation of India ( AMMOI), Confederation of Indian Industry 
(CII), Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry ( FICCI), PHD Chamber of 

9 
 
Commerce and Industry , Forum on Indian Traditional Medicine  (FITM) and Unani Drugs 
Manufacturers Association (UDMA). 
 
1.26 A Central Sector Scheme namely PM VRIKSH AYUSH is being formulated which will 
stimulate the economic activity in rural areas and lead to employment generation both at non -
skilled and skilled level besides adding to the GDP of the country.  A bout 1 lakh farmers will 
become self -reliant in the program by enhancement of their income.  Doubling the farmer‘s 
income would be assessed using Baitarani, Odisha model of livelihood assessment to know the 
exact impact of intervention. The proposed interv entions would lead to production of high 
quality herbal raw material where chain of custody regime is easier to maintain, it would enhance 
the demand of AYUSH products due to greater assurance on quality control, besides increasing 
the profit margin of the growers. 
 
1.27 Availability of quality raw material will help in increasing the market share of AYUSH 
medicines and products by three times in the next five years from the current USD 3 billion to 
USD 10 billion and it will also reduce the burden on the e nhancement in cultivated raw material 
availability would reduce pressure on natural wild resources and thus increase their conservation 
status for environmental gains. 
 
1.28 The increasing export demand is also to be considered when it comes to medicinal p lants. 
The major increase has been recorded in export value which has increased from Rs 345.80 crore 
in 2005 -06 to Rs 3,211 crore in 2014 -15, registering a nine -fold increase during one decade 
(Goraya & Ved, 2017). Recently also, there is an increased dema nd for export of key ingredients 
like Ashvagandha, Tulsi, Giloi, Kalmegh etc., which are mainly used in the herbal products 
which enhance immunity. Recent trends (post COVID-19) indicate 30-35% growth of traditional 
immunity boosters. This increasing deman d would require immediate backup action so that the 
sustainable supply of raw material is ensured for the AYUSH industries wherein 90% are 
MSMEs. At the same time cultivation and related activities of medicinal plants will create new 
avenues of employment and livelihood which would stimulate economy in the rural areas.  
 
Recommendation 
1.29 The Committee appreciates that two projects of multi -tier cropping are being done in 
Andhra Pradesh and Haryana. The Committee recommends the NMPB to expand these projects 
in other States too and also assess the pros and cons of inter -cropping and mono-plantation. The 
Committee desires that NMPB should examine the different type of cropping for cultivation of 
medicinal plants should not in any way adversely affect the efficacy of the medicinal plants. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that research in th is area of different types of cropping and 
its effect on medicinal plants should be conducted so that its outcomes can help in increasing the 
cultivation of medicinal plants. The Ministry should also conduct a research to assess the 
efficacy of medicinal p lants/herbs which are not grown in their natural environment. Such a 
study would help the Ministry improve the quality of Ayurveda drugs. 
(Para 3.42) 
 
 

10 
 
Action Taken  
 
NMPB 
 
1.30 To promote research on different types of cropping for medicinal plant cultivation, 
NMPB supported three projects (ongoing) in Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh and West Bengal 
states in last five years. The pros and cons will be assessed after completion of the projects. 
1.31 To access the efficacy of medicinal plants / herbs wh ich are not grown in their natural 
environment, NMPB supported four projects (ongoing) in last five years. 
Recommendation 
1.32 The Committee is deeply disappointed with the status of manpower in the 36 SMPBs. 
Apart from Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan, there is no separate regular post sanctioned 
by respective State Government for SMPBs. The shortage of manpower in SMPBs is a matter of 
serious concern as the NMPB, being the nodal agency for medicinal plants cannot function 
alone without the active supp ort of SMPBs. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the 
Ministry that issue of shortage of manpower in SMPBs should be taken up with the States/UTs 
and they may be convinced of the importance of having separate manpower for SMPBs. The 
Ministry should also  have guidelines wherein minimum number of manpower required in a 
SMPB be laid down clearly so that the SMPB understand the need to give the support to the 
NMPB as well as involve itself fully in the promotion of the medicinal plants of that State. The 
Committee strongly believes that the schemes of medicinal plant can not be implemented 
properly till a robust structure in the States (SMPBs) with adequate funds and full time 
manpower is made available. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Ministry to persu ade the 
States/UTs to have separate full time manpower for SMPBs for better operational efficacy. 
(Para 3.46) 
Action Taken 
 
NMPB 
1.33 Instead of 36, there are total 37 State Medicinal Plants Boards (SMPBs) constituted till 
date, as Union Territory (UT) of Ladakh has also constituted Medicinal Plants Board (MPB), UT 
Ladakh on 17th June, 2020 to promote the cultivation of medicinal / aromatic plant species.  
1.34 In order to address the shortage of funds and manpower in SMPBs, the NMPB has 
recently modified N ucleus Centre Grant -in-Aid provision of Central Sector Scheme for 
Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal Plants of NMPB as per 
which an annual recurring grant upto Rs.35 lakhs per annum can be provided to SMPBs. In the 
modified p rovision of Nucleus Centre Grant -in-Aid, the provision to provide emoluments for 
engaging the contractual staff / manpower has also been taken into consideration by NMPB 
which will help the SMPBs to engage the manpower (Technical Consultants and Supporting  
Staff on contractual basis) and strengthen it. In addition, the States‘ / UTs‘ Government are also 
being advised to strengthen the SMPBs by sanctioning full time manpower / deputing the regular 
staff for SMPBs. 

11 
 
Recommendation 
1.35 The Committee has been g iven to understand that all the Research Councils under 
AYUSH are fully funded by the Government of India. The Committee also notes the various 
initiatives carried out by CCRAS for generating revenue from external sources. The Committee, 
however, notes tha t there has been a decrease in the earning of the CCRAS over the last two 
years. The Committee would expect that each Research Council to make constant and concerted 
efforts to enhance its internal resource generation capacity so as to match the Government  
funding. 
(Para 3.71) 
Action Taken 
CCRH 
1.36 Council noted the recommendation of the PSC. Council has made efforts to maximize its 
internal resources generation mainly by collecting user charges for services rendered at 
OPD/IPD; Pathological / Biochemical / Radiological and other investigations; sale  of seedlings, 
sale of publications mostly by peripheral institutes and by headquarter. During the last five years, 
the Council has generated Rs.4.60 crores (Rs. Four crore, sixty lakhs only) through its internal 
resources. However, considering the objecti ves, functions and nature of organization, being 
prime mandate do not allow the Council to charge from the patients enrolled under research. 
Council is however exploring sponsorships, submitting proposals to agencies providing funds for 
the projects so as to meet the additional demands. 
CCRAS 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS): - 
1.37 The Council is making constant efforts to generate revenue from various external sources 
mainly through user charges and royalty on commercialization o f Council‘s Research products. 
Due to COVID -19 pandemic, there is steep fall in user charges being generated through 
OPD/IPD etc. Further, the royalty on products has been recently allotted by the Council which 
was on higher side due to initial transfer of  technology to the companies and now the royalty is 
being received only as per sale of item per annum, when new products and new companies will 
be added for commercialization in future the royalty may increase accordingly. Development of 
new drugs take sev eral years constant efforts to come at commercial level after completing 
different essential phases of drug development. Council is making constant efforts to endeavours 
to enhance its resource generation. 
CCRS 
1.38 CCRS has initiated various steps to gene rate revenue from external sources such as, User 
Charges for OPD services, Lab investigation charges, Sample testing charges through various 
sophisticated equipment and Instruments fitted in various scientific laboratories, Library charges, 
charges for Mic robiological study, Pharmacological study, Toxicity studies, Industrial 
consultancy, Sale of Medicinal Nursery plants etc. However, as Siddha System of Medicine is in 

12 
 
the process of propagation to reach at larger scale of population, the fund generation is  in the 
slower pace. Efforts are in hand for maximizing the same. 
CCRUM 
1.39 The CCRUM is constantly trying to increase the  internal resources for generation of 
revenue by revising the user charges towards the facilities provided to the general patients from 
time to time.  Charges for Drug Testing of ASU drugs have also been revised. Further, research 
facilities available within the Council have also been made accessible to  the outsiders on 
payment basis. 
CCRYN 
1.40 CCRYN is taking all necessary steps to enhance its internal resource generation capacity 
so as to match the Government funding. However the decrease in the earning during 2019-20 and 
2020-21 is mainly due to COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
Recommendation 
1.41 The Committee also notes that CCRUM has its own Drug Testing Laboratories and Drug 
Standardization Research Centers for assurance of quality drugs. The Committee recommends 
the Ministry to make constant efforts for increasing the number of such Labs in the country. 
(Para 3.83) 
Action Taken 
CCRH 
1.42 Council has its Drug Standardization Research laboratory at Dr. D.P.R. Central Research 
Institutes (H), NOIDA (Uttar Pradesh) which has been strengthened in recent past where drug 
standardization studies are being undertaken on physicochemical, pharmacogno sy parameters to 
ensure the quality of homeopathic medicines. This laboratory can be considered for drug testing 
in future course. 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS): - 
1.43 The Council also has drug standardization facilities at 5 Research centres. The details are 
as follows:   
 Captain Srinivasa Murthy Central Ayurveda Research Institute, Chennai   
 Central Ayurveda Research Institute, Kolkata,  
 Central Ayurveda Research Institute, Patiala  
 Regional Ayurveda Research Institute, Gwalior  
 Regional Ayurveda Research Institute, Jhansi  
 Out of which CSMCARI, Chennai is having DTL license from Govt. of Tamil 
Nadu and is also NABL Accredited.   \ 

13 
 
1.44 In an effort to increase the no. of such facilities CCRAS has established a Quality Control 
Laboratory at Regional Ayurveda Research Institute, Jhansi. 
CCRS 
1.45 With the support of Ministry of AYUSH, CCRS is taking necessary steps to construct an 
Animal House with Drug Testing Laboratory in Chennai. Moreover, CCRS has established GMP 
certified Pharmacy at Siddha Central Research Institute (SCRI), Chennai which manufactures 
quality Siddha internal and external formulation for aiding the public and for research projects. 
SCRI Pharmacy ensures Quality control and Quality Assurance Standard Paramete rs for the raw 
materials and finished goods. Batch to Batch consistency is tested for all the Siddha formulations 
according to the PLIM guidelines. 
1.46 The Chemistry and Pharmacognosy department of SCRI, Chennai & SRRI, 
Thiruvananthapuram are performing t he drug analysis and Standardization of single drugs and 
compound formulations under Drug Research.  In addition, Siddha Pharmacopoeia committee 
works are being carried out at CCRS, Hqtrs. The details of Pharmacopeial standards developed 
are mentioned below.  
Pharmacopeial standards: 
1.47 Drug Research - Drug studies for quality control and revision of Pharmacopoeia 
 The Siddha formulary of India, Part - I (Tamil & English) - 248 formulations are     
published. 
 The Siddha formulary of India Part - II (Tamil) - 151 formulations are published 
 The Siddha formulary of India Part - III (Tamil) - 140 formulations have been 
sent to PCIMH for printing approved by the SPC 
 Analysis of Single drugs completed: 192 
 Analysis of Compound formulations completed: 40 
 Single drug monographs included in the Siddha Pharmacopoeia: 179 
CCRUM 
1.48 The CCRUM has one Drug Testing Laboratory at Regional Research Institute of Unani 
Medicine, Chennai since 2010. Process for obtaining of Drug Testing Laboratory License for 
testing ASU drugs  from SDLA, Uttar Pradesh has already been initiated for Drug 
Standardization Research Institute, Ghaziabad. 
NIS 
1.49 This Institute has well equipped Clinical Laboratories (Pathology, Biochemistry and 
Microbiology) to cater to the patients availing treatm ent in the attached Hospital. The Institute 
has also got an Animal House, Pharmacology Lab, Quality Control Lab, Gunapadam Lab, 
Anatomy Lab, Physiology Lab and Botany Lab to cater to research and academic needs of the 
faculty members and P.G./Ph.D scholars. 
 

14 
 
NIUM 
1.50 The Institute is upgrading the existing laboratories and establishing new laboratories in 
near future. 
DCC 
1.51 Through National AYUSH Mission is provided to the States for augmenting quality 
control activities of ASU&H drugs including strengt hening of State Pharmacies, Drug Testing 
Laboratories and enforcement framework and testing of drugs. The infrastructural and functional 
capacities of 33 State Laboratories have been enhanced with the financial support provided to the 
States.  Provision in  the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 for joint inspection of laboratories 
involving Central and State Inspectors has been enforced for granting license to 59 institutions 
engaged in the testing and the quality analysis of ASU drugs. 
Recommendation 
1.52 The Committee recommends the Ministry of AYUSH to prepare a list of medicines of its 
own system meant for common man's knowledge to be readily available for used in case of 
minor-illness like routine fatigue, headache and stomachache, etc. The Committee, howe ver, 
does not approve self -medicine. 
(Para 3.90) 
Action Taken  
CCRH 
 Council for the benefit and knowledge of common man has identified medicines 
for use in case of minor -illness like routine fatigue, headache and stomach -ache, 
etc.  
 Council developed Medicine kits with a user manual and disclaimers that these 
medicines are to be used under supervision of homeopathic physicians and do not 
promote self-medication.  
 Some of the kits developed in recent past are: - - Kit for common ailmen ts to be 
used by healthcare workers at the field level. - Kit for parliamentarians with a 
manual having guidelines for usage. - Kit for Homeopathy for healthy child to be 
used by ASHA workers for promoting healthy dentition in children.  
 Council has published book of home remedies for knowledge of common man. 
 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS): - 
1.53 The Council has already published Ayurvedic Home Remedies which is useful for 
common man. 
CCRS 
1.54 CCRS has published a book entitled ―A Hand book of Common remedies in Siddha 
system of medicine (4th Edition)‖ is available in English, Tamil & Hindi languages for sale to 
the common man. However, CCRS seldom encourages self medication. 

15 
 
CCRUM 
1.55 The council is creating awareness regarding the uses of Unani medicines for the 
prevention and cure of different diseases through various IEC activities like free distribution of 
pamphlets, booklets etc. such material is also available on the council‘s website. 
NIS 
1.56 This Institute has published several pamphlets for dissemination of Siddha medicines for 
various ailments. Such pamphlets are distributed to the general public visiting the Hospital, 
medical camps and Arogya fairs. The Institute has also disseminated information about simple  
home remedies to the common ailments. Such information is also given wide publicity through 
social media, website, etc. 
NIUM 
1.57 The Institute took a note of it and will try to prepare such a list. 
 
Recommendation 
1.58 The Committee visualizes the immense potential in AYUSH for its advancement as a 
lifestyle choice. The Committee has time and again highlighted the benefits of Yoga and 
advocated its inclusion in School curriculum. The Committee therefore, reiterates its 
recommendation to include Yoga and specific modules on AYUSH in the School curriculum. The 
Committee is of the considered view that Yoga and Naturopathy contain potential for not only 
employment generation capacity but would also promote the 'Fit India Programme'. 
(Para 3.93) 
Action Taken 
MDNIY 
 NCERT has brought up two modules and books for the introduction of Yoga in 
schools for the age group between 8-18 years.  
 Regarding finalization of age appropriate Yogaasna capsules and disseminating in 
Schools and publishing on multilingual media as part of Fit India Movement, an 
expert committee was constituted. The 15 minutes duration, age appropriate Yoga 
protocols, as discussed in the various meetings of the expert comm ittee were 
submitted by Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga (MDNIY) to the 
Committee for the following age groups along with the general guidelines.  
 5-8 years  
 9-17 years  
 18-35 years  
 35-50 years  
 50-65 years  
 65+age  

16 
 
 This was launched as Fit India Fitness Protocols on 24th September, 2020 by 
Hon‘ble Prime Minister, and are available in public domain. 
Yoga & Naturopathy 
1.59 In order to introduce Yoga in schools, from Ministry of AYUSH, MDNIY is coordinating 
with NCERT, NCTE and Department of School Education of Ministry of Education.  The 
Ministry of AYUSH has taken up required activities to introduce programes for Yoga Education. 
i. MDNIY conducts various programmes comprising of Yoga Education and Training, 
Yoga therapy, seminars/workshops etc. MDNIY h as started the following new courses 
from 2019: 
ii. M.Sc. (Yoga) – 2 years regular course. 
iii. Post-Graduate Diploma in Yoga Therapy (PGDYT) – 1 year regular course for medical 
&paramedical personnel 
iv. NIN offers a 200 hour Yoga teacher training course to generate qualified Yoga teachers. 
The students of Yoga teachers course of NIN get international recognition. To enhance 
the knowledge in Clinical Yoga, NIN is offering a Fellowship program in Yoga and 
Physical Culture for Physicians. 
v. National Institute of Naturopathy (NIN), Pune, conducts on an average 16 outreach 
activities every month to popularize Yoga and Naturopathy.   NIN regularly conducts 
Yoga oriented lectures and sessions in schools, government,  private organizations for 
healthy living as outreach programs. In all major events of NIN, Yoga competition and 
sessions for students is regularly conducted to bring in awareness amongst the girl 
children and women groups. 
vi. The Ministry has also set up the  Yoga Certification Board (YCB) as an adjunct to the 
MDNIY, which offers certification (at different levels of proficiency) to individuals and 
accreditation to Yoga institutions. 
vii. CCRYN carry out Research & Development activities at all India level. It has 
implemented following Scheme/Programme for society in general including women:- 
 Established 15 OPDs and Wellness Centres across the Country and nearly 65 % of the 
beneficiary are women. 
 At present 02 Post Graduate Institute of Yoga & Naturopathy Education and Research 
(PGIYNER) with 200 bedded Yoga & Naturopathy Hospitals are in the final stages of 
construction at Jhajjar, Haryana and Nagamangla, Karnataka. OPD services in both as 
already started 
1.60 For the Fit-India Movement, the following activities are initiated for the purpose of Yoga 
awareness: 
a. Identification and training of Fitness Volunteers in Yogasana with special focus 
on women. 
b. Developing age appropriate Yogasana capsules and disseminating in schools. 
c. Database of places where Yogasan sessions are held regularly. 
1.61 The steps initiated by the Ministry to achieve the above include: 

17 
 
i. Strengthening the certification activities of the Yoga Certification Board and coordination 
with stake -holding Yoga Institutions, Professional Certification Bodies ( PrCBs) for 
enlisting fitness volunteers in Yogasana. 
ii. Yoga protocols for children and adolescents developed and disseminated widely. 
iii. Yoga protocol for women in the age group of forty and above has been developed and 
disseminated widely. 
iv. Design for creation of database on Yoga training services finalised.  
v. MDNIY has come out with some protocols related to Yoga for women‘s health as 
follows: 
a. Yoga for Children of Age 3-6 years. 
b. Yoga for expecting mothers. 
c. Yoga for Adolescent girls. 
d. Yoga for Lactating mothers. 
NIS 
1.62 Yoga (SiddharYogam) is a part of the curriculum for M.D(Siddha). It isan integral part of 
Siddha system of medicine.  This Institute is in the forefront for propagation of Yoga among 
school children and others. The faculty members of this Institute have been deputed to various 
schools to teach yoga to the students. Furthermore, regular Yoga OPD is also conducted in the 
attached Hospital to teach Yoga as a therapeutic measure. 
 
IV. MAINSTREAMING OF AYUSH SYSTEMS 
Recommendation 
1.63 The Committee appreciates the research work done by the Ministry of AYUSH through its 
research institutions in collaboration with foreign institutes. The Committee is of the opinion that 
the joint research work would increase the acceptability of the AYUSH systems in the 
International arena. The joint research work also helps in allaying concerns regarding rejection 
of AYUSH drugs by foreign drug  regulators due to the presence of constituent components 
beyond the permissible limits. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should actively 
work towards creating demand for Indian Traditional drugs in foreign countries. Once the local 
population starts demanding such drugs, the stringent safety norms which are not considerate of 
the nuances of the traditional medicines system would be relaxed by the respective countries. 
The Ministry should also work towards establishing an India led global alliance  for traditional 
drugs to facilitate better knowledge sharing, collaborative research, exchange of ideas & best 
practices and formulate common standards for quality control. A global alliance with a 
headquarters preferably in India would not only give a se nse of legitimacy to the AYUSH 
systems but also help in mainstreaming it. 
(Para 4.9) 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
Action Taken  
 
CCRH 
 
1.64 Homoeopathy is 2nd most popular system of medicine and is being practices in more 
than 80 countries worldwide. In order to generate evidence in collaboration at international level, 
Council has signed MOU with with several countries which enable us to shar e the research 
facilities, widen the horizon of researchers and further speed up the tasks. The MoU has been 
signed with: 
  
 Centre for Integrative Complementary Medicine, Shaare Zedek Medical Centre, 
Jerusalem, Israel in the field of pediatric medicine. A pilot study in this area titled, 
‗Comparison of Conventional & Homoeopathic paradigms in treating children aged 
0-18 months: a pragmatic, randomized clinical trial‘, is being undertaken at JIMS, 
Hyderabad. The enrolment of 108 children in the study was com pleted in 2019. They 
are being followed up and the study shall be concluded in 2021.  
 Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the United States, USA regarding Monograph 
Harmonization, wherein, mapping of 50 monographs is completed and 18 
monographs were discussed.  
 Universidad Maimonides, Argentina. A multi -country study titled, ‗Prevalence of 
selected objective signs of the Muriatic family of homeopathic medicines,‘ was 
conducted in 05 institutes of Council. 188 patients have been enrolled in the study, 
the data is under analysis and discussion with the international investigators.  
 National Institute of Integrative Medicine (NIIM), Australia in the area of public 
health, especially epidemics.  
 College of Homeopaths of Ontario, Canada for organisation of Webinars for  sharing 
knowledge and expertise.  
 Scientific Society for Homoeopathy (WissHom), Germany, regarding the testing of 
anti-virological properties of Viscum album (Iscador).  
 With Institute for the History of Medicine, Robert Bosch Foundation for the 
development of Museum on AYUSH system in India, Archives on Homoeopathy in 
India.  
 
1.65 Realizing the significance of international alliance, Council has translated its publications 
in various foreign languages like Spanish and Japanese, and abstracts of papers pu blished in 
IJRH into German, Japanese, Spanish & French, to disseminate its research findings, sensitize 
professionals and exchange information with other societies, organizations and colleges of 
international repute. 
 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS): - 
1. There is a growing interest for authentic information of Ayurveda, therefore, the CCRAS, 
Ministry of AYUSH has signed Memorandum of Understanding with 10 institutions in 
foreign countries (Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Russia, Hun gary, Trinidad & Tobago, 
Mauritius, Slovenia, Latvia, Argentina) for deputation of Ayurveda experts as 
AYURVEDA CHAIR to take up teaching, clinical work and for research activities as per 

19 
 
institutional requirement to promote and propagate Ayurveda in that country. Now, 
posting of incumbents are under process by the Ministry of AYUSH. 
 
2. In addition, the CCRAS has also signed 7 MoUs for Cooperation in the field of Ayurveda 
for promoting evidence based research in Ayurvedic Medicines with foreign institutions 
(USA (2), Canada, Israel, Hungary, Germany, Turkmenistan ) under these MoUs. 
Activities under these MoUs are being undertaken. One expert at Turkmenistan has been 
deputed for dissemination of authentic information about Ayurveda in the country. 
 
3. One MoU for a c ollaborative research project on Ayurveda with University of Latvia 
(UL) is under process. 
1.66 Council is engaged in a project ‗Assessment of Integration of AYUSH into public health 
system for combating COVID-19‘ in collaboration with Public Health Foundation of India under 
the technical service agreement between Ministry of AYUSH and WHO. 
CCRUM 
 
1.67 At present the Council has not initiated any research study with foreign institute. The 
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
IC Section 
 
1.68 With the mandate to increase the global acceptance of AYUSH Systems of Medicine; 
Ministry of AYUSH undertakes various activities under Central Sector Scheme for promotion of 
International Cooperation, (IC Scheme). AYUSH experts are deputed to foreign count ries to 
participate in international meetings, conferences, training programmes, seminars and on special 
assignment of the Government of India for promotion and propagation of AYUSH Systems 
including Ayurveda. Financial assistance is also provided for pres entation of AYUSH related 
scientific research papers in international conferences, workshops, seminar etc. Incentives are 
provided to AYUSH drug manufacturers/ entrepreneurs/ AYUSH institutions, AYUSH drug and 
Hospitals etc. for (a) participating in Intern ational exhibitions/ conferences/ workshops/ 
seminars/ road shows/ trade fairs, etc. for generating awareness amongst the participating public 
about the AYUSH systems of medicine and; (b) registration of AYUSH products with regulatory 
authorities of the fo reign countries USFDA/EMEA/UK -MHRA/ NHPD (Canada)/ TGA etc. 
There is a provision of financial support up to Rs. 1.00 Crores for strengthening of Health 
Centre(s)/ Institution(s) in the foreign host country.  
 
1.69 Ministry of AYUSH has signed 25 Country to  Country Memoranda of Understanding 
(MoUs) for Cooperation in field of Traditional Medicine and Homoeopathy with foreign 
governments, 23 MoUs for undertaking collaborative research in AYUSH systems of medicine 
and 13 MoUs for setting up of AYUSH academic Chairs have been signed have been signed with 
various foreign institutes/ universities.  
 
1.70 Ministry of AYUSH has also taken initiatives to promote Ayurveda Educations in 
Foreign Countries i.e., AYUSH Fellowship Scheme to foreign nationals, Study in Indi a program, 
BIMSTEC Ayurveda and Traditional Medicine University (BATMU) is proposed to be 

20 
 
established in India; accreditation of the Ayurveda courses running at abroad etc. A 
Panchakarma Centre was established in Cuba with the technical support of Ministry of AYUSH.  
 
1.71 In current pandemic of COVID -19, the Ministry of AYUSH has showed the path to 
combat with COVID by improving general immunity through Ayurveda, Yoga and other Indian 
Traditional System of Medicine and Ministry issued Advisories in this re gard which was 
translated to 8 foreign languages. As a result, globally there is phenomenal growth in the export 
of Ayurvedic Medicines those strengthen immunity. Ministry with the consultation of 
Department of Commerce is in process of establishing a dedi cated AYUSH Export Promotion 
Council (AEPC) at Ministry of AYUSH to promote export of AYUSH products/medicines as 
well as AYUSH services. It is expected that the export promotion Council would be set up 
shortly with the representatives from AYUSH Industry, DGFT, DPIIT etc.  
 
1.72 Ministry of AYUSH is also in process to provide assistance on technical basis for 
establishing Ayurveda Centre in Mauritius, Morocco and Indonesia etc. with the consultation of 
HRD. 
 
1.73 Ministry is in process to undertake clinica l studies/research on identified drugs of Indian 
Traditional system of medicine for the mitigation of Covid 19 with USA, UK, Germany, Brazil, 
South Africa, Ghana etc. Ministry also proposed at various multinational forum like BRICS, G 
20, IBSA, SCO, UNESCO , WHO etc., to conduct research on TM medicine in some identified 
areas for the promotion of TM globally.  
 
1.74 Ministry of AYUSH with the consultation of Ministry of External Affairs proposed for 
creation of a new Sub Group on Traditional Medicine (Traditional Medicine) under The 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), in line with WHO Global Action Plan (2013 -2020) 
for prevention and control of Non -Communicable Diseases (NCDs) for which most of the 
member states agreed for creating sub group on TM. Mo AYUSH prepared a draft Terms of 
Reference for the same.  
 
1.75 In reference to the meeting of EU -India Joint Worki ng Group on Pharmaceuticals, 
Biotechnology and Medical Devices held on 27 - 28 September 2018 at Brussels (Belgium), both 
sides (India & EU) also agreed to establish a Technical Working Group on Ayurveda b/w India 
& EU to discuss AYUSH related issues from b oth side and Indian side would prepare the first 
draft ToR for this Technical Working Group and send the same to EMA for agreement. 
Accordingly, the M/o AYUSH prepared the draft ToR for establishment of a Technical Working 
Group on Ayurveda between India-EU and sent it to EU side for obtaining approval. EU side has 
suggested some changes in the draft for which Ministry agreed and now the same is under 
approval before signing. 
 
CCRS 
 
1.76 CCRS ensures the quality of the product before subjecting it to safety  and efficacy 
studies.  The permissible limits of heavy metals are followed as per the PLIM / WHO guidelines. 
 
 

21 
 
Recommendation  
1.77 The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry must ensure stringent implementation 
of Pharmacovigilance schemes. For th is, the Committee recommends that the education -related 
to Pharmacovigilance should be included in the curriculum itself and periodic awareness 
programmes should be organized for both health care professionals and patients. Moreover, 
monthly reporting of A DRs (Adverse Drug Reactions) reports should be made mandatory at all 
AYUSH wellness centres. The Committee believes that maintaining a comprehensive and 
updated medicine literature database would provide credible and latest medical information to 
health care professionals. Better sync between drug regulators would ensure that authorities are 
well educated on safety issues in everyday practice and thus would be relevant to future 
regulatory action. The Committee desires that the submission of Periodic Safety  Update Reports 
(PSUR) must be made mandatory for AYUSH drugs. The Committee, therefore, would like to 
reiterate that all these measures can only be realized if the Pharmacovigilance network is 
provided with adequate funds and manpower. The Committee, therefore, strongly desires that the 
Ministry should seek adequate funds from the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to strengthen the 
pharmacovigilance network both at the central and regional level. 
(Para 4.13) 
Action Taken 
 
DCC 
 
1.78 The Ministry of AYUSH has implemented the Central Sector Scheme of 
Pharmacovigilance Program of ASU & H drug since December 2017. Through this scheme a 
three tier network consisting of National Pharmacovigilance Co-ordination Centre (NPvCC), five 
Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Centres (lPvCs) and seventy four Peripheral Pharmacovigilance 
Centres (PPvCs) has been established for safety monitoring of Ayush drugs, reporting of adverse 
drug events and surveillance & reporting of misleading advertisements.  The Functionality of the 
pharmacovigilance centres is reviewed periodically. As a result of effective implementation of 
the scheme, pharmacovigilance centres have reported 9369 misleading advertisements, 185 
COVID -19 related claims and 543 cases of suspected adverse drug reactions of AYUSH drugs. 
It is intended in 2021 -22 to further strengthen the Pharmacovigilance network and reporting 
mechanism by establishing more peripheral pharmacovigilance centres i.e. upto 100.  The 
allocated BE 2021-22 is Rs.4.10 crore for increasing the network of Pharmacovigilance activities 
including manpower for Pharmacovigilance centres across the country.  The Ministry has already 
taken up the recommendations of the Committee with the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Recommendation 
1.79 The Committee is given to understand that the Ministry of AYUSH in collaboration with 
the Ministry of WCD will run a pilot Programme in AWCs for testing the efficacy of nutritional 
support for addressing mal -nutrition and mal -nourishment. The Committee appreciates the 
initiatives o f the Ministry for addressing under -nutrition, stunting in children and anemia in 
women. The Committee would like the Ministry to expedite its initiatives in the 3000 AWCs 
which would go a long way in addressing the problem of mal-nutrition. 
(Para 4.24) 

22 
 
Action Taken 
NAM 
1.80 The Ministry has prepared technical guidelines, Take Home Ration guidelines for 
integration of AYUSH knowledge under Poshan Abhiyan. Ministry is also preparing project 
proposal to run a pilot Programme in AWCs for assessment of the effe ctiveness of nutritional 
support for addressing malnutrition and malnourishment. 
 
Recommendation 
1.81 The Committee appreciates the pivotal role of AYUSH systems of medicine during the 
pandemic Covid-19 when the AYUSH systems occupied the mental space of common masses who 
got the benefits of boosting the immune system against the pandemic at time of dire n eed of 
saving lives. Owing to the largely believed notion of negligible side -effects associated with the 
AYUSH drugs and measures, AYUSH systems particularly, Yoga, Ayurveda and Homeopathy 
became very popular among people both locally and globally. To buil d on this newfound 
popularity, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must take concerted efforts like setting 
up a dedicated AYUSH promotion desk in Indian embassies to make the AYUSH system a viable 
alternative abroad. The Committee should project AY USH systems as a means for the holistic 
well being of an individual acting as platform to achieve the objectives of Budget 2021 -22. The 
Committee also recommends that the Ministry should facilitate students’ exchange programmes 
as such initiatives will bro aden the perspectives and understandings of the students. Also, 
foreign students coming to India and understanding AYUSH systems from close quarters will act 
as brand ambassadors of the AYUSH systems in their respective countries. The Ministry may 
approach celebrities to act as brand ambassadors of AYUSH systems in global arena.  
(Para 4.26) 
Action Taken 
  
IC Section 
 
1.82 As recommended by the Standing Committee for setting up dedicated AYUSH 
Promotion Desk, it is to be informed that Ministry of AYUSH in collaboration with Ministry of 
External Affairs/Indian Embassies sets up AYUSH INFORMATION CELLS to take up 
awareness building about AYUSH abroad. An AYUSH INFORMATION CELL is set up at the 
premises of Indian Embassy/Mission or at Cultural Centre set up IC CR or at a venue suggested 
by the Indian Embassy/Mission. As of now, Ministry of AYUSH has given its concurrence for 
setting up of 35 AYUSH Information Cell in 32 countries e.g., Australia, Argentina etc. 
 
MDNIY 
 
1. MoU signed between Morarji Desai National I nstitute of Yoga, New Delhi and 
Divine Values School, Ecuador (DVSE).  

23 
 
2. MoU signed between Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga, New Delhi and 
India Yoga Center (IYC), Korea.  
3. MDNIY has been designated as WHO collaborating center in traditional medicine 
(Yoga).  
4. The Institute had also signed a MoU with ICCR for Yoga Education and Training 
 
 
OUTPUT-OUTCOME FRAMEWORK FOR SCHEMES 2021-22  
 
Recommendation 
1.83 The Committee has taken into consideration the output -outcome framework for schemes 
of Ministry of AYUSH which envelops financial outlay, targets sets for outputs and outcome 
during 2021-22. The Committee hopes that the financial outlay earmarked for various schemes 
would create the enabling environment and bring forth catalectic change in the basic 
infrastructure for AYUSH education and research and improve the AYUSH healthcare services. 
The Committee is of the considered view that the budgetary allocation to the Centre Sector 
Schemes and National AYUSH Mission would definitely improve the quality of AY USH health 
care facilities in the country. The Committee hopes that all the projects undertaken during 2021 -
22 would be completed without time and cost overrun especially construction projects at 
National Institutes. The Committee recommends the Ministry o f AYUSH to strengthen its 
monitoring mechanism to oversee the execution of research projects and to ensure that physical 
targets set during the year are achieved. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to 
undertake annual performance evaluation of each  scheme and programme through cost benefit 
analysis and SWOT analysis. The Committee desires that the Ministry should formulate output -
outcome framework for remaining years of 15th Finance Commission in order to have a holistic 
overview of the schemes unde r the Ministry. The Committee, while taking into account the 
financial and the physical achievement under various schemes of the Ministry, recommends the 
following organizational interventions for improvements:- 
i. Advance planning to be made for completion of various formalities so that the process of 
sanctioning and release of funds for the various projects be started in the beginning of the 
next financial year.  
ii. More workshops and review meetings to be organized f or addressing the issues in the 
implementation of the schemes.  
iii. More field visits to be organized for onsite appraisal of progress of implementation of the 
schemes  
iv. Dashboard for online monitoring of schemes and programmes. 
(Para 4.27) 
Action Taken 
1.84 The consolidated information may kindly be seen at Annexure-I 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER– II  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation  
2.1 The Committee expresses its concern about the ever-perpetuating pendency of UCs. The 
Committee observes that in 2016 -17, 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, even though the number of UCs 
were large in number, the amount involved was not as high as compared to 2019 -20, 2020-21 
and 2021 -22 till 31.01.2021 wherein the amount involved in pending UCs has risen, 
considerably. The Committee is of the view that pending UCs involving huge amounts speaks 
volume of non -accountability of funds released and lack of fiscal discipline. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends to the Ministry to expedite the process of liquidation of the 
pending UCs. The Ministry should also encourage States/UTs to make effective use of the NAM 
web portal to speed up the liquidation process of UCs. 
(Para 2.28) 
Action Taken  
NAM 
2.2 Ministry has taken several steps for liquidation of UCs and as a result during this year as 
on 31.01.2021, Ministry has received UCs for an amount of Rs.84549.54 lakh. Further, it is 
stated that after launching a dedicated web -portal for Centrally Sponsore d Scheme of National 
AYUSH Mission (NAM), a dedicated training has been provided to the Officials/ PMU staff of 
State /UT Governments for the smooth operationalization & implementation of NAM web -portal 
for different activities like submission of SAAP, Phy sical & Financial progress report and 
Utilization Certificates. Ministry is continuously encouraging the States/UTs for effective use of 
the NAM web portal so that timely submission of utilization certificates may be carried out by 
them. 
NMPB 
2.3 To expedite the process of liquidation of the pending UCs, Nodal Officers are designated. 
Regional Facilitation Centres are given the mandate to co -ordinate with reference to the 
liquidation of pending UCs with respective States. Project Investigators are also cont acted and 
review meetings are also taken from time to time. 
Recommendation 
2.4 The Committee observes that out of 1343 pending UCs involving Rs. 1574.56 crores, as 
on 31.01.2021, sizeable number of UCs on account of NAM (684 UCs amounting to Rs. 1473.19 
crores) and National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) (460 UCs amounting to Rs. 81.76 crores) 
are pending. The Committee expresses its anguish that a total of 1198 pending UCs amounting 
to Rs. 1053.75 crores as on 31.03.2020 dramatically jumped to 1569 UCs am ounting to Rs. 
1846.41 crores pending as on 1.4.2020 i.e. the very next day. The Committee fails to understand 
as to how the number of pending UCs reportedly increased overnight. The Committee takes a 

25 
 
serious view of the balance sheet of the Ministry givin g a room to conclude that the number of 
pending UCs were deliberately kept low on penultimate day of the financial year 2020-21.  
(Para 2.31) 
 
Action Taken  
 
NAM 
 
2.5 It is stated that under NAM, 584 no. of UCs amounting to Rs.914.99 crore was pending 
on 31.3.2020. However, on 01.04.2020, it was increased to 713 no. of pending UCs amounting to 
Rs. 1656.41 crore. In this regard, it is stated that new Financial Year 2020 -21 begins from 
1.4.2020 and as per GFR, the UC of the previous year (2018 -19) released GI A became due on 
1.4.2020 and UC of recurring amount of F.Y. 2019 -20 released GIA was also became due. 
Accordingly, Rs. 427.12 crore of 2018 -19 and Rs. 314.30 crore (recurring) of 2019 -20 also 
became due and the same was included in the pending UC amount. T herefore, this pending UC 
no. and amount increases from 584 no. of UCs amounting to Rs.914.99 crore to 713 no. of 
pending UCs amounting to Rs. 1656.41 crore. 
 
NMPB 
 
2.6 The Utilization certificate of the grant released during the financial year 2018 -19 became 
due on 01.04.2020. Due to this reason, the number of UCs as on 31.03.2020 dramatically jumped 
on the very next day i.e. 01.04.2020.   
 
 
III. SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation 
2.7 The Committee finds that variations between BE & RE allocation is not limited only to 
the year 2020 -21 only but it has been there even in the previous years. As is evident from the 
Table 17, as against the Expenditure Finance Commission approval of Rs. 800 crore and Rs. 
1000 crore for the year 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 respectively, an amount of Rs. 504.43 crore and 
Rs. 506.60 crore were actually allocated. The Committee finds it quite strange that the BE 
allocation in the year 2019 -20 was redu ced by almost 50 percent at RE stage. The Committee 
takes a very serious view on this phenomenon and recommends that such a practice needs to be 
discouraged as it makes a mockery of the budgetary provision. 
(Para 3.5) 
  

26 
 
Action Taken  
 
NAM 
 
Financial Outlay and actual allocation/expenditure 
 (Rs. in Crore)  
Year  Financial 
outlay 
Budget 
Estimate 
Revised 
Estimate 
Actual 
Expenditur
e 
2018-19 800.00 504.43 504.43 457.27 
2019-20 1000.00 656.00 500.60 495.49 
2020-21 -- 705.00 400.00 397.72 
 
2.8 With regard to Centrally Sponsored Scheme of NAM budget projection has been made as 
per the requirement to propagate AYUSH system appropriately in different States/UTs. It is 
stated that Rs.656.00 Crore (Rs.506.00 Crore for NAM and Rs.150.00 Crore for AYUS H Health 
& Wellness Centres (HWCs) has been allocated as BE during the year 2019 -20. However, at the 
time of finalization of RE 2019 -20, the AYUSH HWC components have not been approved by 
the Union Cabinet. Accordingly, the grant has been reduced from Rs.1 50.00 Crore to Rs.13.10 
Crore. Further, budget allocation at RE stage under NAM has also been reduced from Rs.506.00 
Crore to Rs.487.50 Crore due to pending UCs from the eligible States/UTs. As such total budget 
allocation at RE stage under NAM (NAM and HW Cs) has been reduced from Rs.656.00 crore to 
Rs. 500.60 crore during the year 2019-20. 
2.9 During the year 2020 -21, the guidelines were issued by Department of Expenditure 
(DoE) on 04.05.2020 that further central funds may be released to the States/UTs, on ce 
previously released amount has been spent by implementing agency of respective State/UT 
Governments and UC been liquidated/submitted to concerned Administrative Ministry. Further, 
due to pandemic situation of COVID -19, States/UTs have made less expendit ure during the year 
2020-21. Therefore, allocation of budget was reduced from Rs.705.00 Crore to Rs.400.00 Crore 
at RE stage. 
 
Recommendation  
2.10 The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 553.80 crore for 2021-22 is less 
by Rs. 151.20 crore as compared to the BE of 2020 -21. The Committee feels that this reduction 
in allocation could be due to under utilization of allocated fund for th e last year. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take proactive steps to fully utilize the budgetary 
allocation made this year so as to justify its claim for higher fund allocation. The Committee 
notes that only Rs. 553.80 crore h as been allocated for NAM in 2021 -22 against the projected 
requirement of Rs. 775.00 crores. The Committee taking cognizance of various vital components 
under NAM believes that NAM needs to be given adequate budgetary support. This Centrally 
Sponsored Sche me of the Ministry has the capacity to increase the outreach of AYUSH 

27 
 
healthcare services to different parts of the country including rural and remote areas and also 
strengthen AYUSH infrastructure with respect to institutions drug testing labs, etc. Keepi ng in 
view a target of setting up of 3100 HWCs in 2021-22, the Committee recommends the Ministry to 
assess its financial requirements realistically and approach Ministry of Finance to enhance the 
fund at the RE stage. 
(Para 3.7) 
Action Taken  
NAM 
2.11 It is stated that for the Financial Year 2021 -22, NAM Cell has projected requirement of 
Rs.775.00 Crore as per target fixed for NAM and AYUSH HWCs. However, only Rs.553.80 
Crore has been allocated for NAM in 2021-22.  
2.12 It is stated that Expenditure Finance Committee approved the continuation of Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM) beyond the 31.3.2021 with budgetary 
outlay of Rs.3000.00 Crore for different activities of NAM excluding AYUSH HWCs 
component.  
2.13 Further, during the continuation of National AYUSH Mission with effect from 1.4.2021 
to 31.3.2026, it was appraised to empowered Finance Committee, Department of expenditure 
that the Health & Wellness Component of NAM shall continue to be impl emented under NAM 
as per approval accorded by Cabinet vide resolution no. 73/11/2020 (Item 6) dated 20.3.2020 
with financial implication of Rs.3399.35 crore (Central share Rs.2209.58 crore and State share 
Rs.1189.77 crore) for 5 years with effect from 2019-20 to 2023-24. 
Recommendation 
2.14 The Committee finds that actual expenditure upto 10.02.2021 is Rs. 35.91 crore against 
allocation of Rs. 50.32 crore in RE 2020 -21. The Committee hopes that the remaining funds 
would be fully utilized in this financial y ear itself. The Committee also finds the utilization trend 
of NMPB satisfactory for the year 2019 -20. The Committee is of the view that our country with 
rich bio -diversity has traditionally been a hub of precious plants having immense medicinal 
value which needs to be fully tapped and utilized for the public health system. For optimum use 
of these resources, the need of the hour is to make available financial as well as other resources 
for successful implementation of the scheme. The Committee is of the view that NMPB should get 
the soil tested for specific plantation so the income of the farmer may be enhanced through 
medicinal plantation. The Committee would like to emphasize on the enhancement of allocation 
for NMPB so that the various components envisage d under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme is 
focused upon and promoted.  
(Para 3.27) 
  

28 
 
Action Taken  
 
NMPB 
 
2.15 The actual expenditure as on 31.03.2021 is Rs.49.96 crore (Provisional) out of RE 
allocation of Rs.50.32 crore. 
 
2.16 NMPB is in the process of signing MoU with ICAR and CSIR organizations for various 
activities in medicinal plants cultivation wherein, soil testing would be conducted with the help 
of Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVKs), Agriculture Universities / Institutions, an d other relevant 
organizations of CSIR and ICAR.  Cultivation model has been designed. 
 
2.17 Region specific Medicinal plants have been identified for cultivation on farmers land 
along with their cost of cultivation/hectare. 
 
2.18 ―Medicinal Plants‖ component is the fourth component of the NAM scheme wherein 
cultivation and Post -Harvest Management activities are supported. Looking at the practical 
difficulties, it is proposed to shift the ―Medicinal Plants‖ component from Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM) to the Central Sector Scheme namely PM 
VRIKSH AYUSH Yojana. 
 
Recommendation 
2.19 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to the component of promotion of Herbal 
Gardens. The Committee, in this regard, is o f the view that educational institutions (schools and 
colleges) must be encouraged and incentivized to have a herbal garden in their campuses. This 
small step towards promoting herbal gardens in educational institutions would go a long way in 
popularizing medicinal plants and also increase awareness about the importance of such natural 
resources. 
(Para 3.28) 
Action Taken 
  
NMPB 
 
2.20 National Medicinal Plants Board has supported for the establishment of herbal garden at 
Home, Schools and Institutions (College, Universities etc.) as per the guidelines of the Central 
Sector Scheme for ―Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal 
Plants‖. Till date about 278 Herbal Garden projects have been supported in different parts of the 
country to create awareness about the importance of medicinal plants and their utilization in the 
healthcare needs. 
 
 

29 
 
Recommendation 
2.21 The Committee observes that after National AYUSH Mission, maximum number of 
pending UCs lie with respect to NMPB. The Committee is constrained to note that such high 
number of pending UCs does not indicate accountability of funds and also blocks further release 
of funds. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Ministry to prioritize liquidation of 
pending UCs and persu ade the States/UTs to submit UCs through the online portal within a 
stipulated period. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should take up the matter of 
pending UCs with States particularly those having high number of pending UCs on an urgent 
basis and encourage them to clear the pending UCs. 
(Para 3.30) 
Action Taken  
 
NMPB 
 
2.22 The State Govt. Departments have been repeatedly requested to take urgent steps for 
early liquidation of UCs. Meeting with the Regional Facilitation Centres  are periodically 
conducted for early liquidation of pending UCs. The Nodal Officers are also directed to regularly 
pursue with the defaulting organizations for early settlement of UCs. Organisations who have not 
submitted their UCs are also blacklisted.  
 
2.23 A proposal has already been sent to Ministry of Finance to consider to treat the subsidy of 
Rs. 1445.73 Lakh released to 1228 farmers as utilized so that these long pending UCs could be 
liquidated. 
 
Recommendation 
2.24 The Committee notes with concer n that as compared to 2019 -20, the utilization trend in 
2020-21 has been poor. The Committee, therefore, recommends that each Research Council 
must draw a fiscal roadmap and make every attempt to fully utilize the allocated funds. 
(Para 3.69) 
Action Taken 
2.25 The utilization of funds by the Research Councils during 2019-20 and 2020-21 is as 
follows: 
                                                                       (Rs. in crore) 
Name AE  
(2019-20) 
AE 2020-21 
(Provisional) 
BE allocated for 2021-22  
CCRAS 280.68 264.16 328.27  
CCRUM 159.54 164.05 167.79  
CCRH 128.83 130.50 167.58  
CCRYN 61.71 48.30 59.70  
CCRS 33.00 35.30 36.77  
Total 663.76 642.31 760.11  

30 
 
2.26 This Ministry agrees with the observation of the Committee that the overall utilization of 
funds by the Research Councils during the year 2020 -21 is less as compared to 2019 -20 mainly 
because of pandemic situation. It can also be seen that three Research Councils viz. CCRUM, 
CCRH and CCRS have utilized more in 2020-21 as compared to 2019-20. 
2.27 Based on the increased scope of various research and other activities, higher budget 
allocation for the year 2021 -22 has been made, as demanded by the Research Councils.  
Additional budget may be allocated at RE stage, if required.  Howeve r, the direction of the 
Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
IV. MAINSTREAMING OF AYUSH SYSTEMS  
Recommendation  
2.28 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts to get feedback from the citizens on its 
initiatives and measures and impact on the prevention of COVID-19 by using the AYUSH drugs. 
The Committee is heartened to note that the 89.8% of the total respondents have benefitted from 
the practice of AYUSH advisory and measures for the prevention of COVID -19. The Committee 
also commends the AYU SH doctors for stepping up and playing a significant role in mitigating 
the Covid pandemic. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry must put in place strict 
guidelines to check false generation of data by the state level AYUSH boards to achieve the  
allotted targets. 
(Para 4.5) 
Action Taken  
DCC 
2.29 In the wake of the Covid 19 outbreak, the government has issued guidelines for 
expediting the process for grant of approval/license/renewal of license for manufacturing of 
Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani immuni ty boosting healthcare products and sanitizers to all states 
UT‘s licensing authorities and drug controllers on 02.04.2020. Due to the urgent need of meeting 
the challenge of increased demand of ASU health care products the State Licensing 
Authorities/Drug controllers  have been directed to  complete the licensing/approval/renewal 
process expeditiously and dispose of the applications of the manufacturers maximum within a 
week‘s time provided the prescribed standards and relevant provisions of the Drugs & Co smetics 
Rules, 1945, in terms of use of ingredients and permitted excipients in accordance with the 
authoritative books including Pharmacopoeias and Formularies are fulfilled. 
Recommendation 
2.30 The Committee is constrained to note large number of vacant positions in AYUSH 
Research Councils and other Institutions. The Committee feels that manpower is the key to 
success of any institution and the lofty objectives of each of the Councils/Institutes would remain 
only on paper without the people in position. The Committee understands that pandemic Covid -
19 may have delayed the recruitment process last year but it is high time that the process is 

31 
 
expedited and completed in the year 2021 -22. The Committe e strongly recommends to the 
Ministry to prioritize this area of concern and take swift measures to fill up the vacant posts. 
(Para 4.22) 
Action Taken 
CCRH 
2.31 Council is in the process of filling up the posts lying vacant in various cadres. Recently 
Council has advertised for the posts in administration section. During 2020 – 21 following 
vacancies are filled up: -  
 Group A  
– Council has filled up 07 posts of Assistant Director (Homoeopathy)  
- Council has filled 14 post of Research Officers (Homoeopathy) in 2020-21.  
Group B - ARO (Pharmacognosy)- 01; stenographer grade II - 01, lab technician -22 is in the 
process of advertising.  
Group C: - Post of 22 LDC has been advertised and is the process of conducting exam. Lab 
assistant- 01, pharmacist-03, junior steno- 01 is in the process of advertising.  
2.32 Council is in the process of advertising 19 posts of Research Officers (Homoeopathy) 
which have fallen vacant in last 6 months. 
 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS)- New Delhi:- 
2.33 Recruitment activity was carried out in respect of 31 discipline of Technical Group ―A‖, 
―B‖ and ―C‖ in this regard with the approval of Ministry of AYUSH, a recruiting agency, Ed 
CIL India Ltd was hired and recruitment in respect of 222 individuals of 30 discipline of Group 
―A‖, ―B‖ & ―C‖ have since been completed. Majority of candidates have joined. Some of them 
have obtained extension of  time to join and they were likely to join by the month ending April, 
2021. In case of 1 discipline of RO (Medical), no candidate appeared in the written examination 
and hence recruitment could not be carried out. 
2.34 As regard UDC & LDC, with the approva l of Ministry of AYUSH, another recruiting 
agency, NIELI was hired. A written recruitment examination was scheduled to be held on 11th 
April, 2021.However, the same has since been postponed until further notice due to surge in 
cases of COVID-19. 
2.35 It is also stated that a total of 481 Group ―C‘ direct recruitment posts have since been 
lapsed. A case is under consideration with the Ministry of AYUSH for revival of the same. 
Recruitment activity could be commenced only after receiving the approval of the revival.   
 

32 
 
CCRUM 
2.36 CCRUM has initiated the process for filling up the vacant posts. Written exam for some 
of the vacant posts e.g. Research Officer (Unani ), Research Officer (Clinical Pharmacology) and 
Research Assistant (Chemistry) was scheduled for 27th and 28th April, 2021. However the same 
exam was postponed due to COVID-19 situation.  
2.37 The Recommendation of the Committee has been noted and the recr uitment process for 
the vacant posts will be expedited. 
2.38 Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda – Jamnagar : -The Anteceding 
Institutions, namely, the Institute of Post Graduate Teaching and Research in Ayurveda, 
Jamnagar, Shree Gulab kunverba A yurved Mahavidyalaya, Jamnagar and the Indian Institute of 
Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jamnagar are conglomerated and established as a body 
corporate under this ITRA Act 2020 and on such incorporation be called the Institute of 
Teaching and Research in Ayurveda with the status of Institute of National Importance (INI). 
2.39 Restructuring is in process for optimization of resources towards quality education, 
innovative research including research projects on COVID-19 and effective patient care. 
2.40 ITRA, Jamnagar has already published following recruitment advertisement time to time 
to fill vacant teaching and nonteaching posts for quality medical education in the field of 
Ayurveda. 
Sl.
No. 
Advertisement No. 
& publish Date 
Post advertisement details Remarks 
1 PGT/02/2019, 
Dt.31.12.2019 
Teaching posts Recruitment process is in 
progress at safe pace 
because of Covid-19 
 
2 PGT/01/2020, 
Dt.16.03.2020 
Technical Posts 
3 PGT/02/2020, 
Dt.16.03.2020 
Technical & Paramedical 
Posts 
4 PGT/02/2020, 
Dt.07.09.2020 
Non-teaching Admin Posts 
5 PGT/02/2020, 
Dt.07.09.2020 
Non-teaching Group - C 
Posts 
 
National Institute of Ayurveda, Deemed To Be University – Jaipur: - 
2.41 Out of the total sanctioned strength of 330 regular posts 252 posts stand filled. The status 
is: 
Sanctioned Strength : 330 
Filled    : 252 
Vacant   :   78 
No. of Vacant Posts that will be filled in another 4-5 Months:  65 

33 
 
(Vacancies notified on 15-12-2020  52  Posts 
(Scrutiny in progress) 
Interviews/Selection to be held very soon   7 Posts 
Promotion & Compassionate Appointments   6 Posts 
to be made very soon.)      65 Posts 
Thus No. of Posts be remained unfilled         13 Posts  
due to non-availability of incumbents and  
other unavoidable reasons.     _______  
                  78 Posts 
Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth(RAV) – New Delhi:- 
2.42 There are 9 regular posts in RAV out of which only one post of LDC is vacant since 
August 2020.  
2.43 The post become vacant due to resignation of incumbent in the month of August 2020. 
The Institute is in the process of filling up the post of LDC. Advertisement will be published in 
the month of May and exam will be held in the near future. 
 
North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine- Passighat(NEIFM):- 
2.44 Recruitment process is under progress for all vacant posts. 
 
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy - Shillong (NEIAH): - 
2.45 Out of 112 sanctioned posts, 58 (Group A, Group B and Group C) post have been filled 
up.  
2.46 An advertisement was published on 3rd August, 2019, the last dat e of submission of 
application forms for which was 23rd September, 2019 (Group A).  
2.47 A fresh advertisement for Group A & B posts has been published in January, 2020 which 
fell vacant due to resignation by some of the incumbents. The last date for submi ssion of 
application form was 24th February, 2020. Scrutiny of applications received against both the 
advertisement has been completed.  
2.48 In view of COVID-19 pandemic, the recruitment process was put on hold during the year 
and will be completed soon. 
 

34 
 
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi 
2.49 The Institute has initiated recruitment process for all vacant post in year 2020 itself and 
most of the faculty positions have been filled up.  In respect of other posts, the recruitment is 
under process and same will be completed shortly. 
CCRS 
2.50 In so far as Central Council for Research in Siddha  (CCRS), Chennai is concerned, 
against the sanctioned strength of 159 technical posts (excluding the erstwhile Group D posts), 
only 17 posts remain vacant. The recruitment/ promotion process is going in a slow pace due to 
pandemic Covid situation. However,  efforts are being continued to fill up these vacancies on 
priority basis.   
2.51 On the administrative side, the position continues to remain grim.  Out of 51 
administrative posts (excluding the erstwhile Group D posts), 33 posts are vacant as on date, as  a 
large number of posts which remained vacant for more than 5 years had to be abolished as per 
the instructions of Department of Expenditure.  Efforts are being made to create a minimum of 
13 posts and a proposal in this regard has already been sent to th e Ministry of AYUSH with a 
request to seek the approval of Department of Expenditure. 
CCRYN 
2.52 This Council has already initiated the process to fill up the vacant posts, which is under 
progress.  Council is making its best efforts to fill up all the vac ant posts within the current 
Financial Year 2021-22. 
NIS 
2.53 Despite the impediment of Covid -19 pandemic, this Institute has 4.22 recruited 5 
Lecturers, one Associate Professor and one Deputy Director (Admn.) during the year 2021 -22. 
Highest priority is given to the filling up of vacant posts. 
MDNIY 
2.54 Recruitment of Teaching Faculty and other Administrative posts has been delayed due to 
covid-19 pandemic. The recruitment process is in progress. Advertisement in this regard has 
already been published in Employment News dated 24 - 30 April 2021. The skill tests for the 
other lower posts are being planned 
NIN 
2.55 Vacancy position as on date in NIN, Pune is ‗NIL‘ 
NIUM 
2.56 All vacant posts are already advertised. Recruitment is under process.  Interview for 
Group ‗A‘ teaching posts already conducted.  Incumbents are joining shortly.  
 

35 
 
NIH 
1. Eligible post for promotion has been filled up. 
2. The post for deputation has been identify and is under process for advertisement. 
3. The post for Direct Recruitment have been id entified and being taken up with NTA for 
conducting the selection process. 
NISR 
2.57 Considering the acute shortage of manpower at the Institute, 10 numbers of different 
posts were transferred from CCRAS, New Delhi to the erstwhile National Research Instit ute for 
Sowa Rigpa (NRISR), Leh and the recruitment process was already initiated by the Institute as 
well as by the CCRAS, New Delhi but the said 10 posts were transferred back from NRISR to 
CCRAS without any reason.  Meanwhile the NRISR was merged with t he National Institute of 
Sowa Rigpa (NISR), Leh for which a proposal for creation of 56 different posts is under 
consideration of the Government.   
 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER–III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
I. KEY  INITIATIVES 
3.1 The Committee takes note of the efforts made by Ministry in achieving its objective of 
“Health for all” during 2020 -21 under NAM and Information, Education and Communication 
Schemes by way of providing cost  effective AYUSH services and also to strengthen and 
popularize AYUSH systems at the grass root level. The Committee, however, feels much more 
needs to be done towards making AYUSH healthcare facilities accessible to all and making its 
presence felt in rur al and remote areas of the country. There have however, been doubts and 
questions regarding the efficacy of Indian systems of medicine. Even though the popularity and 
presence of AYUSH systems is increasing, the need of the hour is to lay focus on standard ization 
of academic courses and scientific validation of AYUSH system. The Committee desires the 
Ministry to focus on standardization of quality of AYUSH healthcare services, quality control of 
AYUSH drugs, strengthening of drug testing laboratories, pharm acies and improving the quality 
of AYUSH education in the country so as to position AYUSH as a true alternative system of 
medicine.  
(Para 1.13) 
Action Taken 
DCC 
3.2 In order to improve and strengthen Quality Control system in the States/UTs a 
restructured Central Sector Scheme of  ―Ayush Oushadhi Gunvattaevum Uttapadan Samvardhan 
Yojana‖ (AOGUSY) with following components are being introduced during 15th FC of 2021 -
22 to 2025-26 :   
i. Strengthening and up -gradation of Ayush Pharmacies and Drug Testing 
Laboratories to achieve higher standards and for Production -Linked Incentive to 
the industry;    
ii. Pharmacovigilance of ASU&H drugs including surveillance of misleading 
advertisements;   
iii. Strengthening of central and state regulatory frameworks including Technical 
Human Resource & Capacity Building programs for control of quality, safety and 
efficacy aspects of Ayush  drugs    
iv. Support for development of standards and accreditat ion/ certification of Ayush 
products & materials in collaboration with BIS, QCI and other relevant scientific 
institutions and industrial R&D centres. 
v. Ministry of AYUSH has set up Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Medicine & 
Homoeopathy (PCIM&H) for making  standards of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani& 
Homoeopathy Drugs.   The legal status to PCIM&H has been given and necessary 
amendment have been made in the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules 163A to 167 after 
merging of PLIM & HPL. 

37 
 
NAM 
3.3 Government of India is implementing  Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH 
Mission (NAM) for development and promotion of AYUSH in the country. The National 
AYUSH Mission (NAM) is a turning point as it inter -alia, envisages better access to AYUSH 
services through increase in number of  AYUSH Hospitals and Dispensaries, ensure availability 
of AYUSH drugs and trained manpower. It also aims at Improvement in quality of AYUSH 
Education through enhancement in the number of upgraded educational Institutions, sustained 
availability of Quality Raw materials and improved availability of quality Ayurveda, Siddha, 
Unani & Homoeopathy (ASU &H) drugs through increase in number of Pharmacies, setting up 
of Drug Laboratories in the states which are responsible for enforcement mechanism of ASU &H 
drugs. Further in order to maintain the quality standard of AYUSH healthcare services, quality 
control of AYUSH drugs, strengthening of drug testing laboratories, pharmacies and improving 
the quality of AYUSH education. The Ministry has provided financial assistance to the State/UT 
Governments for different activities as per the proposals received from them in their State 
Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). 
AYURVEDA SECTION 
3.4 Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences  (CCRAS) is conducting the 
following activities for promotion of Ayurveda across the country:  
3.5 Through IEC Program, the Council has been engaged in popularizing the Ayurveda 
system among the masses by distributing brochures for common people on prevention of 
diseases and health promotion through Ayurveda.   
3.6 Participation in Health Melas / Exhibitions/ Ayurveda Parva/ Arogya Melas.  
3.7 The Council is extending Research Oriented Public Health Care Programmes (Outreach 
Activities) through Tribal Health Care Re search Programme, Ayurvedic Mobile Health Care 
Research Programme under Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP), Integration of AYUSH 
(Ayurveda) with National Programme for Prevention and control of Cancer, Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) an d Ayurvedic Health Centres under North East 
Plan. 
3.8 The Council undertakes clinical studies to scientifically validate the efficacy and safety of 
classical Ayurvedic formulations to generate tangible evidence. Also, Council   develops new 
Ayurveda formulations based on the classical text of Ayurveda/local Health Traditions through a 
systematic process of drug development. For this purpose quality assured Ayurvedic medicines 
are only used. 
North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine- Passighat (NEIFM): - 
3.9 NEIFM is engaged in documenting the traditional medicines used for treating several 
diseases and awareness program cum health camp in the inaccessible areas in the North Eastern 
part of the country to promote and propagate the AYUSH system are being undert aken. 
Scientific validation process will be initiated shortly.  

38 
 
3.10 The Committee takes into account that the entire facilities including research laboratories 
of NEIFM campus was sealed for establishment of Dedicated Covid Hospital since April, 2020 , 
halting all the laboratorial related research activities in the institute. 
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy - Shillong (NEIAH): - 
3.11 The Institute is taking various steps to promote AYUSH system of medicine in Ayurveda, 
Homeopathy and Yoga etc. and in order to achieve the objective of ‗Health for All‘. The Institute 
are regularly given free consultation in the Institute Hospitals (both OPD & IPD) and conducting 
free medical & awareness Camps at villages, school and community levels. Organized National 
Seminars/ workshops, Panel discussions, Doctor se Mileye in All India Radio, Shillong in 
English, Hindi and Regional Language (Khasi), TV Talks shows on Ayurveda in Doordarshan 
Kendra, Shillong, regional level Quiz competitions etc. 
All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), New Delhi: - 
3.12 PG and Ph. D courses in 12 Specialty in Ayurveda are being conducted in AIIA as per the 
CCIM norms and the other guidelines issued by Ministry of AYUSH.  In respect of patient 
healthcare services in Ayurveda through holistic trea tment. Further, i t has already 12 specialty 
Department with 200 bed IPD Capacity and also providing more than 1000 OPD consultation per 
day. AIIA has received NABH accreditation in year 2017. All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) 
is also in process of transforming all laboratories and health care facilities in modern state of the 
art facility. 
3.13 In current ongoing COVID pandemic,  COVID Health Care (CHC), COVID testing 
Centre (CTC) and COVID vaccination centre (CVC) has been established at AIIA and holistic 
COVID treatment is being provid ed with more than  99% success rate.  AIIA also launched an 
immune boosting campaign (AYURAKSHA project) for Delhi Police Personnel and for the 
people of some identified areas of Delhi.  Under this campaign more than 3 lakh AYURAKSHA 
kits have been distributed and the immunity of the people are being monitored closely. 
Further Recommendation 
3.14 The Committee is pleased to note Ministry 's plan to  introduce a restructured 
Central Sector Scheme of “Ayush Oushadhi Gunvattaevum Uttapadan Samvardhan 
Yojana” (AOGUSY) during 15 th Finance Commission 2021-22 to 2025-26 with components 
like strengthening and u pgradation of Ayush Pharmaceuticals and Drug Testing 
laboratories, pharmacovigilance of ASU&H drugs etc.  The Committee, however, would 
like the Ministry to keep a close track of the challenges and Key Areas of Concern in 
respect of the implementation of AOGUSY component.  The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to ensure efficient macro and micro planning and execution of the components 
of the scheme so as to strengthen the AYUSH system of medicine. The Committee observes 
that the  role of the Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Medicine for maintaining 
standards of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homeopathy drugs need to be strictly monitored 
for assured standardization of ASU&H drugs.  The Committee , in this connection,  
recommends that States/UTs must be motivated and incentivized to ensure standardization 
of AYUSH education and quality healthcare delivery system in general and on quality 
control of ASU&H drugs in particular.   

39 
 
3.15 The Committee appreciate s the role of All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) in 
Covid-19 mitigation management . T he Committee  desires that AIIA need s to popularize 
AYURAKSHA project amongst common masses for attracting more and more people 
towards Ayush system.  The Committee beli eves that the  clinical studies of CCR AS, 
intending to scientifically validate the efficacy and safety of classical Ayurvedic 
formulations to generate tangible evidence would not only yield in scientifically validated 
new drug development but would also instill public faith in quality assured Ayurvedic 
treatment. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that CCRAS should adopt a targeted 
approach and chalk out an action plan to achieve the same.  
Recommendation 
3.16 The Committee also recommends that the Ministry  must devise concrete strategy to 
address the issue of practice of AYUSH system of medicine by quacks which has eroded the faith 
of the public in the system. The Ministry may also study and take advantage of the Chinese 
experience of integrating traditional Chinese Medicine with the modern system of medicine. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to prepare a comprehensive and specific course of action to 
re-discover the glorious past of AYUSH system that reigned and ruled the world healthcare 
delivery system. 
(Para 4.1.4) 
Action Taken  
i. Practice of AYUSH system of Medicines is governed by the Indian Medicine central 
Council (IMCC) Act, 1970 and Homoeopathy Central Council (HCC) Act, 1973. As per 
the provisions of these act practitioners registered with Centr al/ state board of Indian 
Medicine and Homeopathy can practice Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy. 
Ministry through Central Council for Indian Medicine and central Council of 
Homoeopathy writes to the state governments to check the practice of AYUSH sy stems 
by the quacks as health is a subject of state. 
ii. Provisions for having interface with modern systems are specified under National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine and National Commission for Homoeopathy. 
iii. Ministry of AYUSH under the mentorship of NITI Aayog has formulated a draft 
scheme “PROGRAMME ON AYURVEDA -BIOLOGY INTEGRATED HEALTH 
RESEARCH‖ to generate evidence & high end publications in AYUSH and to promote 
the integrated health research in India. The draft Scheme has been circulated for the 
comments of stakeholders. Comments from all the stakeholders have been received 
except department of Finance. 
iv. To ensure standards of Skill Development in AYUSH a Sub council on AYUSH under 
Healthcare Sector Skill Co uncil has been constituted. The sub council has developed 6 
Qualification Packs National Occupational Standards. 
v. NABH accreditation standards have also been developed to ensure infrastructural 
standards for AYUSH systems. 
vi. With the initiatives taken by Mini stry,  AYUSH services are being integrated under the 
establishments of Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Railways, MoHFW and Ministry of 
Labour and Employment 

40 
 
vii. AYUSH has also been integrated in 19 AIIMS established by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare. 
viii. 12,500 Health and Wellness centres are being established by the Ministry of AYUSH 
under AYUSHMAN Bharat scheme. 
ix. Under National AYUSH Mission a flagship centrally sponsored Scheme of Ministry of 
AYUSH financial assistance is provided to the state Governments to integrate AYUSH in 
to the Public Health. 
x. AYUSH has also been integrated in the National Programme for Prevention and Control 
of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS). 
xi. A thorough study report on Chinese model of regulating an d promoting Traditional 
Chinese Medicine has been got developed by Ministry of AYUSH. Ministry, to promote 
the evidence based disease specific drug development and to further improve the quality 
of ASU drugs has suggested some regulatory amendments to MoHF W to be made under 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1947 which is under administrative control of MoHFW. This 
would ensure the efficacy and safety of ASU drugs.  
xii. Ministry has signed 25 Country to Country MoUs on cooperation on Traditional System 
of Medicine with v arious countries. Ministry of AYUSH has established 35 AYUSH 
Information Cells in 33 countries in foreign countries under the aegis of Indian Missions 
or the Cultural Centres set up by Indian council for cultural relations to take up awareness 
building and disseminating authentic information about AYUSH systems of medicine at 
International level. 
Further Recommendation 
3.17 The Committee is of the opinion that merely by writing to States Governments to 
check the practice of AYUSH System by quacks, the Ministry of AYUSH  should not 
absolve itself of its responsibility to stop this menace as it not only brings disrepute to the 
AYUSH system of medicine but also discourage s people to have trust in this system. The 
Ministry, therefore, must think of devising certain code under which stern legal action 
could be taken against the quacks. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare  must examine and consider the regulatory amen dments under 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1947 as suggested b y the Ministry of AYUSH without delay to 
improve the quality, efficacy and safety of ASU drugs. The Ministry of AYUSH must take 
up this matter with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare on priority basis and inform 
the Committee on the action taken on the matter. 
II. MACRO ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
Recommendation 
3.18 The Committee observes that most of the projects particularly those proposed to be 
completed in the year 2021 are lagging behind with respect to their physical progress. While the 
projects at serial no. 3, 7 and 8 of the Table -5 are proposed to be completed in March, July and 
June, 2021 respectively, their physical progress is 85, 21.75 and 52.36 percent respectively. The 
Committee feels that in all likelihood the projects will not be completed within the given time 
schedule which would lead to cost over runs. The Committee, therefore, expects strict monitoring 
of the progress of work so that time lines could be adhered to. The Committee hopes that with the 
additional appropriation of Rs. 200.00 crore in 2020 -21 and Rs. 892.53 crores in 2021 -22, the 

41 
 
physical as well financial progress of the construction projects of National Institutes would 
witness a boost. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to approach Ministry of Finance 
for additional funds at RE stage, if required, so that progress of work is no t hampered due to 
inadequate funds. 
(Para 2.17) 
Action Taken  
3.19 Brief status of Construction projects of National Institutes as on 01 April, 2021:- 
i. National Institute of Homoeopathy, Narela  as satellite Institution of National 
Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata:  Construction of super structure of all the building 
i.e. Hospital & Academic building, Marriage Accommodation, Single Accommodation, 
Director‘s Bungalow, Residential Block are complet ed. Boundary wall construction upto 
90% completed. HVAC, Block work, plastering, finishing & painting works in progress. 
The financial progress is about 72.13% and the physical progress is about 62.50%. 
ii. National Institute of Unani Medicine, Ghaziabad as sa tellite Institution of National 
Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangaluru:  Construction of super structure of all the 
building i.e. Hospital & Academic building, Type II, III, IV & V quarters, Girls & Boys 
Hostel and Guest House completed. HVAC, Block work, p lastering, finishing & painting 
works in progress. The financial progress is about 55.94% and the physical progress is 
about 43.37%. 
iii. All India Institute of Ayurveda, Goa as satellite Institution of All India Institute of 
Ayurveda, SaritaVihar: Excavation, foundation and column upto plinth completed for 
Hospital Block, Academic Block, Residential Block i.e. Type II, III, IV & V, UG Hostel, 
PG Hostel and Kitchen / Dinning completed. 1st floor & 2nd Floor slab for residential 
block Type II, III and UG Hostel c ompleted. Boundary wall 55% completed. 
Reinforcement bounding of raft & column for blocks 3, 4, 6 & 7 under progress. The 
financial progress is about 65.28% and the physical progress is about 40.75% 
iv. National Institute of Ayurveda, Panchkula as satellite In stitution of National 
Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur:  NOC has been granted by Station Headquarter, Chandi 
Mandir on 18.01.2020 for construction of NIA at Shri Mata Mansa Devi Complex, 
Panchkula, Haryana. Finalization of implementing agency under process wit h M/s 
WAPCOS Ltd. The financial progress is about 09.12%. 
v. NISARG GRAM, Pune as an Up -gradation centre of NIN, Pune:  The RCC work all 
the building i.e. Hospital building, Academic building, Residential Block   (Type II, III, 
IV & V) and girls & boys Hostel, common mess, Living Gandhi Memorial, Yoga Hall 
and Admin & Diet Centre in progress. Boundary wall & ground water tank work under 
progress. The financial progress is about 71.95% and the physical progress is about 
52.44%. 
vi. All India Institute of Ayurveda Ph -II, Sarita Vihar: Construction of super structure of 
2 to 8 Nos.  buildings in progress. Block work and plastering work in building No. 3 & 4 
in progress. The financial progress is about 46.30% and the physical progress is about 
25.00%. 

42 
 
vii. National Institute of Homoeopathy Ph -II, Kolkata: All work completed except main 
gate (1). The financial progress is about 97.30% and the physical progress is about 
99.00%. 
viii. North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy:  RCC structure block work for 
Boys & Girls Hostel, s taff quarter Type III, IVA & B, Senior resident Hostel and Guest 
House in progress. External development work like road, retaining wall and drain under 
progress. The financial progress is about 73.87% and the physical progress is about 
65.23%. 
ix. The construc tion works of projects of National Institutes have been affected since last 
one year due to Covid -19 pandemic. The projects  have been quarterly monitored by the 
Monitoring committee of the Ministry and also reviewed by Secretary (AYUSH) time to 
time. Spec ial Secretary (AYUSH) has also reviewed the progress of work regularly to 
avoid cost & time overrun. 
3.20 The above information has also been provided in a tabular form at Annexure-II 
Budget  
3.21 The Concerns of the Committee has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance, vide 
Secretary (AYUSH)‘s D.O. letter No.H -11013/9/2021-Budget dated29.04.2021  for providing 
adequate budgetary support to this Ministry. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.22 The Committee takes note of the status of construction of the projects of National 
Institutes and finds that except for National Institute of Homoeopathy, Phase -II, Kolkata, 
all the Institutes are lagging behind with respect to their physical and financial  progress. 
The Committee understands that given the prevailing pandemic Covid -19 situation, it is 
but natural that the deadline for physical completion of construction work at all Institutes 
would certainly not be met.  The Committee , however, recommends that the Ministry must 
make all out efforts to complete the ongoing projects at the earliest so that all the institutes 
could be made operational for the benefit of the people. 
 
Recommendation 
3.23 The Committee appreciates the launch of the long -awaited NAM web -portal is now 
operational and hopes that delay in submission of UCs would be avoided. The Committee, 
however, would like to be apprised about the number of UCs submitted by States/UTs through 
this portal and the status as to which all States/UTs ar e using and which are not using the portal 
including the reasons for the same. The Committee hopes that this portal would solve the 
perennial issue of pendency of UCs and help in releasing idly parked funds for timely utilization 
henceforth. 
(Para 2.32) 

43 
 
Action Taken 
NAM 
3.24 It is stated that after launching a dedicated web-portal for Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
National AYUSH Mission (NAM), subsequently trainings have been provided to officials of 
States/UTs including State Programme Management Unit (SPMU) regarding submission of 
SAAP, Physical & Financial report, Utilization Certificate and DBT related information for the 
smooth operation & implementation of NAM web -portal. Further, to resolve the technical 
glitches and problems faced by States/UTs d uring the submission of SAAPs, Physical & 
Financial progress report and UCs, a dedicated help desk has been setup in the Ministry under 
NAM Division, so that immediately issues may be resolved and effective implementation of the 
NAM Web portal may be carri ed out by different State/UT Governments. As of now, 20 -23 
State/UT Governments has submitted their SAAP and 2 State/UT Governments has also 
submitted utilization certificates through the NAM web portal and remaining States/UTs are 
under process. 
Further Recommendation 
3.25 The Committee is disappointed to note that as of now, 20 -23 States/UT 
Governments have submitted their State Annual Action Plans ( SAAP), 2 States/UT 
Governments have submitted UCs through the NAM web portal and the remaining 
States/UTs are under process.  The Committee apprehends that the NAM web portal is not 
popular amongst States/UTs for prompt submission of UCs despite imparting necess ary 
training to officials of States/UTs on submission of SAAP, physical and financial report, 
UCs, etc. The Committee is surprised that the States which have submitted their SAAP 
through NAM web portal also have not submitted UCs through the same  portal.  The 
Committee believes that such reluctance reeks of evasion of responsibility and 
accountability of funds given.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
persuade all States/UTs to submit not only their SAAP but also pending UCs through the 
web portal. 
III. SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY 
Recommendation 
3.26 The Committee is anguished to find that Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Daman and 
Diu and Delhi have nil AYUSH Co -located facilities under NHM at the CHC level. However, 
West Bengal has the highest number of AYUSH co -located facilities at various level of  health 
centres. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that measures have to be taken for 
mainstreaming of AYUSH services from the peripheral level to the district level. The Committee, 
further recommends the Ministry to monitor the quality of AYUS H healthcare service provided 
from the Sub centre in the rural areas to the District Hospitals. The Ministry must also aim at 
increasing the availability of AYUSH services at all the levels by strengthening the required 
infrastructure as well enhancing the quality of human resource. 
(Para 3.10) 
 

44 
 
Action Taken  
NAM 
3.27 Government of India has adopted a strategy of Co -location of AYUSH facilities at 
Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health Centres  (CHCs) and District Hospitals 
(DHs), thus enabling choice to the patients for different systems of medicines under single 
window. The engagement of AYUSH Doctors / paramedics and their training is supported by the 
Department of Health & Family Welfare, wh ile the support for AYUSH infrastructure, 
equipment / furniture and medicines are provided by Ministry of AYUSH under shared 
responsibilities. Under NAM, financial support for AYUSH infrastructure, equipment / furniture 
and medicines is being provided to S tate/UT Governments for Co -location of AYUSH facilities 
at PHCs, CHCs and DHs as per the proposal received through their SAAPs. 
Further Recommendation 
3.28 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of AYUSH in extending the 
co-location of AYUSH facilities at PHCs, CHCs and District Hospitals and thus providing 
choice to the patients for different systems of medicines under single window. The 
Committee, however, finds such facilities lacking in Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh , Assam,  
Daman & Diu and Delhi, etc. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
States/UTs need to be continuously persuaded for sending proposals through their SAAPS 
for setting up co -location of AYUSH facilities under NHM .  The measures so undertaken 
would not only ensure preferred choice to the patients for different system of medicine 
under single system but also facilitate mainstreaming of AYUSH services at the grass root 
level.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would share 
requisite responsibilities in engagement of AYUSH doctors/paramedical staff and their 
training for enhancing the quality of human resource of each AYUSH centre. 
Recommendation 
3.29 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that out of the total 4436 
AYUSH HWCs approved during 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, only 522 are made functional. The 
Committee feels that at this pace of establishing around 500 centers in the last two year s, it 
would take a very long time to make all the approved HWCs functional. The Committee is also 
surprised to note that out of the 32 States/UTs for which HWCs have been approved, there are 
only 8 such States/UTs where they have been made functional. The Committee is of the view that 
after approval of the HWCs Units, there must be a foolproof process to ensure their completion 
within a specified time and adequate funds should be allocated for the same. The Committee, 
accordingly, recommends the Ministry to  play a proactive role and leave no stone unturned in 
making the HWCs functional in tandem with the States/UTs. The Committee further recommends 
the Ministry to lay special focus on making the remaining approved HWCs operational at the 
earliest with adequate manpower and robust infrastructure in place.  
(Para 3.15) 
 
 

45 
 
Action Taken  
NAM 
3.30 The Ministry of AYUSH is continuously reviewing the status of HWC Operationalization 
and taking various steps to make HWCs functional as detailed below:-  
 Review meetings of State/UTs on critical indicators linked with operationalization of 
HWCs  
 Letters have been issued to Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary/Secretary, AYUSH of all 
State/UTs for giving focused attention on implementation of programme and ac hieving 
the targets as per timelines fixed, so that people in the catchment areas of the AHWCs 
could get AYUSH services on continuum basis. 
 Ministry has constituted two teams for field Visit to State/UTs for assessing progress of 
AYUSH Health and Wellness Centers (HWCs)  
 Due to Pandemic situation of Covid -19, States/UTs are facing challenges in 
implementation of AYUSH HWCs due to which establishment and Operationalization  is 
getting delayed, however as of now 835 AYUSH HWCs are functional under progressive 
category. State-wise list of functional AYUSH HWCs is as follows:- 
 
 
S. 
No.  
Name of States 
/UTs 
No. of AYUSH HWCs functional 
under progressive 
1 Chandigarh  5 
2 Chhattisgarh  2 
3 Haryana    320 
4 Himachal 143 
5 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
80 
6 Karnataka 100 
7 Kerala 13 
8 Madhya Pradesh 100 
9 Nagaland 2 
10 Puducherry 2 
11 Tamil Nadu 48 
12 West Bengal 20 
 Total 835 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.31 The Committee expresses its concern that only 835 AYUSH HWCs against the 
target of 4436 HWCs could be made functional in 12 States which indicates the inadequacy 
of steps taken by the Ministry.  The Committee is utterly disappointed to note such tardy 
progress in operationalisation of HWCs . The Committee  underlines the need of a 
streamlined procedure to ensure the completion of setting up of AYUSH HWCs within a 
specified time with adequate manpower and infrastructure  and provision of operational 

46 
 
cost. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to engage the remaining States/UTs 
which have not yet started the process of making AYUSH HWCs functional so that 
equitable distribution of AYUSH HWCs, keeping in view the geographical extent and 
population of States/UTs, is assured.    
Recommendation 
3.32 The Committee has been given to understand a target of 3100 units of Health and 
Wellness Centres (HWCs) has been fixed for the year 2021-22. The Committee is of the view that 
the Ministry need to make demarcation in physical targets with respect to approval of HWCs and 
targets for operationalisation of HWCs as merely approving HWCs units would not se rve any 
purpose. The Committee recommends the Ministry to make realistic targets for both approval of 
HWCs and its subsequent operationalisation within stipulated time frame. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry should focus on making the approv ed centres functional before 
according any further approval for fresh HWCs. 
(Para 3.16) 
Action Taken  
NAM 
3.33 The targets of operationalization were fixed in consultation with State/UTs. As per 
phasing out plan of AYUSH HWCs duly approved by the Cabinet f unds for upcoming year will 
be released to State/UTs based on functional status of operationalization of HWCs approved in 
previous year. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.34 The Committee is not convinced with the response and justification given b y the 
Ministry on the mismatch between the target of setting up of AYUSH HWCs and actual 
operationalisation during a stipulated time frame .  The Committee , in this connection,  
reiterates its recommendation made in para 3.16 that a demarcation in physical targets 
with respect to approval of HWCs and targets for its operationalisation needs to be clearly 
spelt out .  The Committee recommends that a realistic timeline must be determined to 
make HWCs functional with requisite infrastructure and human resource. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should work in tandem with States/UTs 
Governments on the operationalisation of all the approved HWCs. The Committee believes 
that p roper moni toring and field visits will be of immense help in expediting the 
operationalisation process of HWCs.   
Recommendation 
3.35 The Committee, keeping in view the need to encourage the cultivation of medicinal 
plants, recommends the Ministry to constitute an Expert Committee to study and identify as to 
which agro-climatic region in the country is best suited for cultivation of whic h medicinal plant. 
The information so collected would immensely help in establishing regional depositories at these 

47 
 
places and also encourage cultivation of medicinal plants. Areas like the North East Region 
which has not been explored much for the said pu rpose also needs to be explored and new 
medicinal plants, collected, identified and documented. To make this a success, the local natives 
should be involved in the process. The Ministry should also explore the possibility of 
collaboration with Ministry of Environment and Forests for conservation and maintenance of bio 
diversity hotspots. In addition to this, the Committee also recommends the Ministry to engage 
prominent Agricultural Universities in the country for research, cultivation, conservation of 
medicinal plants. 
(Para 3.34) 
Action Taken  
 
NMPB 
 
3.36 NMPB has already identified/prioritized Region -Specific Medicinal plants through 
Technical Screening Committee / expert committee for cultivation on farmers land. The 
Technical Screening Committee meeting has also reviewed the cost of cultivation/hectare for 140 
medicinal plants. For the same purpose, NMPB has supported R&D projects to develop 
Cultivation technique such as post -harvest management, techniques, agro techniques, 
development of quality plantin g material etc. So far NMPB has developed agro techniques of 
104 Medicinal plants with help of different Agricultural Universities/ Research organizations. 
 
3.37 Under the Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable 
Management of Medicinal Plants, special attention is also given for conservation, maintenance of 
rare, endangered and endemic species of Medicinal Plants throughout the country including the 
NER by way of establishing Medicinal Plants Conservation and Development Area. Su ch 
activities are supported through the State Forest Departments. 
 
3.38 To identify and document the new Medicinal plant species, project based support is also 
provided by NMPB to different Research organization/Universities. 
Further Recommendation 
3.39 The Committee is disappointed that the Ministry has not shared any information 
about its effort undertaken to tap the full potential of the North East Regions with respect 
to the rich biodiversity in the NER.  The Committee firmly believes that NER with its rich 
bio-diversity and region specific  plants of medicinal values must be focused upon for 
exploration, collection, documentation for sustainable and optimal utilization of medicinal 
plants.  The Committee, accordingly, reiterate s its recommendation that the Ministry must 
focus on North East Regions and also liaise with Ministry of Environment and Forests for 
conservation and maintenance of potential utilization of hubs and medicinal plants.   
Recommendation 
3.40 The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry through its medicinal plants 
components under NAM encourages farmers to cultivate medicinal plants by giving subsidy for 
140 growing prioritized plants. The Committee is, however, constrained to observe that  this 

48 
 
scheme has not been able to make its presence felt throughout the length and breadth of the 
country as a result of which a majority of farmers are not benefited by it. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that this scheme needs to be widely publicize d and popularized through 
State Implementing Agencies so that more and more farmers from all the States are encouraged 
to grow medicinal plants and herbs besides routine crop. The State Implementing Agencies 
should also further market linkages so that the farmers do not face the problem of finding buyers 
for their produce. The Committee further recommends the SMPBs to encourage the development 
of clusters of cultivation of medicinal plants. 
(Para 3.39) 
Action Taken  
 
NMPB 
 
3.41 With the objective of strengthening the market linkage of medicinal plants and herbs with 
the concerned stakeholders, NMPB has liaised with major companies across India, and shared 
the species wise demand with SMPBs and State Implementing agencies to foster the whole 
process. 
Further Recommendation 
3.42 The Committee acknowledges the efforts put in by the Ministry  for encouraging 
farmers to cultivate medicinal plants. However, the Ministry has  not been able to take this 
scheme to the length and breadth of the country as a result of wh ich majority of farmers 
are deprived of its benefits.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates is recommendation to 
make the presence of this scheme felt throughout the country in a time bound manner.  
Recommendation 
3.43 The Committee is appreciative of the achievements of the Ministry; however, it feels that 
a lot more needs to be done in this area. The Committee has been emphatically pursuing the 
issue of quality control and scientific validation of AYUSH drugs. The Committee, however, 
expresses concerns over the reported presence of metals in AYUSH drug formulations and safety 
of these medicines. Instances of side -effects of AYUSH medicines and other products have also 
come to light. The Committee believes that a solid and robust quality control mechanism i s the 
only way to ensure credibility and safety of AYUSH drugs. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that in order to have scientific validation, more and more clinical trials need to be 
done to fill up the gap due to lack of evidence based medicines. Gi ven the growing popularity of 
AYUSH systems, it is the need of the hour to lay utmost focus on scientific validation and 
documentation. The role of Central Drug Controller becomes very important in approval of 
drugs which have undergone pre -clinical trials , clinical trials etc. The Committee, further, 
believes that publication of peer-reviewed papers in reputed international journals will go a long 
way in establishing the credibility and authenticity of AYUSH systems of medicine. The 
Committee is also of th e view that there should be separate and adequate funding for clinical 
trials and scientific research which should stand international scrutiny so that AYUSH drug get 
the global recognition and acceptability. 
(Para 3.49) 

49 
 
Action Taken 
 
DCC 
 
 As per Drugs & C osmetics Act 1940 and Rules made there under, it is mandatory for all 
Ayurvedic medicines to comply with the standards prescribed under Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopeia of India (API), published by Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India 
from time to time, which incl udes pharmacopoeial standards for heavy metals contents, 
microbiological limits, aflatoxines etc.  and products are tested against the set standards.   
However, heavy metals are in built ingredients of certain ASU drugs and mentioned 
under Schedule E -1 of the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945.  For such substances 
‗Caution: to be taken under medical supervision‘ is to be conspicuously labeled on the 
container. 
 An advisory has been issued on 14 th October, 2005 by this Ministry which prescribes 
limit and testing of heavy metals mandatory for export purposes in respect of every batch 
of purely herbal ASU drugs by every licensee. 
 A new Scheme is being implemented during 15 th Finance Cycle with the following 
objectives : (i) to facilitate adequate infrastructural & t echnological upgradation and 
institutional activities in public and private sector for standardization, quality 
manufacturing and analytical testing of Ayush  drugs & materials;   (ii)  to strengthen 
regulatory frameworks at Central and State level for eff ective quality control, safety 
monitoring and surveillance of misleading advertisement of Ayush drugs;   (iii) to 
encourage building up synergies, collaborations and convergent approaches for 
promoting standards and quality of Ayush drugs & materials. 
 Presently, there is no separate Central Drug Controller for AYUSH.   A vertical structure 
under CDSCO has been created.  09 posts are created and Recruitment Rules are notified 
on 18/02/2021. 
 Pharmacovigilance Scheme has been implemented in December 2017.  74 Peripheral 
Pharmacovigilance Centres have been established. Adverse Drug Events have been 
reported to National Pharmacovigilance Centre (NPvCC) for action. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.44 The Committee takes into account  that although it is mandatory for all Ayurvedic 
medicine manufacturers to comply with the standards prescribed under Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopeia of India (API) which includes Pharmacopeial standards for heavy metals 
content, microbiological limits, aflatoxines, etc., it is, however, skeptical about  the 
adherence to these prescribed standards in the absence of proper monitoring and 
supervision.  The Committee, time and again, has been emphasizing upon quality control of 
ASU&H drugs  with the purpose of popularizing its domestic use and global acceptance .  
The Committee hopes that all components of the new scheme outlined for the duration of  
15th Finance Commission would be implemented effectively to strengthen the whole regime 
of standardization, scientific validation, Pharmacovigilance, etc.  The Committee reiterates 
its recommendation  regarding increasing  the credibility of AYUSH system to meet 
scientific global scrutiny and scientific validation of new Ayush drugs development 
including pre-clinical and clinical trials to showcase its evidence based products.     

50 
 
Recommendation 
3.45 The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the pace of work being done for 
creation/development of a vertical structure in CDSCO. The low allocation of funds and 
reduction at RE stage in 2020 -21 indicate that the scheme has not taken off as yet. There has 
been inordinate delay in the creation and development of this vertical structure in CDSCO. Even 
the activities mentioned quarter –wise for the year 2021-22 indicate that the Regulatory officials 
will start work in the last quarter only after Recruitment Rules are notified and process of 
recruitment initiated. Emphasizing the need of this structure for carrying out the regulatory work 
in accordance with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940, the Committee feels that it is high time 
that this structure is functional with all requisite features in place to carry out the set mandate 
and ensure good manufacturing practices in the AYUSH industry. The Co mmittee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that creation of the vertical structure should not be delayed any further 
and all out efforts must be made to make CDSCO fully functional in the year 2021 -22 so that the 
envisaged role of this structure is carried out with proper fund allocation and utilization.  
(Para 3.52) 
Action Taken  
 
DCC 
 
3.46 Nine regulatory posts of 04 Drug Inspectors, 04 Assistant Drug Controllers and 01 
Deputy Drug Controller have  been created and Recruitment Rules are notified on 18/02/2021.  
Efforts are being made to fill up these regulatory posts through UPSC urgently.   These posts are 
meant for regulation of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs at central level and 
will manage the AYUSH   Vertical in CDSCO in terms of implementation of the provisions of 
Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 pertaining to ASU&H drugs and associated matters. In the mean 
time additional charge of the proposed posts has been allocated to the existi ng technical officers 
of the Ministry 
Further Recommendation 
3.47 The Committee is constrained to observe that the recruitment process for filling up 
of 09 regulatory posts for creation of a vertical structure progressing at a snail's pace.  The 
Committee, in this connection, strongly recommends that the creation of vertical structure 
for AYUSH under CDSCO should be expedited and the recruitment process be completed 
at the earliest.   
Recommendation 
3.48 The Committee observes that even though the E-Aushadhi portal has been launched more 
than two years ago, the number of online registration and license application is not very 
encouraging. The Committee believes that the Ministry needs to engage the States/UTs and 
incentivize them to encourage the manu facturers, drug inspectors to use the portal so as to 
increase transparency, improve data accessibility of AYUSH medicines and provide real -time 
information of the licensed manufacturers; which are the key features of the portal. The 
Committee recommends t hat the Ministry should come out with clear guidelines stating that 

51 
 
AYUSH manufactures should have in -house drug testing laboratories duly approved by the 
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories and also to ensure 
stringent practicing of WHO prescribed Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). 
(Para 3.54) 
Action Taken  
 
DCC 
 
3.49 e-aushadhi portal has been launched by Ministry of AYUSH since February, 2019 for 
encouraging online system of License applications  and product approval.  The portal is now 
open and functional.  33 State Licensing Authorities and 140 State Drug Inspectors from 29 
States have already registered themselves on the portal.   The existing licensed manufacturers are 
being registered by State Licensing Authorities on the portal and soon new application process 
will also be activated for use. 
3.50 As per schedule T GMP in the Drugs & Cosmetics Rules 1945 every ASU drug 
manufacturer should have in house quality control section and Drug Testing Laboratory.  
W.H.O. GMP has been given to 21 Ayurvedic Drug manufacturers in India, those who are 
exporting their product as per importing countries requirements. 
Further Recommendation 
3.51 The Committee notes that W.H.O Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) has been 
given to 21 Ayurvedic Drug manufacturers to export their products as per standards and 
other requirements of importing countries. The Committee expects the Ministry to monitor 
whether these 21 manufacturers have in house quality control section and drug testing 
laboratory as per the schedule 'T' of prescribed Good Manufacturing Practices. The 
Committee would like to be apprised whether any complaints with respect to sub -standard 
or inferior products has/have been received against existing licensed manufacturers in the 
last two years and the action taken against the manufacturers  violating the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945. The Committee, at the same time, recommends the Ministry to 
effectively operationalise the E-Aushadhi portal by activating new application process for 
online registration and license application in order to achieve the set objectives of the 
portal.  
 
Recommendation 
3.52 The Committee is in full agreement with the findings of the Comprehensive Impact 
Assessment of the scheme wherein it has been noted that due to insufficient manpower, it would 
be difficult to achieve the objectives of the scheme and therefore the scheme needs to be 
strengthened with skilled manpower. The Committee is of the firm view that e ven though the 
network of the Pharmacovigilance centres has increased in the States/UTs, the scheme is not 
being implemented properly due to shortage of manpower. The Committee is also of the view 
that the meager allocation for Pharmacovigilance Initiative  would certainly not help in 
achieving the desired objectives. The Committee wonders that the projected requirement for the 

52 
 
scheme was just Rs. 2.83 crore in 2020 -21 and the allocation was Rs. 2.80 crore in BE 2020 -21. 
It seems to the Committee that the Mi nistry is not planning to enhance the reach of the scheme 
given the demand for funds for this scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the 
Ministry to make available adequate resources, including manpower for Pharmacovigilance 
centres across the cou ntry and visualize the potential of the scheme and accordingly project its 
demand for substantial funds for effective implementation of the scheme. 
(Para 3.64) 
Action Taken  
 
DCC 
 
3.53 Pharmacovigilance Scheme has been implemented in December 2017.  74 Peripheral 
Pharmacovigilance Centres have been established. Adverse Drug Events have been reported to 
National Pharmacovigilance Centre (NPvCC) for action.  It is intended in 2021 -22 to further 
strengthen the Pharmacovigilance network and reporting mechanism by establishing more 
peripheral pharmacovigilance centres i.e., upto 100.  The allocated BE 2021 -22 is Rs.4.10 crore 
for increasing the network of Pharmacovigilance activities including manpower for 
Pharmacovigilance centres across the country. 
Further Recommendation 
3.54 The Committee observes that during 2021-22, an amount to the tune of Rs. 4.10 
crore has been allotted to further strengthen the Pharmacovigilance network and reporting 
mechanism by establishing more peripheral Pharmacovigilance centers i.e. upto 100 by 
ensuring adequate manpower for Pharmacovigilance C entres ac ross the country. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to make an assessment of the operational cost of each 
Pharmacovigilance Centre along with the number of workforce required to run it smoothly 
and accordingly project its fund requirement for the scheme.  The Committee recommends 
the Ministry t o comply with the finding s and observations of the C omprehensive Impact 
Assessment of the Pharmacovigilance Scheme for its effective execution and actual 
achievement of set objectives on the ground level.  
Recommendation  
3.55 The Committee is of the view that obtaining NABH accreditation is essential to gain the 
confidence of the people and to remain competitive in the field of health services. Further 
accreditation would ensure improvement in the quality and competency of the Institute as well. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to ensure that all the AYUSH 
institutes must expedite the process for NABH accreditation and ensure its compliance with the 
NABH standards. The Institutes must endeavour towards improving their capacity and 
implementing NABH standards in their organization. The Committee also recommends all the 
Institutes under the Research Councils to shed off the lackadaisical attitude and set a timeframe 
for completing the NABH Accreditation process so that unwarranted delays are avoided. 
(Para 3.76) 

53 
 
Action Taken 
CCRH 
3.56 Council has initiated NABH accreditation for its three institutes viz.  
1. Dr. D.P.R. Central Research Institutes (H), NOIDA (Uttar Pradesh)  
2. National Homoeopathic Research Institute for Mental Health, Kottayam (Kerala)  
3. Regional Research Institute (H), Gudivada (Telangana)  
3.57 All the 03 Institutes are working to fulfill the compliances as per NABH pre -
requirements. Documentation process is underway, sensitization prog rams and trainings are 
being conducted regularly and all efforts are being made to comply with the applicable statutory 
requirements. To facilitate this process, the Council nominated 08 scientists to attend a virtual 
online course "NABH AYUSH Assessor Training Program" from 17th to 21st August, 2020. 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS):- 
3.58 The council is putting its maximum efforts to expedite the process of NABH 
accreditation of following identified 06 institutes of the Council in a phased manner. 
1. NARIP, Cheruthuruthy 
2. CARI, Kolkata  
3. CARI, Bhubaneswar  
4. CARI, Bengaluru 
5. RARISD, Vijayawada and  
6. RARIUD, Jammu 
3.59 The Nodal Officers at above said institutes have been instructed to consult the NABH 
authority for getting the requisite information and prepare a NABH pre -assessment Summary of 
the respective institutes followed by a budget proposal to fulfill requirements as NABH norms. 
3.60 The fulfillment of requirements is subject to the approval of competent autho rity in terms 
of manpower, infrastructure etc. whatever is required. 
3.61 The Council has also requested the Authority of NABH to impart training to the Nodal 
Officers of the Council to prepare the pre-assessment summary of respective institute. 
 
National Institute of Ayurveda, Deemed To Be University – Jaipur: - 
3.62 The Institute has already been awarded NABH Accreditation in 2017.  All the 
requirements are being followed in later & sprit to maintain the accreditation and the standards 
for the benefit of patients and general public.  

54 
 
CCRUM 
3.63 As far as CCRUM is concerned, the Council‘s National Research Institute of Unani 
Medicine for Skin disorders (NRIUMSD), Hyderabad has already been granted NABH 
Accreditation. 
3.64 Regarding RRIUM Srinagar, the final assessment for NABH Accreditation has been done 
by the Quality Control Council of India (QCI). Four more centres i.e. CRIUM, Lucknow; 
RRIUMs –Bhadrak, Patna and Chennai are in process of completing the desired statuary and 
other requirements. 
CCRYN 
3.65 The process for obtaining NABH accreditation for CRIYN at Rohini Delhi under way. 
North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine- Pasighat (NEIFM): - 
3.66 The Institute is applying for NABH Accreditation and it is under process. 
Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda – Jamnagar: - 
3.67 The Institute is NABH accredited.  
All India Institute of Ayurveda – New Delhi: -  
3.68 The Institute is NABH accredited.  For renewal of accreditation NABS audit has been 
completed and response from NABH is awaited. 
North Eastern Institute Of Ayurveda & Homoeopathy - Shillong (NEIAH): - 
3.69 The Institute being new is in the process of fulfilling the requisite criteria for applying for 
NABH accreditation and it will be done as and when the criteria are fulfilled. 
 
CCRS 
3.70 The Three peripheral institutes of Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) 
namely Siddha Central Research Institute, Chennai, Siddha Regional Research Institute, 
Puducherry & Siddha Regional Research Institute, Thiruvananthapuram are taking re quisite 
steps to obtain NABH accreditation. 
3.71 Many structural standards have been implemented in the hospital of peripheral institutes. 
Upgradation of Functional standards is also is progress. Facilities in IPD's are being improved. 
NABH manual has been prepared and made ready for presentation. 
3.72 The peripheral institutes have created various committee  like Hospital Information 
committee, Patients safety welfare committee, Building maintenance committee and NABH 
implementation committee.  Regular in -house training programmes are being conducted to 
sensitize the staff of respective units.  

55 
 
3.73 The peripheral institutes have been registered in the respective Pollution Control Board 
and biomedical waste management have also been implemented in SCRI, Chennai. 
NIS 
3.74 The AyothidossPandithar Hospital attached with the Institute has been granted 
accreditation with NABH w.e.f. 16-9-2018. 
MDNIY 
3.75 MDNIY has already got NABH accreditation. 
NIN 
3.76 National Institute of Naturopathy (NIN) has been assessed and found to comply with 
NABH Accreditation standards for AYUSH programs on 22/04/2018. 
NIUM 
3.77 The Institute has got NABH Accreditation 
NIH 
3.78 NIH is NABH accreditated Hospital since 24.02.2019. 
Further Recommendation 
3.79 The Committee notes that the various Councils of AYUSH and their institutes are in 
the process of obtaining their NABH accreditation.  The Committee, however,  reiterates 
that a timeframe for completing NABH accreditation must be fixed by the Ministry and 
desired the Ministry to keep a close watch to ensure the compliance of NABH standards by 
those who have been accredited. 
 
Recommendation 
3.80 The Committee, while taking note of the submission of the Ministry, observes that 
ensuring Quality assurance of AYUSH drugs comes under the jurisdiction of State Drugs 
Controllers, is apprehensive about the required technical expertise and the presence of a 
separate Department exclusively for testing AYUSH drugs in States Drugs Controlling/Licensing 
Authorities. The Committee, therefore, feels that AYUSH is in urgent need of a more robust drug 
quality assurance system that is AYUSH centric. A separate indep endent regulating body at the 
State level which focuses on ensuring that only the best quality AYUSH drugs are available in 
the market will go a long way in mainstreaming AYUSH healthcare services in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends for cr eation of a specialized body specifically for AYUSH 
Drug Control which has the required technical staff with requisite expertise in AYUSH at the 
State level on lines of the vertical structure for AYUSH under CDSCO.  
(Para 3.82) 

56 
 
Action Taken 
 
DCC 
 
3.81 Grant-in-aid is given under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme for National AYUSH 
Mission under the component Quality Control of ASU&H Drugs to State ASU&H Licensing 
Authorities/Drug Controllers for Technical manpower. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.82 The Committee is well aware of the grant -in-aid that is given under National 
AYUSH Mission under the component of Quality Control of ASU&H Drugs to S tate 
ASU&H licensing Authorities/Drug Controllers for technical manpower. The Committee 
wonders that the Mi nistry is silent on the recommendation of the Committee relating to 
creation of a specialized body for AYUSH Drug Control with requisite expertise at the 
State level on lines of the vertical structure for AYUSH under CDSCO. The Committee , 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to reconsider its recommendation and also explore the 
feasibility of setting up of a specialized body especially for AYUSH Drugs Control at the 
State Level.  
Recommendation 
3.83 The Committee takes note of the initiatives carried out by t he Councils for the 
formulation of new drugs. The Committee, however, recommends the Councils to carry out well 
designed clinical trials. The Councils must also collaborate with other Institutes and publish 
research papers in high end journals for better scientific validation of AYUSH drugs.  
(Para 3.89) 
Action Taken 
CCRH 
 
 Council has taken up rigorous steps for making clinical trials highly scientific 
for which experts are invited for review at the stage of writing proposals. In the 
past 5 years 22 RCT have been taken up which is gold standard for clinical 
trials.  
 CCRH col laborates with institutes of allied sciences under expression of 
interest scheme or signing memorandum of understanding for undertaking 
fundamental and basic research for generating scientific evidence in 
Homoeopathy. Leads so generated help in undertaking  clinical trials at our 
institutes of specific disease conditions and drugs e.g., Research on treatment 
of Japanese Encephalitis and Acute Encephalitis Syndrome were undertaken in 
laboratory, clinical and field settings. Anti -viral action of homoeopathic 
medicines has been established against the JE virus in in -vitro and in -vivo 
studies. Mortality and post encephalitis morbidity of AES infected children 
reduced significantly on adjunctive Homoeopathic treatment. As basic and 

57 
 
clinical research is going on si multaneously, the studies thus conducted have 
translational value. 
 Council undertook 26 collaborative studies in in last five years with Institutes 
of high repute such as IIT-Bombay; Bose Institute, Kolkata; Panjab University, 
Chandigarh; ICGEB, New Delhi;  ICMR-NICED, Kolkata; NCCS, Pune; 
AIIMS, New Delhi. 19 studies were concluded with promising outcomes.   
 110 research papers with specific outcomes are published in national and 
International peer reviewed journals covering different areas of research duri ng 
last five years.  
 
3.84 Collectively, these forms of health research have led to reduction in disease morbidity 
and a remarkable improvement in health care and public health especially in rural areas where 
the health infrastructure facilities are inadequate. This type of programme has added to the better 
outreach of health care facilities to the grass root level and thus making it more accessible, 
affordable and user friendly. These programs have an enormous impact on human health and 
morbidity, and that resulted in increased productivity of the population. 
 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS): - 
3.85 The council has undertaken the drug development of new/coded formulations based on 
leads from classical texts, contemporary scientifi c and pharmacological leads for important 
diseases of National importance based on strength of Ayurveda wherein the clinical trials are 
being conducted in collaboration with reputed institutes such as AIIMS, New Delhi; ICMR; 
BHU etc. through well designed protocol developed in consultation with domain experts. The 
research outcomes are being published in reputed Journals as appropriate.  
 
CCRS 
 
3.86 CCRS has taken steps to develop new drugs and 10 patents have been filed so far.  CCRS 
and its peripheral institutes abides by the Good Clinical Practice (GCP) guidelines and carries 
out well design clinical trials after Institutional Human Ethics Committee (IHEC) approval and 
CTRI registration. Moreover, CCRS is in collaboration with institutes of repute and are carrying 
out 4 collaborative projects.  In addition, CCRS will adhere to publish research papers in peer 
review impact journals. 
 
CCRUM 
 
3.87 The Council is engaged in developing new drugs on emerging diseases and diseases of 
national importance on well -designed clinical trials. The protocols have been prepared by the 
scientists of the Council which are duly vetted by the multi -disciplinary expert committee and 
recommended by the Scientific Advisory Committee of the Council. The Council is already 
collaborating with other research/academic Institutes like All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
New Delhi, Mumbai University, Mumbai, Jadavpur Univ ersity, Kolkata, JamiaHamdard, New 
Delhi, VallabhBhai Patel Chest Institute, New Delhi, etc. Outcome of these studies are being 
published in high impact journals or utilized for patent. 
 

58 
 
NIS 
 
3.88 The faculty members, Ph.D and P.G. Scholars of Institute ar e undertaking research on 
Siddha drugs as a part of their research and education. The Institute has also undertaken clinical 
trials to establish the efficacy of Siddha drugs as prophylaxis/treatment to Covid-19 
 
NIUM 
 
3.89 Journals are being published.  Th e Institute is carrying out clinical trials and signed MoU 
with two Institutes for this purpose.  Good quality research papers are being published regularly 
in National and International Journals of repute.  
 
Further Recommendation 
3.90 The Committee expresses its pleasure that various research institutes are 
undertaking clinical trials for making their research scientific  and evidence based .  Such 
clinical trials help to reach a firm conclusion that a particular drug is both safe and 
effective.  The Committee is of the considered view that t he Indian system of Medicine 
would get a big boost if quality and evidence based scientific research is carried out.  The 
Committee, in this connection, recommends the Ministry to develop a robust Clinical Trial 
Management System (CTMS) in AYUSH systems that would enable researchers to seek 
better ways to utilize each other research outcomes and thus create a platform for sharing 
the database and the experience gained with each other for better R&D outcome.  
 
IV. MAINSTREAMING OF AYUSH SYSTEM 
Recommendation 
3.91 The Committee acknowledges the initiatives taken by the Ministry of AYUSH through its 
various institutes in mainstreaming AYUSH systems of medicine. However, the Committee is of 
the opinion that the maj ority of the work done is preventive in nature and recommends that the 
Ministry should encourage and create a detailed roadmap for establishing AYUSH systems of 
medicine as a curative alternative to the Allopathic system. The Committee believes that the 
Ministry should do more than organizing seminars, conferences, meetings, workshops, road 
shows etc. to bring some tangible progress in the adoption of Indian traditional systems. The 
Committee notes the main reason behind the poor export of Indian traditiona l drugs is their 
failure to meet global norms on safety and efficacy. The Committee also notes that licensing of 
Ayurvedic drugs is a State subject, so there is a lack of uniformity in the approach of different 
States. 
(Para 4.7) 
  

59 
 
Action Taken  
Background 
3.92 The Ministry of AYUSH has undertaken several R&D Public health initiatives to harness 
the potential of AYUSH system.  Following are brief on R&D activities of Councils: 
CCRH 
3.93 Council have undertaken treatment studies besides undertaking preventive trials on 
disease conditions which are of national health importance and where the allopathic system have 
limited role or only palliative care. Homoeopathy has been used as an adjuvan t or comparative 
trials have been done showing efficacy of homoeopathy. The results of these studies are 
encouraging showing the effectiveness of homeopathy as an alternative to the conventional 
allopathic system.  
- Study on dengue undertaken at a govt. hos pital in Delhi have shown that patients 
who were on homoeopathic drugs improved earlier with an increase in platelet 
count. 
- Similarly study on AES conducted at BRD Medical College and Hospital, 
Gorakhpur have shown that there was decrease in mortality rate  in patients who 
were taking homoeopathy along with standard treatment protocol and the 
neurological sequalae were also less.  
- Study on Diabetic foot ulcer (complication of diabetes) - results have shown that 
homoeopathy as a standalone has a better outcome than conventional system.  
- Comparative trial of homoeopathic medicines vis -a-vis antibiotics in treatment of 
acute otitis media have shown results in favor of homoeopathy.  
- Many other studies wherein integrating homoeopathy with modern medicine has 
shown to reduce the mortality, morbidity.  
3.94 Further the roadmap envisaged is to develop models of integration with other systems of 
medicine for undertaking studies depicting curative action. 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS): - 
3.95 The Council has undertaken following activities to mainstream Ayurveda for 
prevention/management:  
 The Council-WHO India country office conducted an operational study to explore the 
feasibility of integrating Ayurveda with modern system of medicine in a t ertiary care 
hospital (Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi) for the management of Osteoarthritis 
(Knee).  
 Feasibility study to introduce Ayurveda in the National Reproductive and Child Health 
services at Primary Health Care (PHC) level in Himachal Pradesh.  
 Integration of AYUSH (Ayurveda) with National Programme for Prevention and 
control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS) in 3 
districts Surendra Nagar (Gujarat), Bhilwada (Rajasthan) & Gaya (Bihar). 

60 
 
3.96 Feasibility of introducing A yurveda intervention in Reproductive and Child Health 
(RCH) in PHCs of selected district of Maharashtra (effectiveness of Ayurvedic intervention for 
Ante-Natal care (Garbhini Paricharya) at Primary Health Care Level: A Multi -Centre 
Operational Study) in Gaidhchiroli, Maharashtra. 
CCRUM 
3.97 The Council is conducting research studies on pharmacopoeial  as well as new drugs on 
diseases of national importance with the objective of evaluating the efficacy and safety of these 
drugs. The outcomes obtained from these studies may act as a curative lead for the management 
of different disease.   The standardization and quality control of drugs is also carried out by the 
dedicated Drug Standardization Research Institutes/ Units of the Council. 
IC Section 
3.98 Ministry of AYUSH has taken various initiatives/steps for the prevention of COVID 19 
and to develop the suitable treatment of Covid-19 through Ayurveda and other Indian Traditional 
system of medicine. Ministry, with the consultation of experts, issued an advisory on how to 
protect yourself from COVID and how to stay healthy. In the advisory, in addition to 
maintaining hygiene like hand wash, use of mask etc. simple home remedies were also suggested 
for people. The advisory of AYUSH was translated in nine foreign languages like Russian, 
Spanish, Japanese, Arabic, German, Portuguese, French, Chinese and English a nd was spread 
across the world. The utility of traditional systems of medicines to protect people from COVID -
19 has been well experienced by many countries including UK & other European countries. The 
herbal medicine and formulations containing spices have  become popular owing to their 
immunity boosting properties resulting in multi-fold rise in their demand. 
 
3.99 Research studies in COVID 19 in AYUSH:  Under various research organizations and 
National Institutes under Ministry of AYUSH, 120 research studi es at 141 centres in the country 
are being conducted on AYUSH interventions as prophylactic interventions. It includes 42 
Prophylactic studies, 38 Interventional studies, 09 Observational studies, 22 pre -
clinical/experimental studies – 22 (including 13 AYU SH-DBT studies) etc.  Interim trends have 
shown promising outcomes in mitigation of COVID 19 and the AYUSH interventions have been 
well tolerated and no Serious Adverse Event or significant Adverse Drug Reaction reported. The 
Ministry of AYUSH has also don e an assessment of effectiveness, acceptance and usage of 
AYUSH advisories & measures in the prevention of COVID -19 through AYUSH Sanjivani 
Mobile app in 1.47 crores population. 85.1% respondents have reported that they have used some 
of the AYUSH remedy as prophylaxis / treatment of COVID 19.  
 
3.100 Ministry has also initiated to undertake clinical trials on some identified herbal 
formulations with the institutes at UK, USA, Germany, Brazil, South Africa etc. for the 
mitigation of Covid19. Details as under;  
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
United Kingdom:  
 
A.  Research proposal with Aarogyam, UK:  
 
3.101 It has been proposed to conduct a Clinical Research Study entitled ―Efficacy and Safety 
of Ayurveda Combination in patients with mild to moderate COVID -19: Community Based 
Participatory Project‖ b/w AIIA, University Warwick & Aarogyam, UK. Ministry has als o 
agreed to provide the required funds of INR 98 Lakhs approx. i.e., Aarogyam/UK side budget is 
£33k including NHS cost and University Warwick cost is £31k which all together become £64 K 
(INR 64,00,000 approx.) and AIIA‘s budget is INR 34,00,000 approx. f or conducting the 
proposed study at UK and India subject to signing of the agreement and approval/concurrence of 
IFD.  
 
3.102 Further, the MoU for conducting the said study has been finalized and Ministry obtained 
all necessary approvals for signing. The final copy of the MoU has been sent to all parties i.e., 
AIIA, New Delhi and Aarogyam & University of Warwick, UK for signing. 
 
 
B.  Research proposal with LSHTM, UK  
 
3.103 The All India Institute of Ayurveda, M/o AYUSH New Delhi with LSH&TM, UK is 
going to undertake ―Clinical trial of Ashwagandha for promoting recovery from Covid -19 in the 
UK‖ LSH&TM, UK. Ministry has agreed to provide the requ ired/proposed funds i.e., £ 
312,552.75 approx. (INR 3,12,23,725 approx. as on date) to the LSHTM for conducting the 
study at UK and INR 1,49,64,557.00 approx. to the AIIA, subject to signing of the agreement 
and approval/concurrence of IFD.  
3.104 Further, the MoU incorporating the comments of DPIIT and L & T has been sent to 
LSHTM through HCI UK for their concurrence on the minor changes as suggested by DPIIT and 
L & T. The response is awaited from UK side.  
 
3.105 USA: The All India Institute of Ayurveda, M/o AYUSH New Delhi and the Spaulding 
Rehabilitation hospital, USA are going to undertake clinical research on ―Two -arm study: 
controls (standard care) vs Guduchyadi Tablets‖ for the mitigation of Covid -19 . As per the 
budgetary requirement from USA side for implementing the study in US, i.e. $265,024 (INR 1 
Crore 94 Lac approx) has been approved by the Mo AYUSH subject to signing of the agreement 
and the approval of IFD. Ministry also approved Rs. 2.Crore for AIIA for the conducting the said 
study. The draft agreement along with study protocol is being finalized by the both sides.  
 
3.106 Germany: It has been proposed to undertake collaborative Research study entitled 
―Understanding the molecular mechanism of Guduchyadi tablets in combating COVID -19 
infection- In-vitro & In -vivo study‖ between AIIA and FIZ, Germany. Ministry has agreed to 
provide the required funds of Rs. 4.97 Crore approx. for the said study i.e., 2.42 Cr. for AIIA to 
conduct the study at India and 2.55 Cr for FIZ to conduct the study at Germany subject to 
signing of the agreement between the parties and approval/concurrence of IFD.  
 

62 
 
3.107 Further, the MoU incorporating the comments of DPIIT and L & T has been sent to FIZ, 
Germany through the Indian Miss ion at Germany for their concurrence on the minor changes as 
suggested by DPIIT and L & T. The response is awaited from FIZ side.  
 
3.108 Brazil: It has been proposed to conduct Collaborative research on Mitigation of COVID 
19 through Ayurveda between All India Institute of Ayurveda, Federal University of Sao Paulo 
(Unifesp) and Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), and Brazilian Academic Consortium 
for Integrative Health (CABSIN.) The Ministry has agreed to provide the required funds, 
amounting to R $ 650, 000, 00 (Approx. INR 93, 80,150/ -) to Brazilian Institutes and Rs. 
1,41,73,920/- to AIIA for conducting the proposed study in Brazil and in India subject to signing 
of an agreement between the Parties involved and approval/concurrence of IFD. In thi s regards 
the following MoUs are under negotiation with Brazilian institutes. 
 
a. MoU between AIIA and Federal University of Sao Paulo (UNIFESP) for 
establishment of academic collaboration: The draft received from Brazilian side 
was examined in consultation w ith DPIIT & L&T Division. The revised draft 
with comments of the Ministry was forwarded to MEA for further sharing with 
the Brazilian side on 26.02.21.  
 
b. Tripartite MOU between AIIA, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ) and 
Brazilian Academic Consortium for Integrative Health for academic 
collaboration: The revised draft MoU incorporating the comments of DPIIT and 
L&T Division has been sent to Indian  Mission at Sao Paulo for seeking the 
concurrence of Brazilian side on 11.03.21. 
 
c. Project specific MoU between AIIA, UNIFESP, UFRJ and CABSIN on 
collaborative research on ―Effect of Guduchyadi tablet (Tinospora based herbal 
formulation) in the management o f newly diagnosed Mild to Moderate COVID -
19 Patients - An Open Label Randomized Control Trial : A copy of the draft 
project agreement received from AIIA was examined in consultation with L&T 
Division, MEA and DPIIT. Since L&T Division has suggested many ch anges text 
in the draft MoU, the same was forwarded to AIIA vide letter dated 30.03.21 with 
a request to suitably modify the draft and share the same with the Ministry. 
 
3.109 Ghana: Ministry of AYUSH has nominated National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur 
for conducting clinical trials on mitigation of Covid -19 through Ayurveda in collaboration with 
Institute of Traditional and Alternative Medicine (ITAM), University of Health and Allied 
Sciences, Ghana on behalf of the Ministry. After obtaining requisi te approvals from MEA, L&T 
and DPIIT, the Non-Disclosure Agreement was signed between NIA and Institute of Traditional 
and Alternative Medicine (ITAM), University of Health and Allied Sciences, Ghana. The 
protocols for Prophylaxis and Therapeutic studies a nd the Drug Dossier were shared with Ghana 
side. Ghana side had requested for certain documents from NIA for seeking necessary approvals 
and Director NIA has been in communication with Ghana side. Ghana side/partner is in process 
of taking necessary approvals from their regulatory agencies.  
 

63 
 
3.110 South Africa: University of Kwazulu Natal (UKZN) Durban, South Africa, have 
conveyed their willingness to undertake Collaborative Research trials with Ministry of AYUSH 
for mitigation/management of COVID -19 throu gh Ayurveda on the project titled ―Effect of 
Guduchyadi tablet Tinospora based herbal formulation in the management of newly diagnosed 
Mild to Moderate COVID-19 Patients in elderly population with comorbid conditions - An Open 
Label Randomized Standard Con trol Trial‖. The proposed duration of trial will be about 3 to 4 
months. 
 
3.111 The proposal to provide funding for undertaking these trials from the funds available for 
conducting International Clinical Trial on Ayurvedic medicine for Covid -19 was approved by 
PAC. Accordingly, South Africa side has been requested to convey their convenience for a 
virtual meeting to discuss the matter further regarding conducting the clinical trial following the 
signing of the agreement between Ministry of AYUSH and UKZN, Durban, South Africa. Reply 
in this regard is awaited. 
 
CCRS 
 
3.112 CCRS believes in research and it is the only way to achieve mainstreaming of AYUSH 
systems of medicine.  Currently, 14 IMR projects (Clinical trials) are in progress. During 
COVID 19 , the Ministry of AYUSH through the interdisciplinary task force initiated good 
quality research mentored by the project monitoring unit, Ministry of AYUSH. Nation -wide 
similar approach may yield rich dividends. 
 
NIS 
 
3.113 The Ayothidoss Pandithar Hospital, attached with the Institute, has recorded more than 7 
lakh patient visits per annum. It clearly establishes the curative aspect of Siddha system of 
medicine. The Institute has been operating special OPDs for ailments like Cancer, Diabetes, 
Hypertension, Autism, etc, which are well attended. Being an educational Institute this Institute 
has got no input regarding the licensing of medicines. 
 
NAM 
 
3.114 Under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM) AYUSH public 
health programmes like Nat ional Programme for Prevention and Management of 
Musculoskeletal Disorders, AYUSH Maternal & Neo -Natal intervention (Supraja), AYUSH 
Geriatrics health care (Vayo Mitra) etc have been proposed wherein curative strength of AYUSH 
system has also been envisaged. 
 
DCC 
 
3.115 In order to improve and strengthen Quality Control system in the States/UTs a 
restructured Central Sector Scheme of 'Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta evum Uttapadan Samvardhan 
Yojana" AUGUSY) with following components are being introduced during 15th  FC of 2021-22 
to 2025 -26 (i) Strengthening and up -gradation of Ayush Pharmacies and Drug Testing 
Laboratories to achieve higher standards and for Production-Linked Incentive to the industry; (ii) 

64 
 
Pharmacovigilance of ASU&H drugs including surveillance of misleading advertisements; (iii) 
Strengthening of central and state regulatory frameworks including Technical Human Resource 
& Capacity Building programs for control of quality, safety and efficacy aspects of Ayush drugs 
(iv) Support for development of sta ndards and accreditation certification of Ayush products & 
materials in collaboration with BIS, QCI and other relevant scientific institutions and industrial 
R&D centres.  
 
3.116 Presently, there is no separate Central Drug Controller for AYUSH. A vertical  structure 
under CDSCO has been created. Nine regulatory posts of 04 Drug Inspectors, 04 Assistant Drug 
Controllers and 01 Deputy Drug Controller are created and Recruitment Rules are notified and 
advertisements for filling these posts is also being publis hed. These posts are meant for 
regulation of Ayurvedic, Sidclha, Unani and Homoeopathy drugs at central level and will 
manage the AYUSH Vertical in CDSCO in terms of implementation of the provisions of Drugs 
& Cosmetics Act, 1940 pertaining to ASU&H drugs and associated matters.  
 
3.117 e-aushadhi portal has been launched by Ministry of AYUSH since February, 2019 for 
encouraging online system of License applications and product approval. The portal is now open 
and functional. 33 State Licensing Authorities and 140 State Drug Inspectors from 29 States 
have already registered themselves on the portal. The existing licensed manufacturers are being 
registered by State Licensing Authorities on the portal and soon new application process will 
also be activated for  use. The portal is intended to bring in uniformity and transparency in 
licensing of AYUSH drugs. 
 
3.118 According to NMPB Marketing report, three -fold increase in the price of herbal raw 
materials in a span of eight months.  The Export of spices shown two -fold increase during 
previous year even in the crises period.  The export of medicinal plants has also gone up.  
Ashwagandha – top 5 selling herbs.  
 
Further Recommendation 
3.119 The Committee takes into account the significant R&D and public health initiatives 
undertaken by various C ouncils of AYUSH to harness the potential of AYUSH systems.  
The Committee appreciates that c ollaborative research studies with different countries 
would help in establishing the system as the credible and scientific system of medicine 
which may emerge as a curative alternative to modern medicines.   The Committee, 
however, is disappointed to note that the Ministry has not given any information about 
reasons for poor export of ASU&H drugs. The Commit tee's concerns about ASU drugs 
failing to meet global norms on safety and efficacy have not been addresse d.  The 
Committee is also surprised that the Ministry has not paid attention to the point 
highlighted by it regarding lack of uniformity in the approac h of different States with 
respect to ASU Drugs as Health is a State subject.  The Committee emphasise s that given 
the increasing popularity of AYUSH systems especially during pandemic Covid -19, it is 
high time to showcase the effectiveness of ASU&H drugs in domestic market as well as 
global arena . The Committee recommends the Ministry to have a standard licensing 
process based on uniform parameters across all the States so that the drug formulations do 
not vary in different States and also conform to global norms of safety and efficacy. This 

65 
 
would go a long way in establishing Indian System of Medicine as an alternative system  of 
medicine.  
 
Recommendation 
3.120 The Committee believes that misleading and unfounded advertisements particularly by 
ASU drug makers will force people to gradually desist from consuming such ASU formulations. 
The Committee recommends that provisions of both the Drugs & Cosmetics Act Rules & Magical 
Remedies Act should be made more stringent to tackle the problem of misleading and unfounded 
advertisements. The Committee desires the Ministry to revisit both the period of imprisonment 
and the fine amount under these rules to regulate and cont rol the violation of the provisions of 
the said Acts. The licensing authorities and drug controllers at the State level must also take 
prompt actions against any such misconduct.  
(Para 4.11) 
Action Taken  
 
DCC 
 
3.121 Ministry of AYUSH has implemented the Central Sector Scheme of Pharmacovigilance 
Program of ASU & H drug since December 2017. Through this scheme a three tier network 
consisting of National Pharmacovigilance Co -ordination Centre (NPvCC), five Intermediary 
Pharmacovigilance Centres (lPvCs) and seventy four Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centres 
(PPvCs) has been established for safety monitoring of Ayush drugs, reporting of adverse drug 
events and surveillance & reporting of misleading advertisements.   Functionality of the 
pharmacovigilance centres is reviewed periodically. As a result of effective implementation of 
the scheme, pharmacovigilance centres have reported 9369 misleading advertisements, 185 
COVID -19 related claims and 543 cases of suspected adverse drug reactions of AYUSH drugs. 
 
Further Recommendation 
3.122 The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry has not paid attention to the 
area of concern regarding lack of prompt action in response to misleading and unfounded 
advertisements about AYUSH drugs/products. The Committee had recommended for 
making the provisions of both Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Magical Remedies Act stricter 
so as to dissuade drugs manufacturers from giving misleading adver tisement about  
AYUSH products.  The Committee, in this connection, reiterates that the licensing 
authorities and State Drug Controllers should have adequate powers to take prompt and 
stern action against such misconduct under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Magical 
Remedies Act. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to come up with 
appropriate amendments in the concerned legislations accordingly.  
 
 

66 
 
Recommendation 
3.123 The Committee observes that the trend of dis eases as well as severity of illnesses has 
undergone a substantial change in the modern age. Advancement in modern science has brought 
out a revolution in the way one identifies, diagnoses and treats illnesses now -a-days. The 
Committee believes that AYUSH with its traditional/classic knowledge has immense potential in 
devising a holistic approach against the ever changing challenges in the health sector and 
ensuring good health of the masses. However, AYUSH has remained neglected and modern 
system of medicine, with a scientific evidence base, has overshadowed AYUSH's popularity and 
growth. Nevertheless, the Committee observes that with the formation of a separate Ministry for 
AYUSH, various efforts have been made for the revival of AYUSH over the years. The Committee 
appreciates the Schemes and Programmes implemented by the Ministry of AYUSH for 
mainstreaming of AYUSH services and acknowledges its satisfactory trend of budgetary 
utilization. The Committee also believes that it is high time to make AYUSH more competitive 
and expand its outreach across States as well as in the international market. The Committee 
believes that for strengthening AYUSH research, education institutes, its industry and the quality 
of AYUSH healthcare, a substantial enhancement in budgetary allocation is the need of the hour. 
AYUSH must also collaborate and coordinate with other scientific disciplines as well as the 
modern system of medicine. Integration of AYUSH with modern advances will enhance its 
reliability and scientifically validate the ancient AYUSH traditions. 
(Para 4.30) 
Action Taken 
 
IC Section 
 
3.124 With increasing awareness about health and fitness and changing lifestyle, the demand 
for AYUSH Systems especially Ayurveda has increased tremendously at international level. In 
current pandemic of COVID -19, the Ministry of AYUSH has showed the path to com bat with 
COVID by improving general immunity through Ayurveda, Yoga and other Indian Traditional 
System of Medicine. The advisory of AYUSH was translated in nine foreign languages like 
Russian, Spanish, Japanese, Arabic, German, Portuguese, French, Chinese  and English and was 
spread across the world.  
 
Initiatives taken by the Ministry:  
 
 Ministry of AYUSH supports industries to export their products.  
 We have established inter ministerial collaboration with ministry of Commerce, ministry 
of MSME, Ministry of External Affairs, Startup India etc. to increase trade in AYUSH. 
AYUSH products are exported in 100 plus countries. The Ministry is exploring the 
possibility of making India the manufacturing hub in nutraceuticals and supplement in 
collaboration with FS SAI. As India is the world leader in vaccines and generic 
medicines, we look forward to taking the AYUSH manufacturing market to same level. 
 There is major thrust on export of services and AYUSH based medical value tourism. 
 In collaboration with Service Ex port Promotion Council, B2B meetings are organized to 
engage foreign clients with Indian industries. 

67 
 
  As of now, Ministry of AYUSH has signed 25 Country to Country MoUs for 
Cooperation in field of Traditional Medicine.  
 24 MoUs with international institutes for undertaking Collaborative Research / Academic 
collaboration and 13 MoUs for setting up AYUSH Academic Chairs have been signed 
with foreign Universities. 
  The Ministry of AYUSH under its Fellowship Scheme offers 104 scholarships to the 
eligible foreign nationals from 99 countries for undertaking UG, PG and Ph. D courses in 
premier institutes in India. 
  33 AYUSH Information Cell have been set up in 31 countries to disseminate authentic 
information about AYUSH systems of Medicine. 
 In past few years Ayurv eda is recognized in many countries across the globe in various 
countries such as Malaysia, Switzerland, Cuba, UAE, etc. and is in process of getting 
recognition in Australia, Brazil, Argentina etc. 
 Ministry of AYUSH has collaborated with WHO  by signing various agreements. One of 
the major achievements is initiating the process for introducing Ayurveda in international 
classification of Diseases. 
 Various other multilateral forums like G 20, Mecong Ganga Cooperation, BIMSTEC, 
BRICS etc. are being effectively utilized to get global recognition to Ayurveda and other 
AYUSH systems. 
  Every year, Ministry of AYUSH has been providing technical support to Indian Missions 
abroad for celebration of 21st June as International day of Yoga across the globe.  
 BIMSTEC Ayurveda and Traditional Medicine University (BATMU) is proposed to be 
established with the aim of promoting high quality of Ayurveda education in Member 
States.  
 We are also in dialogue with other countries like Hungary, Mauritius etc. to establ ish 
International Ayurveda institutes in different countries.  
 Scheme for ―Voluntary Certification of Yoga Professionals‖: Ministry of AYUSH had 
launched the Scheme for ―Voluntary Certification of Yoga Professionals‖ developed by 
Quality Council of India ( QCI), on 22nd June, 2015 during the 1 st International 
Conference on Yoga. The Scheme aims to certify the competence level of Yoga 
professionals through Certification Process. 
  Ministry of AYUSH has been making effort to include Sowa - Rigpa in UNESCO 
Intangible Cultural Heritage. 
  Ministry of AYUSH has been collaborating with Study in India (SII) program of 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD). Many Ayurveda/ Yoga institutes 
such International Centre for Ayurvedic studies (ICAS), Gujarat; Kaivalyadh ama Yoga 
Institute & Research Center, Lonavala; Dev Sanskrit Vishwavidyalaa, Haridwar, etc. 
have been offering courses under SII program. All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) has 
been requested to develop short term courses of Ayurveda to offer these cou rses to 
foreign nationals under SII program. 
 Ministry of AYUSH is in regular dialogue with IRDA. As an outcome more and more 
Insurance companies are providing Insurance coverage to Ayurveda, Unani, etc. 
 Recently, our Government has provided Rs. 40 billion packages to AYUSH Ministry to 
support farmers for cultivation of medicinal plants, strengthen supply chain of quality 
herbal raw material that would result in global trade of Ayurveda medicines. 

68 
 
  To boost export of AYUSH products, incentive are provided to  AYUSH drug 
manufacturers for Market Authorization/ registration of AYUSH products with USFDA/ 
EMEA/ UK-MHRA/ NHPD (Canada)/ TGA and other international regulatory agencies, 
etc. abroad for the purpose of export. So far more than 50 products (Unani and Ayurveda) 
have been registered in 08 countries namely Kenya, USA, Russia, Latvia, Canada, Oman, 
Tajikistan and Sri Lanka. 
 In view of the huge potential for growth and Export of AYUSH products and services 
across the globe, the Ministry of AYUSH in cooperation  with Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry has proposed to set up an Export Promotion Council (AEPC) for medicines and 
products of Ayurveda, Homoeopathic, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa and Unani systems and 
services of the AYUSH systems. The Federation of Indian Chamber s of Commerce & 
Industry (FICCI) has been given the responsibility as a Nodal agency for Ministry of 
AYUSH to coordinate with other Industry bodies and companies to develop a corpus for 
formation of AEPC as per the norms/ guidelines of the Ministry of Commerce. 
  The export of Ayurvedic products takes place under the Indian Trade Clarification based 
on Harmonized System of Coding (ITCHS) through two HS codes -30039011 for 
medicants and 30049011 for medicaments. The export of products of Unani, Siddha and 
Homoeopathic systems takes place through HS codes - 30039012, 30039013, and 
30039014 (medicants) and 30049012, 30049013, and 30049014 (medicaments) 
respectively. Most of the products of Ayurveda, Homoeopathic, Siddha, Sowa Rigpa and 
Unani systems, Herbal Produ cts and Medicinal Plant products are not identified under 
specific HS Codes (International Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding 
System). 
 A Forum on Indian Traditional Medicine (FITM) in Research Information System for 
Developing Countries (RIS) has been established as a common platform for all 
stakeholders to contribute to policy making in the area and to develop a proactive 
strategy. In view of expansion of coverage of HS for products and medicinal plants and to 
come up with uniform classification system for AYUSH and Herbal products, Ministry of 
AYUSH has set up Task Force on expanding trade classification, quality control and 
standardization of Indian Systems of Medicine (ISM) and Herbal Products. As per the 
recommendation of Task Force, Ministry o f AYUSH has requested Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes & Customs, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
new HS lines for ISM Products, Herbal Products and Medical Plants products. 
 
NIH 
 
3.125 NIH is in collaborated with National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, 
Kolkata. NIH has collaboration with AIIMS, Raipur.  Recently NIH has worked with ESI 
Chennai for the research project namely ―An evaluation on effectiveness of Homoeopathic 
Intervention as an Add -On Therapy in  the Management of Covid -19 infection – An Open 
Labelled Prospective Single Arm Observational ClinicalTrials. 
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.126 The Committee appreciates the various initiatives of the Ministry of AYUSH to 
promote and develop Indian system of Medicine.  Given the vast potential of Indian System 
of Medicine in contemporary times and especially during pandemic Covid -19, the 
Committee believes that Indian System of Medicine has huge capacity to position itself as 
an effective and economic al system of medicine as an  alternative to modern system of 
medicine. This will help  reduce out of pocket expenditure on health .  The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to identify the 'Key Concern Areas'  especially with regard to 
quality of education and research, drugs and overall healthcare delivery systems in 
AYUSH institutions. The Committee recognizes the importance of collaborative researches 
as well as clinical trials for better research outcomes. Since Ayurveda is the valued heritage 
of the glorious past of our country, it needs proper propagation at the grass-root and global 
level. The Committee, in this regard,  recommends the Ministry to lay special focus on the 
regulation and control over safety and efficacy of Ayurveda drugs and products to enable 
the market of the  AYUSH products grow internationally and stand to any scientific 
scrutiny.  Keeping in view the vast arena of  AYUSH systems, the Committee recommends 
the Ministry to chalk out specific course of action to combat the challenges ahead for 
strengthening the infrastructure, education and practice of AYUSH systems and expand 
the reach of these systems across the country and abroad.  
  

70 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation 
4.1 The Committee is anguished to note that the proposal for creation of 24 posts is yet not 
approved. The Committee, time and again, has been laying emphasis on having adequate 
manpower for the Board so that it could effectively implement the mandate assigned  to it. This 
laid back approach of the Ministry is not in sync with its objective mission of giving impetus to 
the cultivation, conservation and documentation of medicinal plants. The Committee is of the 
view that in the absence of adequate manpower the dr eam of achieving the objective cannot be 
realized and it, therefore, recommends the Ministry to accord priority to the human resource 
requirement of the Board as it is the nodal agency for medicinal plants in the country.  
(Para 3.44) 
Action Taken  
 
NMPB 
 
4.2 The proposal for creation of 24 posts has already been sent to Staff Inspection Unit, 
Department of Expenditure, M/o Finance through Internal Finance Division after obtaining 
approval of the competent authority. 
4.3 However, for the smooth functioning of NMPB, suitable officers from the Research 
Councils/Institute of Ministry are posted on loan basis. 
Recommendation 
4.4 The Committee, in its 115th Report on NCISM Bill, had observed that the number of 
registered Naturopathy practitioners as on 1.1.2018 a s per Ministry of AYUSH'S Report "Ayush 
in India" was 2485. The 115th Report on NCISM Bill made no mention of Yoga Practitioners. 
The Committee, therefore, was of the view that bringing a new Bill for regulating Yoga and 
Naturopathy where practitioners are  yet to be identified was unwarranted. The Committee had 
therefore recommended for inclusion of Yoga and Naturopathy in the NCISM Bill instead. 
However, the NCISM Bill was passed and Yoga and Naturopathy was not included in the Bill. 
The Committee accordingly, feels that there is an urgent need to create an overarching body for 
regulation of Yoga and Naturopathy in the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the Ministry to expedite the formulation of legislation for regulation of Yoga and 
Naturopathy.  
(Para 3.92) 
Action Taken 
EP (IM-2) 
4.5 Bill in this regard is under consideration. 

71 
 
Recommendation 
4.6 The Committee believes that all progressive legislation undertaken by the Government 
aims at focusing integrated Health and Well -being and that is the guiding philosophy of the 
Budget 2021 -22. The Committee has already supported the adoption of an inclusiv e and 
integrated health care policy. The Committee believes that AYUSH and its holistic approach to 
promoting preventive and holistic healthcare must also be strengthened. The Committee, in this 
regard, again impresses upon the Government to expedite the p rocess of piloting the Yoga and 
the Naturopathy Bill, to give further impetus to the integrated and holistic approach to the 
Health and Well-being.  
(Para 4.29) 
Action Taken  
EP (IM-2) 
4.7 Bill in this regard is under consideration 
  

72 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
KEY  INITIATIVES 
 The Committee is pleased to note Ministry's plan to introduce a restructured 
Central Sector Scheme of “Ayush Oushadhi Gunvattaevum Uttapadan Samvardhan 
Yojana” (AOGUSY) during 15 th Finance Commission 2021-22 to 2025-26 with components 
like strengthening and upgradation of Ayush Pharmaceuticals and Drug Testing 
laboratories, pharmacovigilance of ASU&H drugs etc.  The Committee, however, would 
like the Ministry to keep a close track o f the challenges and Key Areas of Concern in 
respect of the implementation of AOGUSY component.  The Committee also recommends 
the Ministry to ensure efficient macro and micro planning and execution of the components 
of the scheme so as to strengthen the A YUSH system of medicine. The Committee observes 
that the role of the Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Medicine for maintaining 
standards of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani & Homeopathy drugs need to be strictly monitored 
for assured standardization of ASU&H drugs .  The Committee, in this connection, 
recommends that States/UTs must be motivated and incentivized to ensure standardization 
of AYUSH education and quality healthcare delivery system in general and on quality 
control of ASU&H drugs in particular.  
(Para 3.14)  
 The Committee appreciates the role of All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) in 
Covid-19 mitigation management. The Committee desires that AIIA needs to popularize 
AYURAKSHA project amongst common masses for attracting more and more people 
towards A yush system. The Committee believes that the clinical studies of CCRAS, 
intending to scientifically validate the efficacy and safety of classical Ayurvedic 
formulations to generate tangible evidence would not only yield in scientifically validated 
new drug  development but would also instill public faith in quality assured Ayurvedic 
treatment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that CCRAS should adopt a targeted 
approach and chalk out an action plan to achieve the same.  
(Para 3.15)  
 The Committee is of t he opinion that merely by writing to States Governments to 
check the practice of AYUSH System by quacks, the Ministry of AYUSH should not 
absolve itself of its responsibility to stop this menace as it not only brings disrepute to the 
AYUSH system of medici ne but also discourages people to have trust in this system. The 
Ministry, therefore, must think of devising certain code under which stern legal action 
could be taken against the quacks. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of 
Health & Family W elfare must examine and consider the regulatory amendments under 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1947 as suggested by the Ministry of AYUSH without delay to 
improve the quality, efficacy and safety of ASU drugs. The Ministry of AYUSH must take 
up this matter with  the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare on priority basis and inform 
the Committee on the action taken on the matter. 
(Para 3.17)  
 

73 
 
MACRO ANALYSIS OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 The Committee takes note of the status of construction of the projects of National 
Institutes and finds that except for National Institute of Homoeopathy, Phase -II, Kolkata, 
all the Institutes are lagging behind with respect to their physical and financial progress. 
The Committee understands that given the prevailing pandemic Covid -19 si tuation, it is 
but natural that the deadline for physical completion of construction work at all Institutes 
would certainly not be met.  The Committee, however, recommends that the Ministry must 
make all out efforts to complete the ongoing projects at the earliest so that all the institutes 
could be made operational for the benefit of the people. 
(Para 3.22)  
 
 The Committee is disappointed to note that as of now, 20 -23 States/UT 
Governments have submitted their State Annual Action Plans ( SAAP), 2 States/UT  
Governments have submitted UCs through the NAM web portal and the remaining 
States/UTs are under process.  The Committee apprehends that the NAM web portal is not 
popular amongst States/UTs for prompt submission of UCs despite imparting necessary 
training to officials of States/UTs on submission of SAAP, physical and financial report, 
UCs, etc. The Committee is surprised that the States which have submitted their SAAP 
through NAM web portal also have not submitted UCs through the same portal.  The 
Committee believes that such reluctance reeks of evasion of responsibility and 
accountability of funds given.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to 
persuade all States/UTs to submit not only their SAAP but also pending UCs through the 
web portal. 
(Para 3.25)  
 
SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY 
  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of AYUSH in extending the 
co-location of AYUSH facilities at PHCs, CHCs and District Hospitals and thus providing 
choice to the patients for different systems of medicines under single window. The 
Committee, however, finds such facilities lacking in Bihar, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Daman & Diu and Delhi, etc. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that 
States/UTs need to be continuously persuaded for sending  proposals through their SAAPS 
for setting up co -location of AYUSH facilities under NHM.  The measures so undertaken 
would not only ensure preferred choice to the patients for different system of medicine 
under single system but also facilitate  mainstreaming of AYUSH services at the grass root 
level.  The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare would share 
requisite responsibilities in engagement of AYUSH doctors/paramedical staff and their 
training for enhancing the quality of human resource of each AYUSH centre. 
(Para 3.28)  
 
 The Committee expresses its concern that only 835 AYUSH HWCs against the 
target of 4436 HWCs could be made functional in 12 States which indicates the inadequacy 

74 
 
of steps taken by the Ministry.  The Committee i s utterly disappointed to note such tardy 
progress in operationalisation of HWCs. The Committee underlines the need of a 
streamlined procedure to ensure the completion of setting up of AYUSH HWCs within a 
specified time with adequate manpower and infrastru cture and provision of operational 
cost. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to engage the remaining States/UTs 
which have not yet started the process of making AYUSH HWCs functional so that 
equitable distribution of AYUSH HWCs, keeping in view the geographical extent and 
population of States/UTs, is assured.    
(Para 3.31)  
 The Committee is not convinced with the response and justification given by the 
Ministry on the mismatch between the target of setting up of AYUSH HWCs and actual 
operationalisation during a stipulated time frame.  The Committee, in this connection, 
reiterates its recommendation made in para 3.16 that a demarcation in physical targets 
with respect to approval of HWCs and targets for its operationalisation needs to be clearly 
spelt out.  The Committee recommends that a realistic timeline must be determined to 
make HWCs functional with requisite infrastructure and human resource. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should work in tandem with States/UTs 
Governments on the operationalisation of all the approved HWCs. The Committee believes 
that proper monitoring and field visits will be of immense help in expediting the 
operationalisation process of HWCs.  
(Para 3.34)  
 The Committee is disappointed that the  Ministry has not shared any information 
about its effort undertaken to tap the full potential of the North East Regions with respect 
to the rich biodiversity in the NER.  The Committee firmly believes that NER with its rich 
bio-diversity and region specif ic plants of medicinal values must be focused upon for 
exploration, collection, documentation for sustainable and optimal utilization of medicinal 
plants.  The Committee, accordingly, reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry must 
focus on North East  Regions and also liaise with Ministry of Environment and Forests for 
conservation and maintenance of potential utilization of hubs and medicinal plants. 
(Para 3.39)  
   The Committee acknowledges the efforts put in by the Ministry for encouraging 
farmers to cultivate medicinal plants. However, the Ministry has  not been able to take this 
scheme to the length and breadth of the country as a result of which majority of farmers 
are deprived of its benefits.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates is recommendat ion to 
make the presence of this scheme felt throughout the country in a time bound manner.  
(Para 3.42)  
The Committee takes into account that although it is mandatory for all Ayurvedic 
medicine manufacturers to comply with the standards prescribed under Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopeia of India (API) which includes Pharmacopeial standards for heavy metals 
content, microbiological limits, aflatoxines, etc., it is, however, skeptical about the 
adherence to these prescribed standards in the absence of proper monitorin g and 
supervision.  The Committee, time and again, has been emphasizing upon quality control of 
ASU&H drugs with the purpose of popularizing its domestic use and global acceptance.  

75 
 
The Committee hopes that all components of the new scheme outlined for the  duration of 
15th Finance Commission would be implemented effectively to strengthen the whole regime 
of standardization, scientific validation, Pharmacovigilance, etc.  The Committee reiterates 
its recommendation regarding increasing the credibility of AYU SH system to meet 
scientific global scrutiny and scientific validation of new Ayush drugs development 
including pre-clinical and clinical trials to showcase its evidence based products.     
(Para 3.44)  
 The Committee is constrained to observe that the rec ruitment process for filling up 
of 09 posts regulatory posts for creation of a vertical structure in CDSCO is progressing at 
a snail's pace.  The Committee, in this connection, strongly recommends that the creation 
of vertical structure for AYUSH under CDS CO should be expedited and the recruitment 
process be completed at the earliest.   
(Para 3.47)  
  The Committee notes that W.H.O Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) has been 
given to 21 Ayurvedic  Drug manufacturers to export their products as per standards and 
other requirements of importing countries. The Committee expects the Ministry to monitor 
whether these 21 manufacturers have in house quality control section and drug testing 
laboratory as p er the schedule 'T' of prescribed Good Manufacturing Practices. The 
Committee would like to be apprised whether any complaints with respect to sub -standard 
or inferior products has/have been received against existing licensed manufacturers in the 
last two years and the action taken against the manufacturers violating the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945. The Committee, at the same time, recommends the Ministry to 
effectively operationalise the E -Aushadhi portal by activating new application process for 
online registration and license application in order to achieve the set objectives of the 
portal.  
(Para 3.51)  
  The Committee observes that during 2021 -22, an amount to the tune of Rs. 4.10 
crore has been allotted to further strengthen the Pharmacovigilance network and reporting 
mechanism by establishing more peripheral Pharmacovigilance centers i.e. upto 100 by 
ensuring adequate manpower for Pharmacovigilance Centres across the country. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to make an assessment of the operat ional cost of each 
Pharmacovigilance Centre along with the number of workforce required to run it smoothly 
and accordingly project its fund requirement for the scheme.  The Committee recommends 
the Ministry to comply with the findings and observations of t he Comprehensive Impact 
Assessment of the Pharmacovigilance Scheme for its effective execution and actual 
achievement of set objectives on the ground level.  
(Para 3.54)  
 The Committee notes that the various Councils of AYUSH and their institutes are in 
the process of obtaining their NABH accreditation.  The Committee, however, reiterates 
that a timeframe for completing NABH accreditation must be fixed by the Ministry and 
desired the Ministry to keep a close watch to ensure the compliance of NABH standards  by 
those who have been accredited. 
(Para 3.79)  

76 
 
  The Committee is well aware of the grant -in-aid that is given under National 
AYUSH Mission under the component of Quality Control of ASU&H Drugs to State 
ASU&H licensing Authorities/Drug Controllers for technical manpower. The Committee 
wonders that the Ministry is silent on the recommendation of the Committee relating to 
creation of a specialized body for AYUSH Drug Control with requisite expertise at the 
State level on lines of the vertical structure for AYUSH under CDSCO. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to reconsider its recommendation and also explore the 
feasibility of setting up of a specialized body especially for AYUSH Drugs Control at the 
State Level.  
(Para 3.82)  
  The Committee expresses its pleasure that various research institutes are 
undertaking clinical trials for making their research scientific and evidence based.  Such 
clinical trials help to reach a firm conclusion that a par ticular drug is both safe and 
effective.  The Committee is of the considered view that the Indian system of Medicine 
would get a big boost if quality and evidence based scientific research is carried out.  The 
Committee, in this connection, recommends the Ministry to develop a robust Clinical Trial 
Management System (CTMS) in AYUSH systems that would enable researchers to seek 
better ways to utilize each other research outcomes and thus create a platform for sharing 
the database and the experience gained with each other for better R&D outcome.  
(Para 3.90)  
MAINSTREAMING OF AYUSH SYSTEM 
  The Committee takes into account the significant R&D and public health initiatives 
undertaken by various Councils of AYUSH to harness the potential of AYUSH systems.  
The C ommittee appreciates that collaborative research studies with different countries 
would help in establishing the system as the credible and scientific system of medicine 
which may emerge as a curative alternative to modern medicines.  The Committee, 
however, is disappointed to note that the Ministry has not given any information about 
reasons for poor export of ASU&H drugs. The Committee's concerns about ASU drugs 
failing to meet global norms on safety and efficacy have not been addressed.  The 
Committee is  also surprised that the Ministry has not paid attention to the point 
highlighted by it regarding lack of uniformity in the approach of different States with 
respect to ASU Drugs as Health is a State subject.  The Committee emphasises that given 
the increa sing popularity of AYUSH systems especially during pandemic Covid -19, it is 
high time to showcase the effectiveness of ASU&H drugs in domestic market as well as 
global arena. The Committee recommends the Ministry to have a standard licensing 
process based on uniform parameters across all the States so that the drug formulations do 
not vary in different States and also conform to global norms of safety and efficacy. This 
would go a long way in establishing Indian System of Medicine as an alternative system o f 
medicine.  
(Para 3.119)  
  The Committee is constrained to note that the Ministry has not paid attention to the 
area of concern regarding lack of prompt action in response to misleading and unfounded 
advertisements about AYUSH drugs/products. The Committ ee had recommended for 

77 
 
making the provisions of both Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Magical Remedies Act stricter 
so as to dissuade drugs manufacturers from giving misleading advertisement about 
AYUSH products.  The Committee, in this connection, reiterates t hat the licensing 
authorities and State Drug Controllers should have adequate powers to take prompt and 
stern action against such misconduct under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Magical 
Remedies Act. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to come u p with 
appropriate amendments in the concerned legislations accordingly.  
(Para 3.122)  
 The Committee appreciates the various initiatives of the Ministry of AYUSH to 
promote and develop Indian system of Medicine.  Given the vast potential of Indian System 
of Medicine in contemporary times and especially during pandemic Covid -19, the 
Committee believes that Indian System of Medicine has huge capacity to position itself as 
an effective and economical system of medicine as an alternative to modern system of 
medicine. This will help reduce out of pocket expenditure on health.  The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to identify the 'Key Concern Areas' especially with regard to 
quality of education and research, drugs and overall healthcare delivery systems in 
AYUSH institutions. The Committee recognizes the importance of collaborative researches 
as well as clinical trials for better research outcomes. Since Ayurveda is the valued heritage 
of the glorious past of our country, it needs proper propagation at the grass-root and global 
level. The Committee, in this regard, recommends the Ministry to lay sp ecial focus on the 
regulation and control over safety and efficacy of Ayurveda drugs and products to enable 
the market of the AYUSH products grow internationally and stand to any scientific 
scrutiny.  Keeping in view the vast arena of AYUSH systems, the Co mmittee recommends 
the Ministry to chalk out specific course of action to combat the challenges ahead for 
strengthening the infrastructure, education and practice of AYUSH systems and expand 
the reach of these systems across the country and abroad.  
(Para 3.126)  
 
  

78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  

79 
 
II 
 
SECOND MEETING 
  
           The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 1 st December, 2021 in Committee 
Room-A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav             -   Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.      Shri AK. Antony 
3.      Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4.      Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5.      Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6.      Dr. Kanimozhi NVN Somu 
7.      Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
8.      Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
9.      Shrimati Mangal Suresh Angadi 
10.      Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy 
11.      Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
12.      Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
13.      Dr. Sanghmitra Maurya 
14.      Shri Arjunlal Meena 
15.      Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
16.      Shri K. Navaskani 
17.      Adv. Adoor Prakash 
18.      Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
19.      Dr. DNV Senthilkumar. S 
20.      Shri Anurag Sharma 
21.      Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
22.      Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal                 Joint Secretary  
2. Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                    Under Secretary 
 

80 
 
WITNESSES 
Department of Health and Family Welfare  
1. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Secretary (Health) 
2. Shri Vikas Sheel, Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. Mandeep K. Bhandari, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. V.G. Somani, DCG(I), CDSCO 
5. Shri Rajiv Wadhawan, Director 
6. Shri Pardeep Dahiya, Drugs Inspector, CDSCO 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
informed them that at first the Committee would consider and adopt the draft (i) *** (ii) 131 st 
Report on Action T aken by Government on the  Recommendations/Observations contained in 
128th Report on  Demands for Grants (2021 -22) (Demand No.4) of the  Ministry AYUSH and  
(iii) ***.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the draft ***, 131 st and *** reports 
of the Committee.  He invited views/suggestions/modifications, if  any, from the Members in the 
draft reports. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted all three reports and decided to 
present them in the ongoing session of the Parliament. The Committee also authorized the 
Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual errors in the ***, 131 st and *** Reports, if 
necessary. 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Friday, the 3 rd December, 2021. The 
Committee authorized its Chairman Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav, MP, Rajya Sabha and in his 
absence Smt. Sampatiya Uikey, MP, Rajya Sabha and in the absence of both members, Dr. 
Kanimozhi NVM Somu t o present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized 
Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe MP, Lok Sabha and in his absence, Dr. Rajdeep Roy MP, Lok Sabha 
to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
5. *** 
6. *** 
7. ***  
8. *** 
9. *** 
10. *** 
11. *** 
12. *** 
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
14. The Committee then adjourned at 4:17 p.m.  
* Relates to other matter 

81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
  

82 
 
Annexure-I 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Question Reply 
i. Advance planning to 
be made for 
completion of 
various formalities 
so that the process of 
sanctioning and 
release of funds for 
the various projects 
be started in the 
beginning of the next 
financial year. 
NAM Under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH Mission (NAM) Grant - in-
aid is being provide d to State/UT Governments for development and promotion of 
AYUSH systems as per their proposed State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). Ministry 
has taken the following Steps for betterment and improvement of Scheme:  
(i) Ministry of AYUSH has also made advance planning for grant -in-aid release and 
PFMS portal to be used for Sanctioning, monitoring and releasing of Grant which 
will be released in current financial year. 
 
COE Noted for compliance. The PAC and PSC meetings would be organized periodically 
preferably every quarter. 
PHI Noted for compliance. The PAC and PSC meetings would be organized periodically 
preferably every quarter. 
IEC An annual Action plan is being formulated for the effective implementation of the 
programme, including sanction  and release of funds.   However, keeping in view that 
most of the activities under the IEC scheme is physical, the overall planning and 
implementation will be adversely affected due to the COVID-19 restrictions. 
IC In the present situation of Covid -19, Estimation of 2021 -22 for OUTPUT 
OUTCOME FRAMEWORK for PROMOTION OF INTERNATIONAL 
COOPERATION SCHEME, MINISTRY OF AYUSH; 
 
Indicators Targets 2021-22 
1.1. Number of experts deputed 20 
1.2. Number of research papers published 8 
1.3. Number of trade fairs organized 15 
1.4. Number of International Conferences 
Organized 
20 
1.5. Number of AYUSH Chairs held 5 
1.6. Number of Information Cells formed in 
abroad 
2 
1.7. Number of students allotted with 
international fellowships 
80 
1.8. Number of international bilateral 
agreements finalized 
19 
 
CME Meetings of PAC/PSC will be held in first quarter of FY for timely sanctioning and 
release of funds. 
 
EMR Meeting of PAC/PSC in each quarter of FY. 
 
Pharmacovigilance 26 more Pharmacovigilance Centres shall be established during the FY 2021-22. 
Requisite PAC/PSC meetings will be called on the basis of demand from the grantee 
Institution i.e. AIIA to release appropriate grant in time. 
 
CDSCO Central Sector Scheme for Drug Controller of ASU&H Drugs yet to be started, thus, 
process of sanction/ release of funds etc. be started accordingly. However, under 
CDSCO, Recruitment Rules for 09 regulatory posts i.e. 01 -Drug Inspectors, 04 -
Assistant Drug Controllers and 01 -Deputy Drug Controller have been notif ied on 
18/02/2021. Efforts are being made to fill up these regulatory posts through UPSC.  
 

83 
 
Champion Proposals have been invited for the establishment of AYUSH Super specialty 
Hospitals and Day care centres  and skill Development in AYUSH Sector. These 
proposals are under process for approvalby the Project Appraisal and Project Sanction 
Committee. 
1.) Establishment of NGO portal for smooth functioning of the Champion Service 
Sector Scheme is under process. 
2.) For Champion service sector scheme there is monitoring committee for further 
analyses and after that funds will be released. 
3.) By the development of NGO portal for Champion Service Sector Scheme the 
formalities and sanction of the funds will be smooth.  And every component of the 
champion service sector need very less time for the process of the approval for PAC 
and release of funds by the CPMU. 
 
ii. More workshops and 
review meetings to 
be organized for 
addressing the issues 
in the 
implementation of 
the schemes. 
NAM For better implementation of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National AYUSH 
Mission (NAM) and utilization of their grants, workshops and review meetings has 
also been organized time to time and addressing the issues in the implementation  of 
the schemes. 
COE Noted for compliance 
PHI Noted for compliance 
IEC The advice has been noted. 
IC  -Same as above- 
CME Noted for compliance 
EMR Noted for compliance 
Pharmacovigilance 06-workshops/capacity building program will organized under Pharmacovigilance 
Scheme throughout the year and about 1000 Doctors, State Licensing Authorities, 
Inspectors will be trained. 
CDSCO 04- workshops/training program to be conducted in the States on ASU&H drugs 
regulatory and quality control aspects. 
Champion (i). Periodic review to address the implementation issues will be carried out.  
(ii) As per the approved scheme guidelines for the Champion Services Sector Scheme 
for Medical value Travel there is a mechanism for monitoring which consistofregular 
field visits. 
 
iii. More field visits to 
be organized for 
onsite appraisal of 
progress of 
implementation of 
the schemes. 
NAM For monitoring of AYUSH HWCs and NAM activities, Ministry has constituted two 
teams for conducting field visits to review the physical progress in the States/UTs. 
Accordingly, these teams have visited in the field time  to time and submitted the 
actual progress report of implementation in the fields. 
 
COE Noted for compliance 
PHI Noted for compliance 
IEC The IEC scheme includes provisions for onsite monitoring of the events held.   The 
institutes under Research Councils are also being engaged for the evaluation of an 
event. 
IC -Same as above- 
CME Noted for compliance 
EMR Monitoring visits are being done for projects as and when required/directed by the 
PSC/PAC of the EMR Scheme 
Pharmacovigilance All established Pharmacovigilance centres shall be visited from time to time to 
review the progress of work. 
CDSCO NA 
Champion (i). Periodic review to address the implementation issues will be carried out.  
(ii) As per the approved scheme guidelines for the Champion Services Sector Scheme 
for Medical value Travel there is a mechanism for monitoring which consistofregular 

84 
 
field visits. 
 
iv. Dashboard for online 
monitoring of 
schemes and 
program. 
NAM A dedicated NAM web -portal under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National 
AYUSH Mission (NAM) was launched by Hon‘ble MoS (IC) on 30th July 2020. 
Dashboard of NAM web portal for online monitoring, submission of State Annual 
Action Plans (SAAPs), Physical & F inancial reports (Quarterly), DBT report 
(monthly), Management Information Systems (MIS) and real time reporting of 
schemes has already been developed and working smoothly. 
COE A dashboard would be created for online monitoring of schemes and programmes. 
PHI A dashboard would be created for online monitoring of schemes and programmes.  
IEC This is being implemented. 
IC -Same as above- 
CME Noted for future compliance 
EMR The Programme Division will be pleased to have a Dashboard for online monitoring 
of the Scheme. 
Pharmacovigilance Dashboard for online monitoring of Pharmacovigilance Scheme and progress will be 
uploaded. 
CDSCO Dashboard for online monitoring of Central Drug Controller Scheme and progress 
will be uploaded. 
Champion Ministry is in process to develop a dashboard to invite online proposals for the 
various schemes. The dashboard also has a provision for the monitoring of the 
scheme. 
 
NAM- National AYUSH Mission (CSS) 
COE- Assistance to accredited AYUSH Centres of Excellence in Non-Governmental/ Private Sector engaged in AYUSH education/Drug 
Development and Research/ Clinical Research/ Folk Medicine etc (CS) 
PHI- AYUSH and Public Health Initiatives (CS) 
IEC- Information, Education and Communication (CS) 
IC- Promotion of International Cooperation (CS) 
CME- Re-orientation Training Programme of AYUSH Personnel/Continuing Medical Education (ROTP/CME)(CS) 
EMR- Extra Mural Research Projects through Research Institutes etc. (CS) 
Pharmacovigilance- Pharmacovigilance Initiative for ASU Drugs (CS) 
CDSCO-Central Drug Controller for AYUSH (CDSCO)(CS) 
Champion-Champion Services Sector Scheme 
 
  

85 
 
Annexure-II 
Status of construction projects of National Institutes upto March, 2021 
(Rs. in crore) 
S. 
No 
Project Estimated  
cost of  
Project 
Date of 
start 
Likely date 
of 
completion 
Capital  
Funds  
allocated 
to  
PMC upto 
March, 
2021 
Expenditure  
made by 
PMC upto 
March, 2021 
Balance  
fund  
available  
with PMC  
as on  
01.04.2021 
Physical  
Progress 
 achieved 
in % 
PMC 
Agency 
1 NIUM, 
Ghaziabad 
339.68 01.04.2017 31.03.2022 190.01 147.31 42.70 43.37% M/s 
WAPCOS 
Ltd. 
2 NIH, Narela 259.12 01.04.2017 31.03.2022 186.9 139.02 47.88 62.50% M/s MECON 
Ltd. 
3 NIH, Kolkata,  
Ph-II 
37.08 01.06.2018 31.03.2021 36.08 35.98 0.10 99.00% M/s NPCC 
Ltd. 
4 AIIA, 
SaritaVihar, 
Ph-II 
228.21 06.04.2019 31.03.2022 105.67 69.16 36.51 25.00% M/s NPCC 
Ltd. 
5 AIIA, Goa 267.81 11.11.2019 31.03.2022 174.826 111.64 63.19 40.75% M/s NBCC 
(I) Ltd. 
6 NIA, 
Panchkula 
270.54 08.08.2018 30.06.2022 24.67 0.67 24.00 NIL M/s 
WAPCOS 
Ltd. 
7 NISARG 
GRAM, NIN 
Pune 
170.29 05.08.2017 23.07.2021 122.52 89.3 33.22 52.44% M/s 
WAPCOS 
Ltd. 
8 NEIAH, 
ShillongPh-II 
56.03 01.04.2018 30.06.2021 41.39 31.12 10.27 65.23% M/s NPCC 
Ltd. 
Total 1628.76     882.07 624.20 257.87     
 
 