 
 
               
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (SAKA) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
116 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT 
On 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY BILL, 2019 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27 November, 2019) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 November, 2019) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail :  rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
 
 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
27 November, 2019/Agrahayana, 1941 (SAKA) 
 
ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT 
On 
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY 
 BILL, 2019 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  27 November, 2019) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27 November, 2019) 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i)  -  (ii) 
2.  PREFACE 
 
(iii) - (iv) 
3.  ACRONYMS 
 
(v) 
4.  REPORT 
Chapter- I      Introduction  
Chapter-II   Presentation and views of the   Ministry of 
AYUSH 
 
Chapter - III  Views of Organizations/ Associations/ 
Institutions/ Experts 
Chapter - IV  Clause-by-clause consideration to the Bill 
Chapter - V    General Recommendation 
 
 
1 - 10 
11 - 22 
 
23 - 30 
31 - 62 
63 - 66 
 
 
5.  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A 
GLANCE 
 
 
6.  MINUTES 
 
 
7.  ANNEXURES 
  (i) Bill 
  (ii) List of Witnesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2018-19) 
 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 
2.  Dr. R. Lakshmanan  
3.  Dr. Vikas Mahatme 
4.  Shri Jairam Ramesh  
5.  Dr. Santanu Sen 
6.  Shri Ashok  Siddharth 
7.  Shri K. Somaprasad 
8.  Dr. C. P. Thakur 
9.  Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA  
 
11.  Shri Thangso Baite 
12.  Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan    
13.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
14.  Shri C. P. Joshi  
15.  Dr. K. Kamaraj 
 16.  Shri Arjunlal Meena 
17.  Shri Anoop Mishra 
18.  Advocate Jayasingh Thiyagaraj Natterjee 
19.  Dr. Mahendra Nath Pandey 
20.  Shri Chirag Paswan 
21.  Shri C. R. Patil 
22.  Shri M.K. Raghavan 
23.  Shri Janak Ram 
24.  Dr. Shrikant Eknath Shinde 
25.  Shri Gyan Singh 
26.  Shri Bharat Singh 
27.  Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
28.  Shrimati Rita Tarai 
29.  Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
*30.  Shri Manohar Utawal 
31.  Shri Akshay Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu         Secretary 
Shri J. Sundriyal Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri Rakesh Naithani   Director 
Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                      Additional Director 
Shrimati Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma  Assistant Committee Officer 
Ms. Monika Garbyal   Assistant Committee Officer 
Shri Parth Gupta   Assistant Research Officer 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------- 
*ceased to be member of the Committee w.e.f 21st December, 2018 
(i)  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019-20) 
 
1.      Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   -   Chairman 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.K. Antony 
3. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
8. Shri K. Somaprasad  
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Vacant 
12. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
13. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
14. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
15. Shrimati Malothu Kavitha 
16. Shri P. K. Kunhalikutty 
17. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
18. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
19. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
20. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
21. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
22. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
27. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Secretary  
2. Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma, Assistant Committee Officer 
6. Ms. Monika Garbyal, Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Shri Parth Gupta, Assistant Research Officer 
                                                           
 Shri Udayanraje Pratapsingh Bhonsle, Member resigned from the membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f 14 th 
September, 2019. 
(ii) 

 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and 
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, 
present this One Hundred Sixteenth Report of the Committee on the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy Bill, 2019. 
2. In  pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules  of Procedure and Conduct of  Business in the 
Council of States relating  to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing  Committees, the 
Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sa bha, referred* the National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 
2019 (Annexure I) on the 14th  January, 201 9 as introduced  in the Rajya Sabha on the  7th 
January, 2019 for examination  and report  by  30th January, 2 019. However, the previous 
Committee could not consider the Bill and present its Report and requested for extension of time.  
Subsequently, Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha granted extension of  time for presentation of 
Report on the Bill upto 29th April, 2019.  However, the deliberations on the said Bill could not be 
concluded due to preoccupation of the Members of the previous Committee in the General 
Elections for the 17th Lok Sabha and subsequent dissolution of the Committee.   
3. The previous C ommittee started the examination of the Bill and held one sitting on 24th 
January, 2019 . The Committee also issued a Press Release inviting memoranda/views from 
individuals and other stakeholders. In response thereto, a number of memoranda from different 
organistation/association and individuals were received.  
4.  The re-constituted Committee held 4 sittings during the course of examination of the Bill, 
i.e., on 21st and 22nd October, 7th and 15th November, 2019.   The list of witnesses heard by the 
Committee is at Annexure-II. 
5. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 15th November, 
2019. 
6. The Committee relied on the following documents in finalizing its Report:- 
(i) The National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019; 
(ii) Background Note on the Bill received from the Ministry of AYUSH; 
(iii) Presentation, clarifications and Oral evidence of Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH; 
(iv) Memoranda received on the Bill from various 
institutes/bodies/associations/organizations/experts and replies of  the Ministry on 
the memoranda selected by the Committee for examination; 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.58476, dated 14 th  January, 2019. 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
(v) Oral evidence and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts on the 
Bill; and 
(vi) Replies received from the Ministry of AYUSH to the questions/queries  raised by 
Members during the meetings on the Bill. 
7. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made 
by those who deposed before the Committee and also those who gave their valuable suggestions 
to the Committee through their written submissions.  
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
15 November, 2019 
3, Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)                                                            
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
Chairman,  
Department-related Parliamentary   
Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare, Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iv) 

 
 
ACRONYMS 
AIPGET All India Post Graduate Entrance Test 
ATS Association of Teaching Staff 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation  
CCH Central Council of Homoeopathy 
CCIM Central Council for Indian Medicine 
CCMP Certificate course in modern pharmacology 
CCRH Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CGHS Central Government Health Scheme 
CRRI Compulsory Residential Rotatory Internship in various Departments 
DFG Demands for Grants 
EWS Economically Weaker Section 
HCC Homoeopathy Central Council 
IIHP Indian Institute of Homeopathic Physicians 
IIPH Indian Institute of Public Health 
IMCC Indian Medicine Central Council 
MARBH Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homeopathy 
MCI Medical Council of India 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MQT Minimum Qualifying Test 
NCDs Non-communicable diseases 
NCH National Commission for Homoeopathy  
NCHRH National Commission for Human Resources in Health (NCHRH) 
NCISM National Commission of Indian System of Medicine 
NEET National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test 
NEIAH North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy 
NEP National Education Policy 
NET National Entrance Test  
NEXT National Exit Test 
NHRM National Rural Health Mission 
NOVOD National Oilseeds and Vegetable Development 
NTET National Teachers Eligibility Test 
OBC Other Backward Class 
PGNET Post Graduate National Exit Exam 
PH Physical Handicapped 
PHC Primary Health Care 
PMO Prime Minister's Office 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
RBSK Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SOR Statement of Objects and Reasons 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
UT Union Territory 
WHO World Health Organisation  
 
(v)  

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER -1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Mission Statement of the Bill 
1.1.1 The National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 seeks to provide for constitution 
of a National Commission for Homoeopathy for development and regulation of all aspects 
relating to education, medical profession, medical institutions of Homoeopathy and an Ad visory 
Council to advise and make recommendations to the Commission to achieve the mission 
objectives of the Bill as enshrined in Preamble to the Bill. 
1.1.2 The Preamble to the Bill aims to provide a medical education system that improves 
access to qualit y and affordable medical education and to ensure availability of adequate and 
high quality Homoeopathy medical professionals in all parts of the country. The Bill also seeks 
to promote equitable and universal healthcare that encourages community health per spective and 
makes services of Homoeopathy medical professionals accessible to all the citizens. In order to 
achieve the National Health goals, the said Bill encourages Homoeopathy medical professionals 
to adopt latest medical research in their work and co ntribute to research. It envisages a system 
that has an objective, periodic and transparent assessment of medical institutions and facilitates 
maintenance of a Homoeopathy medical register for India and enforces high ethical standards in 
all aspects of medical services. 
1.1.3 Broadly, the Bill is a replica of National Medical Commission Bill, 2019.  The Bill 
entails the constitution of Autonomous Boards, holding of NEET, NEXT, National Entrance Test 
and National Teachers Eligibility Test and strives to adap t to the changing needs and keep pace 
with the time and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
1.2 Objectives of the Bill  
1.2.1 The National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 has been proposed to achieve the 
following objectives:-  
(a) Constitution of a National Commission for Homoeopathy for development and 
regulation of all aspects relating to education, medical profession and medical 
institutions of Homoeopathy and an Advisory Council to advise and make 
recommendations to the Commission;   
(b) Constitution of three Autonomous Boards, namely: — (i) the Homoeopathy Education 
Board (ii) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board and (iii) the Board of Ethics and 
Registration; 
(c) Holding of a uniform National Eligibility -Cum-Entrance Test for admission to 
undergraduate medical education;  

2 
 
(d) Holding of a National Exit Test for granting license to practice as medical practitioner 
of Homoeopathy;  
(e) Holding of a uniform Post-Graduate National Entrance Test for postgraduate courses;  
(f) Holding of National Teachers  Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy for appointment as 
teachers of Homoeopathy;  
(g) The manner of seeking permission for establishment of new medical institution;  
(h) The manner of maintaining National Register and State Register of Homoeopathy;  
(i) Recognition of medical qualification granted by Universities and medical institutions in 
India and outside India and withdrawal of recognition or de -recognition of 
qualification; 
(j) Holding of joint sitting of the Commissions of other medical education to enhance 
interface be tween Homoeopathy, Indian System of Medicine, and modern system of 
medicine;  
(k) The repeal of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 and for dissolution of the 
Central Council of Homoeopathy constituted there under with certain conditions. 
1.3      Background and Necessity of the Bill  
1.3.1 According to Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR) of the Bill, the Homoeopathy 
Central Council (HCC) Act, 1973 (59 of 1973) was enacted to provide a solid foundation for the 
growth of Homoeopathy medical education an d constitution of the Central Council of 
Homoeopathy for regulation of the educational standards of Homoeopathy, maintenance of the 
Central Register of practitioners and for matters connected therewith. This Act was drafted on 
the pattern of the Indian Med ical Council Act, 1956 and the broad functions, constitution, 
regulation making powers, etc. of Central Council for Homoeopathy are identical to the Medical 
Council of India. However, the said Homoeopathy Central Council Act has not kept pace with 
time. Va rious bottlenecks viz. irregularities in regulation of AYUSH medical institutions, 
ineffective role of members and Executive Committee, lack of standard curriculum and 
education, absence of ethics in practice of Homoeopathy, failure to provide transparent system of 
inspection and alleged irregularities in grant of recognition & de-recognition of education system 
have crept into the system with serious detrimental effects on medical education and delivery of 
quality health services.  
1.3.2 Replying to Committee‘s query about the details of the factors that hindered the effective 
implementation of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973, the Ministry of AYUSH 
elaborated as under:- 
―The Homoeopathy Central Council (HCC)Act, 1973 was enacted for constitution 
of a Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH) for regulation of education and 
practice of Homoeopathy, for maintenance of Central Register of Homoeopathy 
and for matters connected the rewith.  The lack of effective provisions in the Act to 
address the issues relating to Membership, conditions for removal of 
Members/President in case of non -performance or otherwise, lack of power of 
Central Government to make regulations or supersede the  Council and lack of 

3 
 
penalizing provisions on institutes for non -compliance of prescribed standards. 
Due to the above lacking provisions in the Act, the members are continuing beyond 
5 years tenure. The Inspection of colleges being conducted by the Council  has been 
observed to be unfair. The Council had not implemented the suggestions of 
Government like Aadhar based geo -location enabled attendance system for 
teachers, Hospital staff and PG students, NEET, and Teachers eligibility test. The 
Council failed to  ensure standards in colleges and no steps have been taken to 
improve the teaching and training skills of teachers. The Council could not unfold 
the hidden potentialities of the system. Further, CCH president was convicted by 
CBI. In this regard, Ordinance  was taken and subsequently amended HCC Act to 
supersede CCH by Board of Governors. 
 
1.3.3 The Ministry added that the Homeopathy Central Council has not kept pace with time as 
various bottlenecks have crept into the system . D ue to various administrative r easons and 
influence of sitting members, the elections to the Council could not be conducted in time. 
Inspection of colleges is being conducted by the Council by deploying the Council members/ 
visitors who are appointed by the President of the Council. It has been observed that the findings 
of the Inspection reports are often not fair. The Executive Committee of the Council further 
examines the inspection reports and furnishes their recommendation to the Central Government 
for taking further action. It has been noted that the recommendations of the Council are also not 
fair.  
1.3.4 Accordingly to the Ministry they had requested the Council to address the issue of ghost 
teachers, genuine functioning of hospital and colleges. The Ministry had also suggested th e 
Council to implement the Aadhar based geo -location enabled attendance system for teachers, 
hospital staff and PG students and also to conduct teacher's eligibility test to assess the quality of 
teachers, but the Council's attitude was inert in implementi ng the same. The Council failed to 
ensure standards in colleges and no steps have been taken to improve the teaching and training 
skills of teachers. The Council could not unfold the hidden potentialities of the system. To make 
the things worse, the CCH pr esident was convicted by CBI. In this regard, Ordinance was taken 
and subsequently amended HCC Act to supersede CCH by Board of Governors. 
1.3.5 The 9 th Report of the Planning Commission, Government of India noted that 
Homoeopathy ―training Institutes lack well qualified teachers and the quality of training was not 
of requisite standard.‖  The National Policy on Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy, 
2002 also stated that ― Medical education in Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy has 
been a cause of  concern. The number of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy at 
increased phenomenally to 404 (729 colleges at present). The Central Councils have 
implemented various educational regulations to ensure minimum standards of education. 
Despite this, ther e has been a mushrooming of sub -standard colleges causing erosion to the 
standards of education and harm to medical training and practice. Liberal permission by the 
State Governments, loopholes in the existing Acts and weakness in the enforcement of standa rds 
of education have contributed to this state of affairs.‖   

4 
 
1.3.6 It was, therefore, felt by the Commission that there is a need to amend some of the 
provisions of the IMCC and HCC Acts with respect to establishment of new medical colleges, 
increasing seats and granting permission to existing medical colleges. 
1.3.7 The Government of India has taken some steps to meet the challenges before the 
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 and to resolve these bottlenecks. 
1.4 The Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2002 
1.4.1 The first in a series of such efforts was the amendment of Homoeopathy Central Council 
Act, 1973 in the year 2002. The Bill was introduced to keep a check on growth of sub -standard 
colleges, increase in admission capacity and starti ng of new courses in such colleges. 
Accordingly, section 12A and 12B were inserted by the 2002 Amendment Act and the 
permission of the Central Government was made mandatory for establishing new colleges or 
starting new courses of study. The amendment ensur ed that quality of Homoeopathy education 
was not being compromised. 
1.5 The Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 
1.5.1 The Homoeopathy Central Council  (Amendment) Bill, 2005 was subsequently introduced 
in the Parliament to ensure timely elect ion to the Central Council of Homoeopathy and 
streamline its functioning. The Homoeopathy Central Council  (Amendment) Bill, 2005 
contained amendments with respect to tenure of membership of the members of the Central 
Council of Homoeopathy, directional pow ers of the Central Government and provision for 
regulating existing colleges. The aim of the Bill was to amend inherent flaws in these provisions 
of the Central Homeopathy Council Act, 1973. These flaws caused undue delay in the elections 
to the Central Co uncil and arbitrary decisions being taken by it. In order to bring about overall 
quality improvement in the educational standards of Homeopathy, the Homoeopathy Central 
Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 was brought before Parliament. The Bill was referred to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health & Family Welfare. 
1.5.2 The Committee in its tenth Report on the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) 
Bill, 2005, which was presented to Parliament on 29th July, 2005 had made recommendations on 
various cla uses related to structure and functioning of Homoeopathy Central Council namely, 
to:- (i) amend the Act to define Homoeopathic Medical College, (ii) nominate ex -officio 
members, (iii) seek permission for existing colleges, (iv) fix tenure of elected/nomina ted 
members of the Council,  (v) remove President and Vice -President, (vi) dissolve the Executive 
Committee of the Council and (vii) give directions to the Council in public interest. 
1.5.3   However, due to various reasons, significant progress with respec t to these bills was not 
made and challenges with the regulation of medical education for Homoeopathy persisted.  
1.5.4 In 2006, the Planning Commission convened a Task Force for AYUSH education, which 
found that the curriculum and course content across sy stems was unsatisfactory.  The Task 
Force, further, concluded that most AYUSH educational institutions did not provide quality 

5 
 
medical education, a feature compounded by poor infrastructure and lack of qualified and 
committed faculty.  This yielded ill tra ined AYUSH practitioners who lacked knowledge of the 
fundamentals of the concerned system of medicine and were unable to practice in accordance 
with the best traditions of their systems.  Specifically, both under -graduate and post -graduate 
courses were des cribed as ―blindly imitative of the corresponding courses in Allopathic 
medicine…. To the extent that the very character of the AYUSH systems gets compromised.‖ 
1.5.5 The Department of AYUSH, Government of India, in its report (F.No.R -13040/10/2011-
HD (Tech) dated March, 2011, stated ―The Central Government has also received complaints, in 
the scenario give apprehension that there may be possibility of growth of substandard education. 
Similarly, the existence of such substandard colleges may create a possib ility of adopting 
malpractices and unfair practices by the colleges…. it is necessary to adopt urgent measures to 
regularly monitor the Homoeopathy Medical Colleges.‖ 
1.6 The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 
1.6.1   While considering the observations of Parliamentary Standing Committee of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, the proposal of Department of Health for establishing an 
overarching body namely, ―National Commission for Human Resources in Health (NCHRH)‖ 
was int roduced. Accordingly, the Ministry conceived a similar proposal for establishing an 
overarching body namely National Commission for Human Resources in AYUSH (NCHRA), 
which was modeled on the National Commission for Human Resources in Health (NCHRH). As 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare did not pursue the proposed Bill , the Ministry of 
AYUSH also decided not to pursue the idea of setting up of National Commission for Human 
Resources in AYUSH.  
1.7 The Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015 
1.7.1 Thereafter, the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015 was introduced in 
Parliament to amend the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973, to (a) make provision for 
obtaining prior permission of the Central Government by all Homoeopathy Medical Colleges for 
admission of new batches of students in any course of study or training (including post -graduate 
course of study or training); and (b) provide the aforesaid permission by the Central Government 
for a period of five years. The proposed amendment aimed to ensure quality of Homoeopathy 
education leading to better healthcare through Homoeopathy system of medicine. 
1.7.2 The Committee is given to understand that due to persistent challenges, yet another effort 
was made by the Ministry of AYUSH with the introduction of the Homoeopathy Central Council 
(Amendment) Bill, 2015 on 6 th May, 2015. The Secretary, AYUSH, during his evidence before 
the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare on 
25th May, 2015, shared that although the Homoeopathy Central Council Act contained provisions 
for de-recognition of degrees granted by any existing institution, it was lacking in stopping grant 
of permission to make admissions year after year, etc. In view of the said lacunae, the Ministry 
had contemplated the amendment of the Act by inserting two provisions in the Amendment Bill , 

6 
 
2015 to discourage continuance of ―business as usual‖ approach of Homoeopathy colleges which 
undermined the standards of education i n existing colleges and the quality of Homoeopathy 
education.  
1.7.3  The DRSC on Health and Family Welfare in its Eighty Sixth Report on the 
Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015  recommended a credible and vibrant 
appeal mechanism in place so  that minor technical and procedural defaults are not made a basis 
for harassment and questionable practices and genuine grievances of Homoeopathy medical 
institutions are addressed swiftly within set timelines. These Acts at first pave a solid foundation 
for growth of medical education and development of therapeutic training pertaining to 
Homoeopathy. However, over the time, several issues started to emerge in functioning of CCIM 
and CCH and in regulation of medical education for these systems. 
1.8 The Committee under the Chairmanship of Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog 
1.8.1   The specific lacunae that Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2015 aimed 
to address and were also the subject of the 86 th Report of Parliamentary Standing Committee 
examined in the context of the broader reforms mandated by PMO. Thus, the Government of 
India, vide its OM No. 4(3)/2016 -H&FW dated 04.08.2016 and in terms of the PMO I.D. No. 
520/31/C/462015-ES2 dated 01.08.2016  had set up a Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Vice-Chairman, NITI Ayog, with Additional Principal Secretary to PM, CEO, NITI Ayog and 
Secretary, AYUSH as members to examine all options of reforms in Homoeopathy Central 
Council (HCC) Act, 1973 and Indian Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act, 1970. 
1.8.2   The NITI Ayog Committee, consulted the States/UTs in its various meetings and also 
sought views and suggestions of various experts including eminent medical professionals, 
experts in the fields of public  health, former Secretaries (Department of AYUSH), Presidents/ 
Vice-President/ Members of the CCIM, CCH, lawyers etc. The said Committee observed that the 
IMCC Act, 1970 and HCC Act, 1973 were framed along th e lines of the IMC Act, 1956 and 
flagged the following reasons behind failure of Central Council of Homoeopathy:- 
(i) Failure to bring in competent and qualified persons based on merit for regulating 
AYUSH medical education; 
(ii) Failure of nominated members of CCH in making an effective impact over the 
elected members; 
(iii) Failure in creation of standard curricula that can produce quality doctors in 
Homoeopathy and maintaining uniform standard of medical education at the under -
graduate and postgraduate levels; 
(iv) Failure in ensuring ethics in practice of Homoeopathy  
(v) Inadequate quality enforcement mechanisms; 
(vi) Lack of transparent system of inspection and grant of recognition or de -recognition 
of institutions pertaining to Homoeopathy 
(vii) Failed to produce skilled and professionally competent medical graduated and post 
graduates. 

7 
 
(viii) Inadequate emphasis on substantial evaluation of quality of teaching, training and 
imparting of skills, in addition to assessment of infrastructure and availability of 
human resources in the institutions during inspections.  
1.8.3 The Government of India meanwhile undertook a landmark step on the Modern Medicine 
front and introduced the National Medical Commission Bill, 2016 to revamp the Indian Medial 
Council Act, 1956. The said Bill included several far -reaching changes for strengthening the 
regulation of the medical education in the country. Given that a number of issues plaguing MCI 
were also the ones affecting the CCH, the NITI Aayog Committee has recommended for 
enactment of the National Commission for Homoeopathy on the same lines as that of the 
National Medical Commission Bill, 2016. 
1.8.4 The Government of India introduced the National Medical Commission Bill, 2017 on the 
29th December, 2017 which was referred to the Committee on Health and Family Welfare on the 
4th January, 2018. The Committee presented its 109th Report on the said Bill on 28th March, 2018 
containing a total of 56 recommendations. The Government has accepted a total of 40 
recommendations of the DRSC on Health and Family Welfare, 7 were partially accepted and 9 
recommendations we re not accepted.  The National Medical Commission Bill, 2019 has now 
been enacted as the National Commission Act, 2019 (No. 30 of 2019 with effect from 8th August, 
2019). As the NMC Act replaced the IMC Act, 1956, on the same line, the Ministry has 
proposed to supersede the HCC Act, 1973 vide the National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 
2019 to replace the HCC Act, 1973.   
1.9 Salient Features of the National Commission for Homoeopathy, Bill, 2019 
  The salient features of the National Medical Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 may be 
enumerated as under:- 
1.9.1 Institutional Framework for Regulation of Medical Education  
(i) The Bill proposes creation of a new institutional framework, in the form of a National 
Commission for Homoeopathy, an Advisory Council for Homoeopath y and three 
Autonomous Boards for regulating all aspects relating to medical education, medical 
profession and medical institutions. 
(ii) The National Medical Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 will formulate and lay down policies 
for maintaining a high quality and high st andards in education of Homoeopathy, 
framing policies for regulating medical Institutions and Homoeopathic Medical 
Professionals, develop a road map for meeting  the requirements in healthcare, 
including human resources and infrastructure, ensuring complia nce by the State 
Medical Councils of Homoeopathy of the regulations made under the Bill and 
ensuring coordination among the autonomous boards set up under Bill. 
 
 

8 
 
1.9.2   Composition and Structure of National Commission for Homoeopathy               
(i) The National Commission for Homoeopathy comprises of a Chairperson, seven ex -
officio members and twelve part-time members.  
(ii) The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven administrative 
capacity and integrity, possessing a postgraduate de gree in Homoeopathy from a 
recognized University and having experience of not less than twenty years in the field 
of Homoeopathy, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of 
healthcare delivery, growth and development of Homoeopathy or its education. 
(iii) Of the twelve part -time members, three members will be from the field of 
Homoeopathy, Management, law, Health Research, Science Technology and 
Economics, five Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the 
nominees of the S tates and Union territories in the Advisory Council for a term of 
two years and four members to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of 
Homoeopathy from amongst themselves. 
(iv) The Central Government is empowered to appoint the Chairperson, Presi dent of 
Autonomous Boards, the Secretary of the Commission on the recommendation of a 
Search Committee. These posts will have a maximum term of four years. The Search 
Committee will consist of six members including the Cabinet Secretary and three 
experts nominated by the Central Government of which two will have experience in 
the homoeopathic field. 
1.9.3   Advisory Council for Homoeopathy 
Under the Bill, the Central Government will constitute an Advisory Council for 
Homoeopathy.  The Council will be the pr imary platform through which the States/Union 
Territories can put forth their views and concerns before the NCH. Further, the Council shall 
advise the Commission on measures to determine and maintain, and to coordinate maintenance 
of the minimum standards in all matters relating to medical education, training and research. 
1.9.4   Autonomous Boards under National Commission of Homoeopathy 
Three Autonomous Boards are proposed to be setup under the Commission. The three 
Autonomous Boards are the Homoeopathy Education Board, the Medical Assessment and Rating 
Board for Homoeopathy and the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy. The brief 
outline of their composition, powers and functions is as follows:- 
(a) Homoeopathy Education Board 
The Homoeopathy E ducation Board will be responsible for formulating standards, 
curriculum, guidelines for setting up of medical institutions, and granting recognition to medical 
qualifications at the undergraduate and post graduate levels respectively.  The Homoeopathy 
Education Board shall consist of a President and four Members from the discipline of 
Homoeopathy. 
 

9 
 
(b) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy 
The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy will determine the process 
of rating and ass essment of medical institutions and have the power to levy monetary penalties 
on institutions which fail to maintain the minimum standards. It will also grant permission for 
establishing a new medical institution. The Medical Assessment and Rating Board fo r 
Homoeopathy shall consist of a President from the discipline of Homoeopathy and two 
Members, out of whom one Member shall be from the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other 
Member shall be chosen from any of the disciplines of management, quality assura nce, law or 
science and technology. 
 
(c)   The Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy. 
It will maintain a National Register of all licensed Homoeopathic medical practitioners, 
and regulate their professional conduct. Only those medical practitioners included in the Register 
will be allowed to practice Homoeopathic medicine. The Board of Ethics and Registration for 
Homoeopathy shall consist of a President from the discipline of Homoeopathy and two 
Members, out of whom one Member shall be from the d iscipline of Homoeopathy and the other 
Member shall be a person who has demonstrated public record of work on medical ethics or 
chosen from any of the disciplines of quality assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy. 
1.9.5   National Level Examinations and Counseling 
(i) There will be a uniform National Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test for admission to under -
graduate Homoeopathy education in all medical institutions regulated by the Bill. The 
NCH will specify the manner of conducting common counseling for admission in all such 
medical institutions. The Bill proposes a common final year National Exit Test for the 
students graduating from medical institutions to obtain the license for practice.  Further, 
there will be a uniform Post -Graduate National Entrance  Test that will serve as the basis 
for admission into post -graduate courses at medical institutions. The Bill also proposes a 
National Teachers' Eligibility Test for postgraduates of Homoeopathy who wish to take up 
teaching Homoeopathy as a profession. 
 
(ii) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common 
counseling by the designated authority for admission to all the medical institutions 
governed under this Act provided that the common counseling shall be conducted by the 
designated authority of:- 
(i)   the Central Government for All India seats; and 
(ii) the State Government for the remaining seats at the State level. 
1.9.6 Powers of Central Government 
The Bill empowers the Central Government to supersede the Commission, not exceeding 
one yea r, if the Commission is unable to discharge the functions and duties, or persistently 
defaults in complying with any direction issued by the Central Government. The Central 

10 
 
Governments empowered to give directions to the Commission and the Autonomous Board s. It 
can also give directions to the State Governments for carrying out the provisions of the Act. 
1.9.7 Appeal on matters related to professional and ethical misconduct 
State Medical Councils will receive complaints relating to professional or ethical 
misconduct against a registered Homoeopathic medical practitioner. If the medical practitioner is 
aggrieved of a decision of the State Medical Council, he may appeal to the Board of Ethics and 
Medical Registration for Homoeopathy. The State Medical Councils and the Board of Ethics and 
Medical Registration for Homoeopathy have the power to take disciplinary action against the 
medical practitioner including imposing a monetary penalty. If the medical practitioner is 
aggrieved of the decision of the Board, he ca n approach the NCH to appeal against the decision. 
Appeal of the decision of the NCH lies with the Central Government. 
 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER - II  
 
PRESENTATION AND VIEWS OF MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
 
2.1 PRESENTATION OF THE MINISTRY 
 
2.1.1  The Committee started deliberations on the said Bill by hearing the views of the Ministry 
of AYUSH. The Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH made a presentation before the Committee 
during the previous Committee's meeting held on 24 th January, 2019 and before the present 
Committee on 21 st October, 2019.  During the course of presentation the Secretary highlighted 
the background and necessity of the Bill. He informed that review of the HCC Act, 1973 was 
entrusted to a Committee chaired by Vice -Chairman, NITI Aayog on 1 st August, 2016. He 
apprised the Committee that the drafting of the said Bill was on the lines of National Medical 
Commission Bill. The Ministry has examined the Bill in consultation with NITI Aayog. The 
Secretary justified that the proposed Bill seemed to be the solution for all lapses of the HCC Act. 
He also informed the Committee that presently there 243 Homoeopathy colleges imparting UG 
courses and 54 Homoeopathy colleges imparting PG courses with intake capacity of 18,9 44 UG 
seats and 4014 PG seats. The Commission shall further assess the requirements in healthcare, 
including human resources for health and healthcare infrastructure and develop a road map for 
meeting the requirements. 
2.1.2  Explaining the salient feature s of the Bill, the Secretary highlighted the proposed 
institutional structure, powers and functions, and the composition of the National Commission 
for Homoeopathy. The Committee was also informed about the mode of appointment of the 
Members of the Commiss ion and the qualifications stipulated for them in the Bill to be eligible 
for appointment. The Committee noted that the proposed Bill provides for selection of the 
members of the Commission by a Search Committee unlike the present mode of Elections. The 
proposed composition of the Commission is also well balanced as out of 20 members, only 4 
part-time members are from elected category. Further, the tenure of the members is also fixed for 
4 years and no reappointment or extension is allowed. The provision sp ecifying the conditions 
for removal of members shall ensure a rationale functioning of the Members and Commission. 
The Bill further provides for the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test, All India Post Graduate 
Entrance Test (AIPGET), Aadhar based Geo Lo cation Enabled Attendance System, AYUSH 
National Teachers Eligibility Test, reservation for Economically Weaker Section (EWS) in 
admission to educational institutions and inspection of colleges. 
2.1.3 The Secretary drew a comparison between the Central Cou ncil of Homoeopathy and the 
proposed National Medical for Homoeopathy as reflected in the following table:  
 
 
 
 

12 
 
Subject Existing CCH Proposed NCH 
1. Members- mode of 
selection 
(1) Elected members amongst 
the practitioners from the 
States.  
(2) Representatives of the 
Universities by election.  
(3) 30% Nomination of (1) and 
(2) for CCIM, and 40% for 
CCH. 
All members are nominated 
by Central Government on 
the recommendation of 
Search Committee, except 
for elected part -time 
members. 
 
2. Tenure  
 
Tenure of members is five 
years or till his successor is 
elected. 
Fixed tenure of four years 
and no re -appointment. 
(Section 6) 
3. Inspections & Permissions  
 
Conducted by inspectors and 
visitors. Mostly by Members. 
By a separate Board which 
can hire any agency . 
(Section 28) 
4. Structure  
 
Executive committee is the 
main functioning body  
 
Separate Boards for 
education, assessment and 
Rating; Ethics and 
Registration so as to have 
proper focus. (Section 19) 
5.Permission for setting up of 
a medical college  
 
Application to Central 
Government and permission by 
CG on recommendation of 
Councils.  
Application and permission 
by Assessment and Rating 
Boards. (Section 29) 
6. Permission for UG courses  
 
Establishment; renewal; 
recognition; increase of intake.  
 
Only Establishment and 
Recognition; automatic 
increase of intake allowed 
by fulfilling the required 
norms; recognition by 
Boards.  
7.  Removal of President/ 
Members  
 
Not Available  
 
Conditions for removal has 
been proposed and 
Members to be public 
servants. (Section 7 and 47) 
8. Penalising provisions for 
non-compliance of standards  
 
Not Available  
 
Provisions for imposition of 
monetary penalty, reducing 
intake or stoppage of 
admissions and 
recommending to the 
Commission for withdrawal 
of recognition, agains t a 
medical institution for its 
failure to maintain the 
minimum essential 
standards. 
(section 28)  

13 
 
9. Exit test/ test for licensing  
 
No test is required before 
registration. The Degree of the 
University entitles for 
registration and practice.  
 
Common final year 
undergraduate examination 
shall be held by the 
Commission for granting 
license to practice as 
practitioner and for 
enrolment in the Register. 
Proposed Test to be started 
within 3yrs of enactment. 
(Section 15). 
10. Teachers eligibility Test  
 
Not Available  
 
National Teachers‘ 
Eligibility Test shall be 
conducted separately for the 
postgraduates who desire to 
take up teaching profession 
in that discipline. Proposed 
to be operational within 3 
years of enactment. (Section 
17) 
11. Provision to supersede  
 
Not Available  
 
Available.  
Proposed for superseding 
the Commission for a 
period not exceeding one 
year. (Section 50) 
2.1.4 The Committee notes that the members of the Commission are treated as public servants 
and t he provision specifying conditions for removal of members shall ensure a rationale 
functioning of the Members and Commission. The Commission  shall submit such reports and 
statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the Commission, 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, as required. The Central Government has the 
power to issue directions relating to policy for achieving the objectives of the Commission and 
also can supersede the Commission if the functioning of the Commission is not  in accordance 
with the directions of the Central Government. According to the Ministry  the proposed Bill is 
having sufficient checks and balances to achieve the objectives of the Bill in fair and transparent 
manner. 
2.2 Comments of the Ministry 
 The Commi ttee Secretariat prepared detailed questionnaire on the various issues and 
clause specific queries to which the Ministry of AYUSH furnished written submission for the 
consideration of the Committee.  The Ministry also furnished its comments to the queries raised 
by the Chairman and Members of the Committee.  The comments/response of the Ministry of 
AYUSH on the issues/questions raised by the Members of the Committee on various provisions 
of the Bill are enumerated in the succeeding paras:- 
2.2.1 On a query as to what extent the National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 in its 
present form would improve the overall regulatory mechanism of Homoeopathy medical 
education and practice in the country , the Ministry replied that the proposed Bill is expected to 

14 
 
bring quality education and healthcare services to the public at large. The Bill provides for 
separate independent Autonomous Boards for (i) Education, (ii) Assessment and Rating Board 
for granting permissions to colleges and (iii) Ethics and R egistration Board for maintenance of 
National Register. This mechanism, unlike the present structure of CCH, will help proper focus 
for development of Homoeopathy by the independent Boards for the development and promotion 
of Homoeopathy Medical education, Research training & development. 
2.2.2 As regards the provisions to promote equitable and universal Healthcare through 
Homoeopathic mode of treatment and the  measures that  could  be taken for implementation of 
these provisions on the ground level especi ally in rural & tribal areas, the Ministry clarified that 
the National Commission for Homoeopathy through its Autonomous Board, namely, the Board 
of ethics and registration for Homoeopathy shall ensure that the practice in Ho moeopathy is 
allowed only by th e licensed practitioners so as to promote equitable and universal Healthcare 
through Homoeopathy mode of treatment. The Board also regulates professional conduct and 
promotes medical ethics through State Medical Councils. Under the Act, the practice of 
Homoeopathy shall be regulated uniformly across the country.  It was also added that the 
Community Health Perspective can be given impetus in rural and tribal areas of the country in 
the Homoeopathic field.   The function of the Homoeopathy Education  Board i s to develop a 
competency based dynamic curriculum at all levels for appropriate skill, knowledge, attitude, 
values and ethics among the postgraduate and super  specialty students and enables them to 
provide quality healthcare as per the needs of the countr y. It is expected that the curriculum 
addresses the community health perspectives. 
 
2.2.3 The Committee was also apprised of measures/strategy that can be adopted for 
proliferation and popularization of Homoeopathic mode of treatment in various parts of th e 
country especially in rural and tribal areas to make service of Homoeopathy medical 
professionals accessible to all the citizens. The Ministry informed that the Homoeopathy mode of 
treatment is quite popular in various parts of the country. There are 245  Colleges spread in 25 
States having attached hospitals with inpatient and outpatient services. Apart from this, 
Homoeopathy dispensaries are established by the concerned State Governments where 
Homoeopathy treatment is available for the citizens. Further,  the Ministry of AYUSH under the 
flagship scheme of ‗National AYUSH Mission‘ is funding the State/Union Territory 
Governments for development of AYUSH treatment centers like establishment of dispensaries 
and hospitals. 
 
2.2.4 The Committee sought to know s pecifically the provisions in the Bill, intending to 
achieve the National Health goals and the common meeting ground of the National Health goals 
and objective mission of the Bill alongwith the strategy for execution of Mission and objectives 
of the Bill on the ground level. The Ministry clarified that the proposed National Commission for 
Homoeopathy is expected to assess the requirements in healthcare including human resources for 
health and healthcare infrastructure and develop a roadmap and to lay down p olicies for 
achieving the national health goals. It is also expected that the Advisory Council consisting of 
State/UT representatives shall advise the Commission in shaping the overall agenda, policy and 

15 
 
action relating to medical education in the field of  Homoeopathy across the country. The State 
Governments are expected to take necessary measures to enhance the capacity of the healthcare 
professionals for the purposes of addressing or promoting healthcare in rural areas. 
 
2.2.5 As regards the proficiency of Homoeopathy research institutions in the country and their 
conversion into outcome -centric from the input -centric, the Ministry replied that there is a 
separate apex research institution for Homoeopathy, namely, ‗Central Council for Res earch in 
Homoeopathy‘ for conducting specific research in fundamental and clinical areas. The studies 
conducted by the research institutes are being utilized in healthcare services. In order to further 
utilize the work done by the research institutes into the healthcare, the Ministry has upgraded the 
Central Research Institute of Homoeopathy at Kottayaminto postgraduate teaching institute.  
 
2.2.6 Regarding the prospects of the Homoeopathy research work in curing the illness in more 
precise and proficient m anner and encouragement of the research work through PPP model, it 
was stated that there is a separate apex research institution for Homoeopathy, namely, ‗Central 
Council for Research in Homoeopathy‘. The Council undertakes, coordinates, develops, 
disseminates and promotes scientific research in Homoeopathy.   The Council formulates and 
conducts research programs/projects; collaborates with national and international institutes of 
excellence to undertake evidence based research in fundamental and applied asp ects of 
Homoeopathy; monitors extra mural researches and propagates the research findings through 
monographs, journals, newsletters, I.E.&C. materials, seminars/workshops. Studies comply with 
the modern scientific parameters and research is undertaken with  the goal that the outcome of 
research translates into practice and the benefit of the research is extended to the profession and 
the public at large. 
 
2.2.7 On the precautionary measure that can be taken for implementing the provisions of the 
Bill pertaining to high ethical standards in all aspects of Homoeopathic medical services in the 
country, the Ministry informed that maintenance of a National Register by Ethics and 
Registration Board shall contain the name, address and all recognized qualifications p ossessed 
by licensed medical practitioners of Homoeopathy. Every State Medical Council shall maintain a 
State Register for registration of practitioners of Homoeopathy. The registers will be maintained 
in such forms including electronic form as may be spec ified. The State Councils are empowered 
to take disciplinary actions in respect of any professional or ethical misconduct by a registered 
practitioner of Homoeopathy and shall act in accordance with the regulations prescribed under 
the Commission. 
 
2.2.8 About the lacunae in the existing grievances redressal mechanism and the provisions in 
the Bill to eliminate the same and improve upon its functioning, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that as per the existing Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973, the C entral Council 
Homoeopathy (CCH) was constituted for regulation of education and practice of Indian Systems 
of medicine. The CCH is conducting inspections of the colleges and furnishing recommendations 
to the Central Government for taking further necessary  action. The Central Government after 
examining the same vis -à-vis with the norms specified in relevant regulations shall be 

16 
 
granting/denying permission to the colleges.  Whereas, in the proposed Bill, the Assessment and 
rating Board grants permission to start new Colleges and in the case of disapproval, the applicant 
may prefer a first appeal to the Commission and followed by an appeal to the Central 
Government.  Similarly, for the ethical or professional misconduct a practitioner who is 
aggrieved by the order passed by the State medical Council may prefer an appeal to the Board of 
Ethics and Registration and subsequently to the Commission and to the Central Government. 
 
2.2.9 The Committee sought to know the perception of the Ministry on the ‗Bridge course ‘ for 
AYUSH doctors.  The Ministry maintained that as per the provisions of the Homoeopathy 
Central Council Act, 1973, only the persons registered in the Stare register or central register of 
Homoeopathy are entitled to practice the Homoeopathy. To enhance interface with other medical 
systems, the joint sittings with the Commissions of other systems have been proposed.  
 
2.2.10   The National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 aims to address the alleged 
widespread corruption in the council. The Committe e desired to know about overall nature of 
corruption   the details of the employees/officers facing corruption charges or those have been 
convicted, alongwith the pre -cautionary measures that  can be taken to avoid the incidents of 
corruption in proposed NCH.  The Ministry in its written submission replied as under:- 
―The Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 was amended in the year 2002, to make 
provision for seeking permission of the Central Government for establishing new colleges or 
starting new courses  of study or increase of admission capacity in existing colleges. The 
amendment has been made to check the growth of sub -standard Homoeopathy Colleges. 
Further, many Homoeopathy Medical Colleges are still struggling to meet the required 
standards necessary  to impart quality education. There have been instances of serious 
malpractices in the Council, as a result of which the quality of medical education has been 
compromised with. The Central Government has taken various steps to streamline the 
functioning of the Council and to bring transparency in the affairs of the Council. However, 
the Council has been stalling all such initiatives of the Central Government. Many Members 
of the Council continued in the Council long after their tenure is completed. Further,  there 
have been many charges of serious misconduct against the President of the Council, who 
continued to be a Member in the Council even after the end of his tenure as the election to 
elect the new incumbent could not be completed in time. However, the H omoeopathy Central 
Council Act does not have any enabling provisions for taking over the powers of the 
President of the Central Council or superseding the Council or to take action on conviction 
or misconduct. 
 
   In the proposed National Commission for Ho moeopathy Bill, 2019, the tenure of the 
Members has been fixed for 4 years and there will be no reappointment. Further, the 
conditions for removal of Members have been specified. The provision of the proposed 
Commission addresses the lacunae existing in the HCC act, 1973.‖ 
 
2.2.11   The Committee desired to know whether the NCH Bill, 2019 also have provision to 
cover the allied homoeopathy staffs that are not covered under the Allied and HealthCare 

17 
 
professions Bill, 2018, to which the Ministry replied that at present there is no separate Central 
regulation for  allied homoeopathy staffs. Most of the allied staff used by modern medical 
institutes is also being used by Homoeopathy institutes.  
2.2.12 The Committee wanted to know as to why there is no representation from the 
Institutes/NGO working to uphold the rights of Patients that are affected by the functioning or 
malfunctioning of the regulatory bodies. It was informed that t he Advisory Cou ncil consist of 
one member to represent each State, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a University in that State, to 
be nominated by that State Government, and one member to represent each Union territory, who 
is the Vice-Chancellor of a University in that Union territory, to be nominated by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in the Government of India. The intention is that the Vice-Chancellors being heads 
of the University shall have overall idea about the requirements of Colleges, students, patients 
and public. Th e members of the States may take the views of the students' patients and 
perspectives of the citizens and present the same before the Advisory Council for consideration.  
Further, in the Commission, 3 part -time members who do not belong to the Homoeopathy 
fraternity may look into the patient perspective matters. 
2.2.13 In response to a question about appointment of majority of part -time members by the 
Government of India  and the likely more intervention of the Government in the functioning of 
the commission, the Ministry responded that in the present CCH, nominated members are only 
40% and the functioning of CCH was not satisfactory in achieving the required objectives. The 
proposed Bill intends to select the members of the Commission by a Search Committee C haired 
by Cabinet Secretary. The proposed composition of the Commission is also well balanced where, 
out of 20 members, only 4 part -time members are from elected category. Further, the tenure of 
the members is also fixed for 4 years and no reappointment or  extension is allowed. The 
provision specifying conditions for removal of members is also an important proposal which 
shall ensure a rationale functioning of the Members and Commission.  
2.2.14  Further, in response to a query seeking protection of the int erest of Homoepathy in the 
backdrop of search Committee comprising persons of academic background, the Ministry  stated 
that the proposed Bill intends to select the Chairperson of the Commission and Presidents of the 
Autonomous Boards by a Search Committee  Chaired by Cabinet Secretary along with two 
experts of Indian System of Medicine, one expert from elected representative of registered 
medical practitioner and only one non -Homoeopathy person. Hence, the Search Committee is 
well balanced and neutral. 
2.2.15 Clause 6(7) prevents the Chairman or Members to accept, for a period of two years from 
the date of demitting such office, any employment in any private Medical Institution of 
Homoeopathy.  However, proviso to Clause 6(7) and 6(8) allows the Chairman/Mem bers to 
accept employment. Explaining the rationale for these proviso and exception, the Ministry 
clarified that the Chairperson or member cannot join any employment in any private medical 
institution, whose matter has been dealt with by them for a period of two years after demitting 
the office. The exemption is provided so that the Central Government can permit them to join 
after assuring that there was no conflict of interest involved while dealing the matter of the 
concerned institute.  In response to th e query that it would have been better if the Secretariat for 

18 
 
the Commission is headed by persons with a Homoeopaths background, it was explained by the 
Ministry that the nature of duty of Secretary includes more of administrative in nature. However, 
the qualifications and experience shall be proposed in the rules to be made after enactment of the 
Bill.  
2.2.16 As regards the measures for maintaining a high quality and high standards in education of 
Homoeopathy and the criteria and parameter of 'high qualit y' and 'high standards', the Ministry 
maintained that the proposed National Commission for Homoeopathy is expected to develop a 
roadmap and to lay down policies for requirement of Healthcare infrastructure and Human 
Resource Management and also to maintain  a high quality and high standards in education. It is 
also expected that the Advisory Council consisting of State/UT representatives shall advise the 
Commission in shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education in the 
field of Homoeopathy across the country. The Commission may adopt any new advancement in 
other countries for improving the quality of teaching and practice standards. 
2.2.17  Clause-11 (2) (a) & (b) spells out that the Chairperson of the Commission shall be the ex-
officio Chairperson and every Member of the Commission shall be ex -officio Member of the 
Council' which means  the same people would advise the Commission, and therefore, nothing 
fresh thinking would come out of the intended exercise. The Committee desired  to know as why 
not Advisory council for Homoeopathy should comprise of group of experts from Homoeopathic 
field.  The Ministry submitted that the Advisory Council consists of one member to represent 
each State, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a University i n that State, to be nominated by that 
State Government, and one member to represent each Union territory, who is the Vice -
Chancellor of a University in that Union territory, to be nominated by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs in the Government of India. Furthe r, all members of the Commission shall be ex-officio 
members of the Council and 4 members shall be nominated from the Indian Institute of 
technology, Indian Institutes of Management and Indian Institute of Science shall be Members of 
the Advisory Council.  The role of Advisory Council is to put forth their views and concerns 
before the Commission and help in shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to 
medical education, research and training of Homoeopathy. The Council shall advise the 
Commission on measures to determine and maintain, and to coordinate maintenance of the 
minimum standards in all matters relating to medical education, training and research. Further, 
the Council shall advise the Commission on measures to enhance equitable access t o medical 
education. 
2.2.18 Under clause - 12(3) the Advisory council shall advise NCH on measures to enhance 
equitable access to medical education. In response to the query as to  how the Ministry is 
contemplating to enforce the provision on the grass -root level, especially for wea ker section of 
the Society and in the rural and tribal areas as also the guiding principle of rules and regulation to 
be framed for the purpose under the proposed regulation, the Ministry replied that the National 
Commission for Homoeopathy through its aut onomous Board, namely, the Board of ethics and 
registration for Indian System of Medicine shall ensure that the practice of Homoeopathy is 
allowed only by the licensed practitioners so as to promote equitable and universal Healthcare 
through Homoeopathy mo de of treatment. The Board also regulates professional conduct and 

19 
 
promotes medical ethics through State Medical Councils. Under the Act, the practice of 
Homoeopathy shall be regulated uniformly across the country. 
2.2.19   Responding to the query of the C ommittee as to the measures that can be taken to 
facilitate research programme in Homoeopathic research Institutes and make it a centre of 
excellence in the field of Homoeopathic research, the Ministry replied that the medical research 
shall be included appropriately in the curriculum of undergraduate and postgraduate courses and 
the studies/ results conducted by the students/faculty may be further taken ahead by the research 
institutes of Homoeopathy to a logical use in the healthcare. 
2.2.20 The Committee  sought to know whether any minimum criteria or parameter has been 
contemplated by the Ministry of AYUSH to grant recognition to medical qualifications of 
Homoeopathy at all levels as mentioned   in clause 26(1) (i), the Ministry mentioned that the 
undergraduate and postgraduate medical courses of Indian System of medicine prescribed by the 
NCH shall be the recognized Courses. The recognition shall be granted to the qualifications 
awarded to such candidates after successful completion of the courses. 
2.2.21 Clause 28 deals with powers and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating Board for 
Homoeopathy.  The Ministry was sought to explain about the  quantitative and qualitative 
parameters for hiring third party agency and how it would be ensured that such th ird party 
agency is giving rating as per rules & regulations and do not set their own methodology or 
propagate their own hidden agenda.  The Ministry explained that the Medical Assessment and 
Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall empanel indepen dent rating agencies to 
conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions, within such period of their opening, and every 
year thereafter, at such time, and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations to be 
framed under the Act. Adequate provisions to conduct fair and transparent inspection of the 
Institutions shall be incorporated in the regulation to be prescribed under the Act. 
2.2.22 Clause 30 provides for establishment of the State Medical Council and other provisions 
relating thereto, however, the Bill does not have provisions enumerating powers and functions of 
State Medical Councils. The Committee desired to know the reason for not specifying the 
powers and functions of State Medical Councils.  It was explained that the State Medical 
Council‖ means a State Medical Council of Homoeopathy constituted under any law for the time 
being in force in any State or Union territory for regulating the practice and registration of 
practitioners of Homoeopathy in that State or Union territory. It has been de fined under clause 
2(q) of the Act.  In response to a further query whether the patient or his legal heir can also be as 
an aggrieved party, the Ministry replied that the patients or his legal heir can complain against 
any registered practitioner in respec t of any professional or ethical misconduct to the State 
Medical Council and the State Medical Council shall take action in accordance with the 
regulations. 
2.2.23   NCH Bill, 2019 does not have the provision of prescribing fees. While NMC Act, 2019 
has the provision for regulation fees regulation. The Committee desired to know as how the fees 
would be regulated and whether the recommendations of the Committee given in NMC report 
were taken into consideration while drafting the Bill.  The Ministry apprised that currently, 

20 
 
fixation of fees is being done by the respective State Governments after taking into the account 
of local factors, reservation quota and other issues prevailing in the concerned State. The 
structure of fee also varies from State to State ac cording to the MoUs signed by private medical 
colleges. In most States, fees of seats in deemed universities are not regulated by State 
Governments. Hence no provision has been prescribed for fee regulation. 
2.2.24 Clause 49 states that "No Court shall tak e cognizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act except upon a complaint in writing made in this behalf by an officer authorised by the 
Commission or the Ethic and Registration Board or a State Medical Council, as the case may 
be."  Responding to the q uery as to the types of offenses punishable under the provision of the  
Bill and whether the punishment will be accorded as per IPC any other Act/Rules,  the Ministry 
explained that non -compliance of the provisions of the norms prescribed under the Act sha ll be 
the offences and action shall be taken as per the procedure laid down in the Act. If the offences 
are of serious in nature and the punishment is not defined in the Act, then the matter shall be 
treated under the IPC.  
2.2.25 The Committee wanted to k now as to how the spirit of co -operative federalism can be 
protected in view of preponderance of powers of Central Government as enshrined in the 
provision for giving direction to State Government.  The Ministry replied that Medical Education 
is a concurrent subject under Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. Therefore, the Centre and the 
States needs better coordination in that matter. The directions would be limited to the provisions 
of NCH Act. In order to maintain uniformity of education and practice of  Homoeopathy across 
the country, the preponderance of Central Government over State Government is required. 
2.2.26 The Committee apprehended that powers of Central Government to give direction to the 
Commission and Autonomous Board also restricts the auton omy and independent functioning of 
the Commission. It sought to know the  safeguards that can be spelt out to prevent the power of 
Central Government from becoming authoritative, arbitrative and autocratic so as to ensure 
autonomy and independent functionin g of the Commission and autonomous Boards.   The 
Ministry clarified that the powers of the Central Government to give directions to the NCH and 
the Boards will be limited to policy matters to achieve the objectives of the Act.   Furthermore,  
the Central G overnment can supersede the commission upto one year that can be further 
extended upto a period of six months. During that period the Central Government undertakes all 
function of the Commission. The Ministry explained that  the power to supersede the 
Commission for a period of one year and subsequently for another half year has been proposed in 
the Bill, so that sufficient time will be available to the Central Government to make necessary 
reforms and reconstitute the Commission. 
2.2.27  In the National Comm ission for Homeopathy Bill, 2019, Clause 51spells out the 
provision for joint sittings, of NCISM, NCH, NCYN and National Medical Commission.  There 
is no express provision for chairperson for conducting the joint sitting. The Ministry stated that 
the joint sitting shall be held at least once a year with mutual consent of the Chairman of the 
Commission concerned.  One of the objectives of joint sittings is to promote 'Medical Pluralism'. 
The other objective of the Clause is to approve specific educational an d Medical module on 
programme that could be introduced in UG and PG course across medical system.  The 

21 
 
Committee desired to know whether the Government intends to promote crosspathy, and whether 
it would be practically feasible to have the consent of all Members present and voting to arrive at 
a decision.  The Ministry explained that Agenda for the joint sittings shall be placed with mutual 
agreement by the Chairpersons of the Commissions concerned. There is a provision for joint 
sittings of the Commissions of various other systems of medicine to have interface meetings and 
to exchange the knowledge of development of science and technology in the field of medicine. 
After the consent, specific educational and medical modules or programs in the under -graduate 
and post -graduate courses across medical systems, and promote medical pluralism  shall be 
introduced. 
2.2.28 Clause 57 (3) of the Bill provides that "the Chairman of that Council and every other 
person appointed as the Member and any officer and other employees of the Council and holding 
office as such immediately before such dissolution shall vacate their respective offices and such 
Chairman and other Members shall be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three 
months‘ pay and allowances for the prem ature termination of term of their office or of any 
contract of service".  Responding to the Committee‘s query as to the total number of employees 
working in CCH and the relevant rules for the appointment of the employees on regular basis and 
way out to re tain the employees either in NCH or any other Department of the Government, the 
Ministry replied that there are total 22 regular employees (including 01 on deputation) and eight 
(08) contractual employees working in CCH. So far as appointment of employees on regular 
basis is co ncerned, all the regular posts  have been created by the Govt. of India.  The 
Recruitment Rules of all the regular posts have been approved by the Govt. of India.  The 
appointment have been made on the basis of recommendations of the S election Committee (as 
prescribed under the respective recruitment rules) out of the candidates who applied against the 
open advertisement in News Papers / Employment News and fulfilling the qualification 
prescribed in the Recruitment Rules. Promotions hav e also been made on the recommendations 
of the Departmental Promotion Committee, as prescribed under the Govt. of India rules.  Posts 
reserved for SC/ST/OBC/PH and other categories, have been filled up, accordingly. The 
Committee pointed out that the Gover nment of India on many occasions has repealed so many 
acts and as a result so many organizations were closed but the Government rehabilitated/ 
absorbed their employees in other organization and one of the examples is of NOVOD Board.  
The National Oilseeds and Vegetable Development (NOVOD) Board Act, 1983 was repealed by 
the Parliament of India and its employees were absorbed in other organizations.  The Committee 
sought to know why the Ministry has not made provisions for absorption of employees of CCH 
in other Department of Ministry. The Ministry replied that adequate compensation will be paid to 
all such employees as specified in proviso 2, Section 57(3) of the Act. In view of the past legacy 
of CCH, it will not be advisable to take these employees into th e NCH secretariat. Even, the 
National Medical Commission Act, 2019 stipulates similar action against the employees of MCI. 
2.2.29 As regards the future outlook of Indian Homoeopathic system and the planks of 
international co -operation for its promotion, th e Ministry responded that the Homoeopathy 
system of Medicine has gained much popularity across the globe. The Ministry of AYUSH is 
having Country to Country MoUs for cooperation in the field of Traditional Medicine in about 
20 countries and Institute to In stitute MoUs for Research/ Academic Collaboration in areas of 

22 
 
mutual interest in about 17 institutes. Further, strengthening of Homoeopathy in India will enable 
the Government to promote internationally in other countries also. India is the leading country  
having for having dedicated infrastructure like Homoeopathy teaching colleges (245), Central 
Research Council and Pharmacopoeia Laboratory for drug testing. 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER - III 
Views of Organizations/ Associations/ Institutions/ Experts 
3.1.1 The Committee in its meeting held on 22nd October, 2019 heard the views 
Organizations/Institutions/Associations/ Experts and members of Central Council Homeopathy 
on the various provisions of the NCH Bill, 2019. The previous Committee had issued a Press 
Release inviting memoranda and suggestions from a wide cross -section of stakeholders on the 
Bill. In response to the Press Release, the Committee received a number of memoranda on the 
National Commission for Homeopathy, 2019. The views of Experts/Organizatio ns/Associations 
that submitted their written views in response to the press release and organizations that 
presented their oral evidence before the Committee are enumerated below:  
3.2 Central Council for Homeopathy (CCH) 
3.2.1  The CCH apprised the Committee that the Union of India by an amendment in HCC Act, 
1973 published in the Official Gazette on 13.8.2018 (deemed to have come into force on 
18.5.2018), had superseded the Central Council of Homoeopathy and the President, Vice -
President and other Members of the Council had vacated their offices and a Board of Governors 
had been constituted by the Central Government to exercise the powers and perform the 
functions of the Council under the said Act. The appointment of Board of Governors is an 
interim arrangement made by the Government of India to look after the education and practice of 
Homoeopathy in the country.  However, it is only the recommendatory Board to the Government 
of India. The Committee was, further, informed that the Central Council was not co nsulted in the 
matter of drafting of the present Bill on National Commission for Homoeopathy and the present 
Board of Governors also have not deliberated on this issue as the progress in the matter of the 
NCH was not within the knowledge of the present Board. 
3.2.2 The CCH informed the Committee that, in response to letter No.F.4(1)/2017 -H&FW 
dated 20.03.2017 received  from NITI Aayog with respect to proposed reforms in Homoeopathy 
Central Council Act, the Council have written to the Aayog wherein they have  raised the 
following points: 
 The preamble to the proposed Bill gives a one side story (showing all faults of regulatory 
body) without reflecting the faulty decisions and actions of the concerned administrative 
Ministry, Government of India. 
 The Ministry ( Union of India) has not nominated the acclaimed persons in CCH as 
reflected in the preamble of the NCH Bill. 
 The CCH was being projected as a villain whereas amnesty for admission in all 
Homoeopathic Medical Colleges by non enforcement of Homoeopathy (Mini mum 
Standard of Education) Regulations followed by extension of amnesty by non 
enforcement of Homoeopathy (Minimum Standard of Requirement of Homoeopathic 
Colleges & attached Hospital) Regulations, 2013 was allowed to continue for five years 
by the Central  Government which was against the settled principles and spirit of law. 
This resulted into feeling of laxity in all Homoeopathic Medical Colleges for non -
complying with the said statutory regulations. The Central Government in majority of the 

24 
 
cases did not  implement the provisions of section 19 of HCC Act where they have 
recommended for the same. 
3.2.3  The Council made the following comments on the preliminary report of the 
Committee constituted under NITI Aayog on the reforms of the Homoeopathy Central 
Council Act, 1973 which suggested the repealing of Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 
by constitution of National Commission for Homoeopathy:- 
 The Central Council of Homoeopathy has members elected by the practitioners of 
Homoeopathy, elected from facilit ies of Homoeopathy in the Universities and 40% of 
such elected members have been nominated by Central Government. It is strange to note 
that Committee constituted under Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog in its Report has stated 
that the CCH has failed to maintain uniform standards of medical education, failed to 
create  standard curricula and failed to emphases on evaluation of quality of teaching, 
training in Homoeopathic colleges. However, CCH as per provisions of Homoeopathy 
Central Council Act did its level bes t for creating uniform standards of education by way 
of regulations which were duly sanctioned by the Central Government which enhanced 
the quality of teaching and training in Homoeopathic Medical Colleges, due to which 
India is known as the global leader of Homoeopathy.      
 The Council submitted that, if the Committee constituted under NITI Aayog feels that the 
nominated members could not succeed in making an effective impact over the elected 
members in the Central Council of Homoeopathy, may reflect to p oor selection of 
members by Central Government through nomination or lack of interaction between such 
members and officials of Central Government or lack of faith of Central Government in 
such nominated members. What then will be the guarantee that members  nominated/ 
deputed in the proposed Commission by the Central Government will succeed in creating 
standards of education in Homoeopathy. 
 There appears nothing concrete in the proposed Bill except making strange provisions 
wherein Medical Council of India o r its successors, Central Council of Indian Medicine 
or its successor shall meet once in a year to realize the potential of India's medical 
pluralism and provide more choices to patients without elaborating the same. However, 
what results such joint meetings will bring cannot be imagined.    
 The representative character of Central Council of Homoeopathy and the fine balance 
between elected and nominated has been completely ignored in the proposed Bill by way 
of total exclusion of elected members thereby making a mockery of democratic process. 
 There are other professionals Councils too like Nursing Council of India, Pharmacy 
Council of India, Veterinary Council of India, Bar Council of India etc. but efforts have 
been made by such Committees of Central Govern ment to abolish Medical Council of 
India, Central Council of Homoeopathy and Council of Indian Medicine. There is no 
legitimate reason for doing so when in the shortest span, education on Homoeopathy has 
been put on uniform pattern by the Central Council of Homoeopathy.   
 The officers and staff of Central Council of Homoeopathy implement the policies of this 
Council (to earn their respective salaries) and they have no other influence. Therefore, if 

25 
 
at all NCH is to be formed then all officers and staff of C CH need to absorbed in NCH 
and their rights and privilege need to be protected to avoid legal complicities. 
 The draft Bill is not only plagued by inconsistencies and contradictions including 
undefined grey areas as it has adequately provided for wide and v aried loop holes 
catering to abuse, misuse and corruption and also ends up in denying the legitimate 
meritorious claims of poor and deserving students and therefore turns out to be anti -merit 
and anti-people. 
3.2.4  On the issue of the premature terminatio n of employment of the employees of the 
Central Council of Homoeopathy as mentioned in clause 57(3), the representatives of the 
Council has stated that the employees in the Council, who are working in a statutory body set up 
by the Government of India, req uired to be treated sympathetically and they may be absorbed in 
other Central Government Departments, on the principle of natural justice as  has also been 
recommended in the recommendations of the Department related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health & Family Welfare in the matter of National Medical Commission Bill. 
3.3 Association of Teaching Staff (ATS) 
3.3.1 The ATS in its representation submitted that the biggest lacuna in the development of the 
Homeopathy is that there is no independent allocation of funds for its development. 
Homoeopathy has no direct fund allocation for Research and Development.  The re are only one 
or two National Level Institutes and very few Government medical colleges in country and none 
whatsoever in the state of Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh.  Most of the Homoeopathic 
Colleges are run by members of CCH or other influential people who do not want this sort of Bill 
and development of Homoeopathy.  
3.3.2 The Association, further, highlighted that Department of AYUSH and CCH conduct 
inspection of all the running Homoeopathic Medical Colleges before every academic year. They 
inspect building, infrastructure, equipment and staff. They only inspect qualification, experience, 
attendance and other clerical issue but never the salaries of the teaching staff. This means that 
there is no salary structure, no emoluments, no gratuity, no retirement plans and no other benefit 
for the serving employees. They strongly demanded the inclusion of salary structure in the entire 
private and the Government run Homoeopathic medical colleges all over the country. 
3.3.3 The Association demanded that H omoeopathy should be included in all National Health 
Schemes and Cancer Research and Treatment. Provisions for independent allocation of funds for 
the development of Homoeopathy should be chalked out to ensure the practical utility of the Bill. 
The Association has emphasized on including the formation, development and maintenance of 
standard of Homoeopathy first then quality of service rendered by them.   
3.4 Indian Institute of Homeopathic Physicians (IIHP) 
3.4.1 The Indian Institute of Homeopathic Physici ans strongly supported the National 
Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019. The Institute, further, stated that the proposed 
National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 replacing Homoeopathy Central Council 
(HCC) Act, 2019 and Central Council for Homoeop athy (CCH) constituted under it, is a very 

26 
 
important reformative step by the Government. CCH was established in 1973 to regulate the 
education and practice of Homoeopathy and to maintain the Central Register. Even after more 
than 45 years, CCH could not br ing a mechanism for ensuring quality education in medical 
colleges and to unfold the real potential of Homoeopathy. The proposed Bill seems to be the 
solution for all lapses present in the HCC Act. 
3.4.2  The IIPH highlighted that the structure of the exis ting CCH have majority of elected 
members and only 40% of the members are nominated. There are no provisions in the present 
HCC Act regarding the fixed tenure of membership, conditions for removal of Members, 
penalizing provisions against colleges for non-compliance of standards etc. 
3.4.3 On the composition of the NCH, IIPH pointed out that the proposed NCH Bill, 2019 
seem to be the solution for all lapses in the HCC Act. It is observed that the proposed Bill intends 
to select the members of the Commission  by a Search Committee unlike the present mode of 
election. The proposed composition of the Commission is also well balanced where out of 20 
only 4 part time members are from elected category. Further, the tenure of members is also fixed 
for 4 years and no  reappointment or extension is allowed. The conditions for removal of 
members are also an important provision which shall ensure rationale functioning of members 
and Commission. 
3.4.4  IIPH welcomed the provisions to control nepotism in the Commission. The  Bill also 
provides that no member shall either himself or through any of his family members, directly or 
indirectly, own or be associated with or have any dealings with the managing body of a private 
or non-Government medical institution. 
3.4.5  It has also been submitted by IIPH that other provisions like common entrance exams for 
admission into UG and PG courses, National Exit Exam for the license to practice, enrolment in 
the register and National Eligibility Test for teachers will definitely attract me ritorious students 
into Homoeopathy courses and can also induct quality of education. 
3.4.6  IIHP also submitted that Advisor (Homoeopathy) in the Ministry of AYUSH is 
appointed from among the senior Homoeopathic doctors working in CGHS merely on a seniori ty 
basis. This should be a selection post at all India level to justify the duties of an Advisor and 
must have a pan national character with knowledge, skills and experience. Until then, the Joint 
Secretary in the Ministry of AYUSH dealing with Homoeopathy affairs should be made the Ex -
officio Member in the Commission.    
3.4.7  There are better Government Homoeopathic Medical Colleges having excellent facilities 
and standards, producing outstanding Homoeopa thic graduates. The NIH Kolkata is always in 
controversy and the quality of education being imparted to in North Eastern Institute of 
Ayurveda and Homeopathy (NEIAH), Shillong have not been known to Homoeopathic 
professions yet. Hence, role of Director NEI AH is insignificant in the august body. IIPH, 
therefore, suggested that a panel of Principals/Directors/Professors etc. of Government and 
private Homoeopathy Medical colleges which are attached with the NABH Accreditation 
Hospitals in Homoeopathy may be co nsidered as Ex -officio members for two years by rotation . 
This will certainly give a Pan National status to the National Homeopathy Commission. Taking 

27 
 
doctors of above two Institutions in the Commission as Ex-officio members amount to 
underestimating the s tandards of other Homoeopathic Medical Colleges and denying these 
institutes an opportunity to serve NCH.    
3.5 The Homoeopathic Medical Association of India 
3.5.1 The Association strongly opposed the passing of the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy (NC H) Bill, 2019 and is of the view that the Bill will totally demolish the 
previously existing democratic process by building a new autocracy process. The Association 
submitted that the Bill is nothing but a replica of proposed National Medical Commission 
(NMC) Bill 2019 of Government of India by which present Government wants to take entire 
power in their hands which is quite evident by the proposed formula of Constitution of the 
Commission. the Association has also expressed reservations regarding compositi on of the 
Commission, common final year examination to get license for practice etc.  
3.5.2 The Association, further, stated that the proposed Bill is stipulating about the Research and 
latest development in Homoeopathy that means it is denying the functio ning and existence of its 
own creation i.e. Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH).  The CCRH used to 
perform research work with the help of Government funds, but as per the new proposed Bill, the 
research work will also be done by the Commissi on and so automatically in future the CCRH 
will become defunct. 
3.5.3 The Government of India, by trying to fit itself into the ambit of proposed NCH Bill 2019, 
is challenging the existence and functioning of its own creation – the Homoeopathy Central 
Council Act, 1973 and its amendments time and again. The Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 
1973 was introduced by the Central Government to regularize and bring uniformity in 
Homoeopathic education across the country. What the Central Government is trying to sa y by 
proposed NCH Bill 2019, it can say the same by simply amending the existing Act. 
3.5.4 The Association also pointed out that the National Commission for Homoeopathy has lots 
of flaws within and it contradicts itself. As per the proposed Bill, the Homo eopathic education 
was not affordable all these years. However, even earlier than 1970, Homoeopathic education 
was affordable as a matter of fact. 
3.6 Unified AYUSH Associations of Tamil Nadu 
3.6.1 While welcoming the proposed Bill, the Unified AYUSH Associations of Tamil Nadu were 
of the view that the primary reason for lack of quality education in Homoeopathy system was 
lack of commitment on the part of regulatory body resulting in poor infrastructure in colleges, 
insufficient staff, shortage of hospitals  and training facilities, fake hospital records and faulty 
attendance for inspection. The Association was of the view that surprise educational inspection 
should be conducted and there is a need for more strict provisions to prevent malpractices. The 
education system in Homoeopathy remains woefully short in imparting quality education to the 
Homoeopaths. The number of colleges and students are consistently increasing whereas 
confident prescribers and able teachers are gradually decreasing.  

28 
 
3.6.2 The Association has also argued that AYUSH doctors pursue five and half years courses in 
other forms of medicine and study various subjects such as Physiology, Anatomy, Biochemistry, 
Embryology, Pathology, surgery, ENT, Ophthalmology, Forensic Science, Social and Pr eventive 
Medicines Obstetrics and Gynecology in their four and a half year curriculum. They also pursue 
one year Compulsory Residential Rotatory Internship in various Departments (CRRI) same as 
MBBS doctors. The Association, further, argued that if doctors  from other streams are given 
basic training in modern medicine and are permitted to work at primary level, that will be 
beneficial for people living in rural areas. Many States including Karnataka Maharashtra, Tamil 
Nadu, Gujrat, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bi har, Assam and Uttarakhand have already allowed 
AYUSH doctors to get appointed in Primary Health Care Centers in rural areas to practice 
Allopathy in emergencies. This will not only help in curbing quackery but also ensure that 
people in rural areas get timely treatment.    
3.6.3 The Association has demanded that Homoeopathy should be included in all National 
Health Schemes introduced by Government of India. A study carried out by Public Health 
Foundation of India in 2014 highlighted that in as many as 32% of Primary Health Care Centers 
in remote and tribal areas, it is the alternative medicine practitioners who carry out clinical care. 
Further, according to Rural Health Statistics 2017 -18 of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, there is a huge shortfa ll of doctors and specialists in the rural healthcare system. With 
little or no presence of private hospitals in rural areas, large sections of the rural population do 
not have access to doctors. In such circumstances, training AYUSH practitioners to fill the gaps 
in healthcare delivery at primary level can improve the doctor -patient ratio and provide medical 
assistance to poorest masses in the remote areas. 
3.6.4 The Association has, further, requested to introduce new post graduate educational modules 
i.e. short term diploma courses/ certificate course/ fellowship courses in clinical and non clinical 
subjects like Ultra sonogram, Embryology, epidemiology, Endocrinology, Dermatology etc after 
under graduation. This will result in established practice, devel opment of Homoeopathic system 
and active participation in building a healthy nation. 
3.7 The National Integrated Homoeopathic Medical Practitioner's Association 
3.7.1 The Association has submitted that the Bill will revolutionize medical education 
completely by improving its standards, efficiency and help medical education keep up with the 
pace of improvements in the medical field and also remove red tape and corruption. It will 
promote innovation in training and facilitate Universities to come up with newe r courses and 
speedily implement them, as the Bill proposes composition of Autonomous Boards dedicated for 
each aspect of medical education in detail and also comprehensively defines the composition, 
functions and powers of the each Board. It will facilita te opening of new colleges and increase 
seats in medical colleges. 
3.7.2 The Association further, submitted that if Homoeopathic doctors are trained in modern 
pharmacology and modern advances during their undergraduate course, they will be immediately 
be available to Government for providing Primary Health Care and utilized in Central and State 
Government‘s health projects/ Schemes such as Community health officer in Health & Wellness 

29 
 
Centers under Ayushman Bharat, 108 Ambulance, Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Kary akram (RBSK), 
Medical officers in Primary Health Centers. This will save time and money of both Government 
and the doctors.  
 
3.7.3 It has also been argued by the Association that State Governments should have right to 
frame training programs in ―Modern Pharmacology‖ for Homoeopathic doctors which should be 
conducted through Health Universities in respective States to make doctor more competent to 
provide primary, preventive and emergency services in needy areas. A very good example of 
such educational module is implemented by State Government of Maharashtra under name of 
―Certificate course in modern pharmacology‖ (CCMP) run by ―Maharashtra University of Health 
Sciences‖ since 2016 till today.  
3.7.4 The Association also submitted that many of the State Governments have permitted 
AYUSH doctors to work in PHCs and District hospitals by virtue of notifications that are being 
challenged in  various Courts thus hindering patient care or breeding irregularity in the health 
care system. Hon‘ble Supreme Court of India has in its judgment in Muktiar Chand vs State of 
Punjab and others have clearly stated that unless a doctor is either registered under the Central or 
State Medical Council, he cannot use allopathic medicine. This deployment has produced visible 
results in reducing mortality and morbidity in those States and without any disastrous out comes 
as alleged by some allopathic doctor‘s orga nizations. This provision will enable the AYUSH 
doctor to upgrade their knowledge and then render better patient care. This is highly advocated 
from patient safety point of view. 
3.7.4 AYUHS doctors have played a very vital role in National Immunization Pr ogramme and 
Pulse Polio Program to make it a success. Bridge course will upgrade their current knowledge 
with regard to newer vaccines introduced under Mission Indradhanush. 
3.7.5 The Association advocated in the favor of Bridge Course and submitted that B ridge 
Course training to Homeopathic practitioners regarding the recent advances in the Non 
Communicable Disease and their management will help to reduce mortality and morbidity. 
Further, Tuberculosis, HIV, Malaria, Dengue related national programmes can b e better 
implemented if trained AYUSH doctors are available in the PHCs or at primary Care level in 
private sector. The Association, further, asserted that may result in increased efficiency of public 
health surveillance and data collection  
3.8 Individual Stakeholders  
3.8.1 Few individual stakeholders in their representation have requested to start Bridge Course 
and to start practice Modern Medicines for Homoeopathic doctors so that Homoeopathic doctors 
can be appointed to the post of Community Health Officer. They strongly support NMC Bill & 
Bridge course which is inter -related with National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill 2019. 
They were of the view that by starting a Bridge Course, research on Homoeopathy will increase. 
 

30 
 
3.9 Government of Maharashtra 
3.9.1 The Directorate o f AYUSH, Government of Maharashtra  has submitted that while 
considering the inappropriate ratio between needy population and number of healthcare 
providers/doctors in the country, Niti Ayog and Central Government under National Health 
Policy 2017 directed for creation of a cadre of mid -level health care providers encompassing a 
huge manpower/resource of Ayush medical practitioners for provision of holistic health care to 
needy population. In attempt to achieve this goal the government needed to incorporate various 
modern advances/techniques and inclusion of modern pharmacology syllabus in curriculum of 
Ayush faculty for up gradation in their strengths/skills as per need of public health care delivery 
system such all new supplementary provisions declared by state or central government from time 
to time, needs to be incorporated in the definition o homeopathy. 
3.9.2 Since many of the States are facing problems of appropriate number of skilled medical 
human resource for proper provision of primary healthcare in accordance to criteria laid down by 
WHO, the Niti Ayog and Central Government under National Health Policy 2017 has given clear 
guidelines for utilisation of huge skilled human resource of AYUSH faculty to meet this gap 
between needy population and healthc are service providers . States like Maharashtra has taken 
the first initiative and formulated a competency based post graduate course of modern 
pharmacology for Homeopathic practitioners of the state, after completion of which th ese 
practitioners will be ab le to utilize their skill and knowledge of modern medical system for 
fulfilling the gap in primary healthcare system . The provisions made by State of Maharashtra or 
any other state in future, need  to be incorporated in rules and regulations of proposed 
commission.  It should be assured that such kind of automaticity of the state regarding the 
powers confirmed under concurrent list in subject to providing health care facilities in the 
respective states will not be affected by enforcement of provisions/acts of commission. 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL 
4.1 During the course of the examination of the Bill, the Committee received a large number 
of suggestions on various clauses from experts from Homoeopathy medical fraternity, some 
individuals/organizations/institutions/associations representing Homoeopathic d octors‘ 
communities, in response to the Press Release issued by the Committee.  These memoranda were 
forwarded to the Ministry of AYUSH for its response. The written views of all the State 
Governments/UTs were sought on the Bill.  However, only the Maharas htra Government 
responded in time for its views to be included in the Report. Upon scrutiny of the suggestions of 
the organizations/institutions/ associations/individuals/experts, State Governments vis -à-vis the 
response of the Ministry of Ayush, the Commi ttee, however, finds that the Bill suffers from 
certain infirmities and is of the view that certain provisions of the Bill need to be 
recast/amended/changed to serve the intended purpose of the Bill better and to achieve its 
legislative objective.  
Clause 2 
4.2.1 This clause defines various terms and expressions used in the proposed Act. 
4.2.2 Clause 2 (f) of the Bill deals with the definition of “Homeopathy” and reads as 
under: 
―Homoeopathy‖ means the Homoeopathic System of Medicine and includes the 
use of biochemic remedies"  
Suggestions 
4.2.3 The National Integrated Homoeopathic Medical Practitioner's Association submitted that 
the definition of Homeopathy under clause 2(f) may be amended as follows: 
―Homoeopathy‖ means the Homoeopathic System of Medicine and includes the use of 
biochemic remedies and whether supplemented or not by such modern medicine and 
modern advances as the Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, 
declare by notification from time to time" 
  
4.2.4 Directorate of AYUSH, Government of Maharashtra has suggested that the definition of 
Homeopathy under clause 2(f) may be amended as follows: 
―Homoeopathy‖ means the Homoeopathic System of Medicine and includes the use of 
biochemic remedies and whether supplemented or not by such modern advances as the 
Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, declare by notification 
from time to time"; 
 

32 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.2.5 The Committee notes that there is an acute  shortage of doctors and health 
workforce in the country especially in rural/remote and tribal areas of the country. 
Allopathy or the modern system of medicine has emerged as the most commonly used and 
the more popular system of medicine all around the world. With the advent of the scientific 
age and lifestyle changes, the burden of chronic, systemic and non -communicable diseases 
(NCDs) has been increasing. According to WHO, non -communicable diseases such as 
cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases have been collectively responsible for 70% of 
all deaths worldwide. The Committee is of the view that in the wake of this global health 
crisis, Homeopathy can be utilized as an affordable means to tackle various illness 
including NCDs. The Co mmittee also recognizes the constant efforts of the Government to 
mainstream Homeopathy and integrate it in the health delivery system. The Committee 
strongly believes, with the multitude of health issues that the country is facing today, 
adoption of an inclusive and integrated health care policy has become more important  and 
necessary. The Committee believes that there is a need to create a rational and sustainable 
interface between Homeopathy and the modern medicine  to increase its acceptability.  
Homeopathy and modern medicine are two different streams of knowledge  and there have 
been efforts on the part of  the Government to mainstream  Homeopathy in the National 
Rural Health Mission (NRHM). The Committee also recognizes the services of 
Homeopathy doctors for providing the first line of treatment especially in the rural areas.  
4.2.6 The Committee, therefore,  recommends integration of Homeopathy with the 
modern scientific advances that will be fundamental in providing accessible, affordable and 
quality health care. The Committee in its 109 th Report on the NMC Bill, 2017 had 
recognized the need to build capacity of existing human resource in the healthcare sector to 
address the shortage of healthcare professionals. The Committee at the same time cannot 
overlook the possible risk of non -qualified and untrained doctors prescribing modern 
medicine and inducing irreparable damage to the patients and reiterates its 
recommendation as in its 109 th Report that healthcare professional practicing without 
requisite qualification anywhere in the country may attract   provision. The Committee 
had also recognized specific healthcare issues and challenges of every  State. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation  that State Governments may 
implement measures to enhance the capacity of existing health care professionals including 
Homeopathy practitioners to addre ss State specific primary health care issues/challenges.  
The Committee  also recommends that the States and UTs while formulating laws to 
integrate the best of these two Systems should keep in mind the National Health Goals.  
 
4.2.7 The Committee also belie ves that there is an urgent need to promote and integrate 
Homeopathy with the scientific modern advances to increase its acceptability as a scientific 
and reliable alternate system of medicine. The Committee therefore, strongly recommends 
adoption of science based approaches in Homeopathy  for its seamless integration with the 
National Level health care delivery infrastructure. The Committee recommends that clause 
2(f) should be amended as follows:  
“Homoeopathy” means the Homoeopathic System of Medicine and  includes the use of 
biochemic remedies supplemented by such modern advances , scientific and 
technological development  as the Commission may, in consultation with the Central 
Government, declare by notification from time to time"; 

33 
 
4.2.8 Clause 2 (l) of the  Bill deals with the definition of “National Register” and reads as 
under: 
"National Register" means a National Medical Register for Homoeopathy maintained by 
the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy under section 31" 
4.2.9 Clause 2 (r) of the Bill deals with the definition of “State Register” and reads as 
under 
―State Register‖ means a State register for Homoeopathy maintained under any law for 
the time being in force in any State or Union territory for registration of practitioners of 
Homoeopath"; 
Suggestions 
4.2.10 Mumbai Grahak Panchayat submitted that both these existing definitions were inadequate 
to explain the eligibility of registering in National Register or the State Register. Neither the 
definitions nor any other provisions in the Bil l explain as to who qualifies to be in National 
Register and who qualifies for State Register. Hence, it is suggested that the definition of 
"National Register" and "State Register" must clarify as to who is required to register in the 
National or State Re gisters. Both these existing definitions are inadequate to explain the 
eligibility of registering in National Register or the State Register.  
Ministry's Response 
4.2.11 The Ministry stated that separate definitions for National Register and State Register  are 
mentioned in the NCH Bill, 2019. 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.2.12 The Ministry may examine the suggestions made by the stakeholder for providing 
more clarity to the definition of „National Register and State Register" by incorporating 
the elements of eligibility criteria for registration in the said two registers, as gi ven in 
clause 2(i) and 2(r). 
 
Suggestions 
4.2.13 It was also suggested by Mumbai Grahak Panchayat that the terms ―Professional 
Misconduct‖ and ―Ethical Misconduct‖ should be incorporated in the definition clause of the 
Bill. The Board of ethics and registr ation under clause 27 (1) (b) is mandated to perform 
functions of regulating professional conduct and promote medical ethics. The Board and the 
State Medical council are required to take disciplinary actions in respect of any Professional or 
Ethical Misconduct of registered practitioners. Therefore, the definition clause of the Bill needs 
to define as to what constitutes "Professional Misconduct‖ and ―Ethical Misconduct‖ 
 
 

34 
 
Ministry's Response 
4.2.14 The regulations to be made under the Act to regulate professional conduct and medical 
ethics may address these suggestions. 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.2.15 The Committee is of the view that since the proposed Bill is an attempt to improve 
access to q uality and affordable medical education and treatment in the field of 
Homeopathy and promote medical ethics, it is therefore pertinent to define the terms 
"Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” in the Bill appropriately so that 
there are no ambiguities in the proposed legislation. The absence of definitions of the terms  
"Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” does not provide for any grounds to 
the patients or their legal heirs, who has suffered, to appeal against the misconduct of a ny 
Homeopathy professional. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definitions of 
the terms "Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” should be incorporated in 
the definition clause of the Bill and the same may be borrowed from the Indian M edical 
Council (Professional Conduct Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002. However, at the 
same time, necessary safeguard should be put in place to protect the rights of practitioner 
and they should not be subject to unnecessary harassment.  
4.2.16 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 4 
4.3.1 Clause 4 deals with the composition of the Commission and reads as under; 
(1) The Commission shall consist of the following persons, namely:- 
 (a) a Chairperson; 
 (b) seven ex-officio Members; and 
 (c) twelve part-time Members. 
 
(2) The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity 
and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in Homoeopathy from a recognized University 
and having experience of not less than twenty years in the field of Homoeopathy, out of which at 
least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of healthcare delivery, growth and development 
of Homoeopathy or its education. 
(3) The following persons shall be appointed by the Cent ral Government as ex officio Members 
of the Commission, namely:– 
 (a) the President of the Homoeopathy Education Board; 
 (b) the President of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy;   
 (c) the President of the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy; 

35 
 
(d) Advisor (Homoeopathy) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India  in-  charge of 
Homoeopathy, in the Ministry of AYUSH; 
 (e) the Director, National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata; 
 (f) the Director, North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy,  Shillong; 
 (g) the Director-General, Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy,  Janakpuri, 
New Delhi. 
(4) The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government  as part-time Members 
of the Commission, namely:— 
(a) three Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability,  integrity and 
standing, who have special knowledge and professional  experience in the areas of 
Homoeopathy, management, law, health  research, science and technology and 
economics; 
(b) five Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the  nominees of 
the States and Union territories in the Advisory Council for a  term of two years in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
(c) four members to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of  Homoeopathy 
from amongst themselves, from such regional constituencies and in such manner as may 
be prescribed: 
 Provided that no Member shall either himself or through any of his family members, 
directly or indirectly, own or be asso ciated with or have any dealings with the managing body 
of a private or non-government medical institution which is regulated under this Act. 
Suggestions 
4.3.2 The following suggestions have been received on Clause 4 of the Bill:- 
(i) Indian Institute of Homoe opathic Physicians (IIHP) stated that Advisor 
(Homoeopathy) in the Ministry of AYUSH is appointed from among the senior 
Homoeopathic doctors working in CGHS merely on a seniority basis. Advisor 
(Homoeopathy) in the Ministry of AYUSH should be a selection p ost at all India 
level to justify the duties of an Advisor and must have a pan national character with 
knowledge, skills and experience. Until then, the JS in the Ministry of AYUSH 
dealing with Homoeopathy affairs should be made the Ex -officio Member in th e 
Commission.    
(ii) With respect to clause 4 (3) (e) and clause 4 (3) (f), IIHP suggested that a panel of 
Principals/Directors/Professors etc. of Government and private Homoeopathy 
Medical colleges which are attached with the NABH Accreditation Hospitals in 
Homoeopathy may be considered as Ex-officio members for two years by rotation.  

36 
 
(iii) IIPH was further of the view that in clause 4(4)(c) the four members criterion to be 
elected among Homoeopathic practitioners is very less and suggested that at least six 
members should be elected from 6 different zones as decided by the Commission. 
The members interested in contesting from these zones must be Registered 
Practitioners in that particular zone who would be able to understand the problems of 
the profession in that p articular Zone and also will be able to coordinate with 
practitioners in that particular zone.    
(iv) The National Integrated Homeopathic Medical Practitioner's Association submitted 
that for purpose of increasing Homeopathic doctor's representation in the 
Commission, the strength of members elected by the registered medical practitioner 
of Homeopathy under clause 4(4)(c) may increase from 4 to 10. 
(v) The Central Council for Homoeopathy (CCH) submitted that no parameters have 
been specified to judge the outstandin g ability, proven administrative capacity and 
integrity of concerned persons. No PG Degree course in Homoeopathic Education is 
available in India as such from where candidates holding PG Degree in the 
Homoeopathic education from a University will come.  
(vi) The National Federation of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in India and the 
Homoeopathic Medical Association of India raised concerns over the composition of 
the National Commission of Homeopathy. It was submitted that the proposed 
composition of the Commission indicates that if one State is given a representation in 
a specific year, the next turn of that State would come after a period of not less than 
ten years. They have suggested to increase the membership of the States under clause 
4(4)(b). 
(vii) Mumbai Grahak P anchayat has suggested to increase the strength of part time 
members from 12 to 13. They have proposed for the representation of the patients 
through recognized consumer body. They also suggested that either clause 4 (4) (b) 
should provide 4 years term for  5 members or clause 6(1) should provide term not 
exceeding 2 years.    
(viii) Dr. K.A.Mohit, Chairman, all Bengal Homoeopathic Doctors Forum has submitted 
that representative of grass root level doctors viz. village Homoeopathy practitioners 
from each State should be included in the Commission on the basis of selection.  
Ministry's Response 
4.3.3 The Ministry of AYUSH submitted that unlike the present mode of selection of members in 
CCH, the proposed Bill intends to select the members of the Commission by a Search 
Committee. The proposed composition of the Commission is also well balanced having 20 
members, out of which only 4 Part -time members are elected registered medical practitioners. 
Out of the remaining 16 members, 8 members represent Homoeopathy and  5 members represent 
State/UT Universities and 3 Part time members who can either be from Homoeopathy or from 
other fields like law, health research, science and technology and economics. Therefore, there are 
more than 50% members including Chairman from Ho moeopathy. The term of all Members has 
been proposed for four years only and no reappointment is allowed.  

37 
 
4.3.4 On the issue of  selection of Advisor from All India Level, the Ministry submitted that at 
present the Advisor is a senior person from the CGHS cadre which is having all India stature. 
4.3.5 In response to the submission of the CCH that relates to qualifications for the 
Chairperson of National Commission for Homoeopathy, the Ministry has sub mitted that the 
selection of members is entrusted to Search Committee which shall assess the required qualities. 
Further, Homeopathy PG courses were started in the year 1989, hence sufficient PG holders are 
available in the country. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.3.6 The Committee held detailed deliberations on clause 4 with the officials of the 
Ministry of AYUSH as well as the stakeholders. The Committee received large number of 
suggestions/recommendations from the various sectors of stakeholders. They h ave 
requested to increase not only the strength of the Commission but also the representation 
of States and UTs in the Commission.  
 
4.3.7 The Committee observes that representation of five part time members on rotational 
basis from amongst the nominees of  the States and Union territories in the Advisory 
Council for a term of two years, is not only inadequate but also reflects ineffective 
participation of the States in the Commission. The Committee also notes that if one State is 
given a chance this year, t heir next chance will come after a period of not less than ten 
years. The Committee is surprised to note that though its recommendation related to 
composition of National Medical Commission in the NMC Bill, 2019 had been accepted, the 
same has not been ref lected in this Bill even though this Bill has been based on the NMC 
Bill.  Keeping in view the representative and federal charter of the country as emphasized 
in its 109th Report on the NMC Bill, the Committee recommends that the representation of 
States and UTs should be increased from 5 to 10, on the lines of National Medical 
Commission Act, for their proper representation in the proposed Commission.  
4.3.8 The Committee also notes that of the 20 members, only 4 are elected to the 
Commission. This means 80% of the members in the Bill are nominated by the Central 
Government which clearly reflects lack of proper representation of elected Homeopathic 
medical professionals in the composition of the Commission. The Committee, thus, agrees 
with the contention of the stakeholders that the Commission lacks the democratic character 
in its present form as it is dominated by the members nominated by the Central 
Government. The Committ ee also finds merit in the submission by stakeholders that 
representative of Homoeopathy practitioner should be zone -wise. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the representation of the Homeopathy medical practitioners 
should be increased from 4 to 6 and these 6 practitioners should be elected from each zone 
i.e. East, West, North, South, Central and North-East. The Committee is in agreement with 
suggestion of the stakeholder that the members interested in contesting from these zones 
must be Registered  Practitioners in that particular zone and shall only be allowed to 

38 
 
contest from the zone where they are registered as a Homeopathic practitioner. This way 
elected members will be able to understand the problems of the profession in that 
particular zone an d also will be able to coordinate with practitioners in that particular 
zone. The Committee recommends that the electoral college for the members to be elected 
by the medical practitioners must be well defined in the Bill itself and if not in the Bill, the  
details must be explained in the Rules and Regulations framed under the Act. 
4.3.9 Keeping in view the above deliberations, the Committee, recommends that the total 
strength of the Commission should be increased from 20 to 27 to facilitate proper 
representation of all the sections in the Commission. Hence the composition of the proposed 
Commission w.r.t. part-time members should be as under:- 
(a) three Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing, 
who have special knowledge and professional experience in the areas of Homoeopathy, 
management, law, health research, science and technology and economics; 
(b) ten Members to be appointed on rot ational basis from amongst the nominees of the 
States and Union territories in the Advisory Council for a term of two years in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(c) six members to be elected by the regis tered medical practitioners of Homoeopathy from 
amongst themselves, one from each Six zones i.e. East, West, North, South, central and 
North-east and in such manner as may be prescribed: 
 
4.3.10 The Committee also recommends that clause 4(2) wherein the requisite 
qualifications for the Chairperson of the Commission are prescribed may be amended as 
follows:- 
„„The Chairperson shall be a Hom eopathic medical professional of outstanding ability, 
proven administrative capacity and integrity, possessing a recognized postgraduate 
degree in Homeopathy and having experience of not less than twenty years in 
Homeopathy, out of which at least ten years  shall be as a leader in the area of 
healthcare delivery, growth and development of Homoeopathy or its education.‟‟ 
 
4.3.11 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
Clause 5 
4.4.1 Clause 5 deals with Search Committee for appointment of the Chairperson and members 
of the Commission under proposed Act. The Search Committee shall be chaired by the Cabinet 
Secretary and include two experts nominated by the Central Government of which on e shall be 
with experience in field of Homoeopathy and one from non -medical. One of the elected medical 
members in National Commission for Homoeopathy shall also be a Member of this Committee. 
The Secretary to the Government of India, in charge of the Mini stry of AYUSH, is to be the 
convenor member.  
4.4.2 Provided that for selection of part -time members of the Commission referred in Clause 
(a) of sub-section (4) of section 4, the Secretary referred in section 8 and other Members of the 

39 
 
Boards referred in s ection 20, the Search Committee shall consist of members specified in 
clauses (b) to (d) and Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of AYUSH as 
Convenor-Member and chaired by the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the 
Ministry of AYUSH.  
4.4.3 Clause 5 (2) of the Bill reads as under: 
"The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence of any 
vacancy, including by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a 
Member, or within three months before the end of tenure of the Chairperson or Member, 
make a reference to the Search Committee for filling up of the vacancy." 
Suggestions 
4.4.4 The stakeholders furnished following suggestions in clause 5:- 
(i) The CCH pointed out that Search committ ee fully comprises of Government officials 
and nominees. The procedure and process of selection of persons in the panel of 
Search Committee needs to be detailed. 
(ii) No mechanism is in place to ensure that Government shall initiate the process of 
appointment o f the Chairperson and Members of the Commission, President and 
members of the Boards at least three months before the expiry of the respective terms. 
(iii) The National Federation of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in India and the 
Homoeopathic Medical Association  of India raised concerns on composition of 
Search Committee. They are of the view that all the members are nominated from 
Government of India and none of them elected. Only 2 Homoeopathic experts are in 
the Search Committee.  
Ministry's Response 
4.4.5 The Ministry submitted that selection of members is entrusted to Search Committee who 
shall assess the required qualities and  nominate the members to fill up the vacancies within due 
time. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.4.6 The Committee has been apprised by the stakeholders that the similar provisions, 
where the Search Committee recommended to Central Government regarding 
appointment of members to the Commission, are present in the CCH as well. It has also 
been pointed out that  the Central Government ha d failed in their appointment and had 
issued unlawful guidelines to the members that resulted in litigations. The Committee is of 
the view that since the Search Committee has to play a critical role in the selection of the 
Chairperson and members of the Commission, a proper and streamlined procedure should 
be evolved where the appointment of the Chairperson and Members should be done within 
a stipulated time period by the Central Government so as to avoid unwanted litigations 
that may take place against the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 

40 
 
Ministry to ensure timely appointment of the Chairperson and members of the 
Commission. 
4.4.7   The Committee observes that in Clause 5(1)(c), one expert from amongst the part 
time members referred to in Clause 4(4)(c) will also be a Member of the Search Committee. 
The Committee in Clause 4(4)(c) has recommended to increase the strength of part time 
members from 4 to 6, one each from 6 zones. Since the membership under Clause 4( 4)(c) 
has been increased from 4 to 6, the Committee feels that it would be appropriate to have 
one more representation from the part -time members in the Search Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to increase the strength of experts under clause  5(1)(c) 
from 1 to 2 conforming to the line of NMC Act, 2019.  
4.4.8 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 6 
4.5.1 This Clause provides for the terms and office conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
members. 
4.5.2 Clause 6(7) of the Bill reads as under:  
"The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not accept, for a 
period of two years from the date of demitting such office, any employment, in any 
capacity, including as a consultant or a n expert, in any private Medical institution of 
Homoeopathy or, whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson or Member, 
directly or indirectly: 
Provided that nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing such 
person from accepting an em ployment in a body or institution including Medical 
institution of Homoeopathy, controlled or maintained by the Central Government or a 
State Government". 
4.5.3 Clause 6(8) of the Bill reads as under:  
"Nothing in sub -section (7) shall prevent the Central Government from permitting the 
Chairperson or a Member to accept any employment in any capacity, including as a 
consultant or an expert, in any private Medical Institution of Homoeopathy, whose matter 
has been dealt with by such Chairperson or Member". 
Suggestions 
4.5.4 Section 6(7) prohibits Chairperson/president/Members from accepting employment in any 
private Homoeopathy Medical educational institution for a period of two year but in sec 6(8) the 
authority has been given to Central Government to allow Ch airperson/president/Members for 
accepting such appointment thus giving discretionary authority to Central Government would 
lead to corruption, nepotism and favoritism. 
 

41 
 
Ministry's Response 
4.5.5 In section 6 of the NCH Bill, 2019, it has been proposed that for a period of two years the 
Chairperson and Members shall not enter into any contract or employment in private medical 
institution but allowed for employment in Government colleges. The provision is to discourage 
misuse of powers of the post held in the commission. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.5.6 The Committee notes that at first clause 6(7) forbids the Chairperson and Members 
Commission for accepting any employment in any capacity including as a consultant or 
expert in any private medical education. However, clause 6(8) of the Bill allows the 
Chairperson and Members to accept the same with the prior permission of the Central 
Government. The Committee is of the view that giving the Central Government this 
discretion will leave unnecessary scope for bia s and favoritism. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Clause 6(8) empowering the Central Government to relax this condition 
be deleted. 
4.5.7 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 7 
4.6.1 This clause deals with removal of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission. 
4.6.2 Clause 7 of the Bill reads as under: 
"The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or any 
other Member, who 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central    Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or         a 
Member; or 
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or 
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his 
functions as a Member; or 
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public 
interest; or 
(2) No Member shall be rem oved under clauses (e) and (f) of sub -section (1) unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter." 
 

42 
 
Suggestions 
4.6.3 The stakeholder has submitted that the clause 7(1)(c) permits Central Government to 
remove Chairperson and  Members/Members Secretary of the Commission and President and 
Members of the Boards on the ground of being physically or mentally incapable of performing 
ones duty which is too vague. The Authorities concerned may keep in view the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities Act 2016. CCH also pointed out that the provisions of clause 7(1) (f) are too 
vague. 
Ministry's  Response 
4.6.4 The Ministry submitted that the conditions for removal of members are standard 
conditions which have been approved by the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.6.5 The Committee observes that this clause is on similar lines with the clause dealing 
with removal of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission as in NMC Act, 2019. 
These are certainly standard condit ions for removal as approved by Ministry of Law & 
Justice. The Committee, however, finds some sense in the argument of the stakeholder that 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 should be kept in mind while removing 
such persons on physical or mental grounds as the Bill should not discriminate persons 
with disabilities.   
4.6.6 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
Clause 9 
 
4.7.1 Clause 9 provides for meetings, its Chairperson, quorum and other ancillary matters 
connected to meetings. The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter. 
4.7.2 Clause 9(6) of the Bill reads as under: 
"A person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Commission may prefer an appeal to 
the Central Government against such decision within thirty days of the communication of 
such decision". 
Ministry's Response 
4.7.3 On a specific query regarding the proposal of a common Medical Appellate Tribunal, the 
Secretary deposed before the Committee that the final appellate authority will be th e Central 
Government after the Commission.  The Secretary, further, submitted that making a separate 
body is very expensive, time taking and judiciary is available if somebody is aggrieved by the 
appellate authority.   So, a separate medical appellate tribunal will not be feasible. 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.7.4 The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made in para 4.9.3 of 
109th report on National Medical Commission, 2017 that giving the appellate jurisdiction to 
the Commission with respect to the decisions of the Central Government does not fit into 
the constitutional provision for separation of powers. The Committee, therefore,  
recommends constitution of a common Medical Appellate Tribunal for Indian System of 
Medicine and Homeopathy comprising of a Chairperson, who should be a sitting or retired 
Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of a High Court, and four other Membe rs, 
to have an appellate jurisdiction over the decisions taken by the Commission. One of the 
Members should have a special knowledge and experience in the medical 
profession/medical education, one have special knowledge and experience in the field of 
Indian system of medicine and one in homeopathy and finally the last member with an 
experience in the field of health administration at the level of Secretary to Government of 
India. Consequent changes for replacing the Central Government with the said Tribunal  
may be reflected in all the subsequent clauses viz. clause 29(6), clause 30(4)(b), clause 34(7), 
clause 35(3) or any other related clause of the Bill. 
 
4.7.5 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 10 
4.8.1 This clause deals with the powers and functions of the Commission. 
4.8.2 Clause 10 of the Bill reads as under: 
"(1) The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:— 
(a) lay down policies for maintaining a high quality and high standards in education of 
Homoeopathy and make necessary, in this behalf; 
(b) lay down policies for regulating medical institutions, medical researches and medical 
professionals and make necessary regulations in this behalf; 
(c) assess the requirements in healthcare, including human resources for health and 
healthcare infrastructure and develop a road map for meeting such requirements; 
(d) frame guidelines and lay down policies by making such regulations as may be necessary 
for the proper functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards  and the State 
Medical Councils of Homoeopathy; 
(e) ensure coordination among the Autonomous Boards ; 
(f) take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure compliance by the State Medical 
Councils of Homoeopathy of the guidelines framed and regulat ions made under this Act 
for their effective functioning under this Act; 

44 
 
(g) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to decisions of the Autonomous Boards ; 
(h) make regulations to ensure observance of professional ethics in Medical profession and 
to promote ethical conduct during the provision of care by medical practitioners; 
(i) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
Suggestions 
4.8.3 The stakeholders furnished the following suggestions on Clause 10:- 
(i) CCH submitted that NCH can take action against State Councils as it deems fit to ensure 
compliance. This is totally contrary to federal structure as State Councils are 
independent Statutory Councils constituted under the respective State Acts and these 
Councils will act as per provision of the respective Acts.  
(ii) Directorate of AYUSH, Government of Maharashtra and the National Integrated 
Homoeopathic Medical Practitioner's Association has submitted to amend the clause 
10(1)(d) and  
10(1)(f) as follows: 
  "10 (1) (d) frame guidelines and lay down policies regarding education and 
educational institutions by making such regulations as may be necessary for the proper 
functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards  and the State Medical Councils 
of Homoeopath y without affecting the autonomy of State Medical Councils of 
Homoeopathy as confirmed by respective state acts". 
 
  "10 (1) (f) take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure compliance by the 
State Medical Councils of Homoeopathy of the guidelines fr amed and regulations made 
under this Act for their effective functioning under this Act without affecting the 
automaticity of State Medical Councils of Homoeopathy"; 
 
(iii) Directorate of AYUSH, Government of Maharashtra has also suggested to frame 
guidelines and lay down policies regarding education and educational institutions. 
 
(iv) The power of appellate authority over Medical Assessment and Rating Board for 
Homeopathy (MARBH), given to the Commission which are its own constituent, is 
antithesis to normal functioning of an organization, therefore, the appellate authority 
should ideally be outside the purview and has to be independent organization as in the 
case of Income Tax Appellate Tribunal etc.   
Ministry's Response 
4.8.4 The Ministry clarified that once the Central Act is enforced, the State Acts shall be suitably 
amended in consonance with the provisions of Central Act. In response to the submission of the 
CCH that relates to power of appellate authority over MARBH, the Ministry has submitted that 
the NCH Bill, 2019 does not have the provision of appellate authority. 

45 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.8.5 The Committee recognizes the fact that the State Medical Councils will be 
constituted/established by the State Government, under Clause 30, after the 
commencement of the Act. However, it is the responsibility of the National Commiss ion to 
look over or monitor the functioning of the respective State Council in order to ensure 
compliance of the guidelines framed and regulations made under the act. The Committee 
understands the fact that the Doctrine of Repugnancy would apply in the cas e of conflict 
between the Centre and State and once the Central Act is enforced, the State Acts shall 
suitably be amended in consonance with the provisions of Central Act. The Committee, 
therefore, is in agreement with provision made under the Act and concludes that there is no 
reason to amend the clause.  
4.8.6 The clause is adopted without any change. 
 
Clause 11 
4.9.1 Clause 11 provides for constitution and composition of the Advisory Council for 
Homoeopathy. 
4.9.2 Clause 11(2) reads as under: 
 "The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and the following Members, namely: 
(a) the Chairperson of the Commission shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Council; 
(b) every Member of the Commission shall be ex officio member of the Council; 
(c) one Member, to represent each State, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a University in that 
State, to be nominated by that State Government, and one Member to represent each Union 
territory, who is the Vice -Chancellor of a University in that Union territory, to be nominated by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India: 
Provided that the State Government or the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India, 
as the case may be, shall nominate the Vice -Chancellor of the University in that State or Union 
territory which has the largest number of colleges for Homoeopathy affiliated to it; 
(d) four Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons holding the 
post of Director in the Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian Institutes of Manage ment and the 
Indian Institute of Science. 
(e) The terms of non-ex officio Members in the Council shall be four years." 
  
 

46 
 
Suggestions  
4.9.3 The stakeholders furnished the following suggestions on Clause 11:- 
(i) The Central Council for Homoeopathy submitted t hat the ‗Vice - Chancellors‘ as 
members of Advisory Council may contribute without having any expertise in 
Homeopathy system either in practice or in teaching due to lack of  exposure to medical 
education. It is not clear whether members of Advisory Council  will be full time/ part 
time/ visiting/ ordinary. The function of Advisory Council does not include the area of 
―practice of homeopathy by the profession which is an important omission‖. 
(ii) The National Integrated Homoeopathic Medical Practitioners have subm itted that the 
Vice Chancellor along with the Dean for the Homoeopathic faculty of that University 
in that State/UT should be nominated by the respective State and UT's in the 
Advisory Council for Homoeopathy. 
Ministry's Response 
4.9.4 The Advisory Council consists of Chairperson and all Members of the Commission apart 
from the Vice -Chancellors of all States/UTs and four persons from Indian Institutes of 
Technology, Indian Institutes of Management and the Indian Institute of Scienc e. Further, the 
role of Advisory Council is to put forth the views and concerns of States regarding medical 
education, research and training before the Commission and to advise the Commission in the 
said matters. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.9.5 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to clause 11(2)(c) wherein Vice -
Chancellors of a University from each State/UT would be Members of the Advisory 
Council for Homoeopathy. The Committee observes that in NMC Act, Vice -Chancellors of 
Health University of each State/UT was given representation where as this Bill refers to any 
University. The Committee also notes the argument put forth by the stakeholders' w.r.t. the 
contribution of Vice-Chancellor of a University in a State/UT representing each State. The 
Committee is of the view that given the different nature of Homeopathy system of 
medicine, appropriate representation from recognized Homoeopathy Colleges/Universities 
in a State/UT must be given. The representative would be in possession of specialization 
knowledge and skills of their own system of medicine and would offer a much better 
understanding of challenges and solutions thereof. However, in the case where there is no 
recognized Homoeopathy College/University, then Vice -Chancellor of any University may 
be appointed.   
4.9.6 The Committee also notes that the representation from State Medical Councils is 
missing in the Advisory Council. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provision 
for the representation of members from the State/UTS from amongst elected members of 
the State Medical Council should be added in the clause, on the lines of NMC Act 

47 
 
4.9.7 The Committee also notes that the representation of  the Chairman, University Grants 
Commission and the Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council is missing in 
the NCH Bill, 2019, as given in NMC Act, 2019. The Committee would like to reiterate that 
the since Bill is based on the lines of NMC Act, therefore, representation of  the Chairman, 
University Grants Commission and the Director, Nati onal Assessment and Accreditation 
Council should also be there in the Advisory Council in the NCH Bill. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to add similar provision for their representation in the 
Advisory Council for Homeopathy. 
4.9.8 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 12 
4.10.1 Clause 12 provides for functions of Advisory Council for Homeopathy 
4.10.2 Clause 12(1) reads as under:  
"The Council shall be the primary platform through which the States and Union 
territories may put forth their views and concerns before the Commission and help in 
shaping the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education and 
training". 
 
4.10.3 Clause 12(2) reads as under:  
"The Council shall advise the Commission o n measures to determine and maintain, and 
to co-ordinate maintenance of, the minimum standards in all matters relating to medical 
education, training and research". 
Suggestions 
4.10.4    It has been suggested that the words 'development' may be added, afte r the word 
training and before the word 'of' in third line to give impetus to the outcome - centric approach. 
Similarly, in Clause 12 (2) the word 'development' may be added after the word research. 
Ministry's Response 
4.10.5 The development of Homoeopathy is the inherent spirit of the Bill. The role of Advisory 
Council is to put forth their views and concerns before the Commission and help in shaping the 
overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education, research and training of 
Homoeopathy for taking proper measures in overall development of Homoeopathy. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.10.6 The Committee is of the view that when the development of Homoeopathy is the 
inherent spirit of the Bill as submitted by the Ministry, there should be no se cond thought 
on the part of the Ministry to add the word "Development" in clause 12(1) and 12(2). The 

48 
 
addition of word "Development" will only make explicit, of what is implicit in the Bill. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends addition of the word "develo pment" in clause 12(1) 
and 12(2). 
4.10.7 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
Clause 15 
4.11.1 This clause provides that National Exit Examination for students graduating from the 
medical institutions for granting license to medical practice.  
Suggestions 
4.11.2 The following suggestions have been received of Clause 15:- 
(i) Few Stakeholders that include CCH, Association of Teaching Staff have suggested to 
remove National Exit Test for students graduating from the medical Institutions fo r 
granting license to medical practice. They have expressed their concern as to why a 
student passing first three exams from a recognized University has to appear for a 
common final year examination to get license to practice as Medical Practitioner.   
  
(ii) Dr. Sukhdeo M Makhija, MD (Medicine), Guest Faculty in Allied subjects of BMHS 
curriculum has suggested that the nomenclature of National Exit Test should be 
―National Assessment Test‖. The curriculum for the proposed Exit Test for 
Homoeopathy students gra duating from recognized Indian Institutions should be 
based on practical skills and clinical acumen only but not on theoretical aspects and 
principles. 
 
(iii) Adv. Shirish V Deshpande, Chairman, Mumbai Grahak Panchayat  have suggested to 
curtail the time provided for the National Exit Test from 3 years to 1 year.  
Ministry's Response 
4.11.3 The Ministry while justifying upon this clause Stated that the National Exit Test shall be 
conducted by the Commission to assess and  ensure the quality of students coming out of 
Institutions across the country before registration and offering license to practice. It has been 
proposed that the final year exam of the Undergraduate course shall serve as National Exit Test 
and it is clarified that no additional test shall be conducted for offering license to practice. 
4.11.4   In response to curtail the time for the National Exit Test, the Ministry has Stated that the 
National Exit Test shall be operational within three years. It implies th at the Commission can 
implement National Exit Test even earlier. 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.11.5  The Committee believes that National Exit Test will serve as an instrument of 
quality assurance and ensure that the quality and competencies  of a Homeopa thic doctors 

49 
 
before they starts practicing are guaranteed and standardized in terms of various quality 
norms. It is envisioned to standardize the quality of the Homeopathic doctor, i.e. to certify 
to the people that the doctor licensed by the NCH has the appropriate level of competencies 
and skills needed for a doctor irrespective of which medical institution he or she is trained 
in.  This is an attempt to overcome the huge disparities in teaching and educational 
standards prevailing across medical colleges  and give the practitioner a brand value. The 
Committee has, further, noted that many of the Homeopathic medical institutes have 
faculty and infrastructure shortages resulting in poor quality of education. This leaves a 
wide gap in the knowledge of the stu dents graduating from these institutes as compared to 
the institutes that have adequate faculty and infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, is 
in the favor of the National Exit Test which is also in line with the provision of the NMC 
Act, 2019.  
 
4.11.6 The clause is adopted without any change. 
Clause 16 
4.11.7 Clause 16 provides for uniform National Eligibility -cum-Entrance Test and counseling 
for admission in Post-graduate course in medical institutions. 
Suggestions 
4.11.8 Stakeholders like the National  Federation of Homeopathic College in India and 
Homeopathic Medical College in India is of the view that the admission in P.G. courses in 
Homeopathy may be based on the merit of National Exit Exam so as to reduce the burden on the 
proposed Commission and the also on the students/doctors. 
Ministry's Response 
4.11.9 The Ministry submitted that as per NC H Bill, separate post graduate entrance test has 
been proposed for PG admissions apart from the National Exit Test. The Ministry would like to 
adopt the simila r provision of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 by making the 
National Exit Test as entrance test for admission to Post graduate courses. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.11.10 The Committee takes the note of the concerns expressed by the stakeholders stating 
that the PGNET will be an added burden on both the students and the examiner. However, 
the Committee believes that the PGNET for admission to PG courses may continue as of 
now as an interim management till a mechanism is evolved within three to five years for the 
conduct of a common final year examination which has  an adequate structure, so that 
subjectivity in the theoretical examination is replaced by common problem/case study 
based MCQ type examination.  
4.11.11  The clause is adopted without any change. 

50 
 
Clause 17 
4.12.1  Clause 17 provides for uniform National Teachers Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy for 
appointment of teachers.  
4.12.2  Clause 17 reads as under: 
"(1) A National Teachers’ Eligibility Test shall be conducted s eparately for the postgraduates of 
Homoeopathy who desire to take up teaching profession in that discipline. 
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy 
through such designated authority and in such manner as may be specified by regulations. 
(3) The National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy shall become operational on such 
date, within three years from the date on which this Act comes into force, as may be notified by 
the Central Government: 
 Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the teachers appointed 
prior to the date notified under sub-section (3)". 
Suggestions 
4.12.3 Dr. Parmod Kumar, Professor and HOD (Practice of Medicine), Secretary, Association of 
Teaching Staff (ATS) w elcomed the Teachers Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy and all other 
qualifying conditions mentioned in "minimum standard education for Homoeopathy". However, 
he has raised the questions as to why no one has ever taken up the issue of pay parity, pay 
structure, Gratuity and pension plans for Homoeopathic Teachers. 
Ministry's Response 
4.12.4 At present the pay related matters are regulated by the respective State Governments. 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.12.5 The Committee appreciates the idea of National  Teachers Eligibility Test as it is the 
best way to tap qualified persons into the teaching profession.  The Committee is aware of 
the fact that one of the major challenges in promotion of Homoeopathic education and 
practice is inadequate as well as sub -standard faculty and infrastructure. Such a merit 
based examination will certainly improve the education being imparted to students 
studying Homoeopathy as well as improve the quality of health care services.  
4.12.6 The Committee is also of the considered view that pay parity, pay structure, gratuity 
and Pension plans is an important motivational factor for Homoeopathic medical/teaching 
professionals across the country. Improving the motivation and incentives of teachers will 
certainly improve the overall qu ality of the education system. This will result in 
augmenting a sense of equality among the homeopathic professionals and also encourage 
more and more people to take up Homeopathy as a career. The Committee, therefore, 

51 
 
recommends to the Ministry to take these issues of pay parity, pay structure, gratuity, 
pension plans and other related incentives of Homeopathic doctors with the State 
Governments so that Homeopathic professionals get similar incentives as that of a MBBS 
doctor.  
4.12.7 While deliberating section 17 , the Committee finds that nothing contained in this 
section shall apply to the teachers appointed prior to the date notified under sub section (3).  
The Committee notes that there are many teachers in the syste m who do not hold a post -
graduate degree but are part of the education system. They are likely to remain in the 
system for quite a long period of time. For such teaching professionals, it would not be easy 
to clear the NET exam. Therefore, there must be a provision for a training or refreshers 
course for them followed by Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT) so that their knowledge base 
in widened as well as updated and they are better equipped to teach efficiently. 
4.12.8 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
Clause 18 
4.13.1 Clause 18 provides for constitution of three Autonomous Boards under the overall 
supervision of the Commission. The three Autonomous Boards are the Homoeopathy Education 
Board, the Medical Assessment and Rating Board fo r Homoeopathy and Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Homoeopathy.  
Suggestions 
4.13.2 The following suggestions have been received of Clause 18:- 
(i) The Central Council of Homoeopathy submitted that the draft Bill reflects the 
intention to establish Autonomous Boards under the overall supervision of the 
Commission, which appears to be antithetic being autonomous in character on one 
hand, but subjugated to overall control of Commission on the other hand. 
(ii) The National Federation of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in India and 
Homoeopathic Medical Association of India, West Bengal Branch have expressed 
their concern over independent working of Autonomous Boards and submitted that 
there would not be any autonomy and Government will try to get control over it. 
(iii) Dr. Parmod Kumar, Professor and HOD (Practice of Medicine), Secretary, 
Association of Teaching Staff (ATS) suggested forming Research and Development 
Board along with constitution of Commission and Advisory Council exclusively for 
Homoeopathy with its independent budget. 
Ministry's Response 
4.13.3 The Ministry submitted that the Autonomous Boards are constituted by the Central 
Government under the overall supervision of the Commission. The Boards have autonomy to 
function as per the guidelines and policies framed by the Commission.  

52 
 
4.13.4 The suggestions have also been received to form a research and development board 
exclusively.  However, the Ministry submitted that component of research standards to be taught 
to students is a function of Homeopathy Education Board.  
Recommendations/Observations 
4.13.5 The Committee time and again in its DFG reports has been emphasizing upon the 
quality control and drugs standardization and promotion of research for research outputs 
to be translated into remedies/ medicines in the public health care system. The Committee 
believes that research must be carried on with the pursuit for its scientific validation for 
better acceptability and higher credibility. The Committee recognizes the fact that 
Research and Development is vital for growth and promotion of Homoeopathy.  
4.13.6 The Committee hopes that the Homoeopathy Education Board would take care of 
research pursuits and standards during the course of education as stated in Clause 26(h) 
and give adequate priority an d focus to research and development. However, the 
Committee feels that since research being an important component for the growth of any 
medical system around the world, it should be explicit in the name of the board. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends t hat the name of "The Homoeopathy Education 
Board" be renamed as "The Homoeopathy Education, Research and Development Board" 
in commensurate to the expected role and responsibilities of the said Board.  
4.13.7 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted  
 
Clause 19 
4.14.1 Clause 19 provides for composition of the following Autonomous Boards  
4.14.2 Clause 19(1)(a) reads as under: 
"the Homoeopathy Education Board shall consist of a President and four Members from 
the discipline of Homoeopathy" 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.14.3 The Committee observes that since the research is an important component of 
Homeopathy, there should be representation of the apex research body for Homeopathy i.e. 
Central Council for Research in Homeopathy in "The Homoeopathy Education, Research 
and Development Board". The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that the Director -
General or a member of CCRH should also have representation in the said Board. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 19(1)(a) may be amended as under:- 
 
"the Homoeopathy Education Board shall consist of a President and five Members, out 
of whom four members shall be from the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other 

53 
 
member shall be the Director -General/Member, Central Council for Research in 
Homeopathy, Janakpuri, New Delhi" 
4.14.4 Clause 19(1)(b) reads as under: 
 "the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall consist of a President 
from the discipline of Homoeopathy and two Members, out of whom one Member shall be from 
the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other Member shall be chosen  from any of the disciplines 
of management, quality assurance, law or science and technology" 
4.14.5 Clause 19(1)(c) reads as under: 
 "the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall consist of a President from 
the discipline of Homoeopathy and two Members, out of whom one Member shall be from the 
discipline of Homoeopathy and the other Member shall be a person who has demonst rated pubic 
record of work on medical ethics or chosen from any of the disciplines of quality assurance, 
public health, law or patient advocacy".  
Suggestions 
4.14.6 The following suggestions have been received on the Clause 19 
(i) The National Integrated Homo eopathic Medical Practitioners Association submitted 
that in the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy and the Board of 
Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy, there should be four members other than 
President, out of whom three should be from the discipline of Homeopathy.  
(ii) It is also suggested that in the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for 
Homoeopathy and the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy, there 
should be two members from the discipline of Homoeopathy instead of just one.  
(iii) The Board of Ethics and Registration should be independent of NCH and in order to 
maintain its autonomy. 
Ministry's Response 
4.14.7 The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy and the Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Homoeopathy have been proposed for containing a President and two Members, 
out of which one member shall not be from Homoeopathy. These two Boards deal with the most 
sensitive functioning of the Commission. Hence, it has been proposed to include a neutral person 
to balance the functioning.  
4.14.8 The Board of Ethics and Registration is an autonomous Board to maintain National 
Register for all licensed practitioners of Homoeopathy and to regulate professional conduct and 
promote medical ethics. In the process of exercising its functions, the Board may make such 
recommendations to the Commission for achieving overall objectives of the Act. 
 

54 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.14.9 The Committee is in agreement with the view of stakeholders that in the MARBH 
and the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy, there should be two members 
each from the discipline of Homoeopathy instead of just one besides President to discharge 
its enshrined function and responsibility and to have judicious decision whenever required.  
Moreover, two Members from the field of Homoeopathy wo uld add advantage to each 
Board for  in-depth understanding of the profession and i ts functioning  in a more 
democratic way. Further, the large composition of Ethics and Registration for 
Homoeopathy would provide adequate platform for interaction with State Medical Council 
of Homoeopathy to effectively prompt and regulate the conduct of Medical practitioner of 
Homoeopathy. The Committee also understands that one person from any of the disciplines 
of managemen t, quality assurance, law or science or patient advocacy, and the work 
related to medical education and professional standards would adequately diversify the 
composition of two Boards to equip additional specialization knowledge in that field. The 
Committee believes that representation of member other than Homeopathy professional 
will bring in wide range of knowl edge of other fields in the Boards along with the 
knowledge of Homeopathy. This has become necessary for better administration of Boards 
whose func tioning requires a diversified range of knowledge of other fields as well. The 
Committee, therefore, is in consonance with the Ministry's view to have a neutral person to 
balance the functioning of the Commission. 
 
4.14.10 The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 19(1)(b) and 19(11) (c) may be 
amended as under:- 
 "(b) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall consist of a President 
from the discipline of Homoeopathy and three Members, out of whom two Member shall be 
from the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other Member shall be chosen from any of the 
disciplines of management, quality assurance, law or science and technology"; 
"(c) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall consist of a President from 
the discipline of Homoeopathy and three Members, out of whom two Member shall be from 
the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other Member shall be a person who has demonstrated 
pubic record of work on medical ethics or chosen from any of the disciplines of qual ity 
assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy." 
Clause 28 
4.15.1 Clause 28 deals with powers and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating Board for 
Homoeopathy.  
4.15.2 Clause 28 of the Bill reads as under: 
 "The Medical Assessment and Rating Boa rd for Homoeopathy shall perform the 
following functions, namely:– 

55 
 
(a) determine the process of assessment and rating of medical institutions on the basis of their 
compliance with the standards laid down by the Homoeopathy Education Board, in accordance 
with the regulations made under this Act; 
(b) grant permission for establishment of a new medical institution in accordance with the 
provisions of section 29; 
(c) carry out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such institutions in 
accordance with the regulations made under this Act: 
 Provided that the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy may, if it 
deems necessary, hire and authorise any other third party agency or persons for carrying out 
inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such institutions: 
 Provided further that where inspection of medical institutions is carried out by such third 
party agency or persons authorised by the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for 
Homoeopathy, it shall be obli gatory on such institutions to provide access to such agency or 
person; 
(d) conduct, or where it deems necessary, empanel independent rating agencies to conduct, 
assess and rate all medical institutions, within such period of their opening, and every year 
thereafter, at such time, and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations; 
(e) make available on its website or in public domain, the assessment and ratings of medical 
institutions at regular intervals, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act; 
(f) take such measures, including issuing warning, imposition of monetary penalty, reducing 
intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the Commission for withdrawal of 
recognition, against a medical institution for its failure to mainta in the minimum essential 
standards specified by the Homoeopathy Education Board, in accordance with the regulations 
made under this Act." 
Suggestions 
4.15.3 The CCH pointed out that the criteria for hiring a third party agency are not provided. It is 
not cleared as to how it would be checked whether such third party agency has verified as per 
rules and regulations. There should be express provision for legal responsibilities. Considering 
all aspects, verification has to be done through assessment cell in th e Commission itself through 
assessors who will be appointed directly by the Board. CCH, further, submitted that empanelling 
a rating agency is not a good idea. It is experienced that presently there are many rating agencies 
who give rating as per their own methodology which is not in consonance with regulations. 
Ministry's Response 
4.15.4 The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine shall empanel 
independent rating agencies to conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions, within such 
period of their opening, and every year thereafter, at such time, and in su ch manner, as may be 

56 
 
specified by regulations to be framed under the Act. Adequate provisions to conduct fair and 
transparent inspection of the Institutions shall be incorporated in the regulation to be prescribed 
under the Act. 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.15.5 The Committee notes that one of the targeted missions of the proposed legislation is 
to have an objective periodic and transparent assessment of Medical institution. In this 
regard, ratings have been prescribed to facilitate the institutions to assess their 
performance vis-a-vis set p arameters through introspection. This  helps the institution to 
know its strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities through an informed review process 
ratings and also helps in identifying areas of planning and resource allocation and 
formulate direction and identity for institutions. It, thus, plays a pivotal role in the 
development of the institutions.  
 
4.15.6 The Committee, therefore, is in the favor of making quantitative and qualit ative 
parameters for hiring and empanelling third party agency more explicit in the Bill to avoid 
any confusion or conflict in the future.  The Committee is of the view that the methodology 
for conducting inspection by the third party agency must also be made crystal clear, so that 
these agencies do not evolve their own criteria while rating any institution. The Committee 
also recommends that necessary safeguards and pre caution may be specified to ensure that 
the rating agencies do not give any unwanted leverage to any institute that may improve 
their rating. 
 
4.15.7  Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted  
 
 Clause 30 
4.16.1 Clause 30 provides for es tablishment of the State Medical Council and other provisions 
relating thereto.  
4.16.2 Clause 30(3) reads as under:- 
 "A practitioner of Homoeopathy who is aggrieved by the order passed or the action taken 
by– 
(a) the State Medical Council under sub-section (2) may prefer an appeal to the Board of Ethics 
and Registration for Homoeopathy and the decision, if any, of the Board of Ethics and 
Registration for Homoeopathy thereupon shall be binding on such State Medical Council, unless 
a second appeal is preferred under sub-section (4); 
(b) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy under the first proviso to sub -section 
(2) may prefer an appeal to the Commission  
 

57 
 
Suggestion 
4.16.3       Mumbai Grahak Panchayat has submitted that present Bill  does not provide for 
powers and functions of State Medical Council at all. Since clause 57 repeals Homoeopathy 
Central Council Act, 1973, it is necessary to provide powers and functions of State Medical 
Council in this Bill. They have, therefore, suggeste d to add provisions enumerating powers and 
functions of State Medical Councils. 
4.16.4      The stakeholders submitted that existing provisions allows appeal only by the 
aggrieved practitioner of Homoeopathy. It is possible that the complainant (patient or  his legal 
heir) could also be aggrieved. It has therefore been suggested to replace the words "A 
practitioner of Homoeopathy who is aggrieved" with "Any party aggrieved by" 
Ministry's Response 
4.16.5 The powers and functions of State Medical Councils shal l be specified by the concerned 
State Acts to be framed/amended in accordance to the Central Act.  
4.16.6 The patients or his legal heir can complain against any registered practitioner in respect of 
any professional or ethical misconduct to the State Medi cal Council and the State Medical 
Council shall take action in accordance with the regulations. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.16.7 The Committee is in agreement with the views/justification given by the stakeholders 
regarding the rights of the patients to complain against any register practitioner in respect 
of any professional or ethical misconduct. It is pertinent that the contents  of the clause 
30(3) must recognise that the patient including their legal heirs could also be aggrieved 
party.  So there is no need to replace the words "A practitioner of Homoeopathy who is 
aggrieved" with "A practitioner of Homoeopathy or patient (inclu ding who is aggrieved)" 
as suggested by the stakeholder. 
 
4.16.8 The Clause is adopted without any change 
Clause 51 
4.17.1 Clause 51 provides for joint sittings of the Commission, the National Commission for 
Indian Systems of Medicine and the National Medical Commission, to enhance the interface 
between Homoeopathy, Indian System of Medicine and Modern System of Medicine.  
Suggestions 
4.17.2 The National Federation of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in India and the 
Homoeopathic Medical Association of India are of the view that the proposed Bill indulges and 
encourages Crosspathy which is not possible as per order of the Hon‘b le Supreme Court. 
Medical pluralism is never feasible, as all the systems are individual vertical systems with own 
defined dedicated principle. They have to be developed in their own glory.  

58 
 
Ministry's Response 
4.17.3 The Ministry submitted that t here shall be a joint sitting of the Commission, the National 
Commission for Homoeopathy and the National Medical Commission, at least once a year, at 
such time and place as they mutually appoint, to enhance the interface between Indian System of 
Medicine, Homoeopathy and modern system of medicine. Agenda for the joint sitting may be 
placed with mutual agreement by the Chairpersons of the Commissions concerned. 
4.17.4 The Ministry further submitted that a fter the consent, specific educational and medical 
modules or programs in the under-graduate and post-graduate courses across medical systems, to 
promote medical pluralism shall be introduced. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.17.5 The Committee is of the view that any effort towards creating a rational and 
sustainable interface between the various systems between Indian System of Medicine 
(ISM), Homoeopathy and Modern Medicine is a laudable objective. Every system of 
medicine has i ts own philosophy and methodology. The AYUSH systems are pure systems 
and each of them has phenomenal advantages in themselves. The Committee, therefore, is 
in agreement with Ministry that joint sittings would provide for an interface between 
different systems of medicine and certainly does not encourage crosspathy. 
4.17.6  This clause is adopted without any change. 
 
Clause 52 
4.18.1  Clause 52 deals with State Government to promote primary healthcare in rural areas. 
Clause 52 reads as under: 
4.18.2  Clause 52 reads as under:- 
Every State Government may, for the purposes of addressing or promoting healthcare in 
rural area, take necessary measures to enhance the capacity of the healthcare professionals. 
Suggestions 
4.18.3 Directorate of AYUSH, Government of Maharashtra has suggested to  amend Clause 52 
as follows: 
"Every State Government may, for the purposes of addressing or promoting healthcare 
facilities in required areas of States, take necessary measures to enhance the capacity 
and ability of the healthcare professionals of any system of medicine". 
Recommendations 
4.18.4 The Committee is of the view that presently the health infrastructure of the country 
especially the public health services delivery system in the rural, tribal and urban areas of 

59 
 
the country are highly inadequate. People from rural areas have to travel miles for availing 
primary health care to get the first line of treatment. Such an environment that lacks basic 
health care needs a focused approach and the States be requested to take necessary 
measures to enhance the health professionals in the rural areas .  The Committee also feels 
that the services of AYUSH Doctors should not be just limited only to rural areas , instead 
they should be promoted and encouraged at pan India level.  
4.18.5 The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 52 may be amended as follows:  
"Every State Government may, for the purposes of addressing or promoting public 
health care especially in rural, tribal and urban slum areas, take necessary measures to 
enhance the capacity of the healthcare professionals". 
4.18.6 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
Clause 57 
4.19.1 Clause 57 provides for repeal and saving. The Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 
shall stand repealed and the Central Council of Homoeopathy shall stand dissolved from the date 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government. The Chairman and other Me mbers and 
employees of Central Council of Indian Medicine shall vacate their respective offices and be 
entitled to the compensation.  
4.19.2   Clause 57 (3) reads as under:- 
 "On the dissolution of the Central Council of Homoeopathy, the person appointed a s the 
Chairman of that Council and every other person appointed as the Member and any officer and 
other employees of the Council and holding office as such immediately before such dissolution 
shall vacate their respective offices and such Chairman and othe r Members shall be entitled to 
claim compensation not exceeding three months’ pay and allowances for the premature 
termination of term of their office or of any contract of service: 
Provided that any officer or other employee, who has been, immediately bef ore the dissolution of 
the Central Council of Homoeopathy appointed on deputation basis to the Central Council of 
Homoeopathy, shall, on such dissolution, stand reverted to their parent cadre, Ministry or 
Department, as the case may be: 
Provided further th at any officer, expert, professional or other employee who has been, 
immediately before the dissolution of the Central Council of Homoeopathy employed on regular 
basis or on contractual basis by the Council, shall cease to be such officer, expert, professi onal 
or other employees of the Central Council and shall be entitled to such compensation for the 
premature termination of his employment, which shall not be less than three months’ pay and 
allowances, as may be prescribed". 
 

60 
 
Suggestions 
4.19.3 Various stakeholders like National Federation of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in India 
and the Homoeopathic Medical Association of India are of the view that it is absolutely in 
contradiction of the service rules of the Central Government and also an inhuman act as most of 
them will fail to find any other means of life to run their livelihood at their age. They have 
therefore requested to direct the Government to modify or to set aside the provisions of Section 
57(3) as referred. 
Ministry's Response 
4.19.4 The Ministry has submitted that Clause 57 provides for dissolution of the Central Council 
of Homoeopathy including the Chairperson, Members and other employees of the Council. So 
far as appointment of employees on regular basis is concerned, it is stated that all th e regular 
posts have been created by the Government of India.  The Recruitment Rules of all the regular 
posts have been approved by the Government of India.  The appointment have been made on the 
basis of recommendations of the Selection Committee (as pres cribed under the respective 
recruitment rules) out of the candidates who applied against the open advertisement in News 
Papers / Employment News and fulfilling the qualification prescribed in the Recruitment Rules. 
Promotions have also been made on the rec ommendations of the Departmental Promotion 
Committee, as prescribed under the Govt. of India rules.  Posts reserved for SC/ST/OBC/PH and 
other categories, have been filled up, accordingly. 
4.19.5 Adequate compensation will be paid to all such employees as specified in proviso 2, 
Section 57(3) of the Act. In view of the past legacy of CCH, it will not be advisable to take these 
employees into the NCH secretariat. 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.19.6 The Committee finds premature termination of the employees of CCH after its 
dissolution very harsh and unfair. The provision is against the p rinciple of natural justice 
and also violates the Article 21 of the Indian constitution by depriving employees of living a 
life with d ignity and Right to Livelihood. The Committee finds that there are only 21 
regular employees working at the CCH .  Termination of their service at this juncture, may 
lead to severe hardship and express violation of constitutional rights as provided in Artic le 
21 of the Constitution. 
4.19.7 The Committee has been apprised that the Government of India has taken the step 
to repeal these bodies quoting the ground of corruption, however, unlike Medical Council 
of India, not even a single employee has been found c orrupt in CCH by the Ministry of 
AYUSH, so the premature termination of employees cannot be validated on such grounds. 
4.19.8 The Committee, further, believes that the compensation amounting to three month‟s 
pay and allowances for the premature termination  of their employment is not adequate 
compared to heavy monetary loss and regular income of  years of pay and allowance  they 
would lose due to premature termination. 

61 
 
4.19.9 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry for either 
accommodating the staff of the CCH in the new Commission after the enactment of the Bill 
or the employees can be accommodated in the different Departments of the Ministry in any 
part of the country. They can be placed under Surplus Staff Establishment in the Ministry 
for their redeployment so that they are available for placement in other 
organizations/offices/divisions of the Ministry of AYUSH.  
4.19.10 The Committee, therefore, recom mends that instead of termination of their 
services, all the employees of the Council may be suitably absorbed on compassionate and 
humanitarian grounds either in NCH or in any Department of the Government so as to 
protect the right of livelihood of these employees.  
4.19.11 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
Preamble  
4.20.1  The Preamble of the Bill reads as follows: 
"to provide for a medical education system that improves access to quality and affordable 
medical education, ensures availability of adequate and high quality Homoeopathy medical 
professionals in all parts of the country; that promotes equitable and univer sal healthcare that 
encourages community health perspective and makes services of Homoeopathy medical 
professionals accessible to all the citizens; that promotes national health goals; that encourages 
Homoeopathy medical professionals to adopt latest medic al research in their work and to 
contribute to research; that has an objective periodic and transparent assessment of medical 
institutions and facilitates maintenance of a Homoeopathy medical register for India and enforces 
high ethical standards in all as pects of medical services; that is flexible to adapt to the changing 
needs and has an effective grievance redressal mechanism and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto". 
Suggestions 
4.20.2 Mumbai Grahak Panchayat has proposed to add word af fordable before the term "to all 
the citizens".  
Recommendations/Observations 
 
4.20.3 The Committee recognizes the fact that Homeopathic are generally affordable means 
of treatment of ailment compared to modern system of medicine.  Affordability of health 
care is the main concern in our country which aims to achieve goal of universal health care. 
The Committee believes that accessibility of healthcare services should go hand in hand 
with the affordability of any stream/system of medicine. Finding merit in t he said 
suggestion the Committee, recommends to  insert the term "affordable" before "to all the 
citizens" as suggested, in the preamble of the Bill. 

62 
 
4.20.4    The Committee also recommends for all consequential changes to be carried out in 
the relevant cla uses of the Bill keeping in view the Committee's observations and 
recommendations contained in the report. 
4.20.5    The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any changes. The 
Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed incorporating the suggestions made by 
it.  
 
  

63 
 
CHAPTER-V 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS  
5.1 FEES REGULATION 
Suggestions 
5.1.1 The Stakeholders have submitted that the NCH Bill has no provision for determination of 
fees in respect of 50% seats in private medical institutions, whereas NMC Act, 2019 has such 
provision mentioned under Clause 10(1)(i). 
Ministry's Response 
5.1.2 The Ministry viewed that currently fixation of fees is being done by the respective State 
Governments after taking into the account of local f actors, reservation quota and other issues 
prevailing in the concerned State. The structure of fees also varies from State to State according 
to the MoUs signed by private medical colleges. In most States, fees of seats in deemed 
universities are not regulated by State Governments. Hence, no provision has been prescribed for 
fee regulation. 
Recommendations/Observations 
 
5.1.3 The Committee observes that there is no provision to regulate fees of Homeopathy 
colleges in the proposed Bill. However, the NMC Act empowers the Commission to regulate 
fees and all other charges in respect of fifty percent of seats in private medical inst itutions 
and deemed to be universities which are governed under the provisions of NMC Act. The 
absence of provision for regulation of fees may result in charging of high fees by the private 
medical institutions and universities. Needless to say, high fees will discourage the students 
from taking up Homeopathy as a career. 
 
5.1.4 The Committee observes that unregulated fee would, therefore, create inequity and 
deprive large number of meritorious students, who want to pursue Homeopathy medical 
education, from  among socially and economically backward sections of society of an 
opportunity to pursue medical education. The Committee, therefore, believes that 
regulation of fees would certainly ensure protection of the interests of students from 
exploitation and enc ourage students from any strata of society to study in such medical 
institution. Given the problem of shortage of doctors in the country especially in rural, 
tribal and urban slum areas, the Committee feels that there is a need to encourage 
alternative system of medicine like Homeopathy. 
5.1.5 In Committee's opinion medical education must be treated as a public good. Public 
Health must not be a profit maximization venture because such objective would only 
encourage and incentivize commercialization of medical education instead of promoting to 

64 
 
the optimum level. Keeping in view the said facts into account, the Committee is of the view 
that Homeopathy medical education needs to be given high priority at an affordable cost.  
5.1.6 The committee, accordingly, recommends that fees for 50 percent of the seats should 
be decid ed by the Fee Fixation Committee of the State Governments or by the National 
Commission for Homeopathy for all private medical colleges or deemed to be universities, 
if any, in line with NMC Act, 2019. The provisions for the regulation of fees should be 
added in the Clause 10 of the Bill i.e. Power and functions of Commission.  
5.2 NOMINATION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
5.2.1 The representatives of the people come across the grievances of the common masses. 
Their representation in the management of the Univers ities and Institutions will form the 
voice of the people spelling out the ground realities. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that three Members of Parliament (two from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya 
Sabha) should be nominated in the Governing Bodies of a ll the Homeopathy Universities 
and Institutions of National Importance in the country.  
5.3 PARAMEDICAL STAFF 
5.3.1 The Committee is of the view that the paramedical education, profession and 
practice should be regulated under the Bill. The Commission shou ld identify the 
paramedical staff under the system of Homeopathy and create a database of the same. 
Such exercise would ensure standardization of education and practice of these professions.  
The Committee, recommends the Ministry that the regulation and s tandardization of 
paramedical profession should also be mentioned as one of the function s of the National 
Commission for Homeopathy so as to develop and maintain the standards of education and 
services by these paramedical  professionals. 
5.4. REGISTRATION OF COMPLAINTS 
5.4.1 Attention of the Committee has been brought to the instances when a person is practicing 
in one State but a case is registered against him in another State. The practitioner in such a 
scenario has to fight the case in the area where th e case has been registered. This leads to 
unwarranted harassment of the doctor and loss of time and money.   
5.4.2 The Committee is of the view that the registration of complaints  filed against the 
AYUSH practitioners should be restricted to the area where  the doctor is practicing. Th e 
Committee, therefore, desires  that the Ministry may consider making provision, either in 
the Bill itself or regulations, restricting the place  of registration of complaints at the place 
of medical practice rather than the residential place of complainant. 
 
5.5 EDUCATION 
 
5.5.1 The Committee also notes that there is an urgent need to establish Homeopathy as a 
preferred choice of career among the students. The present poor health infrastructure in 
the country demands more traine d healthcare providers from the modern as well as 

65 
 
AYUSH System of Medicine. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that Homeopathy 
System should also be included in the School curriculum. Small chapter on Homeopathy 
will help dissemination of information  on these traditional systems of medicine. The 
Committee also notes that the National Education Policy 2019 has emphasized on reforms 
at all levels of education from school to higher education. The NEP 2019 also provides that 
the school curriculum should be integrated and flexible with equal emphasis on all subjects 
and fields. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that, on the same lines of National 
Education Policy, the Curriculum should also be designed according to the changing 
dynamics with regards to quality education and population requirement. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to take necessary initiatives to make students 
from early childhood aware of the concept of mindfulness and holistic health that the 
Homeopathy system is based on.  
5.6. FUTURE OUTLOOK 
5.6.1 India has a population of almost 1.3 billion people with a high degree of socio -
cultural, linguistic, and demographic heterogeneity. There is limited number of health care 
professionals, especially doctors, per he ad of population. In the recent times, 
mainstreaming of AYUSH, including Homoeopathy has been one of the important 
strategies of the Government of India envisaged under the National Rural Health Mission 
to help meet the challenge of this shortage of health  care professionals and to strengthen 
the delivery system of the health care service.  
5.6.2 The Committee is of the view that promotion of Homeopathy in a country can be 
done in the following ways: 
i. It has to be a joint responsibility of the governing bodies and the institutions, 
involved in Homeopathic education, research and patient care  to  clear the 
misconceptions at the mass level and produce faith among people towards 
Homeopathic system as a competent system of medicine to tackle various diseases 
and has a potential to cure them. 
ii. All the individual Homeopathic doctors practicing with their limited resources are 
the ones who are working at the ground level and come in direct contact with 
different categories of the patients. They should display in t heir clinics the kind of 
cases they see and keep the information, education communication material for free 
distribution conveying the importance of Homeopathy in the Primary Healthcare.  
iii. The Ministry should encourage and involve various research bodies an d 
Departments like IIT, CSIR, ICMR, DST etc. to carry out fundamental or 
extramural research by undertaking variou s projects that can help in scie ntiﬁc 
promotion of Homeopathy in India. 
iv. The private sector like NGOs, organizations working as PPP (Public Pri vate 
Partnership) and big Pharmaceutical companies can organize various health camps 
in the peripheral areas of the city and rural as well as tribal regions.  

66 
 
v. Radio talks and TV shows be arranged involving senior Homeopaths to speak on 
various health relat ed issues including the e ﬃcacy and beneﬁts of Homeopathy 
treatment. 
vi. An epidemic cell at the institution level can be set up which can be monitored by the 
people from apex bodies like CCRH, CCH etc. so that in case of epidemics striking 
at a particular area timely and eﬀective homeopathic treatment can be given. 
vii. A Rapid Action Force having trained and skilled Homeopathic physicians be ra ised 
for managing emergency situations and propagating Homeopathy as one of the ﬁrst 
line of treatment in the country. 
viii. Knowledge in the system if shared and upgraded by frequent interactions with 
other Homeopaths around the world through internet can help in devising the 
similar model of Homeopathy in India. 
ix. Motivating Homeopaths by recognizing their judicious contribution and services 
and instituting rewards/awards to enhance their working morale. 
x. Setting up Homeopathic hospitals, camps, homeopathic Primary Health Centers in 
rural areas, practicing classical homeopathy and opportunities for government jobs 
in the ﬁeld of homeopathy 
5.6.3 The Committee is of the considered view that in order to ensure the accessibility and 
availability of health care services to all, policy -makers need to implement strategies to 
facilitate the mainstreaming of the Homeopathy system and to support this system with 
stringent monitoring mechanisms. The mainstreaming of Homeopathic doctors is therefore 
necessary for achieving Universal Health Goals and they can further be utilized in various 
Central and State Government health programs. 
5.6.4 The Committee understands that in a country like India, there is ample scope for 
the widespread use of homeopathy system which can provide a safe, reliable and cheap 
alternative, without producing iatrogenic effects, as may be possible allopathic system. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the country has tremendous potential to e merge 
as a global hub for medical tourism in AYUSH, therefore, believes that Ministry should 
focus on promotion of Homeopathy system and evolve policy, in partnership with the 
Private Sector, which aims to develop better Homeopathy infrastructure to attrac t people 
from around the globe.  
 
  

67 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS -  AT A GLANCE 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL 
Clause 2 
  The Committee notes that there is an acute shortage of doctors and health 
workforce in the country especially in rural/remote and tribal areas of the country. 
Allopathy or the modern system of medicine has emerged as the most commonly used and 
the more popular system of medicine all around the world. With the advent of the scientific 
age and lifestyle changes, the burden of chronic, systemic and non -communicable diseases 
(NCDs) has been increasing. According to WHO, non -communicable diseases such as 
cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases have been collectively responsible for 70% of 
all deaths worldwide. The Committee is of the view that in the wake of this global health 
crisis, Homeopathy can be utilized as an affordable means to tackle various illne ss 
including NCDs. The Committee also recognizes the constant efforts of the Government to 
mainstream Homeopathy and integrate it in the health delivery system. The Committee 
strongly believes, with the multitude of health issues that the country is facing  today, 
adoption of an inclusive and integrated health care policy has become more important and 
necessary. The Committee believes that there is a need to create a rational and sustainable 
interface between Homeopathy and the modern medicine  to increase it s acceptability.  
Homeopathy and modern medicine are two different streams of knowledge and there have 
been efforts on the part of the Government to mainstream Homeopathy in the National 
Rural Health Mission (NRHM). The Committee also recognizes the service s of 
Homeopathy doctors for providing the first line of treatment especially in the rural areas.  
  The Committee, therefore, recommends integration of Homeopathy with the 
modern scientific advances that will be fundamental in providing accessible, affordable and 
quality health care. The Committee in its 109 th Report on the NMC Bill, 2017 had 
recognized the need to build capacity of existing human resource in the healthcare sector to 
address the shortage of healthcare professionals. The Committee at the sam e time cannot 
overlook the possible risk of non -qualified and untrained doctors prescribing modern 
medicine and inducing irreparable damage to the patients and reiterates its 
recommendation as in its 109 th Report that healthcare professional practicing wit hout 
requisite qualification anywhere in the country may attract   provision. The Committee 
had also recognized specific healthcare issues and challenges of every State. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that State Governments may 
implement measures to enhance the capacity of existing health care professionals including 
Homeopathy practitioners to address State specific primary health care issues/challenges. 
The Committee also recommends that the States and UTs while formulating laws t o 
integrate the best of these two Systems should keep in mind the National Health Goals.  
 
  The Committee also believes that there is an urgent need to promote and integrate 
Homeopathy with the scientific modern advances to increase its acceptability as a  scientific 
and reliable alternate system of medicine. The Committee therefore, strongly recommends 
adoption of science based approaches in Homeopathy for its seamless integration with the 
National Level health care delivery infrastructure. The Committee recommends that clause 
2(f) should be amended as follows:  

68 
 
“Homoeopathy” means the Homoeopathic System of Medicine and includes the use of 
biochemic remedies supplemented by such modern advances,  scientific and 
technological development as the Commission may, in consultation with the Central 
Government, declare by notification from time to time"; 
  The Ministry may examine the suggestions made by the stakeholder for providing 
more clarity to the definition of „National Register and State Register" by incor porating 
the elements of eligibility criteria for registration in the said two registers, as given in 
clause 2(i) and 2(r). 
 
           The Committee is of the view that since the proposed Bill is an attempt to improve 
access to quality and affordable medi cal education and treatment in the field of 
Homeopathy and promote medical ethics, it is therefore pertinent to define the terms 
"Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” in the Bill appropriately so that 
there are no ambiguities in the proposed l egislation. The absence of definitions of the terms  
"Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” does not provide for any grounds to 
the patients or their legal heirs, who has suffered, to appeal against the misconduct of any 
Homeopathy professional . The Committee, therefore, recommends that the definitions of 
the terms "Professional Misconduct” and “Ethical Misconduct” should be incorporated in 
the definition clause of the Bill and the same may be borrowed from the Indian Medical 
Council (Profession al Conduct Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002. However, at the 
same time, necessary safeguard should be put in place to protect the rights of practitioner 
and they should not be subject to unnecessary harassment.  
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.2.5, 4.2.6, 4.2.7, 4.2.12, 4.2.15 and 4.2.16 of 116th Report) 
Clause 4 
 The Committee held detailed deliberations on clause 4 with the officials of the 
Ministry of AYUSH as well as the stakeholders. The Committee received large number of 
suggestions/recommendations from the various sectors of stakeholders. They have 
requested to increase not only the strength of the Commission but also the representation 
of States and UTs in the Commission.  
 
The Committee observes that representation of five part time members on 
rotational basis from amongst the nominees of the States and Unio n territories in the 
Advisory Council for a term of two years, is not only inadequate but also reflects ineffective 
participation of the States in the Commission. The Committee also notes that if one State is 
given a chance this year, their next chance wil l come after a period of not less than ten 
years. The Committee is surprised to note that though its recommendation related to 
composition of National Medical Commission in the NMC Bill, 2019 had been accepted, the 
same has not been reflected in this Bill even though this Bill has been based on the NMC 
Bill.  Keeping in view the representative and federal charter of the country as emphasized 
in its 109th Report on the NMC Bill, the Committee recommends that the representation of 
States and UTs should be inc reased from 5 to 10, on the lines of National Medical 
Commission Act, for their proper representation in the proposed Commission.  

69 
 
The Committee also notes that of the 20 members, only 4 are elected to the 
Commission. This means 80% of the members in the B ill are nominated by the Central 
Government which clearly reflects lack of proper representation of elected Homeopathic 
medical professionals in the composition of the Commission. The Committee, thus, agrees 
with the contention of the stakeholders that the Commission lacks the democratic character 
in its present form as it is dominated by the members nominated by the Central 
Government. The Committee also finds merit in the submission by stakeholders that 
representative of Homoeopathy practitioner should be  zone-wise. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the representation of the Homeopathy medical practitioners 
should be increased from 4 to 6 and these 6 practitioners should be elected from each zone 
i.e. East, West, North, South, Central and North-East. The Committee is in agreement with 
suggestion of the stakeholder that the members interested in contesting from these zones 
must be Registered Practitioners in that particular zone and shall only be allowed to 
contest from the zone where they are regist ered as a Homeopathic practitioner. This way 
elected members will be able to understand the problems of the profession in that 
particular zone and also will be able to coordinate with practitioners in that particular 
zone. The Committee recommends that the  electoral college for the members to be elected 
by the medical practitioners must be well defined in the Bill itself and if not in the Bill, the 
details must be explained in the Rules and Regulations framed under the Act. 
 
 Keeping in view the above delib erations, the Committee, recommends that the total 
strength of the Commission should be increased from 20 to 27 to facilitate proper 
representation of all the sections in the Commission. Hence the composition of the proposed 
Commission w.r.t. part-time members should be as under:- 
(a) three Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing, 
who have special knowledge and professional experience in the areas of Homoeopathy, 
management, law, health research, science and technology and economics; 
(b) ten Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the nominees of the 
States and Union territories in the Advisory Council for a term of two years in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(c) six members to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of Homoeopathy from 
amongst themselves, one from each Six zones i.e. East, West, North, South, central and 
North-east and in such manner as may be prescribed: 
 
The Committee also recommends that clause 4(2) wherein the requisite qualifications for 
the Chairperson of the Commission are prescribed may be amended as follows:- 
 
„„The Chairperson shall be a Homeopathic medical professional of outstanding ability, 
proven administrative capacity and integrity, possessing a recogniz ed postgraduate 
degree in Homeopathy and having experience of not less than twenty years in 
Homeopathy, out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of 
healthcare delivery, growth and development of Homoeopathy or its education.‟‟ 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
 
(Paras 4.3.6, 4.3.7, 4.3.8, 4.3.9, 4.3.10 and 4.3.11 of 116th Report) 
 

70 
 
Clause 5 
 The Committee has been apprised by the stakeholders that the similar provisions, 
where the Search Committee recommended to Central Government regarding 
appointment of members to the Commission, are present in the CCH as well. It has also 
been pointed out that the Central Government had failed in their appointment and had 
issued unlawful guidelines to the members that resulted in litigations. The Committee is of 
the view that since the Search Committee has to play a critical role in the selection of the 
Chairperson and members of the Commission, a proper and streamlined procedure should 
be evolved where the appointment of the Chairperson and Members should be done within 
a stipulated time period by the Central Government so as to avoid unwanted litigations 
that may take place against the Government. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to ensure timely appointment of the Chairperson and members of the 
Commission. 
The Committee observes that in Clause 5(1)(c), one expert from amongst the part 
time members referred to in Clause 4(4)(c) will also be a Member of the Search Committee. 
The Committee in Clause 4(4)(c) has recommended to increase the strength of part time 
members from 4 to 6, one each from 6 zones. Since the membership under Clause 4(4)(c ) 
has been increased from 4 to 6, the Committee feels that it would be appropriate to have 
one more representation from the part -time members in the Search Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends to increase the strength of experts under clause 5(1 )(c) 
from 1 to 2 conforming to the line of NMC Act, 2019.  
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.4.6, 4.4.7 and 4.4.8 of 116th Report) 
Clause 6 
 The Committee notes that at first clause 6(7) forbids the Chairperson and Members 
Commission for accepting any employment in any capacity including as a consultant or 
expert in any private medical education. However, clause 6(8) of the Bill allows the 
Chairperson and Members to accept the same with the prior permission of the Ce ntral 
Government. The Committee is of the view that giving the Central Government this 
discretion will leave unnecessary scope for bias and favoritism. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Clause 6(8) empowering the Central Government to relax this co ndition 
be deleted. 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.5.6 and 4.5.7 of 116th Report) 
Clause 7 
 The Committee observes that this clause is on similar lines with the clause dealing 
with removal of the Chairperson and Memb ers of the Commission as in NMC Act, 2019. 
These are certainly standard conditions for removal as approved by Ministry of Law & 
Justice. The Committee, however, finds some sense in the argument of the stakeholder that 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilitie s Act, 2016 should be kept in mind while removing 
such persons on physical or mental grounds as the Bill should not discriminate persons 
with disabilities.   

71 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.6.5 and 4.6.6 of 116th Report) 
 
Clause 9 
 
 The Committee would like to reiterate its recommendation made in para 4.9.3 of 
109th report on National Medical Commission, 2017 that giving the appellate jurisdiction to 
the Commission with respect to the decisions of the Central Government does not fit into 
the constitutional provision for separation of powers. The Committee, therefore,  
recommends constitution of a common Medical Appellate Tribunal for Indian System of 
Medicine and Homeopathy comprising of a Chairperson, who should be a sitting or retired 
Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of a High Court, and four other Membe rs, 
to have an appellate jurisdiction over the decisions taken by the Commission. One of the 
Members should have a special knowledge and experience in the medical 
profession/medical education, one have special knowledge and experience in the field of 
Indian system of medicine and one in homeopathy and finally the last member with an 
experience in the field of health administration at the level of Secretary to Government of 
India. Consequent changes for replacing the Central Government with the said Tribunal  
may be reflected in all the subsequent clauses viz. clause 29(6), clause 30(4)(b), clause 34(7), 
clause 35(3) or any other related clause of the Bill. 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.7.4 and 4.7.5 of 116th Report) 
Clause 10 
The Committee recognizes the fact that the State Medical Councils will be 
constituted/established by the State Government, under Clause 30, after the 
commencement of the Act. However, it is the responsibility of the National Commission to 
look ove r or monitor the functioning of the respective State Council in order to ensure 
compliance of the guidelines framed and regulations made under the act. The Committee 
understands the fact that the Doctrine of Repugnancy would apply in the case of conflict 
between the Centre and State and once the Central Act is enforced, the State Acts shall 
suitably be amended in consonance with the provisions of Central Act. The Committee, 
therefore, is in agreement with provision made under the Act and concludes that there is no 
reason to amend the clause.  
 
The clause is adopted without any change. 
(Paras 4.8.5 and 4.8.6 of 116th Report) 
Clause 11 
 Attention of the Committee has been drawn to clause 11(2)( c) wherein Vice -
Chancellors of a University from each State/UT would be Members of the Advisory 
Council for Homoeopathy. The Committee observes that in NMC Act, Vice -Chancellors of 
Health University of each State/UT was given representation where as this Bill refers to any 
University. The Committee also notes the argument put forth by the stakeholders' w.r.t. the 

72 
 
contribution of Vice-Chancellor of a University in a State/UT representing each State. The 
Committee is of the view that given the different natur e of Homeopathy system of 
medicine, appropriate representation from recognized Homoeopathy Colleges/Universities 
in a State/UT must be given. The representative would be in possession of specialization 
knowledge and skills of their own system of medicine a nd would offer a much better 
understanding of challenges and solutions thereof. However, in the case where there is no 
recognized Homoeopathy College/University, then Vice -Chancellor of any University may 
be appointed.   
 The Committee also notes that the representation from State Medical Councils is 
missing in the Advisory Council. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the provision 
for the representation of members from the State/UTS from amongst elected members of 
the State Medical Council should be added in the clause, on the lines of NMC Act 
The Committee also notes that the representation of  the Chairman, University 
Grants Commission and the Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council is 
missing in the NCH Bill, 2019, as given in NMC Ac t, 2019. The Committee would like to 
reiterate that the since Bill is based on the lines of NMC Act, therefore, representation of  
the Chairman, University Grants Commission and the Director, National Assessment and 
Accreditation Council should also be ther e in the Advisory Council in the NCH Bill. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to add similar provision for their 
representation in the Advisory Council for Homeopathy. 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.9.5, 4.9.6, 4.9.7 and 4.9.8 of 116th Report) 
Clause 12 
The Committee is of the view that when the development of Homoeopathy is the 
inherent spirit of the Bill as submitted by the Ministry, there should be no second thought 
on the part of the Ministry to add  the word "Development" in clause 12(1) and 12(2). The 
addition of word "Development" will only make explicit, of what is implicit in the Bill. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends addition of the word "development" in clause 12(1) 
and 12(2). 
  Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.10.6 and 4.10.7 of 116th Report) 
Clause 15 
The Committee believes that National Exit Test will serve as an instrument of 
quality assurance and ensure that the quality and competencies  of a Homeopat hic doctors 
before they starts practicing are guaranteed and standardized in terms of various quality 
norms. It is envisioned to standardize the quality of the Homeopathic doctor, i.e. to certify 
to the people that the doctor licensed by the NCH has the appropriate level of competencies 
and skills needed for a doctor irrespective of which medical institution he or she is trained 
in.  This is an attempt to overcome the huge disparities in teaching and educational 
standards prevailing across medical colleges and give the practitioner a brand value. The 
Committee has, further, noted that many of the Homeopathic medical institutes have 
faculty and infrastructure shortages resulting in poor quality of education. This leaves a 

73 
 
wide gap in the knowledge of the stud ents graduating from these institutes as compared to 
the institutes that have adequate faculty and infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, is 
in the favor of the National Exit Test which is also in line with the provision of the NMC 
Act, 2019.  
 
 The clause is adopted without any change. 
(Paras 4.11.5 and 4.11.6 of 116th Report) 
Clause 16 
The Committee takes the note of the concerns expressed by the stakeholders stating 
that the PGNET will be an added burden on both the students and the examiner. However,  
the Committee believes that the PGNET for admission to PG courses may continue as of 
now as an interim management till a mechanism is evolved within three to five years for the 
conduct of a common final year examination which has  an adequate structure, so  that 
subjectivity in the theoretical examination is replaced by common problem/case study 
based MCQ type examination.  
 The clause is adopted without any change. 
(Paras 4.12.4 and 4.12.5 of 116th Report) 
Clause 17 
The Committee appreciates the idea of National Teachers Eligibility Test as it is the 
best way to tap qualified persons into the teaching profession.  The Committee is aware of 
the fact that one of the major challenges in promotion of Homoeopathic educatio n and 
practice is inadequate as well as sub -standard faculty and infrastructure. Such a merit 
based examination will certainly improve the education being imparted to students 
studying Homoeopathy as well as improve the quality of health care services.  
The Committee is also of the considered view that pay parity, pay structure, 
gratuity and Pension plans is an important motivational factor for Homoeopathic 
medical/teaching professionals across the country. Improving the motivation and incentives 
of teacher s will certainly improve the overall quality of the education system. This will 
result in augmenting a sense of equality among the homeopathic professionals and also 
encourage more and more people to take up Homeopathy as a career. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends to the Ministry to take these issues of pay parity, pay structure, 
gratuity, pension plans and other related incentives of Homeopathic doctors with the State 
Governments so that Homeopathic professionals get similar incentives as that of a MBB S 
doctor.  
While deliberating section 17, the Committee finds that nothing contained in this 
section shall apply to the teachers appointed prior to the date notified under sub section (3).  
The Committee notes that there are many teachers in the system who  do not hold a post -
graduate degree but are part of the education system. They are likely to remain in the 
system for quite a long period of time. For such teaching professionals, it would not be easy 
to clear the NET exam. Therefore, there must be a provi sion for a training or refreshers 
course for them followed by Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT) so that their knowledge base 
in widened as well as updated and they are better equipped to teach efficiently. 

74 
 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.13.5, 4.13.6, 4.13.7 and 4.13.8 of 116th Report) 
Clause 18 
          The Committee time and again in its DFG reports has been emphasizing upon the 
quality control and drugs standardization and promotion of research for research outputs 
to be translated into remedies/ medicines in the public health care system. The Committee 
believes that research must be carried on with the pursuit for its scientific validation for 
better acceptability and higher credibility. The Committee recognizes the fac t that 
Research and Development is vital for growth and promotion of Homoeopathy.  
The Committee hopes that the Homoeopathy Education Board would take care of 
research pursuits and standards during the course of education as stated in Clause 26(h) 
and give adequate priority and focus to research and development. However, the 
Committee feels that since research being an important component for the growth of any 
medical system around the world, it should be explicit in the name of the board. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the name of "The Homoeopathy Education 
Board" be renamed as "The Homoeopathy Education, Research and Development Board" 
in commensurate to the expected role and responsibilities of the said Board.  
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.14.5, 4.14.6 and 4.14.7 of 116th Report) 
Clause 19 
 The Committee observes that since the research is an important component of 
Homeopathy, there should be representation of the apex research body for Homeopathy i.e. 
Central Council for Research in Homeopathy in "The Homoeopathy Education, Resear ch 
and Development Board". The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Director -
General or a member of CCRH should also have representation in the said Board. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 19(1)(a) may be amended as under:- 
 
"the Homoeopathy Education Board shall consist of a President and five Members, out 
of whom four members shall be from the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other 
member shall be the Director -General/Member, Central Council for Research in 
Homeopathy, Janakpuri, New Delhi" 
 
The Committee is in agreement with the view of stakeholders that in the MARBH 
and the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy, there should be two members 
each from the discipline of Homoeopathy instead of just one besides President to di scharge 
its enshrined function and responsibility and to have judicious decision whenever required.  
Moreover, two Members from the field of Homoeopathy would add advantage to each 
Board for in -depth understanding of the profession and i ts functioning  in a  more 
democratic way. Further, the large composition of Ethics and Registration for 
Homoeopathy would provide adequate platform for interaction with State Medical Council 
of Homoeopathy to effectively prompt and regulate the conduct of Medical practitioner  of 
Homoeopathy. The Committee also understands that one person from any of the disciplines 
of management, quality assurance, law or science or patient advocacy, and the work 
related to medical education and professional standards would adequately diversif y the 

75 
 
composition of two Boards to equip additional specialization knowledge in that field. The 
Committee believes that representation of member other than Homeopathy professional 
will bring in wide range of knowl edge of other fields in the Boards along wi th the 
knowledge of Homeopathy. This has become necessary for better administration of Boards 
whose functioning requires a diversified range of knowledge of other fields as well. The 
Committee, therefore, is in consonance with the Ministry's view to have a  neutral person to 
balance the functioning of the Commission. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 19(1)(b) and 19(11) (c) may be 
amended as under:- 
 "(b) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall consist of a President 
from the discipline of Homoeopathy and three Members, out of whom two Member shall be 
from the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other Member shall be chosen from an y of the 
disciplines of management, quality assurance, law or science and technology"; 
"(c) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall consist of a President from 
the discipline of Homoeopathy and three Members, out of whom two Member shall  be from 
the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other Member shall be a person who has demonstrated 
pubic record of work on medical ethics or chosen from any of the disciplines of quality 
assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy." 
(Paras 4.15.3, 4.15.9 and 4.15.10 of 116th Report) 
Clause 28 
The Committee notes that one of the targeted missions of the proposed legislation is 
to have an objective periodic and transparent assessment of Medical institution. In this 
regard, ratings have been prescribed t o facilitate the institutions to assess their 
performance vis-a-vis set parameters through introspection. This helps the institution to 
know its strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities through an informed review process 
ratings and also helps in identifyi ng areas of planning and resource allocation and 
formulate direction and identity for institutions. It, thus, plays a pivotal role in the 
development of the institutions.  
 
The Committee, therefore, is in the favor of making quantitative and qualitative 
parameters for hiring and empanelling third party agency more explicit in the Bill to avoid 
any confusion or conflict in the future.  The Committee is of the view that the methodology 
for conducting inspection by the third party agency must also be made crystal clear, so that 
these agencies do not evolve their own criteria while rating any institution. The Committee 
also recommends that necessary safeguards and precaution may be specified to ensure that 
the rating agencies do not give any unwanted leverage to  any institute that may improve 
their rating. 
 
  Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.16.5, 4.16.6 and 4.16.7 of 116th Report) 
 
 
 
 

76 
 
Clause 30 
 
 The Committee is in agreement with the views/justification given by the 
stakeholders regarding the rights of the patients to complain against any register 
practitioner in respect of any professional or ethical misconduct. It is pertinent that the 
contents of the clause 30(3) must recognise that the patient including their lega l heirs could 
also be aggrieved party.  So there is no need to replace the words "A practitioner of 
Homoeopathy who is aggrieved" with "A practitioner of Homoeopathy or patient 
(including who is aggrieved)" as suggested by the stakeholder. 
 
 The Clause is adopted without any change. 
(Paras 4.17.6 and  
4.17.7 of 116th Report) 
Clause 51 
The Committee is of the view that any effort towards creating a rational and 
sustainable interface between the various systems between Indian System of Medicine 
(ISM), Homoeop athy and Modern Medicine is a laudable objective. Every system of 
medicine has its own philosophy and methodology. The AYUSH systems are pure systems 
and each of them has phenomenal advantages in themselves. The Committee, therefore, is 
in agreement with M inistry that joint sittings would provide for an interface between 
different systems of medicine and certainly does not encourage crosspathy. 
 This clause is adopted without any change. 
(Paras 4.18.5 and 4.18.6 of 116th Report) 
Clause 52 
The Committee is of the view that presently the health infrastructure of the country 
especially the public health services delivery system in the rural, tribal and urban areas of 
the country are highly inadequate. People from rural areas have to travel mil es for availing 
primary health care to get the first line of treatment. Such an environment that lacks basic 
health care needs a focused approach and the States be requested to take necessary 
measures to enhance the health professionals in the rural areas.   The Committee also feels 
that the services of AYUSH Doctors should not be just limited only to rural areas, instead 
they should be promoted and encouraged at pan India level.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 52 may be amended as follows:  
"Every State Government may, for the purposes of addressing or promoting public 
health care especially in rural, tribal and urban slum areas, take necessary measures to 
enhance the capacity of the healthcare professionals". 
 Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.19.4, 4.19.5 and 4.19.6 of 116th Report) 
Clause 57 

77 
 
The Committee finds premature termination of the employees of CCH after its 
dissolution very harsh and unfair. The provision is against the principle of natural justice 
and also violates the Article 21 of the Indian constitution by depriving employees of l iving a 
life with dignity and Right to Livelihood. The Committee finds that there are only 21 
regular employees working at the CCH.  Termination of their service at this juncture, may 
lead to severe hardship and express violation of constitutional rights a s provided in Article 
21 of the Constitution. 
The Committee has been apprised that the Government of India has taken the step 
to repeal these bodies quoting the ground of corruption, however, unlike Medical Council 
of India, not even a single employee has been found corrupt in CCH by the Ministry of 
AYUSH, so the premature termination of employees cannot be validated on such grounds. 
The Committee, further, believes that the compensation amounting to three month‟s 
pay and allowances for the premature termin ation of their employment is not adequate 
compared to heavy monetary loss and regular income of  years of pay and allowance they 
would lose due to premature termination. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry for either 
accommodating the staff of the CCH in the new Commission after the enactment of the Bill 
or the employees can be accommodated in the different Departments of the Ministry in any 
part of the country. They can be placed under Surplus Staff Establishment in the Ministry 
for their redeployment so that they are available for placement in other 
organizations/offices/divisions of the Ministry of AYUSH.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of termination of their services, 
all the employees of the Council may be suit ably absorbed on compassionate and 
humanitarian grounds either in NCH or in any Department of the Government so as to 
protect the right of livelihood of these employees.  
Subject to the above recommendations, the clause is adopted. 
(Paras 4.20.6, 4.20.7, 4.20.8, 4.20.9, 4.20.10 and 4.20.11 of 116th Report) 
 
Preamble  
The Committee recognizes the fact that Homeopathic are generally affordable 
means of treatment of ailment compared to modern system of medicine.  Affordability of 
health care is the main concern in our country which aims to achieve goal of universal 
health care. The Committee believes that accessibility of healthcare services should go hand 
in hand with the affordability of any stream/system of medicine. Finding merit in the said 
suggestion the Committee, recommends to insert the term "affordable" before "t o all the 
citizens" as suggested, in the preamble of the Bill. 
            The Committee also recommends for all consequential changes to be carried out in 
the relevant clauses of the Bill keeping in view the Committee's observations and 
recommendations contained in the report. 
           The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of the Bill without any changes. The 
Committee recommends that the Bill may be passed incorporating the suggestions made by 
it.  

78 
 
(Paras 4.21.3, 4.21.4 and 4.21.5 of 116th Report) 
 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
FEES REGULATION 
 
 The Committee observes that there is no provision to regulate fees of Homeopathy 
colleges in the proposed Bill. However, the NMC Act empowers the Commission to regulate 
fees and all other charges in respect of fi fty percent of seats in private medical institutions 
and deemed to be universities which are governed under the provisions of NMC Act. The 
absence of provision for regulation of fees may result in charging of high fees by the private 
medical institutions and universities. Needless to say, h igh fees will discourage the students 
from taking up Homeopathy as a career. 
 The Committee observes that unregulated fee would, therefore, create inequity and 
deprive large number of meritorious students, who want to pur sue Homeopathy medical 
education, from among socially and economically backward sections of society of an 
opportunity to pursue medical education. The Committee, therefore, believes that 
regulation of fees would certainly ensure protection of the interests  of students from 
exploitation and encourage students from any strata of society to study in such medical 
institution. Given the problem of shortage of doctors in the country especially in rural, 
tribal and urban slum areas, the Committee feels that there is a need to encourage 
alternative system of medicine like Homeopathy. 
 In Committee's opinion medical education must be treated as a public good. Public 
Health must not be a profit maximization venture because such objective would only 
encourage and incentivize commercialization of medical education instead of promoting to 
the optimum level. Keeping in view the said facts into account, the Committee is of the view 
that Homeopathy medical education needs to be given high priority at an affordable cost.  
 The committee, accordingly, recommends that fees for 50 percent of the seats should 
be decided by the Fee Fixation Committee of the State Governments or by the National 
Commission for Homeopathy for all private medical colleges or deemed to be universities , 
if any, in line with NMC Act, 2019. The provisions for the regulation of fees should be 
added in the Clause 10 of the Bill i.e. Power and functions of Commission.  
(Paras 5.1.3, 5.1.4, 5.1.5 and 5.1.6 of 116th Report) 
NOMINATION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
 The representatives of the people come across the grievances of the common masses. 
Their representation in the management of the Universities and Institutions will form the 
voice of the people spelling out the ground realities. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that three Members of Parliament (two from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya 
Sabha) should be nominated in the Governing Bodies of all the Homeopathy Universities 
and Institutions of National Importance in the country.  
(Paras 5.2.1 of 116th Report) 

79 
 
PARAMEDICAL STAFF 
 The Committee is of the view that the paramedical education, profession and 
practice should be regulated under the Bill. The Commission should identify the 
paramedical staff under the system of Homeopathy and create a database of the same . 
Such exercise would ensure standardization of education and practice of these professions.  
The Committee, recommends the Ministry that the regulation and standardization  of 
paramedical profession should also be mentioned as one of the functions of the N ational 
Commission for Homeopathy so as to develop and maintain the standards of education and 
services by these paramedical  professionals. 
(Paras 5.3.1 of 116th Report) 
REGISTRATION OF COMPLAINTS 
 The Committee is of the view that the registration of com plaints filed against the 
AYUSH practitioners should be restricted to the area where the doctor is practicing. The 
Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry may consider making provision, either in 
the Bill itself or regulations, restricting the plac e of registration of complaints at the place 
of medical practice rather than the residential place of complainant. 
(Paras 5.4.2 of 116th Report) 
EDUCATION 
 
 The Committee also notes that there is an urgent need to establish Homeopathy as a 
preferred choice of career among the students. The present poor health infrastructure in 
the country demands more trained healthcare providers from the modern as well as 
AYUSH System of Medicine. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that Homeopathy 
System should also be included in the School curriculum. Small chapter on Homeopathy 
will help dissemination of information on these traditional systems of medicine. The 
Committee also notes that the National Education Policy 2019 has emphasized on reforms 
at all levels of education from school to higher education. The NEP 2019 also provides that 
the school curriculum should be integrated and flexible with equal emphasis on all subjects 
and fields. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that, on the same lines of National 
Education Policy, the Curriculum should also be designed according to the changing 
dynamics with regards to quality education and population requirement. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to take necessary initiatives to make studen ts 
from early childhood aware of the concept of mindfulness and holistic health that the 
Homeopathy system is based on.  
(Paras 5.5.1 of 116th Report) 
FUTURE OUTLOOK 
 India has a population of almost 1.3 billion people with a high degree of socio -
cultural, linguistic, and demographic heterogeneity. There is limited number of health care 
professionals, especially doctors, per head of population. In the recent times, 
mainstreaming of AYUSH, including Homoeopathy has been one of the important 
strategies of the Government of India envisaged under the National Rural Health Mission 
to help meet the challenge of this shortage of health care professionals and to strengthen 
the delivery system of the health care service.  

80 
 
 The Committee is of the view that promotion of Homeopathy in a country can be 
done in the following ways: 
i. It has to be a joint responsibility of the governing bodies and the institutions, 
involved in Homeopathic  education, research and patient care to  clear the 
misconceptions at the mass level and produce faith among people towards 
Homeopathic system as a competent system of medicine to tackle various 
diseases and has a potential to cure them. 
ii. All the individual  Homeopathic doctors practicing with their limited resources are 
the ones who are working at the ground level and come in direct contact with 
different categories of the patients. They should display in their clinics the kind of 
cases they see and keep the  information, education communication material for free 
distribution conveying the importance of Homeopathy in the Primary Healthcare.  
iii. The Ministry should encourage and involve various research bodies and 
Departments like IIT, CSIR, ICMR, DST etc. to carr y out fundamental or 
extramural research by undertaking various projects that can help in scientiﬁc 
promotion of Homeopathy in India. 
iv. The private sector like NGOs, organizations working as PPP (Public Private 
Partnership) and big Pharmaceutical companies c an organize various health camps 
in the peripheral areas of the city and rural as well as tribal regions.  
v. Radio talks and TV shows be arranged involving senior Homeopaths to speak on 
various health related issues including the e ﬃcacy and beneﬁts of Homeop athy 
treatment. 
vi. An epidemic cell at the institution level can be set up which can be monitored by the 
people from apex bodies like CCRH, CCH etc. so that in case of epidemics striking 
at a particular area timely and eﬀective homeopathic treatment can be given. 
vii. A Rapid Action Force having trained and skilled Homeopathic physicians be raised 
for managing emergency situations and propagating Homeopathy as one of the ﬁrst 
line of treatment in the country. 
viii. Knowledge in the system if shared and upgraded by frequent interactions with 
other Homeopaths around the world through internet can help in devising the 
similar model of Homeopathy in India. 
ix. Motivating Homeopaths by recognizing their judicious contribution and services 
and instituting rewards/awards to enhance their working morale. 
x. Setting up Homeopathic hospitals, camps, homeopathic Primary Health Centers in 
rural areas, practicing classical homeopathy and opportunities for government jobs 
in the ﬁeld of homeopathy 
 The Committee is of the considered view that in order to ensure the accessibility and 
availability of health care services to all, policy -makers need to implement strategies to 
facilitate the mainstreaming of the Homeopathy system and to support this system with 
stringent monitoring mechanisms. The mainstreaming of Homeopathic doctors is therefore 
necessary for achieving Universal Health Goals and they can further be utilized in various 
Central and State Government health programs. 
 The Committee understands that in a country like India, there i s ample scope for 
the widespread use of homeopathy system which can provide a safe, reliable and cheap 
alternative, without producing iatrogenic effects, as may be possible allopathic system. The 
Committee is of the considered view that the country has tre mendous potential to emerge 
as a global hub for medical tourism in AYUSH, therefore, believes that Ministry should 
focus on promotion of Homeopathy system and evolve policy, in partnership with the 

81 
 
Private Sector, which aims to develop better Homeopathy in frastructure to attract people 
from around the globe.  
(Paras 5.6.1, 5.6.2, 5.6.3 and 5.6.4 of 116th Report) 
 
 
 
  

82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
  

83 
 
IV 
 
FOURTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Monday, the 21 st October, 2019 in   Committee 
Room D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. 1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav         -         Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
2.     Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3.     Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
4.     Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5.     Shri K. Somaprasad 
6.     Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
LOK SABHA 
7.      Shri Arjunlal Meena 
8.      Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
9.      Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
10.     Adv. Adoor Prakash 
11.     Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
12.     Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
13.     Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.     Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
3. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of Ministry of AYUSH 
 
1. Shri Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Pathak, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Roshan Jaggi, Joint Secretary 

84 
 
4. Shri Vikram Singh, Director 
5. Dr. M. Nesari, Adviser (AYUSH) 
6. Dr. D.C. Katoch, Adviser (AYUSH) 
7. Dr. Mohd. Tahir, Adviser (Unani) 
8. Dr. S.R. Chinta, Deputy Adviser (Homoeopathy) 
 
Representative of Central Council of Homoeopathy  
 
9. Shri Nilanjan Sanyal, Chairman, Board of Governors 
 
I.        Opening Remarks 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them 
about the agenda of the day i.e. to hear the views of the Secretary,  Ministry of AYUSH on the 
two Bills namely *** and (ii) "The National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019".  He then 
informed the members that in  these two Bills, there are provisions for constitution of State 
Councils/Commissions. He proposed that since the implementing mechanism of the 
policies under the proposed legislation rests with the State Governments, therefore, it would be 
appropriate for the Committee to solicit the views of the State Governments  for comprehensive 
examination of the three Bills. The Committee, then, agreed to the proposal of the Chairman and 
directed the Secretariat to seek the views of all State Governments/UTs on the two Bills. 
II.      Oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH on the two Bills namely (i) "The 
National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill , 2019" and  (ii) "The National 
Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019"   
  
3.        The Committee, then, heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of AYUSH on the two 
Bills *** (ii) "The National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019".  The Secretary apprised 
the members about the background of the Bills and need for  proposed legislations; Consultative 
process and approach while the   drafting the two Bills ;  its Salient features; constitutions and 
functions of Central and States Councils; maintenance o f Central and States registers etc.  The 
Secretary then  made a power point presentation before the Committee which highlighted the 
following:- 
(i) objectives of the Bills 
(ii) background of the Bills 
(iii) number of AYUSH Colleges in the country 
*** Relates to other matter 

85 
 
(iv) Comparison of existing CCIM/CCH and the proposed NCIM/NCH 
(v) selection of Members of the Commission 
(vi) common features of proposed National Commissions 
(vii) composition of Commissions/Boards 
(viii) initiatives/steps taken by the Ministry to improve the AYUSH education  
  
4.       After the presentation of the Secretary, the Members raised some queries w.r.t. the Bills 
which are as follows:- 
 Standardisation of education of AYUSH institutions. 
 Inclusion of Yoga and Naturopathy in NCISM Bill. 
 Inclusion of representatives of the Parliament  in Governing Bodies/Executive Councils 
in ISM & Homoeopathy Universities and institutions of National Importance.  
 Increasing the number of State representation in the Commission. 
 Services of Employees of CCIM/CCH should not be terminated but be merged in other 
Government departments.  
 Training to AYUSH doctors for giving Emergency critical care aid. 
 Thereafter, the Secretary replied to some of the queries raised by the members. The 
Chairman directed the Ministry to send written replies to the queries within a week's time. He 
also directed the Secretariat to forward a questionnaire on the Bills to the Department for their 
written comments. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.29 p.m.  
 
 
 
  

86 
 
 
V 
 
FIFTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 11.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 22 nd October, 2019 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav         -         Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA       
 2.     Shri A.K. Antony 
 3.     Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
 4.     Shrimati Kahkashan Perween  
 5.     Shri Suresh Prabhu 
 6.     Dr. Santanu Sen 
7.      Shri K. Somaprasad 
8.      Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
9.      Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
10.       Ms. Ramya Haridas 
11.       Shri Arjunlal Meena 
12.       Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
13.       Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
14.     Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
15.     Adv. Adoor Prakash 
16.     Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
17.     Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
18.     Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
19.     Shri Anurag Sharma  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
3. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 

87 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
I. Representative of Central Council for Homoeopathy 
 
Dr. Anil Khurana, Director General In charge 
 
II. Representatives of Homoeopathic Association of India 
 
1. Dr. Ram Jee Singh, National President  
2. Dr. A. K. Arun 
 
III. Representatives of National Federation of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in India 
 
1. Dr. Arun Bhasme, Secretary General 
2. Dr.  D.G Bagal, Member  
 
IV. Representatives of Indian Institute of Homeopathic Physicians 
 
1. Dr. (Prof.) V.K. Gupta, National President of Honor  
2. Dr. V.K.  Khanna, Former President  
3. Dr.  V.K.  Chauhan, President, Delhi State Branch  
 
V. Representatives of Mumbai Grahak Panchayat 
 
1. Adv. Shirish V. Deshpande  
2. Dr. Archana Sabnis, Divisional President 
 
VI.     Employees of Central Council for Homeopathy (CCH) 
 
1. Shri Deepak Chandra Bhagat, Upper Division Clerk  
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bisht, Junior Hindi Translator  
 
VII.   Employees of Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) 
 
1. Dr. Shamshad Bano, Assistant Registrar (Unani) 
2. Dr. K. Natarajan, Assistant Registrar (Siddha) 
3. Smt. Ankita Yadav 
I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them 
that the meeting was convened to hear the views of the stakeholders in connection with the *** 

88 
 
National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 which had been referred to the Committee for 
examination and report. 
2.1 The Committee made an assessment of the volume of the work that was required to be 
done on *** the National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019.  *** The Chairperson 
apprised the members that Press Releases on both the Bills had been published in all lea ding 
newspapers on 9 th February, 2019 inviting views of a wide spectrum of important 
experts/stakeholders on both the Bills.  The Committee had already received a large number of 
Memoranda from a wide cross -section of stakeholders in response to the Press Releases which 
were sent to Ministry of AYUSH for their comments. The comments of the Ministry on the 
memoranda have been received by the Committee. 
 
II *** 
3. ***  
3.1 *** 
3.2 *** 
3.3 *** 
3.4 *** 
3.5 *** 
3.6 *** 
3.7 *** 
3.8 *** 
3.9 ***  
 
III Oral evidence  of the representatives of various Association/Federations on the 
National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019 
4.1 The Committee then heard the views of Director General Incharge,  Central Council for 
Homoeopathy. He suggested to absorb  present employees in the new Commission so that they 
can provide good support to new Commission. 
4.2 National President, Homoeopathic Association of India suggested that the present 
mechanism of 60 percent members having elected and 40 percent nominated s hould be 
continued.  He also suggested that the final year exit exam should also serve as an entrance exam 
for the admission in post graduation course. 
*** Relates to other matter 

89 
 
 
4.3 The Secretary General, National Federation of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in India a 
sought representation of Homeopathy faculty members in the Commission where the vice -
chancellor of the University is not from the field of Homeopathy.  
4.4 The Advisor, the Arya Vaidya Pharmacy (Coimbatore) Ltd. suggested  for reformation o f 
curriculum  and for nomination of the member of the Commission  from Director of Indian 
System of Medicines   or the Director of Ayurveda Medical Education in the place of Vice -
Chancellor. 
4.5. The Chairman, Legal Committee, Integrated Medical Association (AYUS)  suggested to 
make a separate Board for Ayurveda, right to practice any system of medicine, inclusion of  the 
Modern Scientific System   in place of any system of Medicines in Clause 17(3)(b). Ayurveda 
doctors should be exempted from National Exit Test. 
4.6 The President , Indian Naturopathy and Yoga Graduates' Medical Association, 
(INYGMA) National suggested to include Yoga and Naturopathy in the Bill. 
4.7 The President, Maharashtra Council of Indian Medicine suggested to include Public 
Health in place of Rural Health. 
4.8 The Assistant Registrar (Siddha) , r epresentative of Employees of CCIM requested to 
retain the employees of CCIM. 
4.9 The National President of Honor, Indian Institute of Homeopathic Physicians suggested 
to increase the number of members from 4 to 6. 
4.10 Divisional President, Mumbai Grahak Panchayat suggested to include one member from 
recognized consumer organization to represent patients right in clause 11(2)(f) and one year term 
in place of three years term of a member.  It was also suggested that a chapter should be inserted 
regarding punishment and offences as in the Consumer Protection Act. 
4.11 Junior Hindi Translator, Central Council for Homeopathy requested to save jobs of the 
employees of CCH on the same gr ounds as done in the case of employees of National Oilseeds 
and Vegetable Oils Development Board. 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.08 p.m.  
  

90 
 
VI 
 
SIXTH MEETING 
  
 
 The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 7 th November, 2019 in   Committee 
Room D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA    
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween 
4. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
6. Shri K. Somaprasad 
7. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
8. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
9. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
10. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
11. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
12. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
13. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
14. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
15. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
16. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
17. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
18. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
19. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar    Additional Director 
3. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
Representatives of Ministry of AYUSH 
 
1. Shri Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Pathak, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Roshan Jaggi, Joint Secretary 
4. Dr. D.C. Katoch, Adviser (AYUSH) 
5. Dr. Mohd. Tahir, Adviser (Unani) 

91 
 
6. Dr. S.R.K. Vidyarthi, Director 
7. Shri Vikram Singh, Director 
8. Dr. S.R. Chinta, Deputy Adviser (Homoeopathy) 
 
Representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice  
 
Department of Legislative Department 
 
1. Smt. Veena Kothavale, Joint Secretary & Legislative Council 
2. Shri Prashant Singh,  Deputy Legislative Council 
Department of Legal Affairs 
 
Shri Mahendra  Khandelwal, Additional Government Advocate 
 
I. Opening Remarks 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them 
that the meeting was convened to have clause -by-clause consideration on the (i) The National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine Bill, 2019; and (ii) The National Commission for 
Homoeopathy Bill, 2019.  The Members were also informed that most of the provisions of the 
aforementioned Bills have been drafted on the lines of National Medical Commission Act.   
II ***  
3. *** 
III Clarification on The National Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019  
4. The Members of the Committee also deliberated on the clauses of the National 
Commission for Homoeopathy Bill, 2019. The Committee after  a brief discussion decided that 
amendment made in NCISM, Bill, 2019 be incorporated also in the NCH Bill, 2019. 
4.1 Some other suggestions made by the Members on the NCH Bill are as follows:   
(i)  more clarity should be provided to the definition of ‗National Register and State Register";  
(ii)    the representation of the homeopathy medical practitioners should be increased from 4 to 6 
in the Commission;  
*** Relates to other matter 

92 
 
 
(iii)   provision regarding the representation of the Chairman, University Grants Commission and 
the Director, National Assessment and Accreditation Council in the Advisory Council for 
Homoeopathy should be made;  
(iv)   issues of pay parity, pay structure, gratuity, pension plans and other related incentives of 
Homeopathic doctors;  
(v)  A provision for training or refreshers course followed by Minimum Qualifying Test (MQT) 
should be incorporated;  
(vi) "The Homoeopathy Education Board" should be renamed as "The Homoeopathy Education, 
Research and Development Board" etc.  
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12:27 p.m.  
  

93 
 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3:00 p.m. on Friday, the 15 th November, 2019 in Room No.  A, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA    
2. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
3. Dr. Santanu Sen 
4. Chaudhary Birender Singh 
5. Shri K. Somaprasad 
6. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
LOK SABHA 
7. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
8. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
9. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
10. Shri D. N. V. Senthilkumar S. 
11. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
3. Smt. Harshita Shankar     Under Secretary 
 
Opening Remarks 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the meeting has been convened to consider and *** 116th Report on the National Commission for 
Homeopathy (NCH) Bill, 2019.    
3. The Committee then considered the *** 116th Report on the National Commission for 
Homeopathy (NCH) Bill, 2019 respectively.  After some discussion and few modifications, the 
Committee adopted both the reports. 
*** Relates to other matter 
 

94 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Wednesday, the 27 th November, 2019. 
The Committee authorized the Chairman of the Committee and two other member s namely, Dr. 
Santanu Sen and Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. 
Mahesh Sharma and Shrimati Pratima Mondal, Member of Lok Sabha to lay the Reports on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3:11 p.m.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

95 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
  
 

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY BILL, 2019
——————
 ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
——————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY
3. Constitution of National Commission for Homoeopathy.
4. Composition of Commission.
5. Search Committee for appointment of Chairperson and Members.
6. Term of Office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
7.  Removal of Chairperson and Members of Commission.
8. Appointment of secretary, experts, professionals, officers and employees of
Commission.
9. Meetings of Commission.
10. Power and functions of Commission.
CHAPTER III
A
DVISORY COUNCIL FOR HOMOEOPATHY
11. Constitution and composition of Advisory Council for Homoeopathy.
12. Functions of Advisory Council for Homoeopathy.
13. Meetings of Advisory Council for Homoeopathy.
CHAPTER IV
N
ATIONAL EXAMINA TION
14. National Eligibility-Cum-Entrance Test.
15. National Exit Test.
16. Post-Graduate National Entrance Test.
17. National Teachers' Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy.
 A
S INTRODUCED IN THE RAJY A SABHA
Bill  No.  II  of  2019

CHAPTER V
AUTONOMOUS BOARDS
CLAUSES
18. Constitution of Autonomous Boards.
19. Composition of Autonomous Boards.
20. Search Committee for appointment of President and Members.
21. Term of office and conditions of service of President and Members.
22. Advisory committees of experts.
23. Staff of Autonomous B oards.
24. Meetings of Autonomous Boards.
25. Delegation of powers.
26. Powers and functions of Homoeopathy Education Board.
27. Powers and functions of Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy.
28. Powers and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating Board for
Homoeopathy.
29. Permission for establishment of new medical institution.
30. State Medical Councils.
31. National Register and State Register of Homoeopathy.
32. Rights of persons to be enrolled in National register and their obligations thereto.
33. Rights of persons to practice.
CHAPTER VI
R
ECOGNITION OF QUALIFICATIONS OF HOMOEOPA THY
34. Recognition of qualifications granted by Universities or medical institutions in
India.
35. Recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside
India.
36. Withdrawal of recognition or de-recognition of qualification.
37. Special provision in certain cases for recognition of qualifications.
CHAPTER VII
G
RANTS, AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS
38. Grants by Central Government.
39. National Commission Fund for Homoeopathy.
40. Audit and accounts.
41. Furnishing of returns and reports to Central Government.
CHAPTER VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. Power of Central Government to give directions to Commission and Autonomous
Boards.
(ii)

43. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Governments.
44. Information to be furnished by Commission and publication thereof.
45. Obligation of Universities and medical institutions.
46. Completion of courses of studies in medical institutions.
45. Obligation of Universities and medical institutions.
46. Completion of courses of studies in medical institutions.
47. Chairperson, Members, officers of Commission, Autonomous Boards to be public
servants.
48. Protection of Action taken in good faith.
49. Cognizance of offences.
50. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission.
51. Joint Sittings of Commission, National Commission for Indian Systems of
Medicine, National    Commission for Yoga and Naturopathy and National Medical
Commission.
52. State Government to promote primary healthcare in rural areas.
53. Power to make rules.
54. Power to make regulations.
55. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
56. Power to remove difficulties.
57. Repeal and Saving.
58. Transitory provisions.
(iii)
   C
LAUSES

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY
BILL, 2019
A
BILL
to provide for a medical education system that improves access to quality and affordable
medical education, ensures availability of adequate and high quality Homoeopathy
medical professionals in all parts of the country; that promotes equitable and universal
healthcare that encourages community health perspective and makes services of
Homoeopathy medical professionals accessible to all the citizens; that promotes
national health goals; that encourages Homoeopathy medical professionals to adopt
latest medical research in their work and to contribute to research; that has an
objective periodic and transparent assessment of medical institutions and facilitates
maintenance of a Homoeopathy medical register for India and enforces high ethical
standards in all aspects of medical services; that is flexible to adapt to the changing
needs and has an effective grievance redressal mechanism and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
 AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
Bill  No.  II  of  2019
5
10

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Autonomous Board” means any of the Autonomous Boards constituted
under section 18;
(b) “Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy” means the Board
constituted under section 18;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the National Commission for
Homoeopathy appointed under section 5;
(d)  “Commission” means the National Commission for Homoeopathy constituted
under section 3;
(e) “Council” means the Advisory Council for Homoeopathy constituted under
section 11;
(f) “Homoeopathy” means the Homoeopathic System of Medicine and includes
the use of biochemic remedies;
(g) “Homoeopathy Education Board” means the Board constituted for
Homoeopathy education under section 18;
(h) “licence” means a licence to practice Homoeopathy granted under
sub-section (1) of section 32;
(i) “Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy” means the Board
for assessment and rating of medical institutions constituted under section 18;
(j) “medical institution” means any institution within or outside India which,
grants degrees, diplomas or licences in Homoeopathy and includes affiliated colleges
and deemed to be Universities;
(k) “Member” means a Member of the Commission appointed under section 5
and includes the Chairperson thereof;
(l) “National Register” means a National Medical Register for Homoeopathy
maintained by the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy under
section 31;
(m) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(o) “President” means the President of an Autonomous Board appointed under
section 20;
(p) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Commission under this
Act;
(q) “State Medical Council” means a State Medical Council of Homoeopathy
constituted under any law for the time being in force in any State or Union territory for
regulating the practice and registration of practitioners of Homoeopathy;
(r) “State Register” means a State register for Homoeopathy maintained under
any law for the time being in force in any State or Union territory for registration of
practitioners of Homoeopathy;
(s) “University” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (f) of
section 2 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and includes a health
university.
3 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
CHAPTER II
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEOPATHY
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a Commission, to be
known as the National Commission for Homoeopathy, to exercise the powers conferred
upon, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the
said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the Commission shall be at New Delhi.
4. (1) The Commission shall consist of the following persons, namely:––
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) seven ex officio Members; and
(c) twelve part-time Members.
(2) The Chairperson shall be a person of outstanding ability, proven administrative
capacity and integrity, possessing a postgraduate degree in Homoeopathy from a recognised
University and having experience of not less than twenty years in the field of Homoeopathy,
out of which at least ten years shall be as a leader in the area of healthcare delivery, growth
and development of Homoeopathy or its education.
(3) The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as ex officio
Members of the Commission, namely:––
(a) the President of the Homoeopathy Education Board;
(b) the President of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for
Homoeopathy; and
(c) the President of the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy;
(d) Advisor (Homoeopathy) or Joint Secretary to the Government of India
in-charge of Homoeopathy, in the Ministry of AYUSH;
(e) the Director, National Institute of Homoeopathy, Kolkata;
(f) the Director, North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy, Shillong;
(g) the Director-General, Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy,
Janakpuri, New Delhi.
(4) The following persons shall be appointed by the Central Government as part-time
Members of the Commission, namely:—
(a) three Members to be appointed from amongst persons of ability, integrity
and standing, who have special knowledge and professional experience in the areas
of Homoeopathy, management, law, health research, science and technology and
economics;
(b) five Members to be appointed on rotational basis from amongst the nominees
of the States and Union territories in the Advisory Council for a term of two years in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(c) four members to be elected by the registered medical practitioners of
Homoeopathy from amongst themselves, from such regional constituencies and in
such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that no Member shall either himself or through any of his family members,
directly or indirectly, own or be associated with or have any dealings with the managing body
of a private or non-government medical institution which is regulated under this  Act.
Constitution
of National
Commission
for
Homoeopathy.
Composition
of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
Explanation.––For the purpose of this section and section 19, the term “leader”
means the Head of a Department or the Head of an Organisation.
5. (1) The Central Government shall appoint the Chairperson, referred to in section 4
and the President of the Autonomous Boards referred to in section 20 on the recommendation
of a Search Committee consisting of—
(a) the Cabinet Secretary—Chairperson;
(b) two experts, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not
less than twenty-five years in the field of Homoeopathy, to be nominated by the
Central Government—Members;
(c) one expert, from amongst the members as referred in clause (c) of
sub-section (4) of section 4, to be nominated by the Central Government in such
manner as may be prescribed—Member;
(d) one person, possessing outstanding qualifications and experience of not
less than twenty-five years in the field of health research, management, law, economics
or science and technology, to be nominated by the Central Government—Member;
(e) the Secretary to the Government of India incharge of the AYUSH, to be the
Convenor—Member:
Provided that for selection of part-time members of the Commission referred to
in clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 4, the Secretary referred to in section 8 and
other Members of the Autonomous Boards referred to in section 20, the Search
Committee shall consist of members specified in clauses (b) to (d) and Joint Secretary
to the Government of India in the Ministry of AYUSH as Convenor—Member and
chaired by Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Ministry of AYUSH.
(2) The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of occurrence of
any vacancy, including by reason of death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a
Member, or within three months before the end of tenure of the Chairperson or Member,
make a reference to the Search Committee for filling up of the vacancy.
(3) The Search Committee shall recommend a panel of at least three names for every
vacancy referred to it.
(4) Before recommending any person for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member
of the Commission, the Search Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have
any financial or other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as such
Chairperson or Member.
(5) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be invalid merely by reason of
any vacancy or absence of a Member in the Search Committee.
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (5), the Search Committee may
regulate its own procedure.
6. (1) The Chairperson and Members (other than ex officio Members) and Members
appointed under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4 shall hold office for a term not
exceeding four years and shall not be eligible for any extension or re-appointment:
Provided that such person shall cease to hold office after attaining the age of seventy
years.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio Member shall continue as long as he holds the
office by virtue of which he is such Member.
(3) Where a Member, other than an ex officio Member, is absent from three consecutive
ordinary meetings of the Commission and the cause of such absence is not attributable to
any valid reason in the opinion of the Commission, such Member shall be deemed to have
vacated the seat.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of, the Chairperson and Member, other than an ex officio Member, shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Search
committee
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and Members.
Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
chairperson
and Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

5
(5) The Chairperson or a Member may––
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing a notice of not less than three
months to the Central Government; or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 7:
Provided that such person may be relieved from duties earlier than three months or
allowed to continue beyond three months until a successor is appointed, if the Central
Government so decides.
(6) The Chairperson and every Member of the Commission shall make declaration of
his assets and liabilities at the time of entering upon his office and at the time of demitting his
office and also declare his professional and commercial engagement or involvement, in such
form and manner as may be prescribed, and such declaration shall be published on the
website of the Commission.
(7) The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as such, shall not accept, for
a period of two years from the date of demitting such office, any employment, in any capacity,
including as a consultant or an expert, in any private Medical institution of Homoeopathy or,
whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson or Member, directly or indirectly:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall be construed as preventing such person
from accepting an employment in a body or institution including Medical institution of
Homoeopathy, controlled or maintained by the Central Government or a State Government.
(8) Nothing in sub-section (7) shall prevent the Central Government from permitting
the Chairperson or a Member to accept any employment in any capacity, including as a
consultant or an expert, in any private Medical Institution of Homoeopathy, whose matter
has been dealt with by such Chairperson or Member.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or
any other Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or
a Member; or
(d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially
his functions as a Member; or
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial
to public interest; or
(2) No Member shall be removed under clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (1) unless he
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
8. (1) There shall be a Secretariat for the Commission to be headed by a Secretary, to
be appointed by the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 5.
(2) The Secretary of the Commission shall be a person of proven administrative capacity
and integrity, possessing such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed.
(3) The Secretary shall be appointed by the Central Government for a term of four
years and he shall not be eligible for any extension or re-appointment.
(4) The Secretary shall discharge such functions of the Commission as are assigned
to him by the Commission and as may be specified by regulations made under this Act.
Removal of
Chairperson
and Members
of
Commission.
Appointment
of secretary,
experts,
professionals,
officers and
employees of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(5) The Commission may appoint such officers and other employees, as it considers
necessary, against the posts created by the Central Government for the efficient discharge
of its functions under this Act.
(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Secretary, officers and other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(7) The Commission may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by
regulations, such number of experts and professionals of integrity and outstanding ability,
who have special knowledge of Homoeopathy and experience in fields including medical
education in Homoeopathy, public health, management, economics, quality assurance, patient
advocacy, health research, science and technology, administration, finance, accounts or law
as it deems necessary, to assist the Commission in the discharge of its functions under this
Act.
9. (1) The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter at such time and place as
may be appointed by the Chairperson.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Commission and if, for any
reason, the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Commission, any Member being
the President of the Autonomous Boards, nominated by the Chairperson shall preside at the
meeting.
(3) Unless the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Commission is otherwise
provided by regulations, one-half of the total number of Members of the Commission including
the Chairperson shall constitute the quorum and all decisions of the Commission shall be
taken by a majority of the members, present and voting and in the event of equality of votes,
the Chairperson or in his absence, the President of the Autonomous Board nominated under
sub-section (2), shall have the casting vote.
(4) The general superintendence, direction and control of the administration of the
Commission shall vest in the Chairperson.
(5) No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson or as a
Member.
(6) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Commission may prefer an
appeal to the Central Government against such decision within thirty days of the
communication of such decision.
10. (1) The Commission shall perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) lay down policies for maintaining a high quality and high standards in
education of Homoeopathy and make necessary, in this behalf;
(b) lay down policies for regulating medical institutions, medical researches and
medical professionals and make necessary regulations in this behalf;
(c) assess the requirements in healthcare, including human resources for health
and healthcare infrastructure and develop a road map for meeting such requirements;
(d) frame guidelines and lay down policies by making such regulations as may
be necessary for the proper functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards
and the State Medical Councils of Homoeopathy;
(e) ensure coordination among the Autonomous Boards;
(f) take such measures, as may be necessary, to ensure compliance by the State
Medical Councils of Homoeopathy of the guidelines framed and regulations made
under this Act for their effective functioning under this Act;
Meetings of
Commission.
Power and
functions of
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
(g) exercise appellate jurisdiction with respect to decisions of the Autonomous
Boards;
(h) make regulations to ensure observance of professional ethics in Medical
profession and to promote ethical conduct during the provision of care by medical
practitioners;
(i) exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be
prescribed.
(2) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by signature of
the Secretary and the Commission may delegate such of its powers on administrative and
financial matters, as it deems fit, to the Secretary.
(3) The Commission may constitute sub-committees and delegate such of its powers
to them as may be necessary to enable them to accomplish specific tasks.
CHAPTER III
 ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR HOMOEOPATHY
11. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute an advisory body to
be known as the Advisory Council for Homoeopathy.
(2) The Council shall consist of a Chairperson and the following Members, namely:—
(a) the Chairperson of the Commission shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the
Council;
(b) every Member of the Commission shall be ex officio member of the Council;
(c) one Member, to represent each State, who is the Vice-Chancellor of a University
in that State, to be nominated by that State Government, and one Member to represent
each Union territory, who is the Vice-Chancellor of a University in that Union territory, to
be nominated by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the Government of India:
Provided that the State Government or the Ministry of Home Affairs in the
Government of India, as the case may be, shall nominate the Vice-Chancellor of the
University in that State or Union territory which has the largest number of colleges for
Homoeopathy affiliated to it;
(d) four Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst
persons holding the post of Director in the Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian
Institutes of Management and the Indian Institute of Science.
(e) The terms of  non-ex officio Members in the Council shall be four years.
12. (1) The Council shall be the primary platform through which the States and Union
territories may put forth their views and concerns before the Commission and help in shaping
the overall agenda, policy and action relating to medical education, research and training of
Homoeopathy.
(2) The Council shall advise the Commission on measures to determine and maintain,
and to coordinate maintenance of the minimum standards in all matters relating to medical
education, training and research.
(3) The Council shall advise the Commission on measures to enhance equitable access
to medical education.
13. (1) The Council shall meet at least twice in a year at such time and place as may be
decided by the Chairperson.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside at the meeting of the Council and if for any reason
the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Council, such other member as nominated
by the Chairperson shall preside over the meeting.
Constitution
and
composition
of Advisory
council for
Homoeopathy.
Functions of
Advisory
Council for
Homoeopathy.
Meetings of
Advisory
Council for
Homoeopathy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(3) Unless the procedure is otherwise provided by regulations, one-half of the Members
of the Council including the Chairperson shall form the quorum and all acts of the Council
shall be decided by a majority of the Members present and voting.
CHAPTER IV
 NA TIONAL EXAMINATION
14. (1) There shall be a uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test, for admission
to the undergraduate in Homoeopathy in all medical institutions governed under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test in English
and in such other languages, through such designated authority and in such manner, as may
be specified by regulations.
(3) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common
counselling by the designated authority for admission to all the medical institutions governed
under this Act:
Provided that the common counselling shall be conducted by the designated authority
of ––
(i) the Central Government, for All India seats; and
(ii) the State Government, for the remaining seats at the State level.
15. (1) A common final year undergraduate medical examination, to be known as the
National Exit Test, shall be held for granting licence to practice as medical practitioner of
Homoeopathy and for enrolment in the State Register or National Register, as the case may
be.
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Exit Test for Homoeopathy in English
and in such other languages, through such designated authority and in such manner as may
be specified by regulations.
(3) The National Exit Test shall become operational on such date, within three years
from the date on which this Act comes into force, as may be appointed by the Central
Government, by notification.
16. (1) A uniform Post-Graduate National Entrance Test shall be conducted for
admission to postgraduate courses in Homoeopathy in all medical institutions governed
under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Entrance Test for admission to
postgraduate courses in English and in such other languages, through such designated
authority and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The Commission shall specify by regulations the manner of conducting common
counselling by the designated authority for admission to the postgraduate seats in all
medical institutions governed under this Act.
17. (1) A National Teachers’ Eligibility Test shall be conducted separately for the
postgraduates of Homoeopathy who desire to take up teaching profession in that discipline.
(2) The Commission shall conduct the National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for
Homoeopathy through such designated authority and in such manner as may be specified
by regulations.
(3) The National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy shall become operational
on such date, within three years from the date on which this Act comes into force, as may be
notified by the Central Government:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the teachers appointed
prior to the date notified under sub-section (3).
National
Eligibility-
Cum-
Entrance
Test.
National Exit
Test.
Post-Graduate
National
Entrance
Test.
National
Teachers’
Eligibility
Test for
Homoeopathy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
CHAPTER V
 AUTONOMOUS BOARDS
18. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute the following
Autonomous Boards, under the overall supervision of the Commission, to perform the
functions assigned to such Boards under this Act, namely:—
(a) the Homoeopathy Education Board;
(b) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy; and
(c) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy.
(2) Each Board referred to in sub-section (1) shall be an autonomous body which shall
carry out its functions under this Act in accordance with the regulations made by the
Commission.
19. (1) The composition of the Autonomous Boards shall be as under, namely:––
(a) the Homoeopathy Education Board shall consist of a President and four
Members from the discipline of Homoeopathy;
(b) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall consist
of a President from the discipline of Homoeopathy and two Members, out of whom
one Member shall be from the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other Member shall
be chosen from any of the disciplines of management, quality assurance, law or science
and technology;
(c) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall consist of a
President from the discipline of Homoeopathy and two Members, out of whom one
Member shall be from the discipline of Homoeopathy and the other Member shall be
a person who has demonstrated pubic record of work on medical ethics or chosen
from any of the disciplines of quality assurance, public health, law or patient advocacy.
(2) The President and Members of the Autonomous Boards to be chosen under
sub-section (1) shall be persons of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and
integrity, possessing postgraduate degree in respective disciplines from a recognised
University and having experience of not less than fifteen years in respective fields, out of
which at least seven years shall be as a leader:
Provided that seven years as leader in the case of the president and Member from
Homoeopathy shall be in the area of health, growth and development of education in
Homoeopathy.
20.The Central Government shall appoint the President and Members of the
Autonomous Boards on the basis of the recommendations made in accordance with the
procedure specified in section 5 by the Search Committee constituted thereunder.
21. (1) The President and Members of each Autonomous Board shall held the office
for a term not exceeding four years and shall not be eligible for any extension or
re-appointment:
Provided that such person shall cease to hold office after attaining the age of seventy
years.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the President and Members of an Autonomous Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(3) The provisions contained in sub-sections (3), (5), (6), (7) and (8) of section 6
relating to other terms and conditions of service of, and in section 7 relating to removal from
office, the Chairperson and Members of the Commission shall also be applicable to the
President and Members of the Autonomous Boards.
Commission
of
Autonomous
Boards.
Composition
of
Autonomous
Boards.
Search
Committee
for
appointment
of President
and Members.
Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
President and
Members.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
22. (1) Each Autonomous Board, except the Board of Ethics and Registration for
Homoeopathy, shall be assisted by such advisory committees of experts, as may be constituted
by the Commission, for the efficient discharge of the functions of such Boards under this
Act.
(2) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall be assisted by such
ethics committees of experts, as may be constituted by the Commission, for the efficient
discharge of the functions of that Board under this Act.
23.The experts, professionals, officers and other employees appointed under section 8
shall be made available to the Autonomous Boards in such number and in such manner, as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
24. (1) Every Autonomous Board shall meet at least once a month at such time and
place as it may appoint.
(2) Subject to such regulations as may be made in this behalf, all decisions of the
Autonomous Boards shall be made by consensus and if consensus is not possible, decision
shall be made by majority of votes of the President and Members.
(3) A person who is aggrieved by any decision of an Autonomous Board may prefer
an appeal to the Commission against such decision within sixty days of the communication
of such decision.
25. (1) The Commission may delegate all or any of its administrative and financial
powers to the President of each Autonomous Board to enable such Board to function
smoothly and efficiently.
(2) The President of an Autonomous Board may further delegate any of his powers to
a Member or officer of that Board.
26. (1) The Homoeopathy Education Board shall perform the following functions,
namely:––
(a) determine the standards of education at the undergraduate, postgraduate
and super-speciality levels and oversee all aspects of relating thereto;
(b) develop a competency based dynamic curriculum for Homoeopathy at all
levels in accordance with the regulations made under this Act, in such manner that it
develops appropriate skill, knowledge, attitude, values and ethics among the
postgraduate and super-speciality students and enables them to provide healthcare,
to impart medical education and to conduct medical research;
(c) frame guidelines on setting up of medical institutions for imparting
undergraduate, postgraduate and super-speciality courses in Homoeopathy, having
regard to the needs of the country, the global norms and the regulations made under
this Act;
(d) determine minimum requirements and standards for conducting of courses
and examinations in medical institutions, having regard to the needs of creativity at
local levels and the regulations made under this Act;
(e) determine standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of
education and research in medical institutions of Homoeopathy, in accordance with
the regulations made under this Act;
(f) specify norms for compulsory annual disclosure, electronically and otherwise,
by medical institutions of Homoeopathy in respect of their functions that has a bearing
on the interest of various stakeholders including students, faculty, the Commission
and the Government;
(g) facilitate development and training of faculty Members;
Advisory
committees
of experts.
Staff of
Autonomous
Boards.
Meetings of
Autonomous
Boards.
Delegation of
powers.
Powers and
functions of
Homoeopathy
Education
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
(h) facilitate research programmes;
(i) grant recognition to medical qualifications of Homoeopathy at all levels.
(2) The Homoeopathy Education Board may, in the discharge of its functions, make
such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission, as it deems
necessary.
27. (1) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall perform the
following functions, namely:—
(a) maintain a National Register of all licensed practitioners of Homoeopathy in
accordance with the provisions of section 31;
(b) regulate professional conduct and promote medical ethics in accordance
with the regulations made under this Act:
Provided that the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall ensure
compliance with the code of professional and ethical conduct through the State Medical
Council, in a case where such State Medical Council has been conferred power to take
disciplinary actions in respect of professional or ethical misconduct by medical
practitioners under respective State Acts;
(c) develop mechanisms to have continuous interaction with State Medical
Councils of Homoeopathy to effectively promote and regulate the conduct of medical
practitioners of Homoeopathy.
(2) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy may, in the discharge of its
functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the Commission,
as it deems necessary.
28. (1) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall perform
the following functions, namely:––
(a) determine the process of assessment and rating of medical institutions on
the basis of their compliance with the standards laid down by the Homoeopathy
Education Board, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act;
(b) grant permission for establishment of a new medical institution in accordance
with the provisions of section 29;
(c) carry out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such
institutions in accordance with the regulations made under this Act:
Provided that the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy
may, if it deems necessary, hire and authorise any other third party agency or persons
for carrying out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and rating such
institutions:
Provided further that where inspection of medical institutions is carried out by
such third party agency or persons authorised by the Medical Assessment and Rating
Board for Homoeopathy, it shall be obligatory on such institutions to provide access
to such agency or person;
(d) conduct, or where it deems necessary, empanel independent rating agencies
to conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions, within such period of their opening,
and every year thereafter, at such time, and in such manner, as may be specified by
regulations;
(e) make available on its website or in public domain, the assessment and ratings
of medical institutions at regular intervals, in accordance with the regulations made
under this Act;
(f) take such measures, including issuing warning, imposition of monetary
Powers and
functions of
Board of
Ethics and
Registration
for
Homoeopathy.
Powers and
functions of
Medical
Assessment
and Rating
Board for
Homoeopathy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
penalty, reducing intake or stoppage of admissions and recommending to the
Commission for withdrawal of recognition, against a medical institution for its failure
to maintain the minimum essential standards specified by the Homoeopathy Education
Board, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.
(2) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy may, in the discharge
of its functions, make such recommendations to, and seek such directions from, the
Commission, as it deems necessary.
29. (1) No person shall establish a new medical institution without obtaining prior
permission of the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy.
Explanation.––For the purpose of this sub-section, the term “person” includes any
University or a trust or any other body but does not include the Central Government.
(2) For the purpose of obtaining permission under sub-section (1), a person may
submit a scheme to the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy in such
form, containing such particulars, accompanied by such fee, and in such manner, as may be
specified by regulations.
(3) While considering the scheme received under sub-section (2), the Medical
Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall have regard to the standards of
education and research, the standards and norms for infrastructure and faculty, the guidelines
on setting up of medical institutions and other requirements determined by the Homoeopathy
Education Board, and pass an order either approving or disapproving the scheme within six
months from the date of receipt of such scheme:
Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved without giving a reasonable opportunity
of being heard to the person concerned.
(4) Where a scheme is approved under sub-section (3), such approval shall be the
permission under sub-section (1) to establish a new medical institution.
(5) Where a scheme is disapproved under sub-section (3) or where no order is passed
within six months of submitting a scheme under sub-section (2), the person concerned may
prefer an appeal to the Commission within fifteen days of such disapproval or, as the case
may be, after lapse of six months, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(6) Where the Commission has disapproved the scheme or no order has been passed
within forty-five days from the date of preferring appeal under sub-section (5), the person
concerned may prefer a second appeal to the Central Government within thirty days of
communication of such disapproval or, as the case may be, lapse of specified period of
forty-five days.
(7) The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy may conduct
evaluation and assessment of any University or medical institution at any time, either directly
or through any other expert, without any prior notice and assess and evaluate the performance,
standards and benchmarks of such University or medical institution.
30. (1) The State Government shall, by notification, within three years of the
commencement of this Act, establish a State Medical Council for Homoeopathy in that State
if no such Council exists in that State.
(2) Where a State Act confers power upon the State Medical Council to take disciplinary
actions in respect of any professional or ethical misconduct by a registered practitioner of
Homoeopathy, the State Medical Council shall act in accordance with the regulations made,
and the guidelines framed, under this Act:
Provided that till such time as a State Medical Council for Homoeopathy is established
in a State, the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall receive the complaints
and grievances relating to any professional or ethical misconduct against a registered
Permission
for
establishment
of new
medical
institution.
State Medical
Councils.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
practitioner of Homoeopathy in that State in accordance with such procedure as may be
specified by regulations:
Provided further that the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy or, as the
case may be, the State Medical Council shall give an opportunity of hearing to such
practitioner before passing any order or taking any action, including imposition of any
monetary penalty, against such person.
(3) A practitioner of Homoeopathy who is aggrieved by the order passed or the action
taken by––
(a) the State Medical Council under sub-section (2) may prefer an appeal to the
Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy and the decision, if any, of the
Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy thereupon shall be binding on
such State Medical Council, unless a second appeal is preferred under sub-section (4);
(b) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy under the first proviso
to sub-section (2) may prefer an appeal to the Commission.
(4) A medical practitioner who is aggrieved by the decision of––
(a) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy, may prefer an appeal
to the Commission within sixty days of communication of such decision;
(b) the Commission, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within
thirty days of communication of such decision.
Explanation:—For the purposes of this Act;—
(a) “State” includes Union territory and the expressions “State Government’’
and “State Medical Council for Homoeopathy”, in relation to a Union territory, shall
respectively mean the “Central Government” and “Union Territory Medical Council
for Homoeopathy”;
(b) the expression “professional or ethical misconduct” includes any act of
commission or omission, as may be specified by regulations;
31. (1) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall maintain a National
Register containing the name, address, all recognised qualifications possessed by a licensed
medical practitioner of Homoeopathy and such other particulars as may be specified by
regulations.
(2) The National Register shall be maintained in such form, including in electronic
form and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The manner in which any name or qualification may be added to, or removed from,
the National Register and the grounds for removal thereof, shall be such as may be specified
by the regulations.
(4) The National Register shall be made available in the public by placing it on the
website of the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy.
(5) Every State Medical Council shall maintain and regularly update the State Register in
the specified electronic format and supply a physical copy of the same to the Board of Ethics
and Registration for Homoeopathy within three months of the commencement of this Act.
(6) The Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall ensure electronic
synchronisation of the National Register and the State Register in such a manner that any
change in one such register is automatically reflected in the other register.
National
Register and
State Register
of
Homoeopathy.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

14
32. (1) Any person who has a recognised medical qualification in Homoeopathy
under this Act and qualifies the National Exit Test held under section 15 shall have a licence
to practice Homoeopathy and shall have his name and qualifications enrolled in the National
Register or a State Register, as the case may be:
Provided that a person who has been registered in the Central Register of Homoeopathy
maintained under the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 prior to the coming into force
of this Act and before the National Exit Test becomes operational under sub-section (3) of
section 15, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Act and be enrolled in the
National Register maintained under this Act.
(2) No person who has obtained a qualification in Homoeopathy from a medical
institution established in any country outside India and is recognised as a medical practitioner
of Homoeopathy in that country, shall, after the commencement of this Act and the National
Exit Test for Homoeopathy becomes operational under sub-section (3) of section 15, be
enrolled in the National Register for Homoeopathy, unless he qualifies the National Exit Test
for Homoeopathy.
(3) When a person whose name is entered in the State Register or the National Register,
as the case may be, obtains any title, diploma or qualification for proficiency in sciences or
medicine which is a recognised qualification under section 34 or section 35, as the case may
be, he shall be entitled to have such title, diploma or qualification entered against his name
in the State Register or the National Register, in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
33. (1) No person other than a person who is enrolled in the State Register or the
National Register, as the case may be, shall—
(a) be allowed to practice Homoeopathy as a qualified practitioner:
(b) hold office as a physician or a surgeon or any other office, by whatever name
called, which is meant to be held by a physician or surgeon, as the case may be;
(c) be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other
certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified
medical practitioner;
(d) be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert
under section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 on any matter relating to
Homoeopathy:
Provided that the Commission may permit a qualified person to practice Homoeopathy
without qualifying the National Exit Test, in such circumstances and for such period, as may
be specified by regulations:
Provided further that the Commission shall submit a list of such practitioners to the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided also that a foreign citizen who is enrolled in his country as a practitioner of
Homoeopathy in accordance with the law regulating the registration of such practitioners in
that country may be permitted temporary registration in India for such period and in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Any person who acts in contravention of the provisions of this section shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall affect,—
(a) the right of a person enrolled on a State Register as practitioner of
Homoeopathy to practice in any State merely on the ground that he does not possess,
as on the date of commencement of this Act, a recognised medical qualification in
Homoeopathy;
Rights of
persons to
practice.
59 of 1973.
1 of 1872.
Rights of
persons to be
enrolled in
National
register and
their
obligations
thereto. 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
(b) the right of a person who has been practicing Homoeopathy for not less
than five years in a State, to continue to practice in that State in which a State Register
of Homoeopathy is not maintained as on the date of commencement of this Act.
CHAPTER VI
 RECOGNITION OF QUALIFICATIONS OF HOMOEOPATHY
34. (1) The medical qualifications in Homoeopathy at undergraduate or postgraduate
or super-speciality level granted by any University or medical institution in India shall be
listed and maintained by the Homoeopathy Education Board, in such manner as may be
specified by regulations and such medical qualification shall be a recognised qualification
for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Any University or medical institution in India which grants an undergraduate or
postgraduate or super-speciality qualification in Homoeopathy not included in the list
maintained by the Homoeopathy Education Board, may apply to that Board for granting
recognition to such qualification.
(3) The Homoeopathy Education Board shall examine the application for grant of
recognition within period of six months in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(4) Where the Homoeopathy Education Board decides to grant recognition to the
qualification in Homoeopathy, it shall include such qualification in the list maintained by it
and shall also specify therein the date of effect of such recognition, otherwise it shall
communicate its decision not to grant recognition to the concerned University or medical
institution.
(5) The aggrieved University or the medical institution may prefer an appeal to the
Commission within a period of sixty days from the date of communication of the decision of
Homoeopathy Education Board in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(6) The Commission shall examine the appeal received under sub-section (5) within a
period of two months and if it decides that recognition may be granted to such medical
qualification, it may direct the concerned Board to include such qualification in the list
maintained by that Board in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(7) Where the Commission decides not to grant recognition under sub-section (6) or
fails to decide within the specified period, the aggrieved University or medical institution
concerned may prefer a second appeal to the Central Government within a period of thirty
days of the communication of such decision or lapse of specified period, as the case may be.
(8) All medical qualifications which have been recognised before the date of
commencement of this Act and are included in the Second Schedule to the Homoeopathy
Central Council Act, 1973, shall also be listed and maintained by the Homoeopathy Education
Board, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
35. (1) Where an authority in any country outside India which, by the law of that
country, is entrusted with the recognition of qualifications of Homoeopathy in that country,
makes an application to the Commission for granting recognition to such qualification in
India, the Commission may, subject to such verification as it deems necessary, either grant or
refuse to grant recognition to that medical qualification.
(2) Where the Commission grants recognition to any medical qualification under
sub-section (1) , such qualification shall be a recognised qualification for the purposes of
this Act and shall be included in the list maintained by the Commission in such manner as
may be specified:
Provided that in case the Commission decides not to grant recognition to any
qualification, the Commission shall give a reasonable opportunity of being heard to such
authority before refusing to grant such recognition.
Recognition
of
qualifications
granted by
Universities
or medical
institutions in
India.
Recognition
of medical
qualifications
granted by
medical
institutions
outside India.
59 of 1973.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(3) Where the Commission refuses to grant recognition to a medical qualification
under sub-section (2), the Authority concerned may prefer an appeal to the Central
Government for grant of recognition.
(4) All qualifications which have been recognised before the date of commencement
of this Act and are included in the Third Schedule to the Homoeopathy Central Council,
Act, 1973 shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act and shall be
listed and maintained by the Commission in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.
36. (1) Where, upon a report received from the Medical Assessment and Rating Board
for Homoeopathy orotherwise, it appears to the Commission that—
(a) the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency
required from candidates at any examination held by, a University or medical institution do
not conform to the standards specified by Homoeopathy Education Board; or
(b) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education in
medical institutions as determined by the Homoeopathy Education Board are not adhered to
by any University or medical institution, and such University or medical institution has
failed to take necessary corrective action to maintain specified minimum standards,
the  Commission  may  initiate  action  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
Sub-section (2) :
Provided that the Commission shall, before, taking any action for suo motu withdrawal
of recognition granted to the medical qualification awarded by a University or medical
institution, impose penalty in accordance with the provisions of clause (f) of sub-section (l)
of section 28.
(2) The Commission shall, after making such further inquiry as it deems fit, and after
holding consultations with the State Government and the authority of the concerned
University or medical institution, comes to the conclusion that the recognition granted to a
medical qualification ought to be withdrawn, it may, by order, withdraw recognition granted
to such medical qualification and direct the Homoeopathy Education Board to amend the
entries against the University or medical institution concerned in the list maintained by that
Board to the effect that the recognition granted to such qualification is withdrawn with
effect from the date specified in that order.
(3) If the Commission, after verification with the authority in any country outside
India, is of the opinion that a recognised medical qualification which is included in the list
maintained by it is to be de-recognised, it may, by order, de-recognise such medical qualification
and remove it from the list maintained by the Commission with effect from the date of such
order.
37. Where the Commission deems it necessary so to do, it may, by notification, direct
that any qualification in Homoeopathy granted by a medical institution outside India, after
such date, as may be specified in that notification, shall be recognised qualification for the
purposes of this Act:
Provided that medical practice by a person possessing such qualification shall be
permitted only if such person has been enrolled as a medical practitioner in accordance with
the law regulating the registration of medical practitioner for the time being in force in that
country:
Provided further that medical practice by a person possessing such qualification shall
be limited to such period as may be specified in that order:
Provided also that medical practice by a person possessing such qualification shall be
permitted only if such person qualifies National Exit Test.
Withdrawal of
recognition or
de-
recognition of
qualification.
Special
provision in
certain cases
for
recognition of
qualifications.
59 of 1973.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
CHAPTER VII
 GRANTS, AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS
38. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in
this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central Government
may think fit.
39. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called “the National Commission Fund
For Homoeopathy” and there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all Government grants, fees, penalties and charges received by the
Commission and the Autonomous Boards;
(b) all sums received by the Commission from such other source as may be
decided by it.
(2) The fund shall be applied for making payment towards—
(a) The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members of the
Commission, Presidents and Members of the Autonomous Boards and administrative
expenses including the salaries and allowances payable to the officers and other employees
of the Commission and the Autonomous Boards;
(b) the expenses incurred or to be incurred in carrying out the provisions of this Act
including in connection with the discharge of the functions of the Commission and the
Autonomous Boards.
40. (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed, in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred
in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other persons appointed by
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission shall have the same
rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of, and complete access to, records,
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the
office of  the Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit
report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by the Commission to the Central Government
which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each
House of Parliament.
41. (1) The Commission shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time, in such
form and in such manner, as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct,
such reports and statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction
of the Commission, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.
(2) The Commission shall prepare, once every year, in such form and at such time as
may he prescribed, an annual report, giving a summary of its activities during the previous
year and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be laid by the Central
Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
Grants by
Central
Government.
National
Commission
Fund for
Homoeopathy.
Audit and
Accounts.
Furnishing of
returns and
reports to
Central
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
CHAPTER VIII
 MISCELLANEOUS
42. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Commission and
the Autonomous Boards shall, in exercise of their powers and discharge of their functions
under this Act be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government
may give in writing to them from time to time:
Provided that the Commission and the Autonomous Boards shall, as far as practicable,
be given an opportunity to express their views before any direction is given under this
sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not
shall be final.
43. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem necessary, to a
State Government for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act and the State
Government shall comply with such directions.
44. (1) The Commission shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of
its accounts and other information to the Central Government as that Government may
require.
(2) The Central Government may publish, in such manner as it may think fit, the
reports, minutes, abstracts of accounts and other information furnished to it under
sub-section (1) .
45. Every University and medical institutions covered under this Act shall maintain a
website at all times and display in its website all such information as may be required by the
Commission or an Autonomous Board, as the case may be.
46. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any student who was studying
for a degree or diploma in any medical institution immediately before the commencement of
this Act shall continue to so study and complete his course for such degree or diploma, and
such institution shall continue to provide instructions and hold examination for such student
in accordance with the syllabus and studies as existed before such commencement, and
such student shall be deemed to have completed his course of study under this Act and
shall be awarded degree or diploma under this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where recognition granted to a
medical institution has lapsed, whether by efflux of time or by its voluntary surrender or for
any other reason whatsoever, such medical institution shall continue to maintain and provide
the minimum standards as approved by the Commission till such time as all the candidates
are able to complete their study in that institution.
47. The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Commission,
President and Members of Autonomous Boards shall be deemed, when acting or purporting
to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
48. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government,
the Commission or any Autonomous Board or a State Medical Council or any Committee
thereof, or any officer or other employee of the Government or of the Commission acting
under this Act for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act
or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions to
Commission
and
Autonomous
Boards.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions to
State
Governments.
Information
to be
furnished by
Commission
and
publication
thereof.
Obligation of
Universities
and medical
institutions.
Completion
of courses of
studies in
medical
institutions.
Chairperson,
Members,
officers of
Commission,
Autonomous
Boards to be
public
servants.
Protection of
Action taken
in good faith.
45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
49. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act except
upon a complaint in writing made in this behalf by an officer authorised by the Commission
or the Ethic and Registration Board or a State Medical Council, as the case may be.
50. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion that––
(a) the Commission is unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on
it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) the Commission has persistently made default in complying with any direction
issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions
and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Commission
for such period, not exceeding one year, as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Commission to show cause as to
why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any,
of the Commission.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the
Commission,––
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices
as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions
of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Commission, shall, until
the Commission is re-constituted under sub-section (3),  be exercised and discharged
by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct;
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Commission shall, until the
Commission is re-constituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified the notification issued
under sub-section (1), the Central Government may,—
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding six
months, as it may consider necessary; or
(b) re-constitute the Commission by fresh appointment and in such case the
Members who vacated their offices under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be
deemed disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the
period of supersession, whether as originally specified under sub-section (1) or as extended
under this sub-section, take action under clause (b) of this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section (1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to
such action to be laid before both Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.
51. (1) There shall be a joint sitting of the Commission, the National Commission for
Indian System of Medicine and the National Medical Commission, at least once a year, at
such time and place as they mutually appoint, to enhance the interface between Homoeopathy,
Indian System of Medicine, Y oga and Naturopathy and modern system of medicine.
(2) The Agenda for the joint sitting may be placed with mutual agreement by the
Chairpersons of the Commissions concerned.
(3) The joint sitting may, by an affirmative vote of all members present and voting,
decide on approving specific educational and medical modules or programs that could be
introduced in the undergraduate and postgraduate courses across medical systems, and
promote medical pluralism.
Cognizance of
offences.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Commission.
Joint Sittings
of
Commission,
National
Commission
for Indian
Systems of
Medicine and
National
Medical
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

20
52. Every State Government may, for the purposes of addressing or promoting
healthcare in rural areas, take necessary measures to enhance the capacity of the healthcare
professionals.
53. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:––
(a) the manner of appointing five Members of the Commission on rotational
basis from amongst the nominees of the States and Union territories in the Advisory
Council under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 4;
(b) the manner of electing members of the Commission by the registered medical
practitioners from amongst themselves and the regional constituencies from which
such members are to be elected under clause (c) of sub-section (4) of section 4;
(c) the manner of nominating one expert by the Central Government under
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 5;
(d) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(e) the form and the manner of making declaration under sub-section (6) of
section 6;
(f) the qualifications and experience to be possessed by Secretary under
sub-section (2) of section 8;
(g) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
the Secretary, officers and other employees of the Commission under sub-section (6)
of section 8;
(h) the other powers to be exercised and other functions to be performed by the
Commission under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions
of service of, the President and Members of an Autonomous Board under
sub-section (2) of section 21;
(j) the manner of submitting list of practitioners under the second proviso to
sub-section (1) of section 33;
(k) the form for preparing annual statement of accounts under sub-section (1)
of section 40;
(l) the time within which, and the form and the manner in which, the reports and
statements shall be furnished by the Commission and the particulars with regard to
any matter as may be required by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of
section 41;
(m) the form and the time for preparing annual report under sub-section (2) of
section 41;
(n) the compensation for the premature termination of employment under the
second proviso to sub-section (3) of section 57;
(o) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
54. (1) The Commission may, by notification, make regulations consistent with this
Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act.
State
Government
to promote
primary
healthcare in
rural areas.
Power to
make rules.
Power to
make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

21
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the functions to be discharged by the Secretary of the Commission under
sub-section (4) of section 8;
(b) the procedure in accordance with which experts and professionals may be
engaged and the number of such experts and professionals under sub-section (7) of
section 8;
(c) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of Commission, including the
quorum at its meetings under sub-section (3) of section 9;
(d) the quality and standards to be maintained in education of Homoeopathy
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(e) the manner of regulating medical institutions, medical researches and medical
professionals under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 10;
(f) the manner of regulating functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous
Boards and the State Medical Councils under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 10;
(g) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Medical Advisory Council,
including the quorum at its meetings under sub-section (3) of section 13;
(h) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and
the manner in which the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test shall be conducted
under sub-section (2) of section 14;
(i) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority
for admission to medical institutions under sub-section (3) of section 14;
(j) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and
the manner in which, the National Exit Test shall be conducted under sub-section (2)
of section 15;
(k) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and
the manner in which admission to postgraduate courses shall be conducted under
sub-section (2) of section 16;
(l) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority
for admission to the postgraduate seats in all medical institutions under
sub-section (3) of section 16;
(m) the manner of conducting the National Teachers’ Eligibility Test for
Homoeopathy and the designated authority through whom such test shall be
conducted under sub-section (2) of section 17;
(n) the number of, and the manner in which, experts, professionals, officers and
other employees shall be made available by the Commission to the Autonomous
Boards under section 23;
(o) the manner in which decisions of the Autonomous Boards shall be made
under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(p) the competency based dynamic curriculum at all levels under clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of section 26;
(q) the manner of setting up of medical institutions for imparting undergraduate,
postgraduate and super-speciality courses in Homoeopathy under clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of section 26;
(r) the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses and
examinations in medical institutions under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 26;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

22
(s) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education
and research in medical institutions of Homoeopathy under clause (e) of sub-section (1)
of section 26;
(t) the manner of regulating professional conduct and promoting medical ethics
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 27;
(u) the procedure for assessment and rating of the medical institutions under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 28;
(v) the manner of carrying out inspections of medical institutions for assessing
and rating under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 28;
(w) the manner of conducting, and the manner of empanelling independent
rating agencies to conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions under clause (d) of
sub-section (1) of section 28;
(x) the manner of making available on website or in public domain the assessment
and ratings of medical institutions under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 28;
(y) the measures to be taken against a medical institution for failure to maintain
the minimum essential standards under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 28;
(z) the form of scheme, the particulars thereof, the fee to be accompanied and
the manner of submitting scheme for establishing new medical college under
sub-section (2) of section 29;
(za) the manner of preferring an appeal to the Commission for approval of the
scheme under sub-section (5) of section 29;
(zb) the manner of taking disciplinary action by a State Medical Council for
professional or ethical misconduct of registered medical practitioner and the procedure
for receiving complaints and grievances by the Board of Ethics and Registration for
Homoeopathy, under sub-section (2) of section 30;
(zc) the act of commission or omission which amounts to professional or ethical
misconduct under clause (b) of the Explanation to section 30;
(zd) other particulars to be contained in a National Register under
sub-section (1) of section 31;
(ze) the form, including the electronic form and the manner of maintaining the
National Register under sub-section (2) of section 31;
(zf) the manner in which any name or qualification may be added to, or removed
from, the National Register and the grounds for removal thereof, under
sub-section (3) of section 31;
(zg) the manner of entering the title, diploma or qualification in the State Register
or the National Register under sub-section (3) of section 32;
(zh) the circumstances in which, and the period for which, the Commission may
permit a qualified person to practice Homoeopathy without qualifying the National
Exit Test under the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 33;
(zi) the manner in which, and the period for which temporary registration may be
permitted to a foreign citizen under the third proviso to sub-section (1) of section 33;
(zj) the manner of listing and maintaining medical qualifications granted by a
University or medical institution in India under sub-section (1) of section 34;
(zk) the manner of examining the application for grant of recognition under
sub-section (3) of section 34;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
(zl) the manner of preferring an appeal to the Commission for grant of recognition
under sub-section (5) of section 34;
(zm) the manner of including a medical qualification in the list maintained by the
Board under sub-section (6) of section 34;
(zn) the manner in which the Homoeopathy Education Board shall list and maintain
the medical qualifications which have been granted recognition before the date of
commencement of this Act, under sub-section (8) of section 34;
(zo) the manner in which the Commission shall list and maintain the medical
qualifications which have been granted recognition before the date of commencement
of this Act, under sub-section (4) of section 35.
55. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
56. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary, for the
removing of the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
57. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint in this behalf, the Homoeopathy Central Council, Act, 1973 shall stand repealed and
the Central Council of Homoeopathy constituted under section 3 of the said Act shall stand
dissolved.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (1), it shall not
affect,––
(a) the previous operation of the Acts so repealed or anything duly done or
suffered thereunder; or
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under
the Act so repealed; or
(c) any penalty incurred in respect of any contravention under the Act so
repealed; or
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation,
liability, penalty as aforesaid, and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted,
continued or enforced, and any such penalty may be imposed as if that Act had not
been repealed.
(3) On the dissolution of the Central Council of Homoeopathy, the person appointed
as the Chairman of that Council and every other person appointed as the Member and any
officer and other employees of the Council and holding office as such immediately before
such dissolution shall vacate their respective offices and such Chairman and other Members
shall be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three months’ pay and allowances for
the premature termination of term of their office or of any contract of service:
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
saving.59 of 1973.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
Provided that any officer or other employee who has been, immediately before the
dissolution of the Central Council of Homoeopathy appointed on deputation basis to the
Central Council of Homoeopathy, shall, on such dissolution, stand reverted to their parent
cadre, Ministry or Department, as the case may be:
Provided further that any officer, expert, professional or other employee who has
been, immediately before the dissolution of the Central Council of Homoeopathy employed
on regular basis or on contractual basis by the Council, shall cease to be such officer, expert,
professional or other employees of the Central Council and shall be entitled to such
compensation for the premature termination of his employment, which shall not be less than
three months’ pay and allowances, as may be prescribed.
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of the aforesaid enactment, any order made, any licence
to practice issued, any registration made, any permission to start new medical institution or
to start higher course of studies or to increase in the admission capacity granted, any
recognition of medical qualifications granted, under the Homoeopathy Central Council,
Act, 1973 which are in force as on the date of commencement of this Act shall continue to be
in force till the date of their expiry for all purposes, as if they had been issued or granted
under the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
58. (1) The Commission shall be the successor in interest to the Central Council of
Homoeopathy including its subsidiaries or owned trusts and all the assets and liabilities of
the Central Council of Homoeopathy shall be deemed to have been transferred to the
Commission.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Homoeopathy Central Council, Act, 1973, the
educational and medical standards, requirements and other provisions of the Homoeopathy
Central Council, Act, 1973 and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall continue to
be in force and operate till new standards or requirements are specified under this Act or the
rules and regulations made thereunder:
Provided that anything done or any action taken as regards the educational and
medical standards and requirements under the enactment under repeal and the rules and
regulations made thereunder shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provision of this Act and shall continue in force accordingly unless and until
superseded by anything or by any action taken under this Act.
(3) The Central Government may take such measures, as may be necessary, for the
smooth transition of the dissolved Central Council of Homoeopathy to the corresponding to
new Commission under this Act.
Transitory
provisions.
59 of 1973.
59 of 1973.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Homoeopathy Central Council (HCC) Act, 1973 (59 of 1973) was enacted to provide
a solid foundation for the growth of Homoeopathy medical education and provides for
constitution of the Central Council of Homoeopathy for regulation of the educational
standards of Homoeopathy, maintenance of the Central Register of practitioners  and for
matters connected therewith.
2. The said Homoeopathy Central Council Act has not kept pace with time. Various
bottlenecks have crept into the system with serious detrimental effects on medical education
and by implication on delivery of quality health services.
3. In order to streamline the functioning of the Central Council of Homoeopathy, to
bring transparency in the mechanism for grant of permission to medical institutions and to
improve the standards of medical education in Homoeopathy, the Central Government had
introduced the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2005 and the Homoeopathy
Central Council (Amendment) Bill, 2015 in Rajya Sabha which are still pending.
4. In 2016, the Central Government constituted a Committee chaired by Vice-Chairman,
NITI Aayog to review the Homoeopathy Central Council Act and the said Committee has
recommended for enactment of the National Commission for Homoeopathy on the same
lines as that of the National Medical Commission Bill, 2018 which has been introduced in
Lok Sabha.
5. The National Commission for Homoeopathy, Bill, 2019, inter alia, seeks to provide
for—
(a) constitution of a National Commission for Homoeopathy for development
and regulation of all aspect relating to education, medical profession and medical
institutions of Homoeopathy and an Advisory Council to advise and make
recommendations to the Commission;
(b) constitution of three Autonomous Boards, namely:—
(i) the Homoeopathy Education Board to regulate Homoeopathy education
at undergraduate and Post-Graduate levels and to determine standards thereof;
(ii) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy to carry
out inspections and to assess and rate the medical institutions; and
(iii) the Board  of  Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy to regulate
professional conduct and promote medical ethics amongst practitioners and
professionals of  Homoeopathy and to maintain a national register of all licensed
practitioners of Homoeopathy;
(c) holding of a uniform National Eligibility-Cum-Entrance Test for admission to
undergraduate medical education;
(d) holding of a National Exit Test for granting licence to practice as medical
practitioner of Homoeopathy;
(e) holding of a uniform Post-Graduate National Entrance Test for postgraduate
courses;
(f) holding of National Teachers' Eligibility Test for  Homoeopathy for
appointment as teachers  of Homoeopathy;
(g) the manner of seeking permission for establishment of  new medical
institution;
25

26
(h) the manner of maintaining National Register and State Register of
Homoeopathy;
(i) recognition of medical qualification granted by universities and medical
institutions in India and outside India and withdrawal of recognition or de-recognition
of qualification;
(j) holding of joint sitting of the Commissions of other medical education to
enhance interface between Homoeopathy, Indian System of Medicine, and modern
system of medicine;
(k) the repeal of the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 and for dissolution
of the Central Council of Homoeopathy constituted thereunder with certain conditions.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SHRIPAD YESSO NAIK
The 2nd January, 2019.

Notes on Clauses
Clause 1 provides for short title, extent and commencement of the proposed Act.
Clause 2 defines various terms and expressions used in the proposed Act.
Clause 3 provides for constitution of the National Commission for Homoeopathy in
the proposed Act.
Clause 4 provides for composition of the National Commission for Homoeopathy and
appointment and qualifications of its constituent Members. The Commission shall be a
twenty Member body comprising of chairperson, seven ex officio Members and twelve
part-time Members. Of the part-time Members, three shall be from non-medical background
and four shall be elected Members from among registered medical practitioners of
Homoeopathy.
Clause 5 provides for composition of the Search Committee for appointment of the
Chairperson and Presidents of Boards of the Commission under proposed Act. The Committee
shall be chaired by the Cabinet Secretary and include two experts nominated by the Central
Government of which one shall be with experience in field of Homoeopathy and one from
non-medical. One of the elected medical member in National Commission for Homoeopathy
shall also be a Member of this Committee. The Secretary to the Government of India in charge
of the Ministry of AYUSH are the other Members:
Provided that for selection of part-time members of the Commission referred in
Clause (a) of sub-section ( 4) of section 4, the Secretary referred in section 8 and other
Members of the Boards referred in section 20, the Search Committee shall consist of members
specified in clauses (b) to (d) and Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry
of AYUSH as Convenor-Member and chaired by the Secretary to the Government of India in
charge of the Ministry of AYUSH.
Clause 6 provides duration of office, salary and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission. They shall hold
office for a term not exceeding four years and will not be eligible for extension or re-appointment.
Clause  7  provides for removal of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission.
Clause 8  provides for appointments of the Secretary, experts, professionals, officers
and other employees of the Commission.
Clause  9 provides for meetings, its Chairperson, quorum and other ancillary matters
connected to meetings. The Commission shall meet at least once every quarter.
Clause  10  provides for powers and functions of the Commission including:—
(a) formulation of policies and framing of guidelines for ensuring high quality
and standards in medical education and research;
(b) coordination of functioning of the Commission, Autonomous Boards and
State Medical Councils;
(c) formulation of policy for regulation of medical profession;
(d) power to delegate and form sub-committees.
Clause 11 provides for constitution and composition of the Advisory Council for
Homoeopathy. It shall consist of one nominee from every State who shall be the
Vice-Chancellor of State University with maximum Homoeopathy colleges under it. Ministry
of  Home Affairs shall nominate one Member to represent each Union territory. Every Member
of the National Commission for Homoeopathy shall be ex officio Members of the Advisory
27

28
Council. Four Members from among Directors of Indian Institutes of Technology, Indian
Institutes of Management and the Indian Institute of Science shall also be its Members.
Clause 12 provides for functions of Advisory Council to advise the Commission on
minimum standards in medical education, training and research.
Clause 13 provides for meetings and quorum of  the Advisory Council.
Clause 14 provides for uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test and counselling
for admission in undergraduate course in medical institutions.
Clause 15 provides that National Exit Examination for students graduating from the
medical institutions for granting licence to medical practice.
 Clause 16 provides for uniform National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test and counselling
for admission in Post-graduate course in medical institutions.
Clause 17 provides for uniform National Teachers Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy
for appointment of teachers.
Clause 18 provides for constitution of three Autonomous Boards under the overall
supervision of the Commission. The three Autonomous Boards are the homoeopathy
education Board, the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy and Board of
Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy.
Clause 19 provides for composition of the following Autonomous Boards—
(a) Board of Homoeopathy consist of the President and four Members from the
Homoeopathy discipline;
(b) the Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy shall consist
of a President and two Members; The second Member of Medical Assessment and
Rating Board shall be from non-medical background;
(c) the Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy shall consist of a
President and two Members; The second Member of Medical Assessment and Rating
Board shall be from non-medical background.
Clause 20 provides for Search Committee for appointment of the President and
Members of the Autonomous Boards.
Clause 21 provides for duration of office, salary and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the President and Members of the Autonomous Boards.
Clause 22 provides for Advisory Committees of experts constituted by the Commission
to render assistance to all Autonomous Boards for discharging of functions assigned under
the Act.
Clause 23 provides for staff of Autonomous Boards.
Clause 24 provides for meetings of Autonomous Boards. Every Board shall meet at
least once a month.
Clause 25 provides for powers of Autonomous Boards and delegation of powers.
Clause 26 provides for powers and functions of Homoeopathy education Board
including determination of standards of medical education of Homoeopathy at Undergraduate
and Postgraduate level, framing of guidelines for establishment of medical institutions for
imparting undergraduate and Postgraduate medical courses, granting of recognition to
medical institutions at all levels.
Clause 27 provides for powers and functions of Board of Ethics and Registration for
Homoeopathy including maintain a National Register for all licensed medical practitioners
and regulate professional conduct, to develop mechanism for continuous interaction with
State Medical Councils.

29
Clause 28 provides for powers and functions of Medical Assessment and Rating
Board for Homoeopathy including determine the procedure for assessing and rating of
medical institutions for compliance with prescribed standards, granting of permission for
establishment of new medical institutions and carrying out of inspection for this purpose,
imposing of monetary penalty on medical institution for failure to maintain minimum essential
standards prescribed.
Clause 29 provides for permission for establishment of new medical college and for
criteria for approval or disapproval of the scheme for establishment of new medical college.
Clause 30 provides for establishment of the State Medical Council and other provisions
relating thereto.
Clause 31 provides for the maintenance of a National Register by Board of Ethics and
Registration for Homoeopathy which shall contain the name, address and all recognised
qualifications possessed by licensed medical practitioner. Every State Medical Council shall
maintain a State Register. The registers will be maintained in such forms including electronic
form as may be specified.
 Clause 32 provides for rights of persons to have license to practice and to be enrolled
in National Register or State Register. A person who qualifies National Exit Examination shall
be enrolled in the National Register or State Register.
Clause 33 provides for bar to practice. A person who is not enrolled in the State or
National Register of Homoeopathy shall not be allowed to practice medicine or perform any
of the function enrolled upon a qualifies medical practitioner such as holding an office of
physician or surgeon, signing a medical certificate or giving evidence in matters related to
medicine. Any violation shall be punishable with fine up to five lakhs. The Commission may
permit exceptions from qualifying National Exit Examination in certain cases. Foreign medical
practitioners shall be permitted temporary registration in India in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Clause 34 provides for recognition of medical qualifications granted by Universities
or medical institutions in India. The institutions shall apply Board of Homoeopathy which
shall examine the application and decide on grant of recognition. First appeal shall lie to the
Commission and second appeal to the Central Government.
Clause 35 provides for recognition of medical qualifications granted by medical
institutions outside India.
Clause 36 provides for withdrawal of recognition granted to medical qualification
granted by medical institutions in India. The Medical Assessment and Rating Board for
Homoeopathy shall make a report to the Commission which shall decide the matter.
Clause 37 provides for special provisions in certain cases for recognition of medical
qualifications. This relates to medical institutions outside India.
Clause 38 provides for grants by the Central Government.
Clause 39 provides for National Medical Commission Fund for Homoeopathy which
shall form part of the public account of India. All Government grants, fee, penalties and all
sums received by the Commission shall form part of it. The fund shall be applied for making
payments towards all expenses in the discharge of the functions of the Commission.
Clause 40 provides for audit and accounts. The accounts of the Commission shall be
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 41 provides for furnishing of returns and reports to the Central Government.
Clause 42 provides for power of the Central Government to give directions to
Commission and Autonomous Boards on questions of policy.

30
Clause 43 provides for power of the Central Government to give directions to State
Governments.
Clause 44 provides for information to be furnished by the Commissioner and publication
thereof.
Clause 45 provides for obligations of Universities and medical institutions. They shall
maintain a website at all times and display all such information as may be required by the
Commission.
Clause 46 provides for completion of courses of studies in medical institutions.
Students who were studying in any medical institution before the commencement of this Act
shall continue to study and complete in accordance with syllabus and studies as existed
before such commencement. Such student shall be deemed to have completed course of
study under this Act.
Clause 47 provides for the Chairperson, Members, Officers of the Commission and of
Autonomous Boards to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
Clause 48 provides for protection of action taken in good faith.
Clause 49 provides for cognizance of offences by courts only upon a complaint in
writing by an authorised officer of the Committee or Ethics and Medical Registration Board
or State Medical Council.
Clause 50 provides for power of the Central Government to supersede Commission if
it is unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed upon it or persistently defaults in
complying with any direction issued by the Central Government. The Central Government
may issue notifications of supersession not exceeding one year at a time.
Clause 51 provides for joint sittings of the Commission, the National Commission for
Indian Systems of Medicine and the National Medical Commission, to enhance the interface
between Homoeopathy, Indian System of Medicine and modern system of medicine.
Clause 52 provides for promoting primary healthcare in rural areas by the State
Governments.
Clause 53 provides for power to make rules. The Central Government may be notification
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Clause 54 provides for power to make regulations. The Commission may after previous
publication by notification make regulations consistent with this Act.
Clause 55 provides for rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
Clause 56 provides for power to remove difficulties. The Central Government may be
order published in Official Gazette make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act for removing the difficulty.
Clause 57 provides for repeal and saving. The Homoeopathy Central Council Act,
1973 shall stand repealed and the Central Council of Homoeopathy shall stand dissolved
from the date as may be prescribed by the Central Government. The Chairman and other
Members and employees of Central Council of Indian Medicine shall vacate their respective
offices and be entitled to the compensation.
Clause 58 provides for transitory provisions. Even after the repeal of the Homoeopathy
Central Council Act, 1973, the rules and regulations made thereunder shall continue to be in
force till new rules and regulations are framed by National Commission for Homoeopathy.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National
Commission for Homoeopathy to exercise the powers and to perform the functions assigned
to it. Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 provides for the appointment of Chairperson and Members
of the Commission. Sub-clause (4) of clause 6 provides for payment of salary and allowances
to the Chairpersons and Members, other than ex officio Members. Sub-clause ( 1) of
clause 8 provides for appointment of Secretary of the Commission and sub-clause ( 5)
thereof provides for appointment of officers and other employees of the Commission.
Sub-clause (6) of said clause provides for payment of salary and allowances to Secretary,
officers and other employees of the Commission.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 18 provides for constitution of three Autonomous Boards.
clause 19 provides composition of autonomous boards consisting of a President and Members.
clause 20 provides for appointment of President and Members of the Autonomous Boards
and sub-clause ( 2) of clause 21 provides for salary and allowances of the President and
Members of the Autonomous Boards.
3. Clause 38 provides for payment of grants to the Commission, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, as the Central Government may think fit.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 39 provides for the constitution of Fund to be called the
National Commission Fund for Homoeopathy and setting up of the Commission would
entail some expenditure from the consolidated Fund of India. All Government grants, fees
and charges received by the Commission and the Autonomous Boards and all sums received
by the Commission from such other source as may be decided upon by the Central Government
shall be credited to the fund and shall be applied for payment of salaries and allowances and
the expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of the Bill.
5. Sub-clause (3) of clause 57 provides that on the dissolution of the Central Council
of Homoeopathy, persons appointed as Chairman, Members, officers and other employees
of that Council shall vacate their respective offices and that such Chairman and Members
shall, for such premature termination, be entitled to claim compensation not exceeding three
months' pay and allowances and the officers and employees who are employed on regular
and contractual basis by the Central Council of Homoeopathy shall be entitled to such
compensation, which shall not be less than three months' pay and allowances, as may be
provided by rules.
6. The expenditure would be largely met from corpus of the existing Central Council of
Homoeopathy and the funds generated by the National Commission for Homoeopathy. The
budgetary support by the Government to the Commission and its constituent bodies is
estimated not to exceed the level of the current budgetary support given to the Council.
Further, as expenditure would depend on the number of meetings of the Commission, recurring
or non-recurring expenditure cannot be anticipated at this stage.
31

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 53 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules by notification in
the Official Gazette, inter alia, in respect of matters relating to—
(a) the manner of appointing five Members of the Commission on rotational
basis from amongst the nominees of the States and Union territories in the  Advisory
Council;
(b) the manner of electing Members of the Commission by the registered medical
practitioners from amongst themselves and the regional constituencies from which
such Members are to be elected;
(c) the manner of nominating one expert by the Central Government;
(d) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the Chairperson and Members;
(e) the form and the manner of making declaration of assets and liabilities of the
chairperson and every member of the commission;
(f) the qualification and experience to be possessed by the Secretary of the
Commission;
(g) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the Secretary, officers and other employees of the Commission;
 (h) the other power to be exercised and other function to be performed by the
commission;
(i) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of, the President and Members of an Autonomous Board;
(j) the manner of submitting a list of practitioners;
(k) the form for preparing annual statement of accounts;
(l) the time within which, and the form and the manner in which, the reports and
statements shall be furnished by the Commission and the particulars with regard to
any matter as may be required by the Central Government;
 (m) the form and the time for preparing annual report;
(n) the compensation for the premature termination of employment;
(o) any other matter in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. Sub-clause (3) of clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make the
National Exit Test operational from such date, within three years from the date of
commencement of this Act, as may be appointed by notification.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to constitute,
by notification, the Autonomous Boards under the overall supervision of the Commission,
to perform the functions assigned to such Boards under this Act.
4. Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Commission to direct,by notification, that any
medical qualification granted by a medical institution in a country outside India, after such
date as may be specified in that notification, shall be a recognised medical qualification for
the purposes of this Act.
32

33
5. Clause 54 of the Bill empowers the Commission to make regulations after previous
publications and by notification in the Official Gazette, inter alia, in respect of matters
relating to—
(a) the functions to be discharged by the Secretary of the Commission;
(b) the procedure in accordance with which experts and professionals may be engaged
and the number of such experts and professionals;
(c) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of Commission, including the quorum
at its meetings;
(d) the quality and standards to be maintained in education of Homoeopathy;
(e) the manner of regulating medical institutions, medical researches and medical
professionals;
(f) the manner of functioning of the Commission, the Autonomous Boards and the
State Medical Councils;
(g) the procedure to be followed at the meetings of the Advisory Council for
Homoeopathy, including the quorum at its meetings;
(h) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the
manner in which the National Eligibility-Cum-Entrance Test shall be conducted;
(i) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority for
admission to the medical institutions;
(j) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the
manner in which National Exit Test shall be conducted;
(k) the other languages in which, the designated authority through which, and the
manner in which the admission to postgraduate courses shall be conducted;
(l) the manner of conducting common counselling by the designated authority for
admission to the postgraduate seats in medical institutions;
(m) the manner of  conducting the National Teachers' Eligibility Test for Homoeopathy
and the  designated authority through whom such test shall be conducted;
(n) the number of, and the manner in which, the experts, professionals, officers and
other employees shall be made available by the Commission to the Autonomous Boards;
(o) the manner in which decisions of the Autonomous Boards shall be made;
(p) the competency based dynamic curriculum at all levels of education;
(q) the manner of imparting undergraduate, postgraduate and superspeciality courses
in Homoeopathy;
(r) the minimum requirements and standards for conducting courses and examinations
in medical institutions;
(s) the standards and norms for infrastructure, faculty and quality of education and
research in medical institutions of Homoeopathy;
(t) the manner of regulating professional conduct and promoting medical ethics;
(u) the procedure for assessment and rating of the medical institutions;
(v) the manner of carrying out inspections of medical institutions for assessing and
rating;
(w) the manner of conducting, and the manner of empanelling independent rating
agencies to conduct, assess and rate all medical institutions;

34
(x)  the manner of making available on website or in public domain the assessment and
ratings of  medical institutions;
(y) the measures to be taken against a medical institution for failure to maintain the
minimum essential standards;
(z) the form of scheme, the particulars thereof, the fee to be accompanied and the
manner of submitting scheme for establishing new medical college;
(za) the manner of preferring an appeal to the Commission for approval of the
scheme;
(zb) the manner of taking disciplinary action by a State Medical Council for
professional or ethical misconduct of registered medical practitioner and the procedure
for receiving complaints and grievances by  the Board of Ethics and Registration for
Homoeopathy;
(zc) the act of commission or omission  which amounts to professional or ethical
misconduct;
(zd) other particulars to be contained in a National Register;
(ze) the form, including the electronic form and the manner of  maintaining the
National Register;
(zf)  the manner in which any name or qualification may be added to, or removed
from, the National Register and the grounds for removal;
(zg)  the manner of entering the  title, diploma or qualification in the State Register
or the National Register;
(zh) the circumstances in which, and the period for which, the Commission may
permit a qualified person to practice Homoeopathy without qualifying the National
Exit Test;
(zi) the manner in which, and the period for which, temporary registration  may
be permitted to a foreign citizen;
(zj) the manner of listing and maintaining medical qualifications granted by a
University or medical institution in India;
(zk)  the manner of examining the application for grant of recognition;
(zl)  the manner of preferring an appeal to the Commission for grant of recognition;
(zm) the manner of including a  medical qualification in the list maintained by the
Board;
(zn) the manner in which  the Homoeopathy Education Board  shall list and
maintain the medical qualifications which have been granted recognition before the
date of commencement of this Act;
(zo)   the manner in which the Commission shall list and maintain the medical
qualifications which have been granted recognition before the date of commencement
of this Act.
6. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation
of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

MGIPMRND—3064RS(S3)—03-01-2019.
RAJYA  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a medical education system that improves access to quality and affordable
medical education, ensures availability of adequate and high quality Homoeopathy
medical professionals in all parts of the country; that promotes equitable and universal
healthcare that encourages community health perspective and makes services of
Homoeopathy medical professionals accessible to all the citizens; that promotes national
health goals; that encourages Homoeopathy medical professionals to adopt latest
medical research in their work and to contribute to research; that has an objective
periodic and transparent assessment of medical institutions and facilitates maintenance
of a Homoeopathy medical register for India and enforces high ethical standards in all
aspects of medical services; that is flexible to adapt to the changing needs and has an
effective grievance redressal mechanism and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
————
[Shri  Shripad Yesso Naik, Minister of State (Independent charge) of the Ministry
ofAyurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH)]

 
 
ANNEXURE - II 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
Representatives of Ministry of AYUSH 
 
1.      Shri Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Pathak, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Roshan Jaggi, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri P.N. Ranjit Kumar, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Vikram Singh, Director 
6. Dr. M. Nesari, Adviser (AYUSH) 
7. Dr. D.C. Katoch, Adviser (AYUSH) 
8. Dr. Mohd. Tahir, Adviser (Unani) 
9. Dr. S.R. Chinta, Deputy Adviser (Homoeopathy) 
 
Representative of Central Council of Homoeopathy  
 
Shri Nilanjan Sanyal, Chairman, Board of Governors 
 
Representative of Central Council of Indian Medicine  
 
   Dr. Deopujari Jayant Yeshwant, President 
 
Representative of Central Council for Homoeopathy 
 
Dr. Anil Khurana, Director General Incharge 
 
Representatives of Homoeopathic Association of India 
 
1. Dr. Ram Jee Singh, National President  
2. Dr. A. K. Arun 
 
Representative of National Federation of Homoeopathic Medical Colleges in India 
1. Dr. Arun Bhasme, Secretary General 
2. Dr.  D.G Bagal, Member  
 
Representative of National President of Honor, Indian Institute of Homeopathic Physicians 
 
1. Dr. (Prof.) V.K. Gupta, National President of Honor  
2. Dr. V.K.  Khanna, Former President  
3. Dr.  V.K.  Chauhan, President, Delhi State Branch  
 

 
 
Representatives of Mumbai Grahak Panchayat 
 
1. Adv. Shirish V. Deshpande  
2. Dr. Archana Sabnis, Divisional President 
 
EMPLOYEES OF CCH AND CCIM 
Representatives of Central Council for Homeopathy 
 
1. Shri Deepak Chandra Bhagat, Upper Division Clerk  
2. Shri Jaswant Singh Bisht, Junior Hindi Translator  
 
Representatives of Employees of CCIM 
 
1. Dr. Shamshad Bano, Assistant Registrar (Unani) 
2. Dr. K. Natarajan, Assistant Registrar (Siddha) 
3. Smt. Ankita Yadav, Translator  
**** 
 