PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 60
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2012/AGRAHAYANA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTIETH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN
RESOURCES FOR HEALTH BILL, 2011
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 NOVEMBER, 2012)
RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 23  NOVEMBER, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 30 OCTOBER, 2012)TH
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 30  OCTOBER, 2012)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTIETH REPORT
ON
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN
RESOURCES FOR HEALTH BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 30 TH OCTOBER, 2012)
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 30 TH OCTOBER, 2012)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 23 RD NOVEMBER, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 23 RD NOVEMBER, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2012/AGRAHAYANA, 1934 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( IV)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—25
5. O BSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE— A T A G LANCE .......................... 26—30
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 31—63
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 65 —311

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
#2. Shri Janardhan Dwivedi
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
4. Shri Balbir Punj
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
@7. Shri Rasheed Masood
8. Shrimati B. Jayashree
9. Shri Derek O’Brien
10. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
$12. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
$$13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
14. Shrimati Raj Kumari Chauhan
15. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
16. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
17. Dr. Monazir Hassan
18. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
19. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
20. Shri P. Lingam
21. Shri Datta Meghe
22. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
23. Dr. Chinta Mohan
24. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
25. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
26. Shri M. K. Raghavan
27. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
30. Shri Ratan Singh
31. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
# ceased to be a Member w.e.f.  27 th January, 2012 and re-nominated to the Committee on 2 nd February, 2012.
@ ceased to be a Member w.e.f.  9 th March, 2012 and re-nominated to the Committee on 4 th May, 2012.
$ ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 29 th June, 2012.
$$ ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 30 th April, 2012.

(ii)
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE (2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
* ceased to be Member w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012 consequent upon his induction in the Union Cabinet.

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Sixtieth
Report of the Committee on the National Commission for Human Resources for Health  Bill, 2011*.
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council
of States relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Chairman, Rajya
Sabha, referred** the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 (Annexure-I)
as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 22
nd December, 2011 for examination and report by
25th March, 2012. Subsequently, the Committee was granted extension of time till 31 st May, 2012, again
till 15th July, 2012 and further till 31 st August, 2012 and still further till 31 st October, 2012, respectively.
3. The Committee issued a Press Release inviting memoranda/views from individuals and other
stakeholders. ( Annexure-II). In response thereto 53 memoranda from individuals and others relevant
to the Bill have been received till the last date. List of individuals from whom memoranda were
received is at Annexure-III. Copies of the memoranda and suggestions received were sent to the
Ministry for comments. The Comments received from the Ministry are at Annexure-IV.
4. The Committee held thirteen sittings during the course of examination of the Bill namely
24
th January, 2012; 27 th February, 2012; 20 th March, 2012; 7 th June, 2012; 8 th June, 2012; 5 th July,
2012; 17 th July, 2012; 18 th July, 2012; 30 th July, 2012; 31 st July, 2012; 17 th and 28 th August and
19th October, 2012. The list of witnesses heard by the Committee is at Annexure-V.
5. The Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on 19 th October, 2012.
6. The Committee has relied on the following documents in finalizing the Report.
(i) The NCHRH Bill, 2011;
(ii) Background Notes on the Bill received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare
and Department of AYUSH;
(iii) Presentation, clarifications and Oral evidences of Secretaries, Departments of Health and
Family Welfare, AYUSH and Health Research;
(iv) Memoranda received on the Bill from various institutes bodies/associations/organizations/experts
and replies of the Ministry on the memoranda selected by the Committee for examination;
(v) Oral evidence and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts from various
medical professions, on the Bill; and
(vi) Replies to the questions/queries raised by Members in the meeting on the Bill received
from the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
7. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made
by those who deposed before the Committee.
8. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
          BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
19th October , 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Kartik 27, 1934 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II Section 2, dated 22 nd December, 2011.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II, No. 49175, dated 26 th December, 2011.

(iv)
(iv)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
AIIMS – All India Institute of Medical Sciences
AYUSH – A yurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy
CA T – Central Administrative Tribunal
CCH – Central Council of Homoeopathy
CCIM – Central Council of Indian Medicine
DCI – Dental Council of India
GPs – General Practitioners
HRM – Human Resource Management
ICMR – Indian Council of Medical Research
IMA – Indian Medical Association
INC – Indian Nursing Council
IPC – Indian Penal Code
JIPMER, Puducherry – Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of Post Graduate Medical Educational and
Research, Puducherry
MCI – Medical Council of India
MoU – Memorandum of Understanding
NBE – National Board of Examinations
NBHE – Nati onal Board of Health Education
NCHRH – National Commission for Human Resources for Health
NEAC – National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
NGO – Non-Government Organization
NIMHANS, Bangalore – National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore
PCI – Pharmacy Council of India
PGIMER, Chandigarh – Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
SOR – Statement of Objects and Reasons
UGC – University Grants Commission
U K – United Kingdom
WHO – World Health Organization

1
REPORT
The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 (hereinafter referred to
as the Bill) was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 22 nd December, 2011 and referred to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare on the
26
th December, 2011 for examination and report thereon.
2. The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 seeks to consolidate the
law in certain disciplines of health sector and promote human resources in health sector and provide
for mechanism for the determination, maintenance, co-ordination and regulation of standards of health
education throughout the country to ensure adequate availability of human resources in all States and
for the said purpose to establish the National Commission for Human Resources for Health to
supervise and regulate professional Councils in various disciplines of health sector.
3. According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons (SOR) of the Bill, at present various
disciplines of health are supervised and regulated by their respective professional Councils, namely, the
Medical Council of India, the Dental Council of India, the Pharmacy Council of India and the Indian
Nursing Council. The broad vision of human resources in terms of quantity, composition and quality
required for enabling the country’s health system to provide health care for all, is hidden from the
perspective of these individual regulatory bodies. Any effort to make piecemeal changes in the statutes
of the existing regulatory bodies is not likely to bring any substantial reform in the field of health
education and services. The SOR, further states that to address these issues it was felt necessary to
establish a National Commission for Human Resources for Health to provide an institutional framework
to promote availability of health care providers in all parts of the country to reduce shortages,
standardize quality and bridge the uneven distribution of existing work force in the health sector.
4. SOR further states that in view of the above, it was proposed to enact a law, namely, the
National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011. The Bill provides that the Central
Government shall by notification establish the National Commission for Human Resources for Health
with three constituent bodies, namely the National Board of Health Education, the National Evaluation
and Assessment Committee and the National Councils, with distinct responsibilities for regulating
educational standards; enforcing the standards and assuring quality and governing medical practice
along ethical norms. It would also be the task of the Commission to ensure effective use of linkages
in the entire health system, act as the controlling and co-ordinating agency that ensures accountability
in the system and to facilitate interconnectivity among and between disciplines to meet the needs of
a diverse and growing health system in the country. The Bill inter-alia provides for the following:
(a) to establish the National Commission for Human Resources for Health consisting of a
Chairperson, four whole-time members and eight part-time members, to be appointed by
the Central Government on the recommendations of the Selection Committee;
(b) to empower the Commission (i) to grant or withdraw the permission for establishment
of health educational institutions and to ensure compliance of its terms and conditions;
(ii) to conduct the elections to the National Councils; (iii) to make recommendations on
the measures to strengthen the health care delivery, operational efficiency and health care
infrastructure; and (iv) to provide grants and moneys to the National Board for Health
Education, National Evaluation and Assessment Committee and to the National Council for
efficient discharge of their functions under the proposed Bill;
(c) to constitute the National Board for Health Education in the place of the National Board
of Examinations and to confer upon it the powers, inter-alia to, (i) conduct examinations

2
for entry to any under-graduate, post-graduate, doctoral, super-speciality or diploma
courses, fellowship examination and screening test; (ii) determine, coordinate and maintain
standards for health education and research; (iii) specify minimum requirements for
faculty, infrastructure and clinical workload for establishment of institutions for discipline
of health; and (iv) specify the curriculum for examinations to be conducted under the
proposed Bill;
(d) to constitute the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee for (i) evaluation and
assessment of any university or institution seeking permission for establishing an institution
for a course of study or training in the disciple of health; (ii) grant of recognised
qualification or imparting education in the disciplines of health; and (iii) assisting the
Commission in discharge of its powers and functions;
(e) to establish new National Councils to be known as the Medical Council of India for
medicine, the Dental Council of India for dentistry, the Nursing Council of India for
nursing, the Pharmacy Council of India for pharmacy in the place of existing Councils
for regulating the health profession and also to establish a new Paramedical Council of
India for the disciple of paramedics;
(f) to empower the State Government to constitute State Councils where there is no State
Council for the disciplines of health within a period of three years from the date of the
commencement of the proposed legislation;
(g) to constitute a fund to be called “the National Commission for Human Resources for
Health Fund” wherein all government grants, fees and charges received by the Commission
shall be credited to and such grants shall be utilised for the expenses of the Commission,
Board, Committee and the National Councils in discharging of their functions under the
proposed Bill;
(h) to repeal the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists
Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 by the proposed Bill and to dissolve
the Nursing Council of India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental Council of India
and the Medical Council of India;
(i) to transfer the assets, liabilities, rights, duties, etc., for the existing Councils to the
Commission;
(j) to provide for, (i) punishment for establishing institutions without permission under
section 17; (ii) penalty for contravention of provisions relating to enrolment under 57;
(iii) penalty for contravention of section 33 for enrolment as medical practitioner without
qualifying the screening test; and (iv) punishment for furnishing information contrary to
which published by institutions under section 38;
(k) to empower the Central Government to supersede the Commission, Board, Committee or
National Council on account of circumstances beyond their control or if they are unable
to discharge their functions in accordance with the provisions of the proposed Bill and
also to empower the State Government to supersede the State Councils.
5. Keeping in view the critical role of the health sector in our society, the objectives behind the
proposed legislation and its impact on diverse categories of professions and professionals associated
with the health sector, the Committee decided to have opinion of different stakeholders on the Bill.
The Committee, accordingly, issued a Press Release, inviting views/suggestions from all the stakeholders.
An overwhelming response to the Press Release was received by the Committee. A considerable
number of organizations/stakeholders, individuals/associations have submitted memoranda containing
their views. The Committee held extensive interactions with representatives of associations/organizations/

3
Councils/Institutes as well as renowned experts and professionals from the disciplines of medicine,
dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, physiotherapy and Indian systems of Medicine and Principal Secretaries
of the Government of Gujarat and West Bengal.
6. The Committee heard the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare and his team
of officers and sought clarifications on various provisions of the Bill. Besides, the Committee also
heard the views of Secretaries of Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH) and Health Research and the representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice.
The Committee was also benefited by the written submissions made by the State Governments of
Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Tripura, Mizoram, Manipur, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Meghalaya,
Andhra Pradesh, Nagaland, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Union Territories of Daman and Diu and Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and Chandigarh, and oral evidences of State Governments of West Bengal and
Gujarat. The Committee undertook a study visit to Jammu and Kashmir and held discussion with the
Secretary, Health Department of the State.
7. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in its background note on the Bill made the
following submissions:-
“There are important distortions in the development of human resources for health sector in
India. There has undoubtedly been a steep increase in medical colleges in the country but this
has mostly been in private sector especially in southern and western States which share
between them around 70 % of total medical colleges. This reflects the distorted distribution
of the country’s production capacity of health workers. Private medical colleges also place a
heavy burden of fees on students and their admission procedures are not transparent. The
curricula of medical schools, both public and private, are not designed for producing ‘social
physicians’ as envisioned in the Bhore (1946) and other Committees on Medical Education.
Rather, the training they provide is better suited to the problems of urban India and for
employment in corporate hospitals.
After independence, the government attempted to improve the state of nursing in the
country through standardisation of nursing education and increasing the resources for training
public health nurses and midwives. However, despite such efforts, the nursing profession and
other cadres such as auxiliary nurse midwives, pharmacists, medical laboratory technicians etc.
is not in a very promising state. The primary reason for this state of nursing and paramedic
field is the establishment of doctor-centric health system and inadequate financial support from
the government.
Many nursing institutes, especially in the private sector, are under-staffed and provide
poor nursing education. The geographical imbalance of the best nursing institutions, which
provide faculty for teaching the basic courses, is contributing to the near collapse of basic
nursing education in the country. The adverse nurse-doctor ratio of 0.8:1 which should ideally
be 3:1, remains a matter for serious concern. Nurses can deliver many of the basic clinical
care and public health services, particularly at the community level, at a lower cost than trained
physicians.
Professional councils such as the Medical Council of India, the Indian Nursing Council,
Dental Council and the Pharmacy Council have been set up by statutes of Parliament to
regulate the practice of their respective professions, including education. However, many of
these councils, besides being far too unwieldy have attracted criticism of their functioning,
from health professionals, health administrators and media. They have also drawn judicial
censure on several occasions. Further, the existence of these different regulatory bodies, each
responsible for important cadres of health workers have failed to provide synergistic approach
to addressing the human resources needs of the country. There is an urgent need for

4
innovation in health related education which encourages cross connectivity across disciplines
and categories of health workers.
Any effort to make piecemeal changes in the existing Statutes is not likely to bring any
substantial reform in the field of health education and services. The Indian health system stands
to benefit tremendously from the generation of new cadres and competences that can actively
meet the health needs of the country. With rising demand for health services, the inadequacies
of the present health system – both in the public and private domains – are increasingly
becoming evident. The responsibility of the government in providing an efficient and purposeful
health system, covering all aspects such as health education, preventive programmes and
curative services, has considerably increased. Further, the government, besides strengthening
the current public health system has also the challenge of fruitfully utilising the widespread
private health system to address public health goals and make it accessible to the poor at
affordable prices.
The broad vision of human resources in terms of the quantity, composition and quality
required for enabling the country’s health system to provide health care for all, is hidden from
the perspective of these individual regulatory bodies. This makes the need for an overarching
regulatory body critical for addressing the human resource issues facing the country.”
8. During the course of his oral evidence before the Committee on the 24
th January, 2012, the
Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare apprised the Committee of the salient features of
the Bill. He pointed out that unlike the existing system where a single body like the Medical Council
of India or the Dental Council of India performs all the regulatory functions, in the proposed structure
the regulatory functions will be divided amongst three separate bodies, namely, the National Commission
for Human Resources for Health (NCHRH), the National Board for Health Education and the National
Evaluation and Assessment Committee.
9. Apprising the Committee of the need for the NCHRH, the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare in his presentation made the following submissions namely: separate regulatory
bodies oversee different healthcare disciplines and there is no cross-connectivity across these
different health care disciplines; statutes of the present regulatory bodies do not mandate planning
and provisioning of human resources in their respective streams and therefore Human Resource
Management (HRM) in the health sector remains a neglected area; different regulatory bodies, each
responsible for its own cadre of health workers, have failed to provide a synergistic approach to
address the human resource needs in the health sector; the current regulatory bodies regulate both
education and professional practice within its domain and are overburdened with all regulatory
functions starting with inspection of colleges to maintenance of enrolment registers which has led
to stifling of innovation and creativity and increase in inefficiency and malpractices; no quality
assurance framework is in place. He further pointed out that the Bill had been formulated after a
series of consultations with various stakeholders including the State Governments, the various
Councils, the Indian Medical Association etc.
10. Elaborating further on the need for the Bill, the Joint Secretary pointed out that this reform
is being brought with the anticipation that this would bring quality education into the whole system
and the governance method will be much better.
11. According to the Joint Secretary, the Ministry is of the view that piecemeal changes in each
of the existing Acts may not bring about the substantial reforms in terms of quality and quantitative
aspects of medical and allied health sciences education.
12. On being asked about the role assigned to the Councils in the Bill, the Joint Secretary replied
that they will inter-alia act as a watchdog and regulate their profession.

5
Views of the State Governments
13. To acquaint itself with the views of the State Governments, the Committee sought the written
comments of all the State/UT governments. However, only a few governments responded. The
Committee then called some Chief Secretaries for oral evidence. Principal Secretaries of two States
appeared before the Committee. Maharashtra Chief Secretary sent a junior level officer and therefore,
the Committee expressing its displeasure decided not to hear him. The Principal Secretary, Government
of West Bengal during the course of his deposition before the Committee on the 31
st July, 2012, stated
that his State Government was of the view that the Bill should not be passed in the present form.
He further stated that the Bill moves from self regulation of professional bodies to a Central and
technocratic regulation. On being asked as to which structure, the existing individual Councils or the
proposed overarching body would be better suited to deal with the aspects of regulation, the Principal
Secretary stated that a properly strengthened individual Council with a term limit, and definition of the
office bearers as public servants in terms of Indian Penal Code (IPC) and an accountability mechanism
in place, would suit the need better than having an overarching body with gigantic mandate. On the
issue of corruption in the existing bodies, the Principal Secretary submitted that besides the term limits
and the definition of office bearers, a provision to remove the office bearers in case of blatant
corruption or misuse of official powers should suffice to ensure that there is no corruption in the
existing Councils. The reason for creating an overarching body to handle corruption in the existing
Councils is a questionable exercise.
14. In a written submission, the Government of West Bengal also furnished the following comments:–
“(i) The Bill envisages the creation of a number of regulatory bodies. The structure seems
to be top heavy with more emphasis on “expertise” than on “States’ participation”. This
could lead to a purely technical, highly centralized, over-regulated approach to a sector
that impinges on public welfare and one that is clearly in the concurrent list. Clause 4
should be modified to include representatives from the States own councils (medical,
nursing etc.) on a rotation basis.
Clause 5 should be changed to include one or more state representatives on a rotation
basis in the Selection Committee. Further, the Selection Committee should itself be
prepared on the basis of an agreement between the Prime Minister and the Leader of
the Opposition in the Lok Sabha, much in a manner similar to the procedure for the
selection of the Chairman, NCHRH.
(ii)  In terms of Clause 16, the NCHRH is the final authority to grant permissions to
establish health educational Institutions. It is also expected to act as a regulator. It may
be useful to separate the two functions and assign the licensing functions solely to the
subordinate regulatory bodies under Clause 30 ( e.g. the National Board). The Commission
could exercise appellate powers.
(iii) Similarly, the National Board, set out in Clause 23, should also have state representatives.
The same procedure set out for the main Commission should be followed for appointment
of the President and the members of the Board. The Selection Committee should also
have State representatives.
(iv) Likewise, the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee should be structured on the
above lines.
(v) Clause 53 should specify the status of the existing State Councils.
(vi) The concept of a monetary penalty (Clause 69) in case of professional misconduct is
welcome.

6
(vii) The appeals procedure is too lengthy. From the State Council, appeals often lie to the
State Government. Clause 70 will change the appellate authority. The National Council
has been made the appellate body. Thereafter, a further appeal will lie to the National
Council, that is, one more tier will be added. This will lengthen the appeals process. As
of now, the State Council is not a subordinate authority of the medical Council. This
will change the situation.
(viii) In view of the huge information asymmetry in matters relating to medical treatment and
procedures, Clause 73 should allow the formal involvement of NGOs and others to help
the complaints. Locus standi  should be provided.
(ix) Clause 74 should allow the continuance of existing Acts/Regulation.”
15. The Principal Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of Gujarat
during the course of his oral evidence before the Committee on 31
st July, 2012, stated that there is
a need for reform in the area of medical education, creation and maintenance of standards of medical
education and research. However, the Bill under reference attempts to create a mechanism which is
so overwhelming that it is likely to lead to delay in execution. He further stated that the new bodies,
namely, the National Commission for Human Resources for Health, the National Board for Health
Education and National Evaluation and Assessment Committee – which are sought to be created were
purely nominative in character and there was no democratic element. Elaborating on the need for State
role in the medical sector, he stated that the States play a very vital role in the medical education
sector, and unless a State Government gives an essentiality certificate, no new medical college or
nursing institution or dental institution can be set up or existing institution can be expanded to a higher
strength. He stated that the proposed Commission was expected to make an assessment of the
requirement of manpower in order to ensure better geographical spread and meeting the local needs;
but this cannot be achieved without an effective role of the State Governments who are in the know
of the local realities better. Commenting on the roles of the National Councils and the State Councils
under the proposed legislation, he stated that the major functions of fixation of norms or standards
and assessment have been taken away from the National Councils and given to the National Board and
the Assessment Committee proposed in the Bill and the National Councils are left with no other
functions than to maintain a register. He felt that since the State Councils also maintain the State
registers of doctors, dentists or nurses, then why there should be the National Councils at all.
Elaborating further, he stated that the State Government of Gujarat was of the view that it would be
better to modify, amend and expand the role of the existing mechanisms rather than to create new
structures. He also stated that the correct way to go about it was to improve the existing structures,
build in safeguards and have a democratic and more consultative dispensation.
16. On being asked as to what should be the role of the State Government, the Principal Secretary
replied that medical education is a concurrent subject and therefore some form of representation of
the State Government should be there in the National Commission proposed to be set up. Elaborating
further, he pointed out that the process of creation of new medical institutions started from the State
Government; there had to be some kind of a scientific assessment about the existing medical education
capacity and future requirements based on which the State Government could analyze the request for
expanding the capacity of an existing Medical Institution or creating a new one and give essentiality
certificates. He opined that this role of the State Governments should be recognized and put into the
new decision making framework proposed in the Bill.
17. The Committee received written comments of some State Governments/UTs which are dealt
with in the following paragraphs.
18. The State Government of Kerala welcomed the Bill in principle subject to certain reservations.
Welcoming the proposal to split the functions currently concentrated in the National Councils, into

7
accreditation of institutions, academics and conduct of examinations and regulation of profession, it
expressed reservations about the Government of India getting control of every segment of medical
education. It further stated that the Chairman and Members of the Commission and the Selection
Committee are proposed to be appointed by the Central Government and that in a federal set-up as
in India, such centralization of powers should be avoided. The State Government suggested that the
functional autonomy of the institutions proposed should be retained and norms for choosing the
majority of members of the Selection Committee should be stated specifically to ensure integrity and
impartiality of the Selection Committee. The State Government further felt that provisions should also
be incorporated in the Bill so as to have a system to consult the State Government also about their
future plans for the health sector as State health services are major consumers of the human resources
for health. The State Government of Kerala was not in favour of Clauses 16(2) (e) and (f) which
seeks to make recommendations on the measures to strengthen healthcare delivery and coordinate
existing healthcare infrastructure and recommended their deletion. It also recommended amendment to
Clause 46 (1) (a) to the effect that the power to nominate Member from the State in the National
Councils shall vest with the State Government and not with the Central Government “ in consultation
with the State Governments”. The State Government also felt that overriding powers given to the
Central and State Governments to supersede all structures to be constituted under the Bill were too
sweeping and liable to be abused at each change of Government, that would make these structures
political appendages of the Government.
19. The State Government of Andhra Pradesh in its written comments submitted to the Committee,
welcoming the Bill, stated that the strength of the Bill is in its ability to speed up reforms in Health
Education in terms of its context, health system connectivity, standards and standardization across the
country for improving governance and to promote inter-professional education and build teamwork
through overarching body. The State Government also flagged problem areas in the Bill, viz. it is not
in favour of Clause 16 (2) (e) and (f); it favours representation of nurses, dentists or paramedics
under Clause 24 (4); Public Health Courses which find no mention in the Bill should be covered under
the Bill; P.G degrees of Medical Education awarded by the National Board of Examinations, which will
be dissolved under the Bill, should be protected since many public and private hospitals like Army
Hospitals, Railway Hospitals, Apollo Hospitals etc. were running such courses. The State Government
also opined that Director of Medical Education, Vice-Chancellor of Health University should be made
members of the Commission by rotation from Southern Chapter/Zone.
20. The State Government of Tripura accepting the Bill in principle suggested certain modifications.
The State Government inter-alia suggested that a major cause of differential health care standards in
the country was lack of proper funding, and hence, in the proposed Bill there should be assurance
of proper funding for the States like Tripura at par with the developed States of the country. It also
favoured promotion of autonomy of health educational institutions for the free pursuit of knowledge
and innovation.
21. The State Government of Tamil Nadu objected to the Bill stating that the Bill effectively puts
the leadership and decision-making process with regard to medical, dental and paramedical education
in the hands of about twenty five persons, all of whom would be nominees of the Central
Government. This would undermine the powers of the State Governments which would be left with
no role to play in policy issues. The State Government felt that need based planning for medical, dental
and paramedical manpower should follow regional and local demands which would be best achieved
by giving adequate representation to the States in policy making bodies. The Government of Tamil
Nadu was in favour of maintaining the status quo with regard to the existing National and State
Councils.
22. The State Government of Chhattisgarh in its comments welcomed the Bill stating that the
creation of the National Commission for Human Resources for Health, National Board for Health

8
Education and National Evaluation and Assessment Committee would go a long away in regulating the
standards of Health Education.
23. The State Government of Mizoram, in its comments while supporting the provisions of the Bill
expressed the following objections viz. (i) the proposed Bill hampers the spirit of professionalism,
(ii) the system proposed appears to be autocratic in one way or the other (iii) the various Councils’
role has been reduced to merely maintaining registers, (iv) the Central administration from the
Commission will not be able to cater to various needs of professionals at the State level and desired
that status quo may be maintained in respect of the independent Councils.
24. The State Government of Rajasthan in their comments stated that the draft received from
Government of India seems to be exhaustive and explanatory and it has adequate suppleness in its
provisions. It further stated that there was no specific provision in the Bill for saving the existing State
Council. It also stated in Section 78, the report of the State Council shall be sent to the Central
Government which shall be placed before the Parliament. This provision is inconsistent with the federal
system of the Indian Constitution. Instead, there may be a provision for placing the report of the State
Council before the State Legislature.
25. The State Government of Nagaland in their comments informed the Committee that the Bill is
acceptable to the State Government since it brought Medical and Allied services under one umbrella
which would improve the service delivery, management and monitoring of services. However, they
made following two suggestions for consideration of the Committee:
(a) Under Clause 53, a medical practitioner, enrolled with any State Council may be allowed
to practice anywhere within India, and
(b) Under Clause 57, the need to enroll before expiry of ten years may be kept in abeyance
for a period of ten years in case of Nagaland because the State lacks facilities for
teaching and research.
26.  The State Government of Haryana in their comments informed the Committee that it agreed
with the concept of the Bill as the Bill would go a long way in improving and providing quality
health care to the people. Further they made some suggestions on the Bill viz. (i) the existing
Councils in the discipline of health should continue till the enactment of Act and formation of rules
{Clause-53(1)}; (ii) the words “Chairman” and “Members of the Board of Governers” of Medical
Council of India should be incoporated with the words “existing Councils”, and (iii) also the words
“National Board of Examinations” should be added along with the existing Council regarding
providing of benefits {Clause118(1)} etc.
27.  The State Government of Uttar Pradesh in their comments inter-alia informed the Committee
that the Council work should be decentralized specially in a large State like Uttar Pradesh. The Council
members should be selected by the search committee. The process of selection to elect the president
of the National or State Council has not proved to represent the true mandate of the medical fraternity
during the past 50-60 years. There is a strong need to change the system and give autonomy to
various States and allow the Councils to function independently managed by men of highest integrity
and eminence in the medical fraternity.
28. The Union Territory of Daman and Diu and Dadra and Nagar Haveli informed the Committee
that the Bill is in accordance with the needs of the present situation and the Union Territory is in
agreement with such a Bill. However, it would be useful if the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar
Haveli is appointed as one of the members of each of the Councils or may be affiliated to the
neighbouring Councils, as at present the Union Territories are not Members of the Medical Councils
or any of the Councils.

9
29. Union Territory Administration of Chandigarh in its comments stated that the Union Territory
should have its own Council and it should be formed by the Union Territory itself and the norms/rules
which are followed in the constitution of the Council at the State level can be followed by the Union
Territory; but the Union Territory would be in no position to discharge these functions as no powers
of State Government have been conferred upon the administrator of a Union Territory under the Act.
It was further stated that the power of “State Government” should be conferred upon the Administrator
of a Union Territory by defining that the word “State Government” in relation to a Union Territory
as the Administrator of that Union Territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the
Constitution as has been/is being done in all Central Acts now.
30. The State Government of Meghalaya stated that it has no comments/suggestions to offer on
the provisions of the Bill.
31. The State Government of Manipur endorsed the National Commission for Human Resources
for Health Bill, 2011 for its enactment and implementation. While endorsing the Bill, it suggested to
see if the Central Council for Homoeopathy and Central Council of Indian Medicines can be included
in the list of Councils to be supervised and regulated by the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health.
32. The Committee also heard views of the Secretary, Department of AYUSH and Secretary,
Department of Health and Family Welfare on the 27
th February, 2012 on the issue of inclusion or
otherwise of the various disciplines of AYUSH in the NCHRH Bill. The Secretary, Department of
AYUSH during the course of his deposition before the Committee stated that these systems of
medicine needed to be given a focused approach for their development. He also stated that the
Allopathy and the Indian Systems of Medicine are two different systems of Medicine and by bringing
them under one Council, separate focus would be lost. Apprising the Committee of the circumstances
under which the Department of AYUSH was created, he stated that recognizing these systems of
medicine should be developed more strongly and to give them a separate focus, a separate department
was created in 1995 which was renamed as the Department of AYUSH in 2003. He felt that if AYUSH
is included in the NCHRH Bill, it would amount to reverting to pre-1995 position. He sought the
Committee’s support for the Department’s move to set up a separate Commission for the Indian
Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy. The Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
endorsed the above views of Secretary (AYUSH).
33. The Committee also heard the views of Secretary, Department of Health Research on the
27
th February, 2012 on the Bill. On being asked about the status of Health Research in the Bill, the
Secretary replied that education and research are both part of the Bill and Clause 30(a) specifically
talks of determining, coordinating and maintaining standards for health education and research. On
being pointed out that in the Preamble of the Bill, the word ‘Health Research’ did not find a mention,
the Secretary admitted the omission. Making an intervention, the Joint Secretary, Department of Health
and Family Welfare agreed that the word “Health Research” could be added to the Preamble.
Views of Other Stakeholders
Views of Central Council of Indian Medicine
34. The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of Central Council of Indian
Medicine (CCIM) and Central Council of Homoeopathy on the 7
th June, 2012 on the issue of inclusion
or otherwise of the various disciplines of health under AYUSH in the Bill. The President, Central
Council of Indian Medicine submitted before the Committee that the traditional systems of medicine
have separate pharmacopeia and methodology and prior to 1995 when AYUSH was under the
Department of Health and Family Welfare, it did not receive focused attention for its development. He,
therefore, pleaded that the traditional systems of medicine should be kept out of the ambit of the

10
NCHRH Bill. Subsequently, CCIM vide its letter dated the 13 th June, 2012 submitted that the traditional
systems of medicine such as Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Sowa Ripa are quite distinct in their
philosophy and approach to healthcare and any attempt to integrate these systems of medicine within
the overarching framework of a National Commission may be fraught with serious and irreconcilable
difficulties.
Views of Central Council of Homoeopathy
35. Deposing before the Committee, the President, Central Council of Homoeopathy also opposed
the inclusion of the Central Council of Homoeopathy in the NCHRH Bill on the ground that if
Homoeopathy is included in the Bill, it will nullify all progress made since creation of a separate
Department of AYUSH for the promotion of the traditional systems of medicine. He further submitted
that greater autonomy should be given to the existing Council of Homoeopathy.
36. The Central Council of Homoeopathy in its written comments had  inter-alia  submitted that a
separate National/Central Council should be set up for Homoeopathy and other systems of Indian
Medicine. It was also pointed out that at the Medical and Health University level where all systems
of medicine were under the same controlling authority, Homoeopathy and other AYUSH system were
getting dominated by the modern medicine faculty and had the feeling of being neglected. It was
suggested that instead of including Homoeopathy and other AYUSH systems in the proposed National
Commission, the Government should strengthen the individual Councils and establish an Advisory and
Coordinating Central Council of Health and Medical Education.
Views of Pharmacy Council
37. The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of Pharmacy Council of India on the
7
th June, 2012 on the Bill. The President, Pharmacy Council of India submitted before the Committee
that the Pharmacy Council of India frames the course, inspects the pharmacy institutions and gives
approval to the institutions for conducting different courses in pharmacy. However, the proposed Bill
would restrict the function of the Council to maintain the Central register only. He also underlined the
fact that in the Bill there was no mention of the composition of the State Councils which might lead
to a situation where there would be no uniformity as regards the composition of the State Council.
He also pointed out that in the proposed National Commission, National Board and the Assessment
Committee, the representation of the pharmacy profession was not assured. He suggested that the
word “medical college” in the Bill should be replaced by health education and institutions covering all
five disciplines of medical, dental, nursing, pharmacy and paramedical.
38. In reply to a query, the President, Pharmacy Council of India (PCI) replied that PCI was in
agreement with the vision of the Bill but wanted certain modifications in the provisions of the Bill so
that it could be well-equipped and implemented smoothly. Elaborating further, he stated that Pharmacy
Council of India wanted to become an integral part of health delivery system and that is only possible
if all –physicians, nursing staff, paramedics and pharmacists came under one umbrella. In reply to
another query, the President, PCI stated that in the Bill, there is confusion that if a person got
registered in a particular State, he would be able to practice in that State only whereas if he gets
registered himself in the National Council, he would be allowed to practice all over the country. He,
therefore, felt that this confusion needed is to be sorted out.
39. In addition to the above submissions, PCI suggested certain amendments to some provisions
of the NCHRH Bill, 2011. The suggestions are at Annexure-VI.
Views of Indian Nursing Council
40. The Committee heard the oral evidence of the representatives of Indian Nursing Council (INC)

11
on 7 th June, 2012. The President, INC submitted before the Committee that INC was not in favour
of the overarching body proposed in the Bill and instead favoured strengthening of the Indian Nursing
Council stating that in an overarching body, the nursing may not get the importance. He also stated
that the State Governments are empowered to pass the State Nursing Council Act and they have the
duties and responsibilities for recognition and approval and therefore consultations with the State
Governments must be held before having the overarching body. In addition to the above submissions,
INC suggested certain amendments to the provisions of NCHRH Bill, 2011. The suggestions are at
Annexure-VII.
Views of Medical Council of India
41. At the meeting held on 8
th June, 2012, Prof. K.K. Talwar, Chairman, Board of Governors,
Medical Council of India (MCI) informed the Committee that the proposed Bill encompasses what the
present Medical Council of India (MCI) is doing at the moment. The proposed Bill only created an
overarching Council divided into the National Commission, National Evaluation and Assessment
Committee and National Board for Health Education, thereby creating division of responsibilities in the
hope that better services or responsibilities would follow. He however, stated that the proposed Bill
lacks the constitution of a strong selection committee on the lines of National Higher Education Bill
which is being examined by the Committee on Human Resource Development. Such committee should
include only eminent persons from the medical professions. He further felt that the subsumation of
all bodies under the proposed Bill would help in better interface between MCI, Dental Council of India
and Indian Nursing Council, which is lacking at present.
Views of Dental Council of India
42. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Dibyendu Majumdar, President, Dental Council
of India on the Bill on the 8
th June, 2012. He submitted that the unfortunate part of the present Bill
is that it proposes to form a Commission which is totally under the control of the Central
Government. None of the States would have any role to play in the policy issues relating to health.
He was of the view that the Bill is absolutely unconstitutional and against the policy of the present
Dental Council of India. Secondly, Clauses 100 and 101 of the Bill say that the decision of the
Commission cannot be questioned in the court of law and there is no provision for election to any
of the bodies in the present Bill. The Bill forbids any aggrieved party from raising any question or
going to the court of law which is against democratic norms. The present Bill consisted of
nominated members to the various bodies under the Commission which goes against the democratic
principles.
43. He also stated that Clauses 4 (j) and Clause 115 (2) give absolute autocratic power to the
Central Government to make the Commission dance to its tune which is against the very spirit of
democracy and thus unacceptable. The Dental Council of India also submitted written views to the
Committee which are at Annexure-VIII.
Views of Indian Medical Association and Delhi Medical Association
44. The Committee at its meeting held on 5
th July, 2012 heard the views of Indian Medical
Association and Delhi Medical Association on the proposed Bill. The representatives of Indian Medical
Association informed the Committee that the proposed Bill intends to stifle the democratic character
of the existing bodies by substituting them with bodies under the Commission which would have a
nominative character instead of elective character as is existing under the present Councils.
45. The representatives of Delhi Medical Association also supported the stand taken by Indian
Medical Association. They added that in the proposed Bill the role of the State Councils has been

12
relegated to maintenance of registers only. They were of the view that measures were being taken to
streamline the various existing Councils and if need be, laws may be amended to streamline the
existing Councils and there is no need to dissolve the existing Councils.
Indian Medical Association and Delhi Medical Association also submitted written views and suggestions
which are at Annexures–IX and X.
Views of Physiotherapists’ Associations
46. The Committee heard the views of Dr. Umashankar Mohanty, President, Indian Association of
Physiotherapists, Karnataka on the Bill. Dr. Mohanty informed that they wanted a separate Physiotherapy
Council of India which would help to regulate the sector which is suffering due to non-regulation of
this profession by a body on the lines of MCI, DCI.
47. Shri Hemant Juneja of Amarjyoti Institute of Physiotherapy also supported the suggestion of
setting up of a separate Physiotherapy Council of India under the said Bill.
48. The representatives of Physiotherapists’ Forum of AIIMS, New Delhi informed that the
previous Standing Committee had observed that Physiotherapists are independent professionals and
therefore recommended that there should be a separate Physiotherapy Council of India and it should
be acted upon. The forum submitted that as far as autonomy and professional character of the
physiotherapists is maintained, they had no objection to come under the proposed Bill. The representatives
of Society for Research and Evidence Translation in Physiotherapy endorsed the views tendered by
the various physiotherapists.
49. Dr. Ali Irani, President, Indian Association of Physiotherapy, Mumbai submitted that
physiotherapists are equal health partners in health and requested for independent practice in
physiotherapy. He also informed that eighty per cent of the heads of the Department of Physiotherapy
world over are Indians. Further, it was also submitted that because there is no regulatory body to
regulate this profession, population of this country has been deprived of the science of healing at the
right stage.
50. The Committee also received written submissions from these Physiotherapists Associations
which are at Annexures XI-XIV.
Views of National Board of Examinations (NBE)
51. At its meeting held on 17
th July, 2012, the Committee heard the views of representatives of
National Board of Examinations. Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, National Board of Examinations
stated that there is need to bring about reform in health professional education to redefine and maintain
standards of health professional education at highest possible level aligned to the needs of the country.
He supported the purpose of the proposed Bill but pointed out various structural lacunae in the Bill.
The Committee was also informed that the proposed Bill does not bear much resemblance to the first
draft wherein he also participated.
52. The Committee’s attention was drawn towards a major aspect viz. abolition of National Board
of Examinations without clearly defining the preservation, protection and promotion of health professional
education within the ambit of the new Bill.
53. The Committee was further informed that National Board of Examinations was set up more
than three decades ago with the purpose of not only providing a standardized examination for PG
courses across the country but also providing an opportunity to multiple institutions to train people
in PG courses. National Board of Examinations conducts the only national standardised examination

13
in India for PG medical education which is recognised internationally to be of the highest order. In
our country where there exists shortage of specialists, doctors and other health professionals to
manage health services, National Board of Examinations provides an additional opportunity beyond the
medical colleges to train these specialists of a high caliber. At present, National Board of Examinations
is running 63 specialist courses including family medicine, rural surgery, aviation medicine with
participation of approximately 3000 students and 470 hospitals.
54. The Committee was also informed that the current Bill does not make a reference to National
Board of Examinations other than to say that it will be abolished once the Commission comes into
being. Clause 2(r) defines ‘health education institution’ or ‘health institution’ as an institution of
learning including a University, an institution deemed to be a university, a college, an institute, an
institution of national importance or a constituent unit of such institution. Under this definition, neither
Army Hospital, nor Railway Hospital, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital and L.V . Prasad Eye Institute would
figure. Prof. Reddy felt that if this definition as mentioned in the Bill is adhered to, then, the entire
stream of National Board of Examinations will disappear.
55. The Committee’s attention was also drawn towards additional conflicts in the structure of the
Bill. Firstly, clause 16(e) speaks about making recommendations on the measures to strengthen the
healthcare delivery, operational efficiency and healthcare infrastructure which are substantially the
responsibility of the State Governments in terms of health service delivery. The Clause 16(f) says ‘the
Commission will coordinate existing Healthcare infrastructure in Central and State Governments for
effective utilisation thereof. The statement implies that the Commission will be able to control
everything from Safdarjung Hospital to the District Hospital to the Primary Healthcare Centres across
the country when Healthcare infrastructure is not really part of Commission’s ambit which is supposed
to be dealing with Health professional education and standards thereof. Secondly, there is overlapping
of the functions of the 3 bodies set up under National Commission i.e. a Commission, a Board and
a Committee. The Clause 19(2) says- ‘where any health educational institution offers a new or higher
course of study or training (including PG or doctorate or post-doctoral or super speciality course of
study or training) such qualification shall not be a recognized qualification for the purpose of this Act,
unless such course of study or training offered has been approved by the Commission before offering
the same to the students. This shows that it is Commission’s responsibility to recognise new courses
whereas clause 30(2)(d) shows the Board is empowered to recognise new courses and give accreditation
to new courses. Similarly, Clause 37(1) and Clause 30(2)(t) shows potential of conflicts of powers
between the Board and the Committee. So, there is a lack of clarity regarding the overlapping powers
and absence of subsidiarity among the functions of Commission, Board, and Committee under the
ambit of the Bill.
56. It was also informed that the constitution of National Board of Health Education is meant to
assist the Commission in discharge of its powers and functions for the purpose of health education
as stated in Clause 23. But as per Clause 24(3) and 24(4), the President and part-time members of
the Board will have a post-graduate degree in the discipline of medicine or medical education. There
is nobody from nursing, dentistry or paramedical sciences and thus they do not have required
professional representation and the constitution of the Board itself does not appear to be satisfying the
objective of the functions that it is supposed to perform. He also submitted before the Committee few
problems related to potential misuse of provisions of the Bill viz. Clause 17, wherein various
requirements are there for a person to apply for permission to start an institution for a course of study
or framing in the discipline of health which must be fulfilled before the Commission grants permission.
But, at the same time an explanatory note given below Clause 17 clearly states that ‘for the purpose
of this section, “person” includes any University or a trust or other body corporate, but does not
include Central Government or a State Government. According to him, Clause 17(6) of the Bill implies
that if, for one year, file remains in the Commission for any reasons, the permission will be
automatically granted and approved.

14
57. He further added that the Bill serves important public purpose but there are several issues that
need to be addressed to attain the objectives of the Bill. If the NBE is integrated into overall framework
of the National Commission with a clear indication of preservation and protection of its functions as
recognised structure within the new format, National Board of Examinations has no objections with
the Bill. He also submitted few aspects that need to be addressed under the ambit of the proposed
Bill viz. inter-professional education; training of medical professionals as a team to cater to health
services in primary health centres and other areas; professional ethics and professional independence.
Views of Optometric Association
58. The Indian Optometric Association in a written submission stated that there was an imperative
need for reorganisation of optometry and separate Council for optometrists in India so that their full
potential could be realized.
Views of Dental Hygienists Associations
59. The Committee heard the views of the All India Dental Hygienists Association on the Bill on
17
th July, 2012. Shri S. K. Pandey, President, All India Dental Hygienist Association apprised the
Committee about the role of dental hygienist in prevention, control, treatment and eradication of dental
diseases. The Committee also noted that although Dental Hygienists are registered in Dental Council
of India, they have no growth in educational as well as clinical aspect as compared to other countries
where Ph.D in Dental Hygienist is being conducted. Further, he requested for incorporation of Dental
Hygienist in the Bill, time bound promotional avenues after 5 years of service and lateral entry in
Bachelor of Dental Sciences course.
60. The Committee also received written submissions from Dental Hygienists Association which are
at Annexure-XV.
Views of Experts/Others
61. During the course of the meeting held on 18
th July, 2012, the Committee heard the views of
Dr. H.N. Tripathi, Chief Medical Superintendent, Sahara Hospital, Lucknow. He was of the view that
it is important to ensure a measured and balanced approach by involving representatives of the
academic medical fraternity in Medical Council of India along with the appointed panel by the
Government and there should be no bar of jurisdiction as mentioned in the Bill. He further added that
the present system should continue with more stringent rules, close monitoring and auditing system.
62. The Committee then heard the views of Prof. D.K. Gupta, Vice-Chancellor, Chhatrapati Shahuji
Maharaj Medical University, Lucknow on the Bill. He suggested for making the selection process for
the Commission more transparent and stated that the Chairman and five members of the Commission
should be selected by a Search Committee. He also suggested that the Search Committee should
consist of Secretary, Health, Government of India; Director, ICMR; one Judge of the Supreme Court
of India who would be nominated by the Chief Justice of India; one Chairman or Vice-Chancellor of
Medical Universities from the country; one Vice-Chancellor from Health Sciences Universities and
Director General, Health Services. He also stressed that persons of bureaucracy of Additional Secretary
rank should not be included in the selection process. In order to ensure transparency in selection
process, an expert from Health Management should also be included in the Selection Committee.
Further, he was of the view that the Clause relating to heavy penalty on their practicing beyond their
profession should be dropped as the provision would impinge on their freedom to profess after passing
graduation or post graduation.
63. Prof. A. P. Tikku, Faculty of Dental Sciences, Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University,
Luckow, during the course of his deposition before the Committee on the 17
th July, 2012, while

15
supporting the Bill, informed the Committee that existing Dental Council of India has deviated from
the lines of Dental Council Act, 1948, getting inclined towards private organizations, due to which
Government policies are not being implemented properly. His only reservation regarding the proposed
Bill was the concentration of power in the persons selected by the Central Government with no power
whatsoever to the elected persons in the bodies under the Commission. Further, he also submitted that
there should be inclusion of magisterial powers and clear specification of authority to curb malpractices
in health professions in the Bill.
64. Dr. Rohit Khanna, Lucknow during the course of his deposition before the Committee on
17
th July, 2012 was in agreement with selection of members given in the Bill as it ensures selection
of more eminent people rather than influential ones. He also informed that the Bill should focus on
creation of jobs, funds, avenues for human resources in health sector. He also focussed on the need
to strengthen, promote, and monitor ethics amongst medical, allied, paramedical practitioners in the
country. Further, he submitted that more powers should be given to State Councils. While partially
supporting the Bill, he was also of the view that there should be professional representation and firm
policies should be laid and followed in health education.
Views of Director, AIIMS
65. The Committee at its meeting held on 30
th July, 2012 heard the views of Dr. R.C. Deka,
Director, AIIMS on the NCHRH Bill, 2011. Dr. Deka was of the view that there is a need for change
in the present system and the Central Government had rightly and determinately set its mind on a
change. There is a need for a fresh look at the human resource aspects keeping in view the health
needs of the country as the present system of healthcare education had created inequalities, poor
access and has been disconnected with the healthcare needs of different parts of the country which
has resulted in diversity and disproportionate medical establishment, be it a medical college, a nursing
college or a dental college. He submitted that the Government or people of this country had
experienced the MCI, DCI and other Councils and the country has a large experience of them since
they were instituted.
66. He was, however, of the view that the change proposed to be brought by way of proposed
Bill, appears to have been made without assessing the needs of the country. Such assessment had been
done in USA and some other countries before such an Act had been enacted. The same was done
in India as well through Bhore Committee before the MCI Act was enacted. The Committee was
therefore requested that before making the changes as reflected in the proposed Bill, there is a need
for making an extensive study in the country through a Bhore-type Committee.
67. He felt that there is a need to empower and enhance the capabilities rather than just giving
absolute power to a high powered body like the proposed one. The need of the hour is to empower
the State Councils and universities who are aware of the realities/deficiencies existing in the State to
assess the health manpower/health facilities actually needed in the State to serve the people properly.
He therefore stressed on the need to set up a Committee on the lines of Bhore Committee to find out
the deficiencies both in educational and healthcare sectors. Further, he was of the view that the name
‘health education’ is not an appropriate title. According to him, it should have been ‘health professional
education’. He was of the view that in this context the State Governments, the NGOs, the private
universities or deemed to be private universities should be made partners in making changes in the
proposed Bill.
68. With regard to AIIMS and other ‘Institutions of National Importance’, he pointed out that in
the present Bill there is no specific mention whether these institutions of National Importance would
continue to remain under the present Act or will come under the proposed Bill. Further he felt a need
to carve out a separate body in the proposed Bill viz. ‘Medical Practitioners Tribunal Service’ similar
to CAT and other disciplinary bodies to prevent malpractices and to improve patient safety, which is

16
presently under the Medical Council itself or State Councils. Such a Tribunal has been set up in the
United Kingdom (UK) which is separate from the General Medical Council of U.K. in tackling the
problems of disproportionate distribution of health personnel not only for delivery of services but also
for imparting education; there is a need for setting up of a body similar to Civil Services, which could
be constituted under the ambit of the proposed Bill. He felt that this could help in equitable distribution
of personnel throughout the country. With regard to standard and quality assurance, he was of the
view that this should be assigned to some body other than the overarching council. The Committee
was therefore requested that this aspect should be looked into by different experts, Members of
Parliament and Legal experts. Lastly, he was of the view that research and innovation are the part of
healthcare profession and research cannot be kept out of the proposed Bill and should have been
included as a part of the proposed Bill.
Views of Director, PGIMER
69. The Committee then heard the views of Prof. Y .K. Chawla, Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh on
the proposed Bill. He was of the view that PGIMER and institutes like AIIMS should be kept out of
the purview of the present Bill. With regard to Second Schedule in the Bill, he stated that it was not
clear whether or not Post-Doctoral Medical Qualification included Ph.D also. The same analogy also
extended to dental qualification in the Third Schedule. With regard to nomination of members to the
various bodies of the Commission, he was in favour of majority of these being filled by reputed people
from good academic institutes instead of private practitioners as is the present case. With regard to
recruitment of members, it has been laid down that the age of retirement would be 65 years. He was
not clear as to whether a person of the age of 40 years could also become a member.
70. With regard to the provision for collaboration with International Universities, he felt that there
is a need to include a provision for Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with good international
universities which is lacking in the present Bill. He also felt that there is a need to incorporate a
provision for adjunct faculty in the proposed Bill by means of which a professional from one medical
college can go to another medical college for academic purpose for some time to strengthen the latter
as is being done in the IITs presently.
71. Shri Chawla, Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh vide his letter also furnished his written views on
the talking points sent by the Committee which are in Annexure-XVI.
Views of representative of JIPMER
72. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Ananthanarayanan, Jawaharlal Nehru Institute of
Post Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry. While supporting the Bill in principle, he
suggested certain amendments to various provisions of the Bill. The list of amendments suggested by
him is at Annexure-XVII.
73. The Committee then had the benefit to hear the views of Dr. P. Satish Chandra, Director and
Vice-Chancellor, NIMHANS, Bangalore on the Bill. He made certain observations which merited
attention in the various provisions of the proposed Bill as detailed in Annexure-XVIII.
74. The Committee also received the written views of Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of
India which are detailed in Annexure-XIX.
75. As mentioned earlier, the Committee issued a Press Release on the Bill inviting memoranda
from public and other stakeholders. In response thereto, the Committee received several memoranda.
Besides, representatives of various Associations who appeared before the Committee also made written
submissions. All the memoranda and oral submissions were sent to the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for their comments. The issues raised and comments furnished by the Ministry are given in
Annexures IV and XX.

17
Status of AYUSH in the Bill
76. The Committee’s attention was drawn to the fact that AYUSH has not been included in the
ambit of the Bill. The Department of Health and Family Welfare informed the Committee that the Bill
primarily seeks to reform the current regulatory framework in medical education which is based on
biomedical approach. It was further informed that the traditional system of medicine plays an
important role in the health delivery system of the country. However, the modern system of medicine
and the traditional system of medicine are two different approaches and bringing them together under
a single regulatory body may result in AYUSH getting relegated to an ancillary stream in the overall
health delivery system. The Department also stated that accrediting and approving a college imparting
education in traditional system of medicine would require a completely different set of rules and
regulations than that required for a health institution imparting education in modern system of
medicine. The Department was of the view that the two streams needed to have separate regulatory
bodies to allow each stream to develop in accordance with its genius.
77. The Department of AYUSH in its note submitted to the Committee pleaded for a separate
regulatory body for the various disciplines of health under AYUSH, inter-alia stating that these systems
of medicine have not been utilized fully while being under a combined health education and service
delivery systems.
Suggestions of Members of the Committee and comments of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare thereon
78. The Committee also received written suggestions of Shri M.K. Raghavan, M.P (L.S.),
Shrimati Jaishreeben Kanubhai Patel, M.P (L.S.) and Shri Ratan Singh, M.P (L.S.) on the Bill which
were forwarded to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for their comments. The issues raised
and the comments furnished by the Ministry are given below:
Suggestions of Shri M. K. Raghavan, MP (L.S)
79.  The existing regulations pertaining to medical/allied health/paramedical education in the country
should be strengthened and aimed at addressing the genuine health needs of the country and fulfilling
national objectives. The objective of medical education should be people-oriented, not for profit. The
whole system should be working with the single mission of Health for All people without discrimination.
The Medical Council of India (MCI) has failed to maintain ethics and prevent malpractices. This is
because majority of doctors work with a business motive; there is lack of uniformity of selection
procedure and ignoring of merit etc. There is a need for a strong health policy, otherwise the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health (NCHRH) will be like old wine in new bottle. The
NCHRH should be governed by people who know the basic issues related to healthcare, economics
of health, health problems in the society and solutions to them. They should be people of integrity and
academic brilliance alone should not be the criteria. The Chairman or the Members of the NCHRH
should not have any interests in the private hospitals and private medical colleges. They should all be
preferably from government medical colleges or 100% charitable institutions. AYUSH should be
covered under NCHRH. There must be complete transparency and social scientists should be incorporated
in the body. The NCHRH is welcome if its objectives are genuinely aimed at improving the healthcare.
State Councils should have some powers and all powers need not be centralized in the NCHRH.
Financial positions/assets of all members of NCHRH and all State and Central Council should be made
available on the website.
80. All paramedicals were not covered under the NCHRH Bill. The Chairperson and Members
should be selected based on their academic background, seniority, vision on healthcare issues. There
should be minimum super-specialists in NCHRH. They should be selected from Government Sector.
Nomination is not the panacea for all ills. There must be more democracy.

18
81. The NCHRH should be like the University Grants Commission (UGC) and it should have the
power to monitor, direct and modify the medical education. If State Councils are more strengthened
and decentralised that would fetch balanced results.
82. More General Practitioners (GPs) are required. The proposed body should work for bringing
a health policy for the nation. The policy should focus on providing basic health needs to all the
sections of the society. If the proposed body is for modern medicine, there must be a separate Bill
for six systems of medicine under AYUSH.
Comments of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
83. The current regulatory bodies regulate both education and professional practice within their
domain and are over-burdened with all regulatory functions. Further, different regulatory bodies each
responsible for its own cadre of workers have failed to provide a synergistic approach to address
human resources needs in the health sector of the country. NCHRH seeks to decentralise and trifurcate
the regulatory functions among three separate bodies viz. NBHE, NEAC and National Councils which
would function under the overall supervision of the Commission.
84. The NCHRH Bill seeks to provide an institutional framework to promote availability of health-
care providers in all parts of the country, reduce shortage, standardise quality and bridge the uneven
distribution of the existing work force. It also seeks to overhaul the existing system of granting
permissions for opening of new health education institutions, strengthen the State Councils and
introduce penal provisions for violation of laid down norms.
85. The National Councils to be established for each discipline of health would not only promote
ethical standards in each of these professions but also provide grievance redressal mechanism for
strengthening of ethical practice of professions, maintain live register for professionals and enforce a
continuous medical education programme for renewal of license every 10 years.
86. The existing councils have attracted criticisms on their functioning from health professionals,
health administrators and media and have also drawn judicial censure on several occasions. They have
also failed to provide a synergetic approach to address the human resources needs of the health sector.
The existing jumbo sized Councils comprise of elected and nominated members who lack the required
competencies.
87. The NCHRH will be guided by a National Policy for Human Resources for Health that will
articulate a strategic vision and normative framework for the creation of Human Resources for Health.
This policy document, to be updated every five years, will be developed by public health leaders
representing State and Central Governments through the Central Council for Health and Family Welfare
and shall be in the public domain.
88. The composition of the NCHRH will be more compact and the Commission and its constituent
bodies would be guided by eminent persons in health profession with fresh and up to date outlook.
The members of the Commission would represent various streams connected with health education
viz. medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy paramedics and public health. The Commission would
comprise from members who are from outside the medical profession viz. law, technology and
management.
89. The Bill provides that selection of a member shall be subject to his satisfying the fact that he
does not have any financial or other conflict of interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as a member.
90. The traditional system of medicine and the modern system of medicine are two different
approaches and bringing them together under a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting
relegating as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.

19
91. The main objective of the National Commission for Human Resources in Health will be to
provide an institutional framework to promote availability of health care providers in all parts of the
country (doctors, nurses, dentists, pharmacists and paramedics) to reduce shortages, standardize
quality and bridge the uneven distribution of the existing workforce. Accordingly, the Commission’s
immediate tasks will be to undertake a work force study, formulate an action plan, and ensure inter-
sectoral coordination to promote availability of human resources in all parts of the country. As stated
above, the NCHRH will be guided by a National Policy for Human Resources for Health. This policy
document, to be updated every five years, will be developed by public health leaders representing State
and Central Governments through the Central Council for Health and Family Welfare and shall be in
the public domain.
92. Clause 7 of the Bill stipulates that the Chairperson and other members of the Commission, shall
immediately after entering office and every year thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of their
interest, whether direct or indirect and whether financial or otherwise, in any health institution or any
other institution which comes under the purview of the Commission and the same shall be displayed
on the website of the Commission.
93. The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing Councils by constitution of
corresponding new Councils and a paramedical Council, however, it also leaves room for the
Government to notify the constitution of National Councils for any other discipline of health.
94. As stated above, the Commission and its constituent bodies would be guided by eminent
persons in health profession with fresh and up to date outlook. The members of the Commission
would represent various streams connected with health education viz. medicine, dentistry, nursing,
pharmacy paramedics and public health. The Commission would comprise of members who are from
outside the medical profession viz. law, technology and management. The Commission will not
comprise of any nominated members. It will have only appointed members as well as elected
members. The decision of the Commission shall be by consensus failing which by majority of
members present and voting in the meeting. The quorum of the meeting shall be seven members.
95. The current regulatory bodies regulate both education and professional practice within their
domain and are over-burdened with all regulatory functions. NCHRH in fact seeks to decentralise and
trifurcate the regulatory functions among three separate bodies viz. NBHE, NEAC and National
Councils. The NEAC would exclusively deal with evaluation and assessment of institutions imparting
health education and programmes conducted therein. The Committee would inter-alia undertake audit
and cause to be audited the adherence to code of ethics including policies on obviating conflict of
interest, disclosure of information, evolving transparency in the processes and procedure of evaluation
and assessment. The proposal makes it mandatory for States not having State Councils to constitute
the same within three years of the enactment of the NCHRH Bill. Hence, the Bill seeks to further
strengthen institution of State Councils.
96. Allied health practitioners comprise of those who provide a range of diagnostic, technical,
therapeutic and direct patient care and support services that are critical to other health professionals
they work with and patients they serve. Yoga, Homoeopathy, Ayurveda are generally known as
“alternative system of medicine”.
97. The existing curriculum for any course including MBBS would be looked into by NBHE. As stated
above, the NCHRH will be guided by a National Policy for Human Resources for Health. This policy
document, to be updated every five years, will be developed by public health leaders representing State
and Central Governments through the Central Council for Health and Family Welfare and shall be in
the public domain.
98. The main objective of the National Commission for Human Resources in Health will be to
provide an institutional framework to promote availability of health care providers in all parts of the

20
country (doctors, nurses, dentists, pharmacists and paramedics) to reduce shortages, standardize
quality and bridge the uneven distribution of the existing workforce. The Ministry is also of the same
view that there should be separate regulatory body for AYUSH.
Suggestions of Shrimati Jaishreeben Kanubhai Patel, MP (L.S)
99. The suggestions of Shrimati Jaishreeben Kanubhai Patel are delineated below:–
• In NCHRH Bill, nothing is mentioned about inclusion and enrolment of Dental Hygienists.
• The Bill stipulates that the Commission, the Board and the Committee will be bound by
the directions of the Central Government. It may impinge on the objective functioning of
these bodies.
• The Bill lays down that the Commission, the Board and the Committee will have appointed
and nominated members and removal of Chairperson or any other member gives autocratic
powers to the Central Government.
• There is no provision for representation from professional organisations and health
universities or councils.
• Decisions of the Commission cannot be questioned in any court of law, which is against
the principles of natural justice.
• Only power of registration is restored with Councils; State Councils are made branches
of Central Council.
• The registration in State Council valid only for the State. This will only undermine State
Councils
• The NCHRH should consist of eminent persons with integrity.
• The Selection Committee should consist of Director General, ICMR, Supreme Court
Judge and DGHS among others.
• The membership of Selection Committee should be terminated with a notice of one
month.
• The CEO of the Commission should be from the medical field and selected by the
Selection Committee.
• Reconstitution of Medical Council of India.
Views/Comments of the Ministry
100. The Comments of the Ministry of Health and Family is given below point wise:–
• It is neither desirable nor possible to include each and every allied health science stream
as an independent profession in the Bill. Nonetheless, the Bill seeks to promote availability
of health care providers’ standardised quality and bridge the uneven distribution of the
existing work force. The Bill also has the provision to allow the Government to notify
constitution of National Councils for disciplines of health other than those mentioned in
the Bill. Moreover, the primary aim of NBHE would be to ensure augmentation of trained
specialists and super specialist in every field of health care.
• The Bill provides that the Commission will be guided by the directions given by the
Central Government only on the questions of policy. As regards provision to supersede

21
the Commission, Board, Committee and the National Councils, the same have been
incorporated for being exercised directly by the ‘Government in extraordinary circumstances
with a view to improve the overall functioning of the Commission with more transparency
and accountability.
• The Commission, Board and the Committee will not comprise of any nominated members.
They will have only appointed members duly selected by laid down procedure. The
Commission will also have the Presidents of the Council as members, who would come
through election. As stated above, the provision to remove or suspend Chairperson/
members has been kept for use in extraordinary circumstances.
• One of the main functions of the National Board for Health Education would be to
coordinate between medical and other scientific academies, societies, associations, institutions
and Government medical and scientific departments and services. This ensures participation
of professional bodies and health universities in the functioning of the Commission.
Furthermore, it is stated that sub-clause(4) of clause 3 stipulates that the Presidents of
each of the National Council shall be an ex-officio Member of the Commission and sub
clause (5) of clause 3 stipulates that all ex-office Members shall have voting rights.
• In so far as provisions under clause 100 are concerned it is stated that a commission
or tribunal is established with limited powers to decide and investigate matters falling
under its ambit so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However such commissions/
tribunals are amenable to constitutional courts. Therefore a person aggrieved with the
decision of the Commission can always file an appeal in the High Court or the Supreme
Court and his fundamental rights would remain intact. The bill provides for an appellate
authority in the Central Government.
• The current regulatory bodies regulate both education and profession practice within their
domain and are over-burdened with all regulatory functions. NCHRH in fact seeks to
decentralise and trifurcate the regulatory functions among three separate bodies viz.
NBHE, NEAC and National Councils. The State Councils would be constituted by the
States under their own statute.
• The bill seeks to introduce the concept of live register for medical professional and
therefore it is essential to segregate the data. A person registered with the State Council
is not barred from practicing anywhere in India; he just needs to register himself with
the National Register to allow him to practice in any place outside his State that his
whereabouts and manpower planning is made easy.
• The Commission and its constituent bodies will be guided by eminent persons in health
profession with fresh and up to date outlook. They would be persons of standing in the
respective professions with integrity, administrative capability and outstanding ability.
• The Selection Committee would be constituted only for a prescribed period.
• The Bill only specifies that the CEO should not be a person below the rank of the
additional Secretary in Government of India. It does not bar a medical person from being
appointed as the CEO. It is a very crucial position and therefore the appointment should
be in the hands of the Government.
•  All the National Councils will be reconstituted as per the provisions of the Bill.
Suggestions of Shri Ratan Singh, M.P. (L.S.)
101. The suggestions of Shri Ratan Singh, MP (L.S) are delineated below:–

22
• The National Board of Health Examinations has been proposed by naming NBE. thereby
depriving NBE of the independent status; the Committee will have extraordinary responsibilities
to develop and regulate the process of evaluation and assessment of institutions.
• It fails to address various National Registers being maintained by existing Councils.
• AYUSH not incorporated in the Bill.
• The Bill imposes bureaucratic control over medical, dental, pharmacy, nursing education.
• The decision taken by the Commission will not be challenged in any court of law as per
section 100 and 101.
• Duty to serve in India for persons leaving the country to acquire higher education.
• Power of National Council and State Council to institute inquiries and impose penalties
under section 69 and appeal against such decision under section 70.
• Formation of Dental Hygienist Council.
Views/Comments of the Ministry
102. The Comments of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are given below pointwise:–
• The proposal to set up NCHRH has been extensively discussed with all stakeholders and
only after taking everyone on board the Government has gone ahead with the proposal.
The aim of the Bill is to create an overarching regulatory body for the health sector
regulating the various professions related to health under one umbrella. Different regulatory
bodies each responsible for its own cadre of workers have failed to provide a synergetic
approach to address the human resources needs in the health sector of the country. The
Committee itself would not be undertaking evaluation and assessment of institutes. It will
only lay down the standards, norms and processes for registration of evaluation and
assessment agencies with the Commission.
• The Bill seeks to introduce the concept of live register for all the health professionals,
to be maintained by respective State Councils. The National Councils and the State
Council shall maintain the register by such data capturing method as may be prescribed
by the Central or State Government and shall inter alia  contain the biometric and other
detail of each health professional which shall be verified at the time of renewal.
• The traditional system of medicine and the modern system of medicine are two different
approaches and bringing them together under a single regulatory body may result in
“AYUSH” getting relegated as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.
• The NCHRH is proposed to be independent regulatory body and its constituent bodies
would comprise of eminent professionals from various field of health sciences as well as
law, management and technology. The Central Government, other than giving directions
on policy issues would have no say in the functioning of the Commission.
• In so far as provisions under clause 100 are concerned it is stated that a commission
or tribunal is established with limited powers to decide and investigate matters falling
under its ambit so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However such commissions/
tribunals are amenable to constitutional courts. Therefore a person aggrieved with the
decision of the Commission can always file an appeal in the High Court or the Supreme
Court and his fundamental rights would remain intact. The bill provides for an appellate
authority in the Central Government.

23
• The present provisions do not bar a student from leaving the country after obtaining a
medical degree from a Government medical college. Under NCHRH such a student, after
acquiring higher qualification from abroad, would have to return to the country and serve
for three years failing which his registration shall be cancelled.
• The fact that there needs to be more clarity regarding the jurisdiction of the National
Councils and the State Councils has been noted and the clause shall be rectified in
consultation with the Legislative Department.
• The NCHRH Bill leaves a provision for the Government to notify constitution of National
Councils for any discipline of health other than those mentioned in the Bill.
Suggestions of Shri Kirti Azad, M.P. (L.S.)
103. The suggestions of Shri Kirti Azad, MP (L.S) are delineated below:–
• Not just that there is an acute shortage of hospital and their unequal distribution in various
States, the problem is also accentuated by the poor infrastructure and the poor quality of
education that is being given in most colleges. Dental and Medical institutions are
mushrooming all over, yet the quality of medical and paramedical education needs to be
strictly monitored. The concept of an overarching authority, is therefore, welcome.
• Nursing requires greater emphasis than ever before. Not only do we need to impart better
nursing education, we need to produce much larger number of nurses to improve the
Doctor-Nurses ratio. Instead of just expecting the private sector to churn out nurses and
pharmacists, the Government should establish institutes, alongside Government hospitals,
to train quality professionals. ESI, Army and CGHS hospitals can be conveniently used
for harnessing their capacity for training a larger pool of nursing professionals.
• Health is a State subject. This proposed legislation attempts to trample upon the role of
the States in as much as the proposed Commission does not give any representation to
the States. Whether it is the Central or the State Government, it should be mandated that
the members will only be from the Medical profession- there should be self control, and
at least two third members should be from Institutes of National importance, like AIIMS,
JIPMER etc.
• The process of removal of such eminent members should be tough. Unlike the Government’s
pushing out an eminent AIIMS Director Prof Venugopal purely for ego related reasons,
we need to incorporate the procedure for removing the members, which should only be
for very grave reasons. There should be assurance of tenure, and functional autonomy
and authority should be clearly defined and outlined in the proposed bill.
• There should be only one Selection Committee for all the three institutions, both in the
States as well as, in the Central Government, and there should be a minimum qualification,
experience, submission of technical papers in national/ international journals of repute
which should help zero in on the suitable candidates. To maintain quality standards,
doctors in private practice should not be more than 20% of the Committee’s strength.
• There should be no automatic approval of application for establishing educational institutions,
just by the efflux of one year. Every proposed institution should be inspected, preferably
by a panel of eminent doctors in that field to be constituted in every State, and on the
basis of the panel’s recommendation, an appropriate decision should be taken.
• Medical Research should be given prominence in the Bill. Even an Institution like AIIMS
is lagging behind, since it is unable to cope with the massive footfall every day. There
should be an incentive for research placed in the Bill, on the lines of Developed countries.

24
• Specialized institutions need to be encouraged to act as Teaching institutions for producing
quality faculty, contributing to research and at best as, tertiary level referral centre for
patients suffering from complicated disorders that cannot be managed elsewhere. With the
current load on even Institutions of National importance, they have become the first stop
for walk-in-patients, and that has impinged on the basic purpose for which they were
founded.
• Distance Education System in Medical Institutions should be a strict no-no. Like in
Management/ Law etc. Distance Education should not be considered at all. The Medical
profession deals with human life and having ‘professionals’ who are trained through
‘distance training methods’ can spell the end of the road for patient care.
• A new Institution should be allowed to come up after any State issues an Essentiality
Certificate, which should be done after making an objective assessment of manpower
requirements, to ensure better geographical spread and to meet the local needs.
104. The Committee took further oral evidence of Secretary and other officials, Department of
Health and Family Welfare on the 17
th August, 2012 to seek clarifications in the light of suggestions/
comments received from various stakeholders/experts. During his deposition, the Secretary stated that
his Ministry had received the copies of memoranda from the Rajya Sabha Secretariat containing views
and suggestions by different organizations and individuals and the comments thereon had been
furnished. The Secretary highlighted the fact that the dominant view that emerged from the memoranda
furnished to the Committee and evidences tendered before it was the pressing need for reform in the
health education sector. As regards the suggestions to bring AYUSH under the ambit of the Bill, he
emphasized the fact that AYUSH should be kept outside the ambit of the Bill as bringing it under a
single regulatory body may result in it being relegated to an ancillary stream in the overall health care
delivery system. Apprising the Committee of the consultative process undertaken prior to drafting of
the Bill, the Secretary stated that when the formation of the overarching body was envisaged, a task
force was constituted which prepared a report suggesting a model for National Commission for Human
Resources for Health (NCHRH). The report was sent to the State Governments and other stakeholders
and the draft NCHRH Bill was put on the website of the Ministry inviting comments and suggestions
thereon. He also stated that six regional consultations had also been held in which State Governments,
Vice-Chancellors, Principals of Medical Colleges, medical practitioners, academicians and representatives
of regional IMA had participated. He informed the Committee that the Government was open to
increasing the representations of State Governments in the National Commission, Board and Committee.
He tried to impress upon the Committee that the Bill would not usurp any powers that currently vest
with the State Governments. The registration with the State Councils and the National Councils, bar
of jurisdiction, provision for appellate authority, status of the courses run by National Board of
Examinations, formation of additional National Councils, etc. also figured in the discussion.
105. As regards the composition of the National Commission for Human Resources for Health, the
National Board for Health Education and the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee, the
Secretary submitted that those would be guided by eminent persons not only from disciplines of health
education but also from other disciplines like management, law etc. and the appointment of the
Chairpersons and Members would be based on the recommendation of a Selection Committee which
shall consist of persons of eminence and experience from medical and allied fields to avoid bias. As
regards Clause 100 which debars a person from calling into question any order under this Act, the
Secretary submitted that a Commission or Tribunal is established with limited powers to decide and
investigate matters falling under its ambit so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However, all
Commissions are amenable to constitutional courts i.e., the High Courts and the Supreme Court. He
further stated that Clause 98 provides for an appellate authority. On the issue of separate councils for
allied health professionals like physiotherapists, occupational therapists, radiographers, medical technologists
etc., he stated that the Bill contains a provision for setting up of additional Councils.

25
106. The Secretary further informed that as per the Bill, a person enrolled in the State Council can
practice only in that State whereas a person registered with the National Council can practice
anywhere. He clarified that this was necessary because under the current system there was a lot of
confusion and there were cases where doctors have multiple registrations. He stated that actually a
person registered with the State Council is not barred from practicing anywhere in India but needs
to register himself with the National Register so that there is no duplication of figures involved.
Further, he stated that the Bill seeks to introduce the concept of live register for medical professionals
and, therefore, it is essential to segregate the data.

26
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
1. The Committee takes note of the fact that even though it is more than sixty years
since India attained independence, affordable healthcare and health education have been a
distant dream for the common people of the country. Even though concerted efforts have been
made by the Government, but due to substantial socio-economic and geographical inequalities,
those efforts have not made the desired impact. The Committee expresses its concern over the
acute shortage of qualified health workers including doctors in the country. It is constraining
to note that as per 2001 Census, the estimated density of all the health workers (qualified and
unqualified) in India is about 20 per cent less than the WHO norm of 2.5 workers (doctors,
nurses and midwives) per thousand population. This shows the substantial shortage of qualified
health workers in the country. The Committee also notes the disparities between the rural and
urban areas in respect of the availability of health infrastructure. Even though there is a steep
increase in the number of medical colleges in the country, the cause of the concern for the
Committee is that a number of colleges that have been opened are not evenly distributed. This
has resulted in distorted distribution of the country’s production capacity of health workers.
The Committee also takes cognizance of the fact that the other health professions such as
nursing, pharmacy, etc., are not in a promising state. The nursing education is also in a poor
condition resulting in poor quality of the nursing professionals. Similarly, the nurses-doctors
ratio in the country is only 0.8:1 as against the ideal ratio of 3:1. Adding to these woes is the
criticism being made against some of the National Health Councils, leading to judicial censure
on several occasions. The Committee, therefore, takes note of this background in which the
Bill has been brought forward by the Government in the Parliament.
2. Taking note of the importance of the Bill and its likely impact on the availability of
health professionals, health infrastructure and ultimately healthcare delivery for the common
people of the country, the Committee took the views of a cross-section of the society and
various stakeholders. The Committee feels that the need for reforms in health sector is long
overdue so as to invigorate the health sector. But several stakeholders have raised serious
apprehensions on various provisions of the Bill and effectiveness of various bodies that are
proposed to be established under the Bill. In view of the apprehensions expressed by various
stakeholders, the Committee, in its meeting held on 17 August, 2012, felt that the Bill, in the
present form, cannot be recommended. The Committee, therefore, decided not to go in for
clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill and to recommend to the Government to consider all
shades of opinion and all the suggestions and bring forward a revised comprehensive Bill
before the Parliament.
3. The Committee, however, makes the following general observations/recommendations to
enable the Government to take necessary action at the time of revisiting the Bill:
(i) The National Commission for Human Resources for Health, as proposed in the Bill, is
mandated to take measures to determine, maintain and coordinate the minimum
standards of and promote the human resources, in the disciplines of health education
and training, commensurate with the requirement of such resources in different States
and Union Territories. The Committee is aware that ‘Health’ is a State subject whereas
‘Health Education’ figures in the Concurrent List of the Constitution. However, the
composition of the Commission gives no representation to the States. The Committee
agrees with the viewpoint put forth by the State representatives that the States play a
26

27
vital role in delivery of healthcare and medical education. States are well versed with
existing medical education capacity and know their future requirements better. The
Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, during the course of his deposition
before the Committee stated that he was open to giving greater representation to the
States in the National Commission, the National Board and the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee. It is, in this context, that the Committee is of the considered
view that a substantive role should be mandated for the States in the Commission. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to revisit the institutions of National Commission,
National Board and National Evaluation and Assessment Committee and give adequate
representation to the States. Cooperation and coordination of the States is very essential
for better provision of healthcare and health education in the country. Discussions may
be held with all the State Governments before revising the Bill. Necessary modifications
may, accordingly, be made in the Bill.
(ii) Some stakeholders favoured strengthening of the existing Councils rather than
overarching body as proposed in the Bill. They felt that sufficient safeguards should be
provided in the present Councils to ensure their transparent functioning and accountability
to the Central Government and the Parliament. The Committee also took note of their
concern that the present National Councils have been relegated to maintaining the
Central Register only, in the Bill. There was also a mention that in the National
Commission, National Board and National Evaluation and Assessment Committee, the
representation of several professions has not been indicated. The Committee notes the
concern expressed by the Councils that their autonomy and democratic set-up have
been taken over under the Bill. The Committee feels that these apprehensions need to
be appropriately addressed by the Government in the Bill. There is a need for clarifying
all these concerns. The democratic functioning of the National Councils should be
appropriately protected, even if they are brought under the overarching body. As
regards the existing functions of the Councils, the Committee suggests that Councils
may be given the powers to consider all the proposals as per the existing functions and
after their due consideration, the three bodies proposed under the Bill i.e.  the
Commission, the Board and the Assessment Committee may be given the power to take
final decision in the respective matters. Besides, adequate representation should be
given to all the professions in the proposed Commission, Board and Committee.
(iii) Some of the stakeholders expressed their apprehensions that there is no element of
election in the composition of the Commission, Board and the Assessment Committee.
The Bill provides only for the appointment by the Central Government on the
recommendations of the Selection Committees. In fact, this has been objected by the
State Governments also. The Committee desires, that the apprehensions of stakeholders
may be considered by the Government while revising the Bill.
(iv) The Selection Committees proposed to be set up for recommending persons for
nominations to the Commission, Board and the Assessment Committee have been
questioned by some of the stakeholders. They felt that the selection process for the
Selection Committees has been made very ambiguous stating that the Chairperson and
Members shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed. The Committee
agrees that this would lead to doubts in the minds of the people and this needs to be
clearly spelt out. The Committee, in this regard, takes note of the Higher Education
and Research Bill, 2011 in which composition of the Selection Committee has been
clearly spelt out. The Committee recommends that a procedure on the similar lines be
spelt out at the time of revising the Bill. The Committee also feels that the members
of Selection Committee should be persons of eminence, preferably from the medical

28
field. Besides, the Committee also recommends that there should be only one Selection
Committee for all the three bodies.
(v) The Bill provides that the Chairperson or a Member of the National Commission/
National Board/National Evaluation and Assessment Committee can be removed by the
Central Government at its pleasure which is very ambiguous provision and susceptible
to misuse whereas the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011 provides that the
Chairperson or a Member of the National Commission for Higher Education and
Research can be removed by the President. The Committee feels that a similar
provision may be incorporated in the present Bill. The Committee recommends that
adequate safeguards may be provided in the Bill so that the Chairperson and other
Members of the Commission, Board, and the Assessment Committee are able to
discharge their duties and responsibilities in a fair and objective manner.
(vi) It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that though the Bill seeks to
abolish the National Board of Examinations (NBE), it fails to define how the existing
streams of health education run by the NBE are to be preserved and promoted within
the ambit of the Bill. The Committee is given to understand that the NBE has provided
standardized examination for post-graduate courses across the country and public sector
hospitals like Railway Hospitals, Armed Forces Hospitals and some private sector
hospitals like Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Shankar Netralaya, etc. are participating for the
post graduation courses. It has been impressed upon the Committee that India is very
short of specialists and the NBE provides an opportunity beyond the medical colleges to
train the specialists of higher order. The Committee agrees that the NBE performs very
important functions and the post-graduate medical education of the highest order is
being standardized by it, and if this stream disappears, it is going to affect the
specialists, who have been awarded degrees so far. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the above apprehensions be adequately addressed and precise and
explicit provisions be made while revising the Bill to protect the existing streams of PG
education run by the NBE.
(vii) The Committee also takes note of the apprehensions expressed before it about a
potential conflict of powers between the Commission, the Board and the Assessment
Committee due to lack of clarity regarding the powers of the three bodies. One of the
apprehensions was that the Commission gives permission for new courses under Clause
17 of the Bill whereas Clause 30 gives an impression that the Board is fully empowered
to recognize new courses and give accreditation to new courses. Similarly, it was also
apprehended that there is conflict between Board and Committee regarding accreditation
of Health Educational Institutes under Clauses 30 (2) (t) and 37 (1) respectively. The
Committee strongly feels that there is a need to clearly demarcate the respective
jurisdictions of the three bodies under the Bill.
(viii) The Committee also takes note of the apprehensions expressed by some of the professional
associations like physiotherapy, dental hygienists, optometrists, occupational therapists
etc. They expressed the desire to have separate Council for each of the professions. For
example, Dental Hygienists Association felt that they are always relegated to the
background and they do not get sufficient prominence. They also felt that their
profession has not been appropriately represented in the Bill. The Committee feels that
many new fields have emerged in the health profession but the new fields are yet to
be granted the status of separate Council so as to ensure their better growth, regulation
and standards. The Committee, therefore, recommends that their grievances may also
be taken care of and separate Councils may be provided for them, wherever feasible.

29
(ix) The Committee takes note of the provision in Clause 17 (6) which provides that where
no order on establishment of institution for imparting health education or a new course
of study has been given by the Commission for a period of one year, the same shall
be deemed to have been approved by the Commission in the form in which it has been
submitted. The Committee expresses its serious doubts on this open-ended clause. The
Committee feels that this clause is susceptible to misuse by allowing backdoor entry of
health institutions or a new course of study by stalling the decision for one year, which
would automatically be treated as approval. The Committee recommends that this
provision may be made more stringent and sufficient riders and safeguards may be
provided in the clause.
(x) The Committee is also of the view that there is no mention about the Medical Research
in the preamble, powers and functions of the Commission nor has it been defined under
the definition in Clause 2. It has only been mentioned in Clause 30(1)(a) under the
powers and functions of the National Board of Examination stating that it is one of the
functions of the Board to maintain standards of Health Education and Research. Health
Research is covered under the Higher Education and Research Bill, 2011 also. The
Committee has noted that in the Higher Education Bill, 2011, Agricultural Education
and Research has been kept out of its purview. A comparative perusal of contents of
the provisions pertaining to jurisdiction and functions of the Commissions proposed
under both the Bills reveals that both the Bills have identical jurisdiction and functions
on various aspects of Medical Education and Research. Under such circumstances
overlap and conflict of jurisdiction is inevitable. Wherever there is overlap and conflict
of jurisdiction between more than one agency on a particular subject, the ultimate
sufferer would be its objective i.e. development of medical education and medical
research. The Committee is not in agreement with the Ministry’s contention that
Health Research requires a forum like National Commission on Higher Education.
There is a separate department for Medical Research mandated with the responsibility
of development of various aspects of Medical Research and coordination between various
National and International Agencies engaged in Medical Research. In the given
circumstances, the Committee is of the opinion that it would not be appropriate to keep
Medical Education and Medical Research under the jurisdiction of more than one
Agency and Ministry. It would not serve any purpose and rather it would hamper its
development. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that both Medical Education
and Medical Research should be brought under the purview of the proposed National
Commission envisaged in the Bill. The Ministry may appropriately address this issue
while revising the Bill.
(xi) The Committee notes that the medical education and healthcare under AYUSH has not
been brought under the Bill. The Committee, therefore, heard the views of the
Secretaries of Departments of Health and Family Welfare and AYUSH. Both the
Departments of Health and Family Welfare and Department of AYUSH desired to keep
the Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy out of the ambit of the present Bill
on the ground that the Allopathy and the Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
are completely different and the latter needs focussed attention for proper development.
It was, therefore, proposed to be kept on a separate footing due to the apprehensions
that if they were brought under one Commission, the focussed attention of the AYUSH
may be lost. It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that a separate
Department was created in 1995 for Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy to
give focussed attention and later it was named as Department of AYUSH in 2003. A
separate policy known as ‘National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine and

30
Homoeopathy’ was also formulated in 2002. The Committee cannot understand the
rationale behind having two separate overarching bodies for two different systems of
medicine within the country. The Committee is of the view that there should be only
one overarching body and all the health/medical professions should be brought under
one single umbrella though with separate Councils. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy may also be
brought under the jurisdiction of the National Commission for Human Resources for
Health. The representatives of the Councils of the Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy may also be given representation in all the bodies, i.e., the Commission,
the Board as well as the Assessment Committee so that their interests are well taken
care of.
(xii) The Committee notes that though Health Educational Institutions, Health Institutions
and Health Education have been mentioned in the Bill, but Health Education has not
been defined while Health Educational Institution or Health Institutes have been
defined. The Committee desires that this may be amply clarified. The Committee also
desires that health education should be replaced by medical education because it is not
the Health Educational Institution, it is Medical Educational Institution which imparts
various kinds of medical education. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Health
Education, Health Education Institutions/Health Insitution may be replaced by Medical
Education/Medical Educational Institutions/Medical Institutions whereever they appear
and Medical Education may be appropriately defined.
(xiii) Similarly, distance education system as has been mentioned in Clause 2(r) is also not
acceptable to the Committee. The Committee feels that Medical Education should not
be imparted through distance education mode and it should be a regular course.
4. The Committee has received several suggestions from various stakeholders in the form
of written representations, written submissions as well as oral evidence. The Committee has
dealt with some important suggestions made by various stakeholders and appended all the
memoranda/written submissions to the Report. The memoranda/written submissions received
from various persons/bodies had been sent to the Ministry for comments. The issues raised by
various persons/bodies in the memoranda and the written submissions and the comments of
the Ministry are appended. Some of the stakeholders have proposed amendments to various
provisions of the Bill. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare may carefully examine all the suggestions made by various stakeholders in the written
memoranda, written submissions and oral evidence and also the recommendations made by this
Committee while revising the Bill. All the apprehensions made by various stakeholders may
be appropriately addressed. If need be, the Ministry may hold another round of discussions
with all the stakeholders before finalizing the fresh Bill.
5. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry may withdraw this Bill and
bring forward a fresh Bill after sufficiently addressing all the views, suggestions and the
concerns expressed. Before finalising the fresh Bill, the Ministry may hold discussions with all
the stakeholders including the State Governments.

31
MINUTES

33
V
FIFTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 24 th January, 2012, in Committee Room
‘D’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Dr. Monazir Hassan
8. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
9. Shri P. Lingam
10. Dr. Jyoti Mridha
11. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
12. Shri M.K. Raghavan
13. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
14. Shri Ratan Singh
15. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health And Family Welfare
1. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Debasis Panda, Joint Secretary

34
2. In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee, Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, member of the
Committee was elected to the Chair. At the outset, he welcomed Members of the Committee and
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the Secretary, Department
of Health and Family Welfare on the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011.
3. The Committee then heard the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare on the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011. The Secretary
gave a brief background on the Bill.
4. Thereafter, the Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare made a power-point
presentation. The presentation included the composition of Commission, mode of appointment and
distinctive features i.e. power of Central Government to issue directions on issue of policy; power to
remove Chairman of Bodies constituted under it by the Central Government, provision for punishment
under clauses 75-85 which included imprisonment; mandate given to State Governments to form
councils within three years from the passing of the Act; renewal of registration after every ten years;
maintenance of live registers; provision for overseas citizens of India to practice in the country, etc.
5. During the course of the meeting, the members raised some queries including Administrative
Control of Ministry over the Commission; need for bringing such a bill; reasons of exclusion of
traditional system of medicine (AYUSH) from the ambit of Bill; need for bringing physiotherapists
under the separate council; details of medical and dental colleges in Government and private sectors;
details of countries which have such overarching regulator for health sector; rationale behind setting
up of separate State Councils; impact of the Bill on simplification of procedures. The Committee
sought to have details regarding number of seats in Government and private medical colleges; and
copy of Act governing General Medical Council of United Kingdom, composition of the drafting
Committee and Task Force alongwith details of the meetings of the Committee/ Task force and
verbatim records of the proceedings; etc. The Secretary and other officers of the Department of
Health and Family Welfare answered some of the queries. The Committee directed the Secretary,
Department of Health and Family Welfare to send written replies to queries which remained unanswered,
within a week’s time.
6. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.

35
VI
SIXTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 27 th February, 2012, in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
6. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ashok Argal
8. Shrimati Harsimrat Kaur Badal
9. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
10. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
11. Shri P. Lingam
12. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
14. Shri M.K. Raghavan
15. Shri Ratan Singh
16. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
Special Invitee
Dr. Anup Kumar Saha, Lok Sabha
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Department of AYUSH
1. Shri Anil Kumar, Secretary
35

36
2. Shri Bala Prasad, Joint Secretary
3. Shri V .S. Gaur, Joint Secretary
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D. R. Meena, Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Council
2. Shri N. R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri P. K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri Debasish Panda, Joint Secretary
Department of Health Research
Dr. V . M. Katoch, Secretary
2. In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee, Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, Member of the
Committee was elected to the Chair. At the outset, he welcomed Members of the Committee and
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the Secretaries of the
Departments of Health and Family Welfare, AYUSH, Health Research, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs & Additional Secretary of the Legislative
Department, Ministry of Law and Justice on the issue of inclusion of various disciplines of AYUSH
under the ambit of the National Commission for Human Resources for Health (NCHRH) Bill, 2011 and
research related aspects in the Bill.
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretary, Department of AYUSH on the issues of
inclusion of various disciplines of AYUSH in the ambit of the Bill. The Secretary, during his deposition,
inter alia , made the following submissions: (i) There is need to regulate, protect and promote the
traditional Indian system of medicines. (ii) There has been tremendous progress in AYUSH since 1995
when the Department of AYUSH was set up as an independent Department. (iii) The requirements of
Indian systems of medicine in hospitals as well as in teaching colleges are different from the Allopathic
system of medicine and if both the systems of medicines i.e. modern and traditional are put under
a single Commission, Indian systems of medicines may lose focus as needed to nurture them. (iv) The
Department of AYUSH was created to give boost and prominence to Indian systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy and take them out from the shadow of modern medicine and if it does not get separate
Commission, it will revert back to the pre-1995 position. The Secretary also solicited the Committee’s
support for a separate Commission for Indian Systems of Medicines and Homoeopathy. Thereafter, the
Members raised some queries which were answered by Secretary of the Department.
4. The Committee, then, heard the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare on the
issue of inclusion of AYUSH under the NCHRH, Bill, 2011. The Health Secretary inter alia  informed
that the modern system of medicine and the traditional systems of medicine are two different
approaches and bringing them together under a single regulatory body may result in AYUSH getting
relegated as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system. He also informed that the
proceedings for drafting the Bill were initiated by a task force established under the Chairmanship of
Dr. M.K. Bhan. To finalize the implementation of the recommendations of the said task force, another
task force was set up which decided to exclude Indian traditional system of medicine from the ambit
of the NCHRH Bill.

37
5. Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Health Research deposed before the Committee. In
reply to a query, he informed the Committee that the research was part of the said Bill and was
included in Clause 30 of the Bill which states that “ The Board shall take measures to facilitate and
promote academic studies and research in emerging areas of health education with focus on professional
health education and to ensure uniform augmentation of trained specialists and super specialists, to
achieve excellence in these and connected areas”. He, however, admitted that the word “research” did
not find a mention in the Preamble. The Members were of the opinion that research aspect should
be reflected in the ‘Preamble’ and directed the Department of Health and Family Welfare to make
necessary amendments in the said Bill. Members raised queries which were replied to by the
witnesses. The Committee then directed the Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare to
send written replies to queries which remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 4.01 
P.M.

38
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 20 th March, 2012, in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Monazir Hassan
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
6. Shri P. Lingam
7. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
10. Shri M.K. Raghavan
11. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
12. Shri Ratan Singh
13. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed members of the Committee and briefed them about the
agenda of the meeting. * * *
3. The Chairman then recapitulated the progress of the work done so far on the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health (NCHRH) Bill, 2011.
** *
38
*** Pertains to other matters.

39
4. The Committee also discussed the issue regarding inclusion of various disciplines of AYUSH
in the ambit of the Bill and decided that the same may be taken up when the Bill is considered.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. The Committee adjourned at 10.45 
A.M.
*** Pertains to other matters.

40
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 7 th June, 2012, in Room No. 62, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
4. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
5. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
6. Dr. Monazir Hassan
7. Shri P. Lingam
8. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
10. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
11. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Pharmacy Council of India (PCI)
1. Shri D. Chakraborty, Vice-President, PCI, Kolkata (West Bengal)
2. Prof. M.D. Karvekar, Bangalore, Karnataka
3. Dr. F.V . Manvi, Belgaum, Karnataka
4. Mrs. Archna Mudgal, Registrar-cum-Secretary, PCI, New Delhi
5. Shri G. C. Labra, Consultant.
6. Shri H. N. Yadav, Consultant
40

41
Representatives of Indian Nursing Council (INC)
1. Mr. T. Dileep Kumar, President, INC
2. Dr. Manju Vatsa, Principal, College of Nursing, AIIMS
3. Dr. Surekha Sama, Principal, Deen Dayal Upadhyay School of Nursing
4. Shri V .S.R. Krishna, Advocate, INC
5. Ms. K. S. Bharti, Joint Secretary, INC
Representatives of Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH)
1. Dr. Ramjee Singh, President
2. Dr. Arun N. Bhasme, Vice-President, CCH
3. Dr. Lalit Verma, Secretary
Representatives of Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM)
1. Shri Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, President, CCIM
2. Dr. Ved Prakash Tyagi, Vice-President (Ayurved)
3. Prof. Hakim Syed Khaleefathullah, Vice-President (Unani)
4. Dr. V . Stanley Jones, Vice-President (Siddha)
5. Dr. P.R. Sharma, Secretary, CCIM
6. Dr. Pradanya, Ayurved Expert, CCIM
Representatives of Legislative Department
1. Dr. G . Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them about
the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the representatives of Pharmacy Council of India,
Indian Nursing Council, Central Council of Homoeopathy and Central Council of Indian Medicine on
the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011.
3. The Committee then heard the views of Shri. D. Chakraborty, Vice-President, Pharmacy
Council of India, on the said Bill. He stated that pharmacy has both health orientation and industrial
orientation and the issues have not been addressed in NCHRH Bill, 2011 in its present form. He
highlighted issues like composition of pharmacy council in the said Bill, purpose behind separate State
and Central registration; composition of State Councils not finding any mention in the Bill, no
representation of pharmacy in the Board and the three Committees formed under ambit of NCHRH Bill;
conflict between existing assessment and examination committee in Pharmacy Council of India under
AICTE and Pharmacy Act 1948 and the committee as proposed in the NCHRH Bill etc. He suggested
that the term Medical Colleges/Institutes wherever exists in the Bill should be replaced by ‘Health
Institutions’ to also include pharmacy. He further stated that Diploma in Pharmacy should be a
recognized qualification. He further stated that PCI wants pharmacy to be integrated into mainstream
health care delivery system and is in favour of the Bill with some modifications.
4. Thereafter, Mr. T. Dileep Kumar, President, INC, apprised the Committee about the ideal
viz-a-viz present statistics of nurse to patient and physician ratio and nursing census project, Universal
health coverage, nurse midwifery practitioner program etc. He also suggested that there is need to
focus on strengthening the existing nursing organization structure.

42
5. The Committee then heard the views of Shri Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, President, CCIM.
He stated that CCIM is not in favour of inclusion of Indian System of Medicine in NCHRH Bill, 2011.
He justified the non-inclusion of Indian Systems of Medicine in NCHRH Bill, stating that they are based
on different ideologies, concepts and practice; there are conflicts of views between allopathic and
homoeopathic doctors; there would be difficulty in formulation of policies of Indian system of
medicine on global level, etc. He also informed about the current initiatives taken to standardize the
education and practice of Indian Systems of Medicine. Thereafter, Dr. Ramjee Singh, President,
Central Council of Homoeopathy discussed the development in the field of Homoeopathy since
Council’s constitution and stated that homoeopathy has not developed much and a lot still needs to
be done to promote it so as to make it a part of NCHRH Bill, 2011. He also stated that there is need
to enhance the autonomy and budgetary allocations for Homoeopathy.
6. During the course of the meeting, the Members raised queries some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The Committee directed the witnesses to send written replies to queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
7. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

43
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 8 th June, 2012, in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri. Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
6. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
7. Dr. Monazir Hassan
8. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
9. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai
10. Shri P. Lingam
11. Dr. Jyoti Mridha
12. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
13. Shri M.K. Raghavan
14. Shri Ratan Singh
15. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Medical Council of India (MCI)
1. Prof. K. K. Talwar, Chairman, Board of Governors (BoG), MCI
2. Dr. (Prof) H. S. Rissam, Member, BoG, MCI
43

44
Representatives of Dental Council of India (DCI)
1. Dr. Dibyandu Majumdar, President
2. Col. S.K. Ojha, Secretary, DCI
3. Mr. M.L. Meena, Law officer
Representatives of Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Council
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them about
the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the representatives of the Board of Governors of
Medical Council of India and Dental Council of India on the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health Bill, 2011.
3. The Committee first heard Prof. K. K. Talwar, Chairman, Medical Council of India on the Bill.
While supporting the structure of the said Bill in general, he submitted that the Bill would result in
imbibing high sense of professionalism and interaction among all the councils which is lacking in
current scenario and would further clear out division of responsibilities. He, however, felt that there
is need to redefine the selection committee. He also stated that if regulations are followed and proper
implementation is done, the Bill would be able to achieve its intended objectives. The Members also
discussed other issues like state of health research, distortions in Medical Council of India, need for
more medical colleges, graduate and Post graduate seats in medical colleges, duration of rural
internship etc. Further, Dr. Talwar also stated that the quality of medical education has degraded since
last 2-3 decades.
4. Thereafter, Dr. Dibyandu Majumdar, President, Dental Council of India (DCI) stated that the
NCHRH Bill is unconstitutional and is against the policy of DCI. Clauses 100 and 101 are undemocratic
since there are no elections; Clause 115(2) is autocratic; there are less number of members in the
newly formed committees; roles of State councils have not been defined except to maintain registers
and attending seminars etc. He also informed the Committee that there are 290 dental colleges across
the country out of which 40 are Government colleges. He further apprised the Committee about the
new initiatives being undertaken or proposed by DCI including starting satellite centers by various
colleges to provide free dental services, three months mandatory rural internship for dental graduates,
provision of dental surgeon at primary health centers, increase in post graduate seats etc. He suggested
that the current process of getting approvals for dental colleges should be reversed, there should be
more authority to DCI, there is need for transparency in inspection process and to increase number
of staff in Government colleges. He also added that the existing councils should be strengthened
instead of abolishing them.
5. During the course of the meeting, the members raised some queries which were answered by
the witnesses. The Committee directed the witnesses to send written replies to queries which remained
unanswered, within a week’s time.
6. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee adjourned at 1.30 
P.M.

45
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 5 th July, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Rasheed Masood
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ashok Argal
8. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
9. Dr. Monazir Hassan
10. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
11. Shri Datta Meghe
12. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
14. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
15. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
WITNESSES
I. Indian Medical Association
1. Prof. (Dr). G.K. Ramachandrappa, National President
45

46
2. Dr. N. Appa Rao, National Leader
3. Dr. S. Arul Rhaj, Past National President
4. Dr. Ajay Kumar, Past National President
5. Dr. D.R. Rai, Hony. Secretary General
6. Dr. V . C. Shanmuganandan, Joint Secretary
II. Delhi Medical Association, New Delhi
1. Dr. Harish Gupta, President
2. Dr. Anil Aggarwal, President Elect
3. Dr. A. K. Israni, Sr. Vice-President
4. Dr. G. S. Grewal, Vice President
5. Dr. Vijay K. Kohli, Hony, State Secretary
6. Dr. Atul Gupta, Hony. Finance Secretary
7. Dr. Anil Goyal, Member
III. Indian Association of Physiotherapy (Central)
1. Prof. (Dr.) Umasankar Mohanty, President, Indian Association of Physiotherapists,
Karnataka
2. Dr. Sanjiv Jha, General Secretary
IV. Physiotherapists' Forum of AIIMS, New Delhi
1. Dr. V . P. Gupta, President
2. Dr. Ganesh Meena, General Secretary
V . Indian Association of Physiotherapists, New Delhi
1. Dr. Dheerendra Kumar, Convener
2. Dr. Prabhat Ranjan, Treasurer
VI. Delhi Govt. Physiotherapy Association
Dr. Anjali Bhatnagar
VII. Physiotherapy Forum for Physiotherapists
1. Dr. Praveen Kumar
2. Dr. Ajay Kumar
VIII. Amar Jyoti Institute of Physiotherapy, Delhi
Dr. Hemant Juneja, Associate Professor ans Head of Department
IX. Society for Research and Evidence Translation in Physiotherapy, Delhi;
1. Shri K. Haider, General Secretary
2. Shri Sushil Gupta, President
3. Shri Fuzail Ahmed, Executive Member
4. Shri Md. Moin, Executive Member

47
X. Legislative Department
1. Dr. G . Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri N. R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel
XI. Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e. hearing views of the representatives of Indian Medical Association, Delhi
Medical Association, Indian Association of Physiotherapy (Central), and some other Physiotherapist
Forums/Associations on the National Commission for Human Resource for Health Bill, 2011. The
Chairman also informed Members that the Committee was earlier granted extension of time till
31
st May, 2012 and again till 15 th July, 2012, for presentation of its Report on the aforesaid Bill. The
Committee, however, felt that since a large number of stakeholders are yet to be heard and memoranda
received on the said Bill also need thorough examination which would entail considerable time, it would
not be possible for it to complete all stages of consideration of the Bill and present its Report before
15
th July, 2012. The Committee, therefore, decided to seek further extension of time till the last week
of the Monsoon Session of Parliament 2012, for presenting its Report on the Bill, and authorized its
Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the purpose.
3.  The Chairman also informed the Members that the Committee had earlier sought the written
views of all State/UT Governments. However, only 6 State/UT Governments have so far responded.
He therefore suggested that the Committee should hear Chief Secretaries of all the remaining State/
UT Governments and also representatives of medical colleges/institutes of different States before
finalizing its views on the Bill. The Committee agreed to the suggestion and decided that it should hear
Chief Secretaries of all the remaining State/UT Governments including some medical institutions/
colleges/ medical universities functioning under State Governments.
4. Thereafter, the Committee first heard views of Dr. S. Arul Rhaj, Past National President, IMA
on NCHRH Bill, 2011. He presented his views by way of a power-point presentation. While strongly
opposing the said Bill, he inter alia  submitted that the current framework of the Bill would not allow
it to achieve its listed objectives and that the case for abolishing the existing institutions/councils is
unconvincing. He further stated that though the Bill had defined the word ‘Medical’ as ‘Modern
Medical’ and ‘Medical Practitioner’ as ‘Modern Medical Practitioner’; it has failed in defining Dentistry,
AYUSH, Nursing, Pharmacy, Pharmacist and Paramedical Personnel; etc. He also lamented the fact that
the Bill in its present form would seriously erode powers of the State Governments. He concluded by
stating that there was a need to retain the autonomous representative character of the existing medical
and allied councils which were functioning in a transparent manner.
5. The Committee then heard Dr. Harish Gupta, President, Delhi Medical Association on the said
Bill. During his deposition, while endorsing the views of IMA, he added that all members of three
bodies under NCHRH Bill, 2011 would be appointed members, thereby leading to loss of their
democratic character. He was, therefore, of the view that there is a need for more elected members
in the envisaged bodies to ensure that the democratic character of these bodies is kept intact. He also
stated that the prime objective of the said bill is to ensure better Human Resource Development and
better Health education but was of the opinion that this could not be achieved with the proposed
system. He was of the view that the autonomous character of the existing MCI should be restored.
6. The Committee also heard the views of certain Physiotherapy Associations on the Bill by way
of power point presentations. During their deposition, they inter alia  stated that the 31
st report of the

48
Committee had strongly recommended for formation of a separate Physiotherapy Council. They also
stated that even the Planning Commission Report 2002-2007 had recommended favorably in this
regard. They were, therefore, of the view that there is a need to include independent Physiotherapy
Council in the present Bill to ensure better regulation of Physiotherapy profession.
7. During the course of the meeting, the members raised queries, some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The Committee directed the witnesses to send written replies to queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
8. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M.

49
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th July, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Rasheed Masood
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
8. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
9. Dr. Monazir Hassan
10. Shri P. Lingam
11. Dr. Chinta Mohan
12. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
13. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
14. Shri M.K. Raghavan
15. Shri J.M. Aaron Rashid
16. Shri Ratan Singh
17. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
National Board of Examinations, New Delhi
1. Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President
49

50
2. Dr. Bipin Batra, Executive Director
3. Prof. P. S. Maini, Vice-President
4. Dr. S. Jalal, Vice-President
Indian Association of Physiotherapists, Mumbai
1. Dr. Ali Irani, President
2. Dr. A. K. Bhatnagar
3. Dr. Koshy Mathai
4. Dr. Deepak Kumar
5. Dr. Nitesh Bansal
Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University, Lucknow
Prof. Aseem Prakash Tikku, Faculty of Dental Sciences
Individual
Dr. Rohit Khanna, Lucknow
All India Dental Hygienist Association, New Delhi
1. Shri S. K. Pandey, President
2. Shri Baljeet Singh, Vice President
3. Shri S. K. Shukla, General Secretary
4. Shri Radhey Shigam, Member
5. Shri Yogender Sharma, Member
6. Ms. Madhu Sharma, Member
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e. hearing views of the representatives of  the National Board of Examinations;
Indian Association of Physiotherapists, Mumbai; All India Dental Hygienist Association, New Delhi;
Prof. Aseem Prakash Tikku, Faculty of Dental Sciences, Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University,
Lucknow; and Dr. Rohit Khanna, Lucknow on the National Commission for Human Resources for
Health (NCHRH) Bill, 2011.
3. Thereafter, the Committee first heard views of Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President, National
Board of Examinations (NBE) on NCHRH Bill, 2011. He gave an overview of the pressing need for
redefinition of health education, health system connectivity, need for alignment of the health care
delivery system with the needs of the country, functioning of NBE since its inception, initiatives taken
by the NBE. While not opposing the vision of the present Bill he voiced concerns on the abolition of
the existing National Board of Examinations under the proposed Bill which would lead to a complete
watering down of the functions being carried out by the present NBE. He was of the view that there
is a need to protect and preserve the functions of NBE. He also pointed out a number of infirmities
in respect of certain Clauses of the proposed Bill viz. Clauses 16(1)(e),(f);17;19; 24;30(d),(e);37(1);
30(2)(t);24(3);24(4);28(1), etc. He emphasized the need to integrate different streams of medical
education but stated that the Bill does not have any provision in this regard. He concluded his
presentation by stating that although the fundamental autonomy of the individual councils has been
targeted, the ethical standards and the need for integration among various professions has not been
addressed to. Moreover, the proposed Bill is heavily tilted in favour of regulation by bureaucrats.
4.  The Committee then heard Dr. Ali Irani, President, Indian Association of Physiotherapists,
Mumbai on the said Bill. He inter-alia gave the history, growth and significance, of physiotherapy in

51
India. He also expressed the need for inclusion of a separate council physiotherapy in the said Bill as
had also been recommended in the 31 st Report of the Committee on the Physiotherapy Central Councils
Bill, 2007.
5. The Committee further heard the views of Aseem Prakash Tikku, Faculty of Dental Sciences,
Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University, Lucknow and Dr. Rohit Khanna, Lucknow on the Bill.
Prof Tikku, during his deposition before the Committee welcomed the Bill, stating that the Bill was
well-drafted. However, he advocated that some of the part-time members of the envisaged Commission
should be elected and the rest may be selected. With regard to the Dental Council of India, he
informed the Committee that the present council was headed by private practitioners for the last
twenty years which was against the Government policy. Dr. Rohit Khanna also was in favour of
nominated persons. He, however, was of the view that eminent persons of medical fraternity should
only be nominated to the Commission. Lastly, he concluded by submitting that State Councils must
have more teeth to curb malpractices and defined powers must be there to take action at that level.
6. The Committee finally heard the views of Shri S. K. Pandey, President, All India Dental
Hygienist Association, on the said Bill. He was of the view that Dental Hygiene may be given a
separate status in the proposed Bill. He also stressed on the need to upgrade the present Dental
Hygiene diploma by lateral entry to the Bachelor of Dental Sciences (BDS) as it would result in
horizontal and vertical growth and also open promotion avenues which are not present there under the
scheme of Dental Hygiene diploma.
7. During the course of the meeting, the members raised queries, some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The Committee directed the witnesses to send written replies to queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
8. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 
P.M. to meet again on 18 th July, 2012.

52
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 18 th July, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Balbir Punj
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
8. Shri Rasheed Masood
LOK SABHA
9.  Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Dr. Monazir Hassan
11. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
12. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai
13. Shri P. Lingam
14. Shri Datta Meghe
15. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
16. Dr. Chinta Mohan
17. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
18. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
19. Shri M.K. Raghavan
20. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
21. Shri Ratan Singh
22. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
52

53
WITNESSES
1. Dr. H.N. Tripathi, Chief Medical Superintendent, Sahara Hospital, Lucknow
2. Prof. D. K. Gupta, Vice Chancellor, Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University,
Lucknow.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e. hearing views of the representatives of  Prof. D.K. Gupta, Vice Chancellor,
Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University, Lucknow, and  Dr. H.N. Tripathi, Chief Medical
Superintendent, Sahara Hospital, Lucknow, on the National Commission for Human Resource for
Health Bill, 2011.
3. Thereafter, the Committee first heard views of Dr. Tripathi, President, Chief Medical
Superintendent, Sahara Hospital, Lucknow on NCHRH Bill, 2011. He stated that academic and
intellectual independence should be protected. He was of the view that there was a need in the present
Bill to involve a more measured and balanced view towards the Medical Council of India (MCI) and
there was a need to include more medical and other eminent persons form the corporate and
Government Hospitals and if need be a Search Committee may be set up to help in the selection of
suitable persons to the top posts in MCI. He was of the view that the present Bill would discourage
youngsters to enter the profession as there was too much regulation under the Bill. Further, the present
MCI Act was fine, however a stringent auditing system was the need of the hour. He pointed out that
the Bill bars the aggrieved party from going to court which will give rise to unethical practices. He
further opined that the MCI body can be strengthened by including eminent medical professionals for
shorter terms; there is a need for strengthening the auditing and monitioring system; decentralization
of powers must be done; severe punishment must be meted out for malpractices; Advisory Committee
should be given powers to monitor the office bearers, etc.
4.  The Committee then heard Prof. D.K. Gupta, Vice Chancellor, Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj
Medical University, Lucknow on the Bill. He inter-alia submitted that the proposed overarching council
in the Bill should be governed by persons of eminence and impeccable integrity from the medical
fraternity and no bureaucrat should be there; selection process of the Chairman should be transparent;
the chairman and members of the envisaged Commission, members of National Board, National
evaluation and selection Committee and National/State Councils should be appointed by a search
selection committee, etc.
5. During the course of the meeting, the members raised queries, some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The Committee directed the witnesses to send written replies to queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
6. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to circulate for the perusal of Members a
document of Medical Council of India titled – Vision, 2015.
7. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 12.00 Noon .

54
 XIX
NINTEENTH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 30 th July, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
5. Shri Rasheed Masood
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ashok Argal
7. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
8. Dr. Monazir Hassan
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Datta Meghe
11. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
12. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
13. Shri Arvind Kumar Sharma
14. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
15. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
1. Prof. R.C. Deka, Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
2. Prof. Y .K. Chawla, Director, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh
54

55
3. Dr. P.H. Ananthanarayanan, Senior Professor and Head, Department of Biochemistry,
Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry
4. Dr. P. Satishchandra, Director-Vice-Chancellor, National Institute of Mental Health and
Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the
agenda of the meeting, i.e. hearing views of  Prof. R.C. Deka, Director, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi; Prof. Y .K. Chawla, Director, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh; Dr. P.H. Ananthanarayanan, Senior Professor and Head (Department of
Biochemistry), Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry; and
Dr. P. Satishchandra, Director-Vice-Chancellor, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences
(NIMHANS), Bangalore on the National Commission for Human Resource for Health (NCHRH)
Bill, 2011.
3. Thereafter, the Committee first heard views of Prof. R.C. Deka, Director, All India Institute
of Medical Sciences on NCHRH Bill, 2011. He submitted before the Committee that there was a need
to take a fresh look at the health needs of the country as the present system had created inequitable
distribution of human resources for health and medical institutions in the country. He dwelt into the
vision provided by the Bhore Committee in envisioning the health care needs of the country following
which by creation of an Act of the Parliament, Medical Council of India (MCI) came into being in
1956. He therefore was of the view that before passage of the proposed Bill there was a need for
serious introspection of the deficiencies in the present health care delivery system and creation of an
expert Committee on the lines of Bhore Committee to examine the need for healthcare professionals.
He delineated the lacunae existing in the structure of the proposed Bill viz. aims and objectives of the
Bill being not in line with the rapid advancements in the field of Medical sciences. He also stated that
there was need for new knowledge in medical field owing to new technical advancements in the
medical field all over the world, greater delegation of powers to the State Government, universities and
medical institutions, change in the nomenclature ‘Health Education’ to ‘Health Professional Education’,
participation of State Governments and Private Institutions/NGOs in framing of the Bill, creation of
civil services for Health to ensure equitable distribution of Health care personnel and quality assurances
thereof, inclusion of Health Research in the proposed Bill, comparative study of systems prevalent in
other countries. He further touched up on issues like lack of any mention of Institutions of National
importance in the Bill; creation of a medical practitioners’ tribunal to take care of malpractices in health
care; and owing to central quota in State Medical Institutions, need for granting there central
assistance etc.
4. The Committee then heard Prof. Y .K. Chawla, Director, Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Education & Research (PGIMER) on the Bill. He inter-alia submitted that even though the proposed
Bill was a good document, it was silent on status of Institutions of National importance like PGIMER.
He also highlighted the absence of defined procedure for regulation of private medical colleges under
the said Bill, need for pan India registration, absence of clarity in doctoral and post doctoral medical
qualifications in Schedule II of the Bill and doctoral and post doctoral dental qualification in Schedule
III of the Bill, need for inclusion of Members (primarily academic) from Medical Institutes (both
private and Government) in the Bill, need for inclusion of a clause in the Bill to include collaborations
by way of MoUs with international universities, need for inclusion of adjunct facility in the proposed
Bill, etc.
5.  The Committee then heard the views of Dr. P.H. Ananthanarayanan, Senior Professor and
Head (Department of Biochemistry), Jawaharlal Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and
Research on the Bill. He inter alia  submitted his comments on various changes/alterations required in
various provisions of the Bill viz. in Chapter II clause 7- the chairperson and other members should
give declaration of their and family members’ immovable and movable properties at the time of

56
assuming charge and every year thereafter which would be displayed on the website of the Commission;
Chapter II clause 8(1)- duration for not accepting employment by Chairman and other Members on
ceasing to hold office may be increased from 2 to 5 years; Chapter II clause 10(2)-if the period of
absence of chairperson is less than 1 week, the acting chairperson shall not take any policy decision
or major financial decisions; Each Institution should get permission from the Commission in order to
ensure the quality of medical education. In case of delay in getting response from the Commission,
a mechanism or agency should be created /named to whom the affected Institution can approach;
Chapter III (National Board for Health Education) clause 30(2)- besides organising the above it should
also provide financial support for organising seminars,trainings,etc.; Chapter IV clause 37(4)- may be
changed from “same evaluation and assessment agency” to “ same evaluation and assessment agency
or persons”, Chapter IV- clause 40(1) may meet at least once in two months (considering their
responsibility) and the quorum should be at least three(The Total number of members in this
Committee is 7); Chapter V (National Councils and State Councils) clause 57(1)- reduction of
enrolment period from 10 years to 5 years.
6.  The Committee finally heard the views of Dr. P. Satishchandra, Director-Vice-Chancellor,
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS) on the Bill. He inter alia
submitted his comments on various changes/alterations required in various provisions of the Bill viz.
the Bill should be named National Commission for Human Resources for Health Sciences Bill, 2011
instead of the NCHRH Bill, 2011; in Chapter II, qualification for the members should be reduced to
10 years for Professor and additional professor; experience for being a member of the Selection
Committee be reduced to 15 years to encourage younger people; make provisions for promoting
exchange of visiting professors from Institutions of Higher Education and Research to Institutions of
Health Research; Chapter VIII, all regional medical centres should have a Department of Medical
Biotechnology in addition to all the other departments with facility for training; every regional medical
centre must have a separate Department of Disaster Management and Critical Care; need for inclusion
of innovative approaches to teaching in Health Sciences especially Medical Science, etc.
7. During the course of the meeting, the members raised queries, some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The Committee directed the witnesses to send written replies to queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
8. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M. to meet again on 31 st July, 2012 .

57
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 31 st July, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
3. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
4. Shri Derek O’ Brien
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Ashok Argal
6. Shrimati Bhavana Gawali
7. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
8. Shri Datta Meghe
9. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
10. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
11. Shri M.K. Raghavan
12. Shri Ratan Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
1. Shri Sanjay Mitra, Principal Secretary, Government of West Bengal
2. Shri Rajesh Kishore, Principal Secretary, Department of H&FW, Gujarat
2. The Committee elected Shri Derek O’ Brien to the Chair due to slight delay in arrival of the
Chairman of the Committee to the meeting on account of some prior commitments. He informed the
Members that initially Chief secretaries of eight States were invited before the Committee, that is, of
Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat and Maharashtra.
However the Chief Secretaries of the States of Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, and
Uttar Pradesh had sought time ranging from 15 days to two months to furnish their views in writing
57

58
and sought exemption from appearance for the meeting while the Principal Secretaries of Gujarat and
West Bengal respectively, were present to tender their views before the Committee. The State
Government of Maharashtra had sent an officer of the rank of Joint Director in place of Chief
Secretary to brief the Committee. The Chairman of the Committee then joined the meeting. The
Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda of the meeting, i.e.
hearing views of Shri Sanjay Mitra, Principal Secretary, Government of West Bengal and Shri Rajesh
Kishore, Principal Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welefare, Gujarat on the National
Commission for Human Resource for Health (NCHRH) Bill, 2011. The Committee expressed its
displeasure and decided not to hear views of the Joint Director of the Maharashtra Government and
directed to the Secretariat to convey its displeasure to the State Government.
3. Thereafter, the Committee first heard views of Shri Sanjay Mitra, Principal Secretary, Government
of West Bengal on NCHRH Bill, 2011. He inter alia  highlighted before the Committee issues like the
present Bill promoting curtailment of self-regulation and regulation by bureaucrats, need for strengthening
the existing Councils instead of bringing an overarching Council, need for a role of State Governments,
in selection of Chairman and Members of the National Commission, Board and the Committee as
proposed in the Bill, selection of Chairman on the lines similar to the Chairman of the National Human
Rights Commission (NHRC), need to specify the status of the existing councils in the proposed Bill,
lengthy appeals procedure under the proposed Bill,, continuance of existing Acts/regulations, etc.
4.  The Committee then heard Shri Rajesh Kishore, Principal Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welefare, Gujarat on the Bill. He highlighted issues like the need for reforms in medical
education and importance of setting standards in medical education; he apprehended that the proposed
bill was too lengthy and so overarching that it might lead to difficulties in coordination and consultative
mechanism between the National Commission, National Board for Health Education, National Evaluation
and Assessment Committee, the three bodies proposed in the Bill. He also highlighted that the bodies
proposed in the Bill are largely nominative in nature; absence of role of State Governments in the Bill
was a serious drawback as the concerned State being aware of its needs was the best judge to grant
permission for setting up medical institution in the concerned state; Medical education being in the
concurrent list there was a need to have representation of State Governments in the proposed
Commission and Board; the institutional framework proposed in the Bill would make things more
complicated etc.
5. During the course of the meeting, the members raised queries, some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The Committee directed the witnesses to send written replies to queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
6. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 
P.M.

59
XXI
TWENTY-FIRST MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 17 th August, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Derek O’ Brien
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
6. Dr. Monazir Hassan
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
8. Shri Datta Meghe
9. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
10. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
11. Shri M.K. Raghavan
12. Shri Ratan Singh
13. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri K. Desiraju, Special Secretary
3. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the members of the Committee and
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare in light of suggestions received from various stakeholders/experts on the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011. The Chairman apprised Members that on the
basis of inputs received so far on the Bill, he was of the opinion that the Bill was an effort to fully
centralize all power and jurisdiction pertaining to Health Education with the Union Ministry of Health
59

60
and Family Welfare. The proposed Bill while seeking to vest all powers and jurisdiction with the Union
endeavours to neglect State Governments. Public Health and Health Education have been kept under
the State List and Concurrent list respectively and any restriction on these powers is irrational because
implementation thereof is not only difficult but impossible without cooperation of the States. He further
informed that centralization of powers leads to dictatorship and arbitrariness and thus weakens the
framework of democracy and contrary to this, decentralization of powers strengthens democratic
roots and conventions. However, the proposed Bill seeks to entirely ignore interests and jurisdiction
of States and breaches autonomy of all existing Institutions of Health education thereby striking at
roots of their democratic functioning. Therefore, it would not be advisable to support the Bill in its
present shape. The Committee was also of the view that just because of a crunch of human resources
in the field of health services, powers and jurisdiction of States cannot be encroached upon, nor could
the Committee afford to dilute the autonomy and democratic functioning of institutions and institutes
engaged in the field of health education. The Committee underlined the fact that meeting the shortage
of human resources would not be possible without the co-operation of States. He was, therefore, of
the view that the Government may be asked to withdraw the Bill and introduce a revised Bill ensuring
protection of interests of the States and their participation. The revised Bill should also ensure the
democratic functioning and autonomy of the medical institutions while fixing their accountability.
Department of AYUSH should also be brought under the purview of the Bill instead of setting up of
a separate Commission. The proposed Commission should be an independent and autonomous regulator.
A mechanism should be put in place to ensure its accountability. Accordingly, appropriate recommendations
should be made in the report.
3. The Committee then heard the views of the Secretary and other officials, Department of Health
and Family Welfare on the proposed Bill to seek clarifications in the light of suggestions/comments
received from various stakeholders/experts and evidence tendered by a number of stakeholders. During
his deposition, the Secretary stated that his Ministry had received 53 memoranda from the Rajya Sabha
Secretariat containing views and suggestions by different organizations and individuals and the comments
thereon had been furnished. The Secretary highlighted the fact that the dominant view that emerged
from the memoranda furnished to the Committee and evidences tendered before it was that there was
an urgent need for reforms in the health education sector. He also emphasized the fact that AYUSH
should be kept outside the ambit of the Bill as bringing it under a single regulatory body may result
in AYUSH being relegated to an ancillary stream in the overall health care delivery system. Apprising
the Committee of the consultative process undertaken prior to drafting of the Bill, the Secretary stated
that when the formation of the overarching body was envisaged, a task force was constituted, which
prepared a report suggesting a model for National Commission for Human Resources for Health
(NCHRH). The report was also sent to the State Governments and other stakeholders and the draft
NCHRH Bill was put on the website of the Ministry, inviting comments and suggestion thereon. He
also stated that six regional consultations had also been held in which State Governments, Vice-
Chancellors, Principals of Medical Colleges, medical practitioners, academicians and representatives of
regional IMA had participated. He informed the Committee that the Government was open to increasing
the representation of State Governments in the National Commission, Board and Committee. He
impressed upon the Committee that the Bill would not usurp any powers that currently vest with the
State Governments. The registration with the State Councils and the National Councils, bar of
jurisdiction, provision for appellate authority, status of the courses run by National Board of Examinations,
formation of additional National Councils etc. also figured in the discussion.
4. During the course of the meeting, the members raised queries, some of which were answered
by the witnesses. The Committee directed the witness to send written replies to queries which
remained unanswered, within a week’s time.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.45 
A.M.

61
XXII
TWENTY-SECOND MEETING
(2011-12)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Friday, the 28 th August, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
3. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Derek O’ Brien
5. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
6. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
8. Shri P. Lingam
9. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha
10. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
11. Shrimati Jayshreeben Kanubhai Patel
12. Shri M.K. Raghavan
13. Shri Ratan Singh
14. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the members of the Committee and
apprised them about the agenda of the meeting i.e. to consider and adopt draft Report on the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011. However, some Members felt that further
discussions were needed to be held to have clarity on the Bill in view of the apprehensions expressed
by various stakeholders. After some discussion, the Committee deferred the consideration the Report.
The Committee felt it would not be possible for it to complete all stages of consideration of the Bill
and present its Report before 31
st August, 2012 when the extended period of time for presentation of
Report expired. The Committee therefore, decided to seek further extension of time till the last day
of first week of the Winter Session of Parliament 2012, and authorized its Chairman to approach
Hon’ble Chairman for the purpose.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 10.15 A.M.
61

62
II
SECOND MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 19 th October, 2012 in Committee Room ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
3. Shri Rasheed Masood
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri H.K. Dua
7. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ashok Argal
9. Shri Kirti Azad
10. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
11. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
12. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
13. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
14. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
15. Dr. Monazir Hassan
16. Dr. Tarun Mandal
17. Shri Mahabal Mishra
18. Shri Harin Pathak
19. Shri Ramkishun
20. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
21. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
62

63
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri K. Desiraju, Special Secretary
3. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary
** *
** *
** *
I. Opening Remarks
2. The Chairman, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them of the agenda of the
meeting viz. (i) to consider and adopt the draft Report on the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health Bill, 2011 and (ii) * * *
II. Draft Report on the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011
3.  The Committee then took up for consideration draft Report on the National Commission for
Human Resources for Health (NCHRH) Bill, 2011. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the
said Report albeit with some changes suggested by the Members of the Committee. The Committee
also decided to lay Verbatim Record of proceedings on the Bill alongwith the Report. Since the House
is not in session and the last date for presentation of the Report expires on 31
st October, 2012, the
Committee decided to present the Report to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha during the inter-session
period and authorized its Chairman to present the Report to the Hon’ble Chairman.
(The Committee then adjourned at 3.25 
P.M. for tea-break to meet again at 3.40 P.M.)
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.
*** Pertains to other matters.

ANNEXURES

67
ANNEXURE-I
26
 Aug 20
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
22 Dec., 2011
Bill No. LIX of 201 1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RESOURCES
FOR HEALTH BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
l. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
NATIONAL C OMMISSION  FOR H UMAN R ESOURCES  FOR H EALTH
3. Establishment of Commission.
4. Qualification for appointment of Chairperson and Members of the Commission.
5. Selection Committee.
6. Tenure and terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
7. Declaration of interest.
8. Restrictions on re-employment.
9. General superintendence, direction and management of affairs.
10. Member to act as Chairperson, or to discharge his functions, in certain circumstances.
11. Resignation.
12. Removal and suspension of Chairperson or Member from office in certain circumstances.
13. Meetings of Commission.
14. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission.
15. Chief Executive Officer and other officers and employees of Com mission.
16. Powers and functions of Commission.

68
CLAUSES
17. Establishment of institution for imparting health education or new course of study.
18. Recognition of qualifications granted by health educational institutions in India.
19. Non-recognition of qualifications in certain cases.
20. Entry and operation of foreign health educational institutions.
21. Withdrawal of recognition.
22. Fees.
CHAPTER III
N
ATIONAL B OARD FOR H EALTH E DUCATION
23. National Board for Health Education.
24. Composition of Board.
25. Selection Committee for selection of President and members of Board and committee.
26. Transitory provision relating to Board.
27. Appointment and terms and conditions of office of President and members of Board.
28. Executive Director and other officers and employees of Board.
29. Meetings of Board.
30. Functions of Board.
31. Power to conduct certain examination.
32. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations.
33. Screening test.
CHAPTER IV
N
ATIONAL E V ALUATION AND A SSESSMENT  C OMMITTEE
34. National Evaluation and Assessment Committee.
35. Composition of Committee.
36. Terms and conditions of office of President and members of Committee.
37. Functions of Committee.
38. Power of audit and inspection of evaluation and assessment agency.
39. Executive Director and other officers and employees of Committee.
40. Meetings of Committee.
CHAPTER V
N
A TIONAL C OUNCILS  AND S TATE C OUNCILS
41. Constitution of corresponding National Councils.
42. Existing Councils to vest in Commission.
43. President, Vice-President and other members of Council to vacate their offices.

69
CLAUSES
44. Corresponding new National Councils to be guided by the directions of Central
Government.
45. References to existing Councils on and from commencement of this Act.
46. Composition of National Councils.
47. Elections to National Councils and its term.
48. President and Vice-President of National Council.
49. Settlement of disputes regarding election.
50. Meetings of National Council.
51. Functions of National Council.
52. Registrar and other officers and employees of National Council.
53. Constitution of State Councils.
54. President and Vice-President of State Council.
55. Meetings of State Council.
56. Registrar and other officers and employees of State Council.
57. Enrolment of persons.
58. Registers.
59. Duty to serve in India.
60. Prohibition to practice, etc., without enrolment.
61. Privileges of persons enrolled on National Register or State Registers.
62. Persons enrolled to notify change of place of residence or practice.
63. Supply of copies of State Register.
64. Liability of persons enrolled with respective National Councils.
65. Provisional registration of persons possessing required qualification from any
institution outside India.
66. Entry of additional qualifications.
67. Code of ethics.
68. Professional misconduct.
69. Power of National Council and State Councils to institute inquiry and to impose
penalties.
70. Appeals against decision under section 69.
71. Removal of names from National Register or State Register and restoration thereof.
72. Grievance Redressal Mechanism.
73. Power of National Council to make regulations.
74. Power of State Council to make regulations.

70
CHAPTER VI
AUDIT AND A CCOUNTS
CLAUSES
75. Grants by Central Government.
76. Constitution of Fund of Commission.
77. Accounts and audit.
78. Furnishing of returns and reports to the Central Government.
CHAPTER VII
O
FFENCES  AND P ENALTIES
79. Punishment for establishing institution, etc., without permission.
80. Penalty for contravention of section 57.
81. Penalty for contravention of section 33.
82. Punishment for furnishing information contrary to which published by institutions.
83. Offences by companies.
84. Offences by societies or trusts.
85. Cognizance of offences.
CHAPTER VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
86. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council.
87. Power of State Government to supersede State Council.
88. Declaration of interest.
89. Restrictions on re-employment.
90. Member to act as President, or to discharge his functions, in certain circumstances.
91. Restriction on holding office for more than two terms.
92. Resignation of President, Vice-President or a member of Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council.
93. Suspension and removal of President, Vice-President or a member of Board, Committee,
National Council or State Council.
94. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board, Committee, National Council
or State Council.
95. Power to appoint committees or experts.
96. Reporting by universities and institutions.
97. State or regional administrative offices.
98. Reference of dispute to Central Government.
99. Appeal against decisions of Commission.

71
CLAUSES
100. Bar of Jurisdiction.
101. Protection of action taken in good faith.
102. M embers, etc., to be public servants.
103. Powers of Commission, Board, Committee or National Council to call for information
or conduct investigations, etc.
104. Completion of courses of studies in health educational institutions.
105. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
106. Power of State Government to issue directions.
107. Commission, Board, Committee and National Council to furnish information to Central
Government.
108. Power to amend Schedules.
109. Review.
110. Act to have overriding effect.
111. Power of Central Government to make rules.
112. Power of Commission to make regulations.
113. Power of State Government to make rules.
114. Laying of rules and regulations.
115. Powers of Central Government to direct regulations to be made or to make or amend
regulations.
116. Power to remove difficulties.
117. Repeal and savings.
118. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of existing Council and National
Board of Examinations.
119. Transitory provisions.
120. Resolution of difference of openion by Joint Mechanism.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.

AS INTRODUCED IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
Bill No. LIX of 201 1
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RESOURCES FOR
HEALTH BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to consolidate the law in certain disciplines of health sector and
promote human resources in health sector and provide for
mechanism for the determination, maintenance. coordination
and regulation of standards of health education throughout
the country to ensure adequate availability of human resources
in all States and for the said purpose to establish the
National Commission for Human Resources for Health and to
supervise and regulate professional Councils in various
disciplines of health sector and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:
CHAPTER-I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for
Human Resources for Health Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and any reference in any provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the
coming into force of that provision.
73
Short title,
extent and
commencement.

74
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate statutory regulatory body” means the
University Grants Commission established under the University
Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India Council for Technical
Education established under the All India Council for Technical
Education Act, 1987, the National Council for Teacher Education
established under the National Council for Teacher Education
Act, 1993 or any other corresponding statutory regulatory body
by whatever name called regulating the higher education under
any law for the time being in force;
(b) “approved course” means a course recognised and
approved by the National Board for Health Education under this
Act;
(c) “approved institution” means a medical college, hospital,
health centre or such other institution recognised by a university
as an institution in which a person may undergo the training, if
any, required by his course of study for the award of any
recognised qualification to him;
(d) “Board” means the National Board for Health Education
constituted under section 23;
(e) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the
Commission, appointed under section 3;
(f) “code of ethics” includes integrity, objectivity,
professional competence, professional conduct, avoidance of
conflict of interest, transparency and information disclosure and
such other ethical principles as may be specified by the
regulations made by the National Council;
(g) “Commission” means the National Commission for
Human Resources for Health established under section 3;
(h) “Committee” means the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee constituted under section 34;
(i) “corresponding new National Council” in relation to an
existing Council means the body corporate specified against
such Council in column (2) of the First Schedule;
(j) “diploma” means such award, not being a degree,
granted by a health educational institution certifying that the
recipient has successfully completed a course of study of not
less than nine months duration;
(k) “discipline of health” includes medicine, dental, nursing,
pharmacy, paramedical or any other discipline as the Central
Government may notify in this behalf;
(l) “distance education” means the distance education
system as defined in clause ( e) of section 2 of the Indira
Gandhi National Open University Act, 1985;
Definitions.
3 of 1956.
52 of 1987.
73 of 1993.
50 of 1985.

75
(m) “evaluation and assessment” with its grammatical
variations means the process of quality control and assurance in
health education, whereby, as a result of inspection or
assessment, or both of the health educational institution and the
hospital affiliated thereto or any programme conducted in such
institution is recognised as conforming parameters of academic
quality and benchmarking of such academic quality determined
by the appropriate statutory regulatory authority;
(n) “evaluation and assessment agency” means an agency
recommended by the Commission under section 37;
(o) “existing Council” means the councils specified in
column (1) of the First Schedule;
(p) “foreign health educational institution” means an
institution imparting health education situated outside India;
(q) “foreign qualifications” means the recognised
qualification obtained from any university or institution situated
outside India;
(r) “health educational institution” or “health institution”
means an institution of learning including a university, an
institution deemed to be university, a college, an institute, an
institution of national importance declared as such by an Act of
Parliament, or a constituent unit of such institution, which is
imparting education in the discipline of health (whether through
conduct of regular classes or distance education system) beyond
twelve years of schooling leading to the award of a degree or
diploma;
(s) “health professional” means any person possessing the
recognised qualification who is eligible to be enrolled in the
National Register or the State Register in any of the discipline
of health and the expression “health practitioner” shall be
construed accordingly;
(t) “medical practitioner” or “medical professional” means
a person who holds a qualification granted by an authority
notified under section 3 of the Indian Medical Degrees
Act, 1916 or recognised qualification under this Act and has
enrolled himself as a medical practitioner under this Act;
(u) “medicine” means modern scientific medicine in all its
branches and includes surgery and obstetrics, but does not
include veterinary medicine and surgery;
(v) “Member” means a Member of the Commission and
includes Chairperson;
(w) “National Council” means the Medical Council of
India or the Dental Council of India or the Nursing Council of
India or the Pharmacy Council of India constituted under sub-
section ( 1), or the Paramedical Council of India, as the case
may be, constituted under sub-section ( 2), of section 41;
7 of 1916.

76
(x) “National Register” means the National Register
maintained under section 58 and shall include—
(i) the Indian Dentistry Register maintained by the
Dental Council of India;
(ii) the Indian Medical Register maintained by the
Medical Council of India;
(iii) the Indian Nursing Register maintained by the
Nursing Council of India;
(iv) the Indian Pharmacy Register maintained by
the Pharmacy Council of India;
(v) the Register of Paramedics maintained by the
Paramedical Council of India;
(y) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(z) “overseas citizen of India” means such person
registered as an overseas citizen of India under section 7A of
the Indian Citizenship Act, 1955;
(za) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the
Central Government under this Act;
(zb) “programme” means a course or programme of
study leading to the award of a degree or diploma in a health
educational institution;
(zc) “recognised qualification”,—
(a) in relation to medicine, means the qualification
included in the Second Schedule;
(b) in relation to dentistry, means the qualification
included in the Third Schedule;
(c) in relation to nursing, means the qualification
included in the Fourth Schedule;
(d) in relation to pharmacy, means the qualification
included in the Fifth Schedule; and
(e) in relation to paramedics, means the qualification
included in the Sixth Schedule;
(zd) “regulations: means regulations made under this Act;
(ze) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Act;
(zf) “screening test” means a mandatory qualifying
examination for the purpose of recognition of foreign
qualifications under section 33;
57 of 1955.

77
(zg) “State Council” means the State Council constituted
under section 53 or under any other law for the time being in
force;
(zh) “State register” means the State register maintained
under this Act or any other law for the time being in force in
any State regulating the registration of practitioners in the
discipline of health;
(zi) “trained specialist” means a medical professional
possessing a masters degree and clinical training in the specific
area;
(zj) “university” means any university recognised as such
by the University Grants Commission or any university or
institute established by law for the time being in force imparting
education in the discipline of health for the award of degree or
diploma as a recognised qualification.
CHAPTER-II
N
ATIONAL C OMMISSION FOR H UMAN R ESOURCES FOR H EALTH
3. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification,
establish a body to be called the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health to exercise the powers conferred on, and to
perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power,
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by
the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) four whole-time members; and
(c) eight part-time members,
to be appointed, by the Central Government, on the recommendations
of the Selection Committee constituted under section 5.
(4) The president of the National Board for Health Education
referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 24, the president of the
National Evaluation and Assessment Committee referred to in sub-
section ( 1) of section 35, the president of the each National Council
referred to in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 41 and the Chairperson
or a Member of the National Commission for Higher Education and
Research referred to in section 5 of the Higher Education and Research
Act, 2011—Members, ex officio .
(5) All the Members including ex officio Members shall have
voting rights.
Establishment
of
Commission.

78
4. (1) The Chairperson shall be a person of eminence, integrity,
administrative capability and outstanding ability with a post graduate
degree in the discipline of medical science from a university, and
having not less than twenty-five years experience in the profession,
out of which at least fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the
area of health care delivery, growth and development of modern
medicine or medical education.
(2) The other Members shall be persons of eminence, integrity,
administrative capability and outstanding ability with a post graduate
degree in the discipline of medical education, dental education, nursing
education, pharmacy education, public health, management, science
and technology, or law from a university, and having not less than
twenty years experience in the profession, out of which at least fifteen
years shall be in a leadership role, in the area of health care delivery,
growth and development of modern medicine or medical education:
Provided that out of twelve Members,—
(a) four whole-time Members shall be appointed by the
Central Government from the disciplines of medicine, dentistry,
nursing, pharmacy, paramedics; and
(b) eight part-time Members shall be appointed from the
disciplines of medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, paramedics,
management, science and technology and law.
(3) No person, who is not a citizen of India, shall be eligible to
be appointed as the Chairperson or a Member.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Selection
Committee consisting of,—
(a) a person of eminence having qualification and
experience of at least twenty five years in medical profession as
Chairperson;
(b) five other experts of eminence from the discipline of
medical and allied health sciences, management, science and
technology having qualification and experience of at least twenty
years in the discipline, as members, to be appointed in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the
Union Ministry of Health (Department of Health and Family Welfare)
shall be the Convenor.
(3) The term of the Selection Committee shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(4) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the
Chairperson and Members of the Commission within two months
from the date on which the reference is made to it by the Central
Government in this behalf.
(5) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two
names for every vacancy referred to it.
Qualification
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and Members
of the
Commission.
Selection
Committee.

79
(6) Before recommending any person for appointment as a
Chairperson or a Member of the Commission, the Selection Committee
shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any financial or
other conflict of interest, which is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as Chairperson or Member, as the case may be.
(7) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the
Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the
Selection Committee.
(8) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) to ( 7), the
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure.
(9) The Central Government shall initiate the process of
appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise in the office of
the Chairperson or of other Members of the Commission, six months
prior to the date of arising of such vacancy:
Provided that in case a vacancy arises in the Selection Committee
for the reason of death or removal, or resignation from office, such
vacancy shall be filled expeditiously, within six months from the date
on which the vacancy has arisen.
6. (1) A person appointed as the Chairperson or a Member of
the Commission shall hold office for a term of four years from the
date on which he enters upon his office and be eligible for reappointment
for another term:
Provided that a person shall not hold office as a Chairperson or
Member after he has attained the age of seventy years.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), the Chairperson
and other Members shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central
Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members
shall be such as may be prescribed.
7. The Chairperson and other Members, shall immediately after
entering office and every year thereafter, make a declaration to the
extent of their interest, whether direct or indirect and whether financial
or otherwise, in any health institution or any other institution which
comes under the purview of the Commission and the same shall be
displayed on the website of the Commission.
8. (1) The Chairperson and other Members, on ceasing to hold
office shall not, for a period of two years, accept any employment
(including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any health educational
institution whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson or
Member, as the case may be, or has been before the Commission
when he held office as such Chairperson or Member.
(2) Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall prevent the Chairperson or
a Member, as the case may be, to accept any employment in any
health educational institution controlled or maintained by the Central
Government or the State Government.
Tenure and
terms and
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Declaration of
interest.
Restrictions
on re-
employment.

80
9. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the general
superintendence, direction and control of the administration shall vest
in the Chairperson.
10. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the
office of the Chairperson by reason of death, removal, suspension or
resignation, the seniormost whole-time Member shall act as the
Chairperson till such time the Chairperson is appointed to fill the
vacancy.
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence on account of leave or otherwise, the seniormost
whole-time Member shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson
till the Chairperson is able to discharge his functions.
11. The Chairperson or a Member may, by notice given in
writing under his hand of not less than a period of thirty days,
addressed to the Central Government, resign from his office:
Provided that the Chairperson or the Member shall, unless
permitted by the Central Government to relinquish office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of a period of thirty days from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as
his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of
office, whichever is earliest.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by order, remove from
office the Chairperson or any Member, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) being a whole-time Member, has engaged at any time,
during his term of office, in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting
as such Chairperson or other Member; or
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or
(f) has been removed or dismissed from the service or
office of the Central Government or of a State Government or
from a body owned or controlled by the Central Government or
a State Government or from any Central or State statutory
body; or
(g) has acquired such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or
other Member, as the case may be; or
(h) has so abused his position as to render his continuance
in office prejudicial to public interest; or
(i) has been guilty of proved misconduct; or
General
superintendence,
direction and
management
of affairs.
Member to
act as
Chairperson,
or to
discharge his
functions, in
certain
circumstances.
Resignation.
Removal and
suspension of
Chairperson
or Member
from office in
certain
circumstances.

81
(j) has been guilty of proved conflict of interest in the
discharge of his functions.
(2) The Chairperson or any Member shall not be removed from
his office under clause ( g) or clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1), unless he
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter:
Provided that the Central Government may, if it considers necessary
in the public interest, suspend such Chairperson or other Member.
13. (1) The Commission shall meet at least twice every month
at such time and place as it may appoint.
(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the
Commission.
(3) The decisions of the Commission shall be by consensus,
failing which by a majority of votes of Members present and voting
and in the event of equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his
absence, the Member presiding shall have a second or casting vote.
(4) The quorum of a meeting of the Commission shall be seven
members.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Commission
may make regulations for the conduct of business at its meetings.
14. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Commission; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a
Member of the Commission; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission
not affecting the merits of the case.
15. (1) There shall be a Chief Executive Officer of the
Commission, not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the
Government of India, who shall be the Member-Secretary of the
Commission, to be appointed by the Central Government for a
fixed term of four years who shall not be eligible for reappointment.
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall discharge such functions
as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission or may
be assigned to him by the Commission from time to time.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall report to the Commission,
through the Chairperson, on actions taken by him in performance of
his duties.
(4) The Commission may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, appoint such officers and other employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
Meetings of
Commission.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings of
commission.
Chief
Executive
Officer and
other officers
and employees
of
Commission.

82
(5) The salaries and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer and other
officers and employees of the Commission shall be such as may
be prescribed.
16. (1) The Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this
Act, take measures to determine, maintain and coordinate the minimum
standards of and promote the human resources, in discipline of health
education and training commensurate with the requirement, of such
resources in different States and Union territories.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the measures referred to in sub-section ( 1) may provide for all or any
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) carry out studies and collect data required to assess
the needs and requirements of human resources for health in
different States and Union territories;
(b) assess the requirement (including the number, type
and geographical location) of health training facilities for education
and training in medical and allied discipline;
(c) formulate action plans for development of human
resources for health in accordance with the policy and priorities
laid down by the Central Government from time to time;
(d) formulate a plan for financial and other resources
required for creation of human resources;
(e) make recommendations on the measures to strengthen
the healthcare delivery, operational efficiency and healthcare
infrastructure;
(j) coordinate existing healthcare infrastructure in Central
and State Government for effective utilisation thereof;
(g) facilitate coordination among bodies or National
Councils constituted under this Act, conduct or cause to conduct
their social audit and obtain public feedback on their performance
and achievements;
(h) grant permission for establishing of health educational
institution, ensure compliance of its terms and conditions, or
withdraw such permission;
(i) regulate, in accordance with the law, for the time
being in force, the entry and operation of foreign health
educational institutions if permitted under the law for the time
being in force in consultation with the Board or such other
authority as may be specified by the Central Government;
(j) conduct the elections to the National Councils established
under this Act;
(k) promote and regulate inter-professional cooperation
amongst health professions;
Powers and
functions of
Commission.

83
(l) specify by regulations the continuous medical education
and the courses, workshops and training activities;
(m) provide such grants and moneys to the Board,
Committee and National Council as they may require for efficient
discharge of their powers and functions under this Act;
(n) transfer such assets, properties or liabilities to the
Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, as
it may consider necessary;
(o) provide such officers and other employees to the
Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be,
required for efficient discharge of their powers and functions
under this Act;
(p) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
(3) The Commission shall exercise the powers and discharge
the functions under this section in such manner which does not
interfere with the autonomous and self-regulatory nature of universities
or institutions.
17. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any
other law for the time being in force,—
(a) no person shall, without obtaining letter of permission
from the Commission, establish an institution for a course of
study or training in the discipline of health (including a
postgraduate or doctoral or post doctoral or super specialty
course of study or training), for grant of recognised qualification;
and
(b) no institution, which has been granted permission
under sub-section ( 1), shall increase its admission capacity in
any course of study or training (including a post graduate or
doctoral or post doctoral or super specialty course of study or
training), without obtaining the letter of permission from the
Commission:
Provided that any person who has been granted permission for
establishment of the health educational institution or an institution
which has been granted permission to increase of its admission capacity
in course of study or training under the provisions of the Indian
Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists
Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the rules and
regulations made thereunder, or any other law for the time being in
force, shall be deemed to be the health educational institution established
under the provisions of this Act or deemed to have validly increased
their admission capacity and the qualifications granted by such
institutions shall be the recognised qualification for the purposes of
this Act.
(2) Every person shall, for the purpose of obtaining permission
under sub-section ( 1), submit to the Commission a scheme in
48 of 1947.
8 of 1948.
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.
Establishment
of institution
for imparting
health
education or
new course of
study.

84
accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 3) and the Commission
shall refer the scheme to the National Evaluation and Assessment
Committee for its recommendations.
(3) The scheme referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall be in such
form and contain such particulars and be preferred in such manner
and accompanied with such fees as may be specified by regulations
made by the Commission.
(4) On receipt of the scheme under sub-section ( 2), the
Committee may obtain such other particulars from the applicant as it
may consider necessary and thereafter, the Committee may,
(a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain any
required particulars, give a reasonable opportunity to the person
concerned for making a written representation and it shall be
open to such person to rectify the defects, if any, specified by
it;
(b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors
referred to in sub-section (8), and submit the scheme together
with its recommendations thereon to the Commission.
(5) The Commission may, after considering the scheme and the
recommendations of the Committee under sub-section ( 4) and after
obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars as may be considered
necessary by it from the applicant, and having regard to the factors
referred to in sub-section ( 8), by an order either approve (with such
conditions, if any, as it may consider necessary) or disapprove
the scheme and any such approval shall be a permission under sub-
section ( 1):
Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Commission
under this sub-section without giving such person a reasonable
opportunity of being heard:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent
any person, whose scheme has not been approved by the Commission,
to submit a fresh scheme and the provisions of this section shall apply
to such scheme, as if such scheme has been submitted for the first
time under sub-section ( 2).
(6) Where no order passed by the Commission has been
communicated to the person submitting the scheme, within a period of
one year from the date of submission of such scheme to the Commission
under sub-section ( 2), the scheme shall be deemed to have been
approved by the Commission in the form in which it had been
submitted, and, accordingly, the permission of the Commission required
under sub-section ( 1) shall also be deemed to have been granted.
(7) In computing the period specified in sub-section ( 6), the
time taken by the person concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing
any particulars called for by the Committee or by the Commission,
shall be excluded.

85
(8) The Committee, while making its recommendations under
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 4) and the Commission, while passing
an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme under sub-
section ( 5), shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:—
(a) whether the proposed health educational institution or
the existing health educational institution seeking to open a new
or higher course of study or training or increase its admission
capacity, would be in a position to offer the course of study or
training in the discipline of health (including a post graduate or
doctoral or post doctoral or super specialty course of study or
training) with the minimum standards of health education as
specified by the Board under this Act;
(b) whether the person seeking to establish a health
educational institution or seeking to open a new or higher
course of study of training or to increase its admission capacity
has adequate financial resources;
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff,
equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities to ensure
proper functioning of the health educational institution or
conducting the new course of study or training or accommodating
the increased admission capacity have been provided or would
be provided within the time limit specified in the scheme;
(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to
the number of students likely to attend such health educational
institution or course of study or training or as a result of the
increased admission capacity have been provided or would be
provided within the time limit specified in the scheme;
(e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme
drawn to impart proper training to students likely to attend such
health educational institution or course of study or training by
person having the recognised medical qualifications;
(f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice
of medicine; and
(g) any other factors as may be prescribed.
(9) Where the Commission passes an order either approving or
disapproving a scheme under this section, a copy of the order shall
be delivered to the person concerned.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this section, “person”
includes any university or a trust or other body corporate, but does
not include the Central Government or a State Government.
18. (1) The educational qualifications granted by any health
educational institution in India which are included in the Second
Schedule or the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth
Schedule or the Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, shall be recognised
qualifications of the respective discipline of health for the purposes of
this Act:
Recognition
of
qualifications
granted by
health
educational
institutions in
India.

86
Provided that any qualification recognised under the provisions
of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the
Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the
rules and regulations made thereunder, shall continue to be the recognised
qualifications of the respective discipline of health for the purposes of
this Act, unless such qualifications are derecognised by the amendment
of the relevant Schedule under this Act.
(2) Any health educational institution in India, which grants any
qualification in the discipline of health not included in the Second
Schedule or the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth
Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, may apply to the
Commission to have such qualification recognised, and the Commission,
after consulting the Committee, may recommend to the Central
Government to amend the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule or
the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth Schedule, as
the case may be, so as to include such qualification therein and any
notification amending any of the said Schedules may also direct that
an entry shall be made in the last column of the Second Schedule or
the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule or
the Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, against such qualification
declaring that it shall be a recognised qualification only when granted
after a specified date.
19. (1) No qualification granted by any health educational
institution to any student of such institution shall be recognised
qualification for the purposes of this Act, unless such institution has
been established with the approval of the Commission in accordance
with the provisions of this Act or rules or regulations made thereunder.
(2) Where any health educational institution offers a new or
higher course of study or training (including a post graduate or
doctoral or post doctoral or super specialty course of study or
training), such qualification shall not be a recognised qualification for
the purposes of this Act, unless such course of study or training
offered has been approved by the Commission before offering the
same to the students.
(3) Where any health educational institution increases its
admission capacity in any course of study or training (including a post
graduate or doctoral or post doctoral or super specialty course of
study or training), such qualification granted to any student by such
institution on the basis of the increase in its admission capacity shall
not be a recognised qualification for the purposes of this Act, unless
such increase in its admission capacity in any course of study or
training offered has been approved by the Commission before offering
the same to the students.
20. The Commission shall regulate the entry and operation of
foreign health educational institutions in consultation with the Board
and in accordance with the law, for the time being in force:
48 of 1947.
8 of 1948.
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.
Non-
recognition of
qualifications
in certain
cases.
Entry and
operation of
foreign health
educational
institutions.

87
Provided that in case no such law is in force, the Central
Government shall regulate the entry and operation of foreign health
institutions in consultation with the Board till such law comes into
force.
21. When, upon recommendation of the Committee or the
Board, it appears to the Commission that—
(a) the courses of study and examination to be undergone
in, or the proficiency required from candidates at any examination
held by any university or other health institution for an approved
course in health education; or
(b) the faculty, staff, equipment, accommodation, training
and other facilities for instruction and training provided in such
university or other health educational institution, or in any college
or other institution affiliated to any such university,
do not conform to the standards specified by the Commission, the
Commission may, after making such inquiry as it may consider
necessary, for reasons to be recorded in writing, withdraw recognition
of the course or qualification in respect of the university or other
health institution, or college or other institution affiliated to such
university, as the case may be, with such cut-off date as it thinks fit:
Provided that no such recognition shall be withdrawn unless the
university or the institution or college, as the case may be, has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
22. The Commission may levy such fees and other charges in
respect of such functions as may be specified by regulations made by
it.
CHAPTER-III
N
ATIONAL B OARD FOR H EALTH E DUCATION
23. The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute
a Board to be known as the “National Board for Health Education”
to assist the Commission in discharge of its powers and functions
for the purposes of health education.
24. (1) The Board shall consist of—
(a) a President;
(b) two whole-time members; and
(c) four part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of
the Selection Committee constituted under section 25.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member of the National Commission
for Higher Education and Research referred to in section 5 of the
Higher Education and Research Act, 2011—Member, ex officio .
Withdrawal of
recognition.
Fees.
National
Board for
Health
Education.
Composition
of Board.

88
(3) The President and whole-time members shall be chosen
from the persons possessing a post graduate degree in the discipline
of medicine or medical education from a recognised university or
health institutions, having at least fifteen years of standing in the
profession or teaching and training, out of which seven years of
experience shall be in the discipline of medical education, training,
curriculum design or development and conduct of examinations.
(4) The part-time members shall be chosen from persons
possessing a post graduate degree in the discipline of medical education
from a recognised university or medical institution having at least
twelve years of standing in the profession from the discipline of health
or health education out of which seven years of experience shall be
in education, training, curriculum design or development and conduct
of examinations in the discipline of health.
25. ( 1) The Central Government shall constitute a Selection
Committee for appointment of the President and members of the
Board and the Committee, consisting of,
(a) a person of eminence having qualification and
experience of at least twenty years in medical profession as
Chairperson;
(b) three other experts of eminence from the discipline of
medical and allied health sciences, management, science and
technology having qualification and experience of at least fifteen
years in the discipline, as members,
to be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the
Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health
and Family Welfare) shall be ex officio member of the Selection
Committee.
(3) The Chairperson of the Commission shall be the Convenor.
(4) The term of the Selection Committee shall be such as may
be prescribed.
(5) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the
President and members of the Board and the Committee within two
months from the date on which the reference is made to it by the
Central Government in this behalf.
(6) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two
names for every vacancy referred to it.
(7) Before recommending any person for appointment as a
President or a member of the Board or the Committee, the Selection
Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not have any
financial or other conflict of interest, which is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as President or member of the Board or the
Committee, as the case may be.
Selection
Committee
for selection
of President
and members
of Board and
Committee.

89
(8) No appointment of the President or member of the Board or
the Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the
Selection Committee.
(9) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) to ( 8), the
Selection Committee may regulate its own procedure.
(10) The Central Government shall initiate the process of
appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise in the office of
the President or of other members of the Board or Committee, six
months prior to the date of arising of such vacancy:
Provided that in case a vacancy arises in the Selection Committee
for the reason of death or removal, or resignation from office, such
vacancy shall be filled expeditiously; within six months from the date
on which the vacancy has arisen.
26. On and from the date of constitution of the Board,—
(a) the National Board of Examinations registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 shall be dissolved;
(b) any reference to the existing National Board of
Examinations in any law other than this Act or in any contract
or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Board;
(c) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of,
or belonging to, the existing National Board of Examinations,
shall vest in the Board;
(d) all rights and liabilities of the existing National Board
of Examinations shall be transferred to, and be the rights and
liabilities of, the Board;
(e) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( c), all
debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered
into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or
for the existing National Board of Examinations immediately
before that date, for or in connection with the purpose of the
said existing National Board of Examinations shall be deemed to
have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with
or for, the Board;
(f) all sums of money due to the existing National Board
of Examinations immediately before that date shall be deemed to
be due to the Board; and
(g) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or
which could have been instituted by or against the existing
National Board of Examinations immediately before that date
may be continued or may be instituted by or against the Board.
27. (1) A person appointed as the President or a member shall
hold office for a term of four years from the date on which he enters
upon his office or till the date he attains the age of seventy years,
whichever is earlier and be eligible for reappointment for another term.
Transitory
provision
relating to
Board.21 of 1860.
Appointment
and terms and
conditions of
office of
President and
members of
Board.

90
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), the President
or a member shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central
Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of service of the President and other members shall be
such as may be prescribed.
28. ( 1) The Board shall appoint an Executive Director to
perform such functions as may be assigned to it by the Board.
(2) The Board may with the previous approval of the
Commission appoint such other officers and employees as it
considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under this Act.
(3) The term of the Executive Director shall be four years from
the date of his appointment.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of the other officers and employees
of the Board shall be such as may be specified by regulations
made by the Commission.
29. (1) The Board shall meet at least once in every month.
(2) Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for
the meetings.
(3) Every meeting of the Board shall be presided over by the
President or, if for any reason he is unable to attend, such other
member as may be chosen by the members present at the meeting
from among themselves.
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is
absent, without permission, and without sufficient cause in the opinion
of the Board, from three consecutive meetings of the Board.
(5) Subject to the provisions of the foregoing sub-sections, the
Board may regulate its own procedure for the transaction of business
at its meeting.
30. (1) The Board shall take measures to facilitate and promote
academic studies and research in emerging areas of health education
with focus on professional health education and to ensure uniform
augmentation of trained specialists and super specialists, to achieve
excellence in these and connected areas.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the measures referred to in sub-section ( 1) may provide for all or any
of the following matters, namely:—
(a) determine, coordinate and maintain standards for health
education and research;
(b) specify minimum requirements for faculty,
infrastructure and clinical workload for establishment of
institutions for discipline of health;
Executive
Director and
other officers
and employees
of Board.
Meetings of
Board.
Functions of
Board.

91
(c) specify curriculum for examinations which may be
conducted under this Act;
(d) design and approve new courses of study as
recommended by institutes, hospitals, colleges or universities for
imparting training and conducting courses therein;
(e) organise seminars, trainings or conferences for
continuous medical education and such other courses, workshops
or programme as may be specified by regulations made by the
Commission;
(f) to undertake faculty development programmes;
(g) specify schedule of admissions for admission to various
courses of study;
(h) specify calendar of examinations and scheme of
examinations;
(i) conduct examinations for entry to any under graduate,
post graduate, doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or diploma
courses, fellowship examination and screening test;
(j) take such steps as may be desirable to elevate the
standards of training and development of quality health
professionals;
(k) coordinate with institutes, universities, bodies at
international level for discharge of its functions;
(l) advise the Commission regarding establishment of
laboratories, institutes and training centres for continuous medical
education;
(m) recognise and encourage merit in all branches of
health sciences, technology and basic sciences and foster
research;
(n) coordinate between medical and other scientific
academies, societies, associations, institutions and Government
medical and scientific departments and services;
(o) publish journals, memoirs, transactions and other
publications;
(p) promote and maintain a liaison between health and
other sciences;
(q) appoint such number of visitors as it may consider fit
to visit any university or other health educational institution
imparting a recognised course in discipline of health, or to
attend any examination held by any such university or other
health educational institution for the purposes of granting
recognition thereof;
(r) to specify parameters for equivalence between
academic qualifications granted by different health institutions in
the discipline of health whether in India or abroad;

92
(s) to specify norms and mechanisms for transparent,
efficient and accountable governance in a health university or
higher health educational institution empowered by or under any
law to award recognised qualifications only in the discipline of
health education and research;
(t) to approve and notify norms and standards of
maintenance of academic quality for accreditation and
benchmarking of education in recognised health educational
institutions imparting approved courses in the discipline of health
throughout the period of accreditation:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall prevent
the National Commission for Higher Education and Researeh
established under the Higher Education and Research Act, 2011
to specify higher standards for health educational institutions
other than those specified by the appropriate statutory regulatory
body referred to in clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 3
of the Higher Education and Research Act, 2011;
(u) to prescribe norms for compulsory disclosure by
health educational institutions engaging in discipline of health
education on all aspects related to their functioning that has a
bearing on the interests of students, faculty, parents, the
community and the Government;
(v) promote autonomy of health educational institutions
for the free pursuit of knowledge and innovation;
(w) facilitate access, inclusion and opportunities to all;
(x) promote development of a curricular framework with
specific reference to new or emerging or inter-disciplinary field
of knowledge;
(y) promote, through the development of a flexible
academic frame, the exercise of choice for students for self-
development, entrepreneurship, acquisition of skills and pursuit
of learning;
(z) promote joint and cross-disciplinary programmes among
universities and other health educational institutions;
(za) develop measures to effectively connect health
education to the needs of society;
(zb) encourage universities to enable colleges to evolve
into health institutions with powers to award degrees;
(zc) take measures to enhance access to, and inclusion in,
health education to remove regional imbalances in the provision
of health educational institutions for such education as well as
in access of students to such health educational institutions;
(zd) advice the Commission and the Central Government
on any matter that may be referred;
(ze) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.

93
31. The Board may, in consultation with the concerned State
Government and university, conduct, with effect from such date as
may be notified by the Central Government, either by itself or by an
authority authorised by it, examinations for entry to any under graduate,
post graduate, doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or diploma
courses or examination for fellowship in such manner as may be
specified by regulations made by the Commission.
32. Every health educational institution which grants any
recognised qualification shall furnish such information as to courses of
study and examinations as the Board may require from time to time.
33. (1) No person, being a citizen of India or a registered
overseas citizen of India, who obtains the recognised qualification
granted by medical institution in any country outside India recognised
for enrolment as medical practitioner in that country shall be entitled
for enrolment by the National Council or the State Council, as the case
may be, unless he qualifies the screening test in India to be conducted
by the Board.
(2) No person being a citizen of India shall, after the
commencement of this Act, obtain any medical qualification from
any medical institution in a country outside India without obtaining
an eligibility certificate from the Board and any person, who obtains
such qualification without obtaining the eligibility certificate, shall
not be eligible to appear in the screening test referred to in sub-
section ( 1):
Provided that any person being a citizen of India who acquired
the recognised qualification or obtained admission in the medical
institution outside India during the period between 15
th March, 2002
and the date of commencement of this Act, after obtaining an eligibility
certificate from the Medical Council of India under the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956, shall, subject to other provisions of this Act, be
eligible to be enrolled in the National Register or State Register.
(3) Any person, being a citizen of india or a registered overseas
citizen of India, who obtains a recognised qualification in the discipline
of health other than medicine from any health educational institution
in any country outside India recognised for enrolment as practitioner
in that country shall not be entitled to be enrolled in the National
Register or State Register unless he qualifies the screening test in
India.
(4) The Commission may, by notification, exempt any person,
who possesses the recognised qualification and enrolled as health
practitioner in a country outside India for a period of not less than
three years, from the requirement of the screening test under this
section.
Power to
conduct
certain
examination.
Power to
require
information as
to courses of
study and
examinations.
Screening test.
102 of
1956.

94
CHAPTER-IV
NATIONAL E V ALUATION AND A SSESSMENT C OMMITTEE
34. The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute
a Committee to be known as the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee for evaluation and assessment of any
university or institution seeking permission under section 17 or
imparting education in the discipline of health to assist the
Commission in discharge of its powers and functions under this
Act.
35. (1) The Committee shall consist of the following, namely:—
(a) a President;
(b) two whole-time members; and
(c) four part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of
the Selection Committee constituted under section 25.
(2) The President and members referred to in sub-section ( 1)
shall be chosen from the persons of eminence, integrity and outstanding
calibre having post graduate degree in the discipline of health, health
policy, public health, management, technology, law or finance from a
recognised university or institution having ten years of experience in
the respective field.
36. (1) A person appointed as the President or a member of the
Committee shall hold office for a term of four years from the date on
which he enters upon his office or till the date he attains the age of
seventy years, whichever is earlier and be eligible for reappointment
for another term.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), the President
or a member of the Committee shall hold office during the pleasure
of the Central Government.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the President and other members of
the Committee shall be such as may be specified by regulations
made by the Commission.
37. (1) Subject to the provisions contained in any law for the
time being in force relating to accreditation, the Committee shall take
measures to develop and regulate the process of evaluation and
assessment of institutions imparting health education and programmes
conducted therein, and monitor the functioning of agencies recommended
by the Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in any law for the time
being in force relating to accreditation, the measures referred to in
sub-section ( 1), may provide the following matters, namely:—
National
Evaluation
and
Assessment
Committee.
Terms and
conditions of
office of
President and
members of
Committee.
Functions of
Committee.
Composition
of Committee.

95
(a) without prejudice to any law for the time being in
force specify standards, norms and processes for registration of
evaluation and assessment agencies under any law for the time
being in force;
(b) undertake audit and cause to be audited the adherence
to code of ethics including policies on obviating conflict of
interest, disclosure of information, evolving transparency in
processes and procedures of evaluation and assessment;
(c) lay down policies for providing information to the
public with regard to all aspects of quality and performance of
institutions providing health education and programmes conducted
therein;
(d) specify and monitor standards on selection and training
of experts for the purposes of evaluation and assessment;
(e) scrutinise the report of the evaluation and assessment
agency on the applications for consideration of grant of
permission for establishing of college, institute or university and
make its recommendations to the Commission;
(f) submit a report to the Commission for taking up the
matter with the appropriate statutory regulatory authority dealing
with the accreditation for review of registration granted or
cancellation of registration thereof;
(g) levy of fees or other charges for matters relating to
evaluation and assessment;
(h) recommend for improvement of academic quality;
(i) advise the Central Government or any State Government
or the appropriate statutory regulatory authority on any policy
matter concerning evaluation and assessment which may be
referred to it;
(j) develop methodologies of evaluation and assessment in
collaboration with other agencies;
(k) promote research and innovation in evaluation and
assessment;
(l) collect, compile and disseminate information regarding
accreditation of health institutions and programmes conducted
therein to the public;
(m) monitor adherence to such norms, guidelines and
standards of academic quality, as may be specified under any
law for the time being in force by the appropriate statutory
regulatory authority, in health educational institutions;
(n) perform such other functions as may be assigned to
it by the Commission.

96
(3) The process of selection of evaluation and assessment
agency for evaluation and assessment shall be in a transparent manner
and the information relating to the selection of such agency shall be
put in the public domain.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other
law for the time being in force, the Commission or Committee shall
not engage the same evaluation and assessment agency for successive
inspections or audit inspections, to carry out audit or review inspection
of any institute at least for five years.
(5) The evaluation and assessment of a health educational
institution shall be done by the evaluation and assessment agencies
having such qualifications and experience and in such manner as may
be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
38. (1) The Commission may, in consultation with the Central
Government, appoint an audit committee consisting of such number of
persons having such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed,
for the purpose of audit, inspections or inquiry into the affairs of any
evaluation and assessment agency or any health educational institution
in so far it relates to their evaluation and assessment.
(2) The Commission may, on the recommendations of the
National Evaluation and Assessment Committee, at any time, by order
in writing, direct the audit committee specified in the order to audit or
inspect or inquire into the affairs of any evaluation and assessment
agency or any health educational institution in so far it relates
to evaluation and assessment and to report its findings and
recommendations to the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
or the Commission, as the case may be.
(3) On receipt of the report from the audit committee under
sub-section ( 2), the Commission may, after giving such opportunity to
the evaluation and assessment agency to make a representation in
connection with the report, in the opinion of the Commission seems
reasonable, by order in writing:—
(a) take such action in respect of any matter arising out
of the report as the Commission may think fit; or
(b) modify the terms and conditions of certificate of
registration as it thinks fit, and terms or conditions so modified
shall be binding upon and be observed by the evaluation and
assessment agency and shall be of like force and effect as if
they were contained in the certificate of registration or approval,
as the case may be; or
(c) revoke the certificate of registration of the evaluation
and assessment agency or the approval granted to the health
educational institution, as the case may be, under this Act.
(4) It shall be the duty of every evaluation and assessment
agency and every health educational institution, as the case may be, to
produce before the audit committee all such papers and other documents
Power of
audit and
inspection of
evaluation and
assessment
agency.

97
in its custody or power and to furnish any statement and information
relating to its affairs, as the audit committee may require of such
agency or institution, as the case may be, within such time as the
audit committee may specify.
(5) The audit Committee may examine on oath, any chief
executive or officer or other employee of the evaluation and assessment
agency in relation to evaluation and assessment of any health educational
institution or programme conducted therein, and may administer oaths
accordingly.
(6) The audit committee shall submit its report to the Committee
and the Committee shall place the report and the action taken thereon
by it or the Commission, on its website.
39. ( 1) There shall be an Executive Director to the National
Evaluation and Assessment Committee to be appointed by the
Central Government for a period of four years.
(2) The Committee may, with the previous approval of the
Central Government, appoint such other officers and employees
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under this Act.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of the Executive Director and
other officers and employees of the Committee shall be such as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
40. (1) The Committee shall meet at least once in every three
months, at such time and place as it may appoint.
(2) The quorum of a meeting of the Committee shall be two
members.
(3) The President of the Committee shall preside over its meetings
or, if for any reason he is unable to attend, such other member as
may be chosen by the members present at the meeting from among
themselves.
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is
absent, without permission, and without sufficient cause in the opinion
of the Committee, from three consecutive meetings of the Committee.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Committee may
regulate its own procedure for transaction of business at its meetings.
CHAPTER-V
N
ATIONAL C OUNCILS AND S TATE C OUNCILS
41. (1) On the commencement of this Act, there shall be
constituted, from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint, such corresponding new National Councils
as are specified in the First Schedule.
Executive
Director and
other officers
and employees
of Committee.
Meetings of
Committee.
Constitution
of
corresponding
National
Councils

98
(2) On the commencement of this Act, the Central
Government shall, by notification, constitute the Paramedical
Council of India for the disciplines of paramedics:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification,
constitute National Council for any other discipline of health as
may be notified by it under clause ( k) of section 2.
(3) Each corresponding new National Council referred to in
sub-section ( 1) and the Paramedical Council of India and the National
Council for any other discipline of health referred to in sub-section ( 2)
shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable
and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or
be sued.
(4) The head office of each National Council referred to in sub-
sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be in the National Capital Region referred to
in clause ( f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning
Board Act, 1985.
42. On the commencement of this Act, every existing Council
shall be transferred to, and shall vest in the Commission.
43. Every person holding office, immediately before the
commencement of this Act, as President or Vice-President or other
members of an existing Council shall, on such commencement, vacate
their offices as such President or Vice-President or other members, as
the case may be, and no such President or Vice-President or other
member, as the case may be, shall be entitled to claim any compensation
for premature termination of the term of his office.
44. Every corresponding new National Council shall, in the
discharge of its functions, be guided by such directions in regard to
matters of policy involving public interest as the Central Government
may, after consultation with the Chairperson of the Commission, give.
45. Any reference to any existing Council in any law, other than
this Act, or in any contract or other instrument shall, in so far as it
relates to the undertaking which has been transferred by section 42 be
construed as a reference to the corresponding new National Council.
46. (1) Each National Council referred to in sub-section ( 1)
or sub-section ( 2) of section 41 shall consist of the following
members, namely:—
(a) one member from each State (other than a Union
territory), to be nominated by the Central Government in
consultation with the State Government concerned;
Existing
Councils to
vest in
Commission.
President,
Vice President
and other
members of
Council to
vacate their
offices.
Corresponding
new National
Councils to be
guided by the
directions of
Central
Government.
2 of 1985.
References to
existing
Councils on
and from
commencement
of this Act.
Composition
of National
Councils.

99
(b) one member from each university, to be elected
from amongst the members of the faculty of the concerned
discipline of health by members of the Senate of the
University or in case the University has no Senate, by
members of the Court;
(c) one member from each State in which a State
Register in the respective discipline is maintained, to be
elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on
such Register;
(d) five members to be nominated by the Central
Government from amongst heads of medical institutions in
the respective discipline owned, controlled or managed by
the Central Government;
(e) five members to be nominated from amongst
professionals of respective disciplines by the Central
Government;
(f) President of the Board shall be ex officio  member
of the National Council for each discipline of health;
(2) A member of the National Council shall cease to be such
member if he ceases to be a person enrolled on the concerned State
Register or to hold office by virtue of which he was elected or
nominated, as the case may be, as such member to. the Council.
47. (1) The Commission shall conduct elections for each National
Council, within a period of six months from the date of commencement
of this Act for constituting the National Councils under section 41 in
accordance with such procedure and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Each National Council constituted under sub-section ( 1)
shall continue for a period of four years from the date on which it
is constituted:
Provided that the said period may be extended by the Commission,
with the prior approval of the Central Government, for a period not
exceeding six months in case it is not possible for any reason to
reconstitute the National Council after the expiration of the said period.
(3) The Commission shall commence the process of conducting
the next elections for National Council six months before the expiration
of the term of the National Councilor any extended period as may be
provided under sub-section ( 2).
(4) The Commission shall conduct elections to any vacancy that
may arise in the membership of any National Council on account of
death, resignation or removal, in such manner as may be prescribed.
48. (1) Each National Council referred to in section 41 shall
have a President and a Vice-President to be elected by the members
of the National Council from among themselves in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Elections to
National
Councils and
its term.
President and
Vice-President
of National
Council.

100
(2) The powers to be exercised, and the functions to be
performed, by the President or the Vice-President of the National
Council shall be such as may be specified by regulations made by the
National Council.
49. In case of any dispute regarding any election under section 47
or section 48, the aggrieved person may make an application within a
period of thirty days from the date of declaration of the result of
election, to the Chairperson of the Commission who shall forward the
same to the Central Government.
50. ( 1) The quorum of a National Council for a meeting shall
be one-third of its total membership.
(2) The National Council shall meet at least twice in each year
at such time and place as may be appointed by the National Council.
(3) The meetings of the National Council shall be presided over
by the President or, if for any reason he is unable to attend, by the
Vice-President, and in case he is also unable to attend, such other
member as may be chosen by the members present at the meeting
from among themselves.
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is
absent, without permission, and without showing sufficient cause in
the opinion of the National Council, from three consecutive meetings
of the National Council.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the National Council
may make regulations for the transaction of business at its meetings.
51. ( 1) The National Council shall, subject to the provisions of
this Act, take measures to enrol persons having recognised qualifications
to enable them to practice in respective discipline of health and to
regulate the profession of respective discipline of health.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the measures referred to in sub-section ( 1) may, inter alia , provide for
all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) enroll persons having recognised qualifications to enable
them to practice in the respective discipline of health and renew
the enrolment from time to time;
(b) maintain and publish the National Register;
(c) organise and conduct seminars, conferences, workshops
or other programme from time to time;
(d) grant certificate of good standing to the persons
enrolled by it;
(e) levy fees or other charges to be paid by the persons
seeking enrolment or persons enrolled by it;
(f) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
Settlement of
disputes
regarding
election.
Meetings of
National
Council.
Functions of
National
Councils.

101
(3) A person enrolled under this Act, before going abroad for
the purpose of employment, service, professional assignment or post
or position or for exploration of career opportunities or for carrying
out any professional or related work, shall obtain the certificate of
good standing from the respective National Councilor the State
Council.
52. (1) Every National Council shall have a Registrar to be
appointed by the Central Government for a fixed term of four
years who shall not be eligible for re-appointment under this Act.
(2) The National Council may, with the prior approval of
the Central Government, appoint such other officers and
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of
its functions under this Act.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of the other officers and employees
of the National Council shall be such as may be specified by
regulations made by the National Council.
53. (1) Where there is no State Council in any State, the
State Government shall, by notification, constitute the State
Councils for the following disciplines of health, within a period of
three years from the date of commencement of this Act, in such
manner and with such composition as may be prescribed by the
State Government, namely:—
(a) the Medical Council of ........... (name of the State)
........... for medicine;
(b) the Dental Council of ........... (name of the State)
........... for dentistry;
(c) the Nursing Council of ........... (name of the State)
........... for nursing;
(d) the Pharmacy Council of........ (name of the State)
........... for pharmacy;
(e) the Paramedical Council of .... (name of the State)
........... for paramedics:
Provided that the State Government may, by notification,
constitute State Councils for any other discipline of health notified
under clause ( k) of section 2.
(2) Untill the State Council is constituted in a State under sub-
section (1), the National Council of respective discipline of health shall
enrol the persons, in respect of that State, having recognised
qualification in the manner provided under this Act:
Provided that the person enrolled under this sub-section shall be
entitled to practice in the respective discipline of health only in the
State for which he has applied for enrolment.
Registrar and
other officers
and employees
of National
Council.
Constitution
of State
Councils.

102
(3) Each State Council referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be a
body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession
and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act,
to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(4) The head office of each State Council referred to in sub-
section ( 1) shall be at such place as the State Government may
decide.
(5) Each State Council constituted under sub-section ( 1) shall
continue for a period of four years from the date on which it is
constituted or, such period as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
54. (1) Each State Council referred to in section 53 shall have
a President and a Vice President to be elected by the members of the
State Council from among themselves in such manner as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
(2) The powers to be exercised, and the functions to be
performed, by the President or the Vice-President of the State Council
shall be such as may be specified by regulations made by the State
Council.
(3) No person shall be eligible to hold office in any capacity in
the State Council whether as a President or Vice-President or member
for more than two terms.
55. ( 1) The quorum of a State Council for a meeting shall be
one-third of its total membership.
(2) The State Council shall meet at least twice in each year at
such time and place as may be appointed by the State Council.
(3) The meetings of the State Council shall be presided over by
the President or, if for any reason he is unable to attend, by the Vice-
President, and in case he is also unable to attend, such other member
as may be chosen by the members present at the meeting from among
themselves.
(4) A member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is
absent, without permission, and without showing sufficient cause in
the opinion of the State Council, from three consecutive meetings of
the State Council.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the State Council
may make regulations for the transaction of business at its meetings.
56. (1) Every State Council shall have a Registrar to be appointed
by the State Government for a fixed term of four years who shall not
be eligible for re-appointment under this Act or as may be provided
under regulations made by it.
(2) The State Council may, with the prior approval of the State
Government, appoint such other officers and employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.
President and
Vice-President
of State
Council.
Meetings of
State Council.
Registrar and
other officers
and employees
of State
Council.

103
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms
and conditions of service of the other officers and employees of the
State Council shall be such as may be specified by regulations made
by the State Council.
57. (1) Every National Council and every State Council shall
enrol the persons having recognised qualification, in such form, manner
and on payment of such fees and fulfilment of such other criteria or
conditions as may be specified by regulations by the National Council,
for a period of ten years and the person so enrolled shall be entitled
to practice in the respective discipline of health.
(2) Before the expiry of the period of ten years referred to in
sub-section ( 1), the National Councilor the State Council, as the case
may be, may renew the enrolment of such persons for a further
period of ten years, on showing the proof that he has attended such
seminar, conference, workshop or any other programme as may be
specified by the Commission for the purpose of updating his professional
knowledge and skill.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that no person shall be required to appear and pass any qualifying
examination for the purpose of renewal of his enrolment under this
sub-section.
(3) For the purpose of computing the period of ten years, the
period of absence of a person enrolled under this section from India,
if any, shall also be taken into account.
(4) Any person enrolled under this section by the National
Council shall be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of
health anywhere in India and the persons enrolled by the State Council
shall be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of health
anywhere in the State in which he is enrolled.
(5) Any person enrolled with the existing Medical Council of
India or the Dental Council of India or the Nursing Council of India
or the Pharmacy Council of India or any State Council, as the case
may be, shall be deemed to have been enrolled under this Act and be
eligible to continue to practice for a period of ten years and thereafter
he shall be required to renew his enrolment under this Act.
58. (1) Every National Council shall enter the name of persons
enrolled by it under section 57 in the National Register to be maintained
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every State Council shall enter the name of persons enrolled
by it under section 57 in the State Register to be maintained in such
manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(3) Every National Council shall collect data of persons enrolled
in the State Register from each State Council and enter the same in
separate National Register to be maintained in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Enrolment of
persons.
Registers.

104
(4) The National Council and the State Councils shall maintain
the register by such data capturing method as may be prescribed by
the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, and
shall, inter alia , contain the biometric and other details of each health
professional which shall be verified at the time of renewal of enrolment.
(5) The National Council and the State Council shall maintain
the Register in accordance with the provisions of this Act and update
it from time to time, and publish the same in the Official Gazette and
in such other manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government
or State Government, as the case may be.
(6) The National Register and the State Register maintained
under this section shall be deemed to be public document within the
meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
(7) The National Register and the State Register shall also be
maintained in electronic form and wherever admissible, be subject to
disclosure in the public domain and made amenable for electronic
voting for selection of representatives of the profession or for such
other purposes as may be prescribed.
(8) No person who is not registered with the State Council or
the National Council shall falsely represent that his name is so entered
in the State Register or the National Register, or use in connection
with his name or title, any words or letters reasonably calculated to
suggest that his name is so entered.
59. (1) Any person,—
(a) who obtains a degree at graduate or post graduate or
doctoral or post doctoral or super speciality from a university
or institution which receives grants from the Central Government
or State Government or institutions owned or controlled by the
Central or State Government; and
(b) leave India for the purposes of updating or acquiring
higher education in the discipline of health,
shall endeavour to serve in India for a period of three years after such
updating or acquiring such higher education outside India, failing
which his name shall be removed from the National Register or the
State Register, as the case may be.
(2) Any person whose name has been removed under sub-
section ( 1), who opts to return to India shall be entitled to get his
name re-entered subject to payment of such fees and fulfilment of
such conditions as may be specified by regulations by the Commission.
(3) Any person,—
(a) who obtains a degree at graduate or post graduate or
doctoral or post doctoral or super speciality from a university
or institution other than the university or institution referred to
in sub-section ( 1); and
1 of 1872.
Duty to serve
in India.

105
(b) leaves India for the purposes of updating or acquiring
higher education in the discipline of health or for employment
and does not return within the period of three years or does not
inform the respective Councils of his whereabouts during such
period, then, it shall be construed as professional misconduct.
60. (1) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National
Register or the State Register, as the case may be, as a medical
practitioner,—
(a) hold office as physician or surgeon or any other
office as a medical professional in Government or in any health
institution maintained by a local or other authority; or
(b) practice medicine; or
(c) sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or
any other certificate required by any law for the time being in
force; or
(d) give evidence in any court of law as an expert on any
matter relating to medicine.
(2) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National
Register or the State Register, as the case may be, as a dentist,—
(a) hold any appointment in the field of dentistry or
dental hygienist in any dispensary, hospital or other health
institution which is supported wholly or partially from public or
local funds; or
(b) practice dentistry;
(c) sign or authenticate a certificate required under any
law for time being in force from a dentist; or
(d) give evidence in any court of law as an expert in any
matter relating to dentistry.
(3) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National
Register or the State Register, as the case may be, as a nurse, hold
any appointment in the field of nursing as teacher in nursing, nurse,
auxiliary nurse, midwife, health visitor, or public health nurse, in any
dispensary, hospital or other health institution which is supported
wholly or partially from public or local funds.
(4) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National
Register or the State Register, as the case may be, as a pharmacologist,
practice pharmacy.
(5) No person shall, unless he is enrolled on the National
Register or the State Register, as the case may be, of Paramedics,—
(i) hold any appointment as paramedic in any dispensary,
hospital or other health institution which is supported wholly
or partially from public or local funds; or
(ii) practice as a paramedics.
Prohibition to
practice, etc.,
without
enrolment.

106
61. Every person, whose name is for the time being borne on
the National Register or the State Register, as the case may be, shall
subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down by or under this
Act, be entitled to practice in the discipline of his enrolment and to
recover in respect of such practice any expenses, charges in respect
of medicaments or other appliances, or any fees to which he may be
entitled.
62. (1) Any person enrolled under section 57 shall inform
transfer of his place of residence or practice to the Council concerned,
within a period of thirty days of such transfer.
(2) If the person referred to in sub-section ( 1) fails to comply
with the requirements of that sub-section, his right to participate in the
elections to the Council concerned shall be liable to be suspended by
an order of that Council, for such period as may be specified by
regulations made by the Council.
63. Each State Council shall supply to the National Council
printed copies of the State Register as soon as may be after the
commencement of this Act and subsequently after the first day of
April of each year and the State Council shall inform the National
Council without delay of all additions to and other amendments in the
State Register made from time to time.
64. A person enrolled with the respective National Council shall
be liable for all the acts of omission, commission, or professional
misconduct arising in the State in which the cause of action has
arisen.
65. (1) A citizen of India or a registered overseas citizen of
India possessing recognised qualification in the discipline of medicine
granted by a medical institution outside India, who is required to
undergo practical training, on such terms and conditions as the
commission may specify, shall, on production of evidence that he has
been selected for such practical training in an approved institution, be
entitled to enroll himself provisionally in a State Register and shall be
entitled to practice medicine in the approved institution for the purposes
of such training and for no other purpose.
(2) A person who has passed the qualifying examination of any
university or Institution in India in the discipline of medicine for the
grant of a recognised qualification shall be entitled to enroll himself
provisionally in a State Register for the purposes of enabling him to
be engaged in employment in a resident medical capacity in any
approved institution or in the Medical Service of the Armed Forces of
the Union, and for no other purpose, on production of proper evidence
that he has been selected for such employment.
(3) The names of all persons provisionally enrolled under sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) in the State Register shall be entered
therein separately from the names of other persons enrolled therein.
Privileges of
persons
enrolled on
National
Register or
State
Registers.
Persons
enrolled to
notify change
of place of
residence or
practice.
Supply of
copies of
State Register.
Liability of
persons
enrolled with
respective
National
Councils.
Provisional
registration of
persons
possessing
required
qualification
from any
institution
outside India.

107
(4) A person enrolled provisionally as aforesaid who has
completed practical training referred to in sub-section ( 1) or who has
been engaged for the specified period in employment in a resident
medical capacity in any approved institution, or in the medical service
of the Armed Forces of the Union, as the case may be, shall be
entitled to enroll himself in the State Register.
66. If any person whose name is entered in the National
Register or the State Register, as the case may be, obtains any title,
diploma or other qualification for proficiency in sanitary science,
public health or medicine which is a recognised medical qualification;
he shall, on application made in this behalf in such manner as may
be prescribed, be entitled to have any entry stating such other title,
diploma or other qualification made against his name in such Register
either in substitution for or in addition to any entry previously
made.
67. The National Council shall specify, by regulations, the
standards of professional conduct, etiquette and code of ethics to be
observed by the persons enrolled under this Act.
68. For the purposes of this Act, the expression, “professional
misconduct” shall be deemed to include any act or omission provided
in the Seventh Schedule but nothing in this section shall be construed
to limit or abridge in any way the power conferred or duty cast on
the respective Councils under this Act to inquire into the professional
conduct of any person whose name is included in the National Register
or State Register, under any other circumstances.
69. (1) Every National Council and every State Council shall
have power to institute an inquiry into any complaint, charge or
allegation of professional misconduct against any person enrolled by it
under this Act and on finding such person guilty of such conduct, to
impose anyone or more of the following penalties, namely:—
(a) a warning or a reprimand or a reprimand and a
warning;
(b) suspension of registration for a period not exceeding
two years; or
(c) removal of his or her name from the register;
(d) impose a monetary penalty not exceeding ten lakh
rupees;
(e) a compulsory period of such professional service as
may be specified by regulations made by the Council.
(2) Every National Council or State Council, as the case may
be, shall give an opportunity of being heard to the concerned person
before imposing upon him any of the penalties referred to in sub-
section ( 1).
Entry of
additional
qualifications.
Code of
ethics.
Professional
misconduct.
Power of
National
Council and
State Councils
to institute
inquiry and to
impose
penalties.

108
70. (1) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the National
Council may, within a period of ninety days from the date of
communication of such decision, prefer an appeal to the ethics
committee to be constituted by the Commission.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the State Council
may, within a period of ninety days from the date of communication
of such decision, prefer an appeal to the ethics committee to be
constituted by the State Council.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the ethics committee
referred to in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) may, within a period
of sixty days from the date of receipt of the order of the said
Committee, prefer an appeal to the ethics appellate committee to be
constituted by the National Council.
(4) The composition of, and the procedure to be followed by,
the ethics committee and the ethics appellate committee and terms and
conditions of such members shall be such as may be prescribed.
71. (1) The National Council, or as the case may be, the State
Council may remove the name of any person enrolled by it in such
circumstances and in such manner as may be specified by regulations
made by the Commission.
(2) The Commission may, in case of removal of name of any
person from the National Register or the State Register (except in case
of professional misconduct), on an application, if it is satisfied on the
grounds mentioned therein and after making such inquiry as it deems
necessary, may direct, by order, the National Council or the State
Council, as the case may be, to restore the name of such person on
payment of such fees or fulfillment of such conditions which it may
impose in the order.
72. (1) Any person aggrieved from the professional services
rendered by the persons enrolled under this Act may file a complaint
with the State Council, within a period of sixty days from the date of
rendering of such service, in such manner as may be specified by
regulations made by the Commission:
Provided that the complaint may be admitted after expiry of the
said period of sixty days if the complainant satisfies the Council that
he had sufficient cause for not preferring the complaint within the said
period.
(2) The Council shall decide the complaint within a period of
one hundred and twenty days from date of its receipt.
73. (1) The National Council may, with the previous approval of
the Central Government, make regulations consistent with the provisions
of this Act or the rules or regulations made by the Commission.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
Appeals
against
decision under
section 69.
Removal of
names from
National
Register or
State Register
and
restoration
thereof.
Grievance
Redressal
Mechanism.
Power of
National
Council to
make
regulations.

109
(a) other ethical principles under clause ( f) of section 2;
(b) the powers to be exercised and the functions to be
performed by the President or the Vice-President of the National
Council under sub-section ( 2) of section 48;
(c) the procedure for transaction of business at meetings
of the National Council under sub-section ( 5) of section 50;
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other
terms and conditions of the service of the other officers and
employee of the National Council under sub-section ( 3) of
section 52;
(e) the form and manner of enrolment of persons and the
fees and such other criteria or conditions for such enrolment
under sub-section ( 1) of section 57;
(f) the standards of professional conduct, etiquette and
code of ethics under section 67;
(g) the professional service to be rendered under
clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 69;
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by regulations or in respect of which provision is to
be or may be made by regulations.
74. (1) The State Council may, with the previous approval of
the State Government, make regulations consistent with the provisions
of this Act or the rules or regulations made by the Commission and
the National Council.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the powers to be exercised, and the functions to be
performed, by the President or the Vice-President of the State
Council under sub-section ( 2) of section 54;
(b) the procedure for transaction of business at meetings
of the State Council under sub-section ( 5) of section 55;
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other
terms and conditions of the service of the other officers and
employee under sub-section ( 3) of section 56;
(d) the professional service to be rendered under
clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 69;
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by regulations or in respect of which provision is to
be or may be made by regulations.
Power of
State Council
to make
regulations.

110
CHAPTER-VI
AUDIT AND A CCOUNTS
75. The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Commission
grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may
think fit, for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
76. (1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called "the
National Commission for Human Resource for Health Fund" and
there shall be credited thereto—
(a) all Government grants, fees and charges received
by the Commission;
(b) all sums received by the Commission from such
other source as may be decided upon by the Central
Government.
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting—
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the
members, officers and other employees of the Commission,
Board, Committee and National Councils;
(b) the other expenses of the Commission in connection
with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of this
Act;
(c) the expenses of the Board, Committee and National
Councils in connection with the discharge of their functions and
for the purposes of this Act.
77. (1) The Commission, Board, Committee, National Council
and State Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as
may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council and State Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him
and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be
payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other
persons appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts
of the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council and State
Council shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission, Board, Committee,
National Council and State Council.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Constitution
of Fund of
Commission.
Accounts and
audit.

111
(4) The accounts of the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council, State Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by
the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council and State Council
to the Central Government which shall cause the same to be laid as
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
78. (1) The Commission, Board, Committee, National Council,
State Council, and other Committee shall furnish to the Central
Government at such time and in such form as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a summary of their activities during the previous
year.
(2) A copy of the report received by the Central Government
under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER-VII
O
FFENCES AND P ENALTIES
79. Whoever contravenes the provision of section 17 shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both
for the first offence and in case of second or subsequent offence,
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both.
80. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 57
relating to enrolment shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five
lakh rupees, or with both for the first offence and in case of second
or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or with fine which may extend to twenty-five
lakh rupees, or with both.
81. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 33
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one year, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or
with both for the first offence and in case of a second or subsequent
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or fine which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees or with
both.
82. Where on assessment under section 38 it is found that the
information provided by university or an institution imparting health
education, is not in conformity with the information displayed at its
website or information given to the concerned authorities for evaluation
and assessment, then the Head of the university or institution in case
of Government university or institution and in case of non-governmental
university or institution, any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company, trusts, societies such director, manager,
Furnishing of
returns and
reports to the
Central
Government.
Punishment
for
establishing
institution
etc., without
permission.
Penalty for
contravention
of section 17.
Penalty for
contravention
of section 33.
Punishment
for furnishing
information
contrary to
which
published by
institutions.

112
secretary or other officer shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees, or with both.
83. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by
a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed,
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the
conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that
he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a
firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director” means a whole-time director in the company
and in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
84. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by
a society or a trust, every person who, at the time the offence was
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the society or
trust for the conduct of the business of the society or trust, as well
as the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render
any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that
he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where
an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or trust
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent
or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer of the society or
trust, such director, manager, secretary, trustee or other officer shall
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Offences by
companies.
Offiences by
societies or
trusts.

113
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,
(a) “society” means any body corporate registered under
the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and, “trust” means any
body registered under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or any other
law for the time being in force;
(b) “director”, in relation to society or trust, means a
member of its governing board other than an ex officio  member
representing the interests of the Central or State Government.
85. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable
under this Act, save on a complaint made by the Commission or by
an officer authorised by it.
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable
under this Act.
CHAPTER-VIII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
86. (1) If, at any time the Central Government is of the
opinion,—
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control
of the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as
the case may be, it is unable to discharge the functions or
perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of
this Act; or
(b) that the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, has persistently defaulted in
complying with any direction given by the Central Government
under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the
financial position of the Commission, the Board, the Committee
or the National Council, or the administration of the Commission,
the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case
may be, has suffered; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in
the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the Commission,
the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be,
for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the
notification and appoint a person or persons as the Chairperson or the
President, as the case may be, to exercise powers and discharge
functions of the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council,
as the case may be, under this Act:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Commission,
21 of 1860.
2 of 1882.
Cognizance of
offences.
Power of
Central
Government
to supersede
Commission,
Board,
Committee or
National
Council.

114
the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be,
to make representations against the proposed supersession and shall
consider the representations, if any, of the Commission, the Board, the
Committee or the National Council, as the case may be.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1)
superseding the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National
Council, as the case may be.—
(a) the Chairperson, President, Vice-President and other
members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their
offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged
by or on behalf of the Commission, the Board, the Committee
or the National Council, as the case may be, shall, until the
Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council,
as the case may be, is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be
exercised and discharged by the person or persons referred to
in sub-section ( 1); and
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Commission,
the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case
may be, shall, until the Commission, the Board, the Committee
or the National Council, as the case may be, is reconstituted
under sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession
specified in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government shall reconstitute the Commission, the Board, the Committee
or the National Council, as the case may be, by a fresh appointment
of its Chairperson, President, Vice-President and other members and in
such case any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of
sub-section (2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification
issued under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken
under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be
laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
87. (1) If, at any time the State Government is of the opinion,—
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control
of the State Council, it is unable to discharge the functions or
perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of
this Act; or
(b) that the State Council has persistently defaulted in
complying with any direction given by the State Government
under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the
financial position of the State Council, or the administration of
the State Council, has suffered; or
Power of
State
Government
to supersede
State Council.

115
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in
the public interest so to do,
the State Government may, by notification, supersede the State Council
for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the
notification and appoint a person or persons as the President to
exercise powers and discharge functions under this Act:
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the State
Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the State Council to
make representations against the proposed supersession and shall
consider the representations, if any, of the State Council.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section ( 1)
superseding the State Council,—
(a) the President and other members shall, as from the
date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged
by or on behalf of the State Council shall, until the State
Council is reconstituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised
and discharged by the person or persons referred to in sub-
section ( 1); and
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the State Council
shall, until the State Council is reconstituted under sub-
section ( 3), vest in the State Government.
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession
specified in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the State
Government shall reconstitute the State Council, by a fresh appointment
of its President and other members and in such case any person who
had vacated his office under clause (a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be
deemed to be disqualified for reappointment.
(4) The State Government shall cause a copy of the notification
issued under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken
under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be
laid before State Legislature at the earliest.
88. The President or Vice-President and other Members of the
Board, Committee, National Council or State Council, as the case may
be, shall immediately after entering office and every year thereafter,
make a declaration to the extent of their interest, whether direct or
indirect and whether financial or otherwise, in any health institution
which comes under the purview of the Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council, as the case may be, and the same shall be
placed in the public domain.
89. (1) The President or Vice-President and other members of
the Board, Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the
case may be, on ceasing to hold office shall not for a period of two
years accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or
Declaration of
interest.
Restrictions
on re-
employment.

116
otherwise) in any health educational institution whose matter has been
dealt with by such President, Vice-President or member, as the case
may be.
(2) Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall prevent the President, Vice-
President or a member, as the case may be, to accept any employment
in any health educational institution controlled or maintained by the
Central Government or the State Government.
90. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the
office of the President or other member of the Board, Committee,
National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, by reasons
of death, removal, suspension or resignation, the senior most whole-
time member of such the Board, Committee, National Council or the
State Council, as the case may be, shall act as the President till such
time the President is appointed, to fill the vacancy.
(2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions
owing to absence on account of leave or otherwise, the senior-most
whole-time member shall discharge the functions of the President till
the President is able to discharge his functions.
91. Notwithstanding anything in this Act, no person shall be
eligible to be appointed or nominated or elected in any capacity in the
Commission, Board, Committee, National Council or State Council,
whether as the Chairperson or President or Vice-President or member
for more than two terms.
92. The President. Vice-President or a member of the Board,
Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the case may be,
may, by notice given in writing under his hand of not less than a
period of thirty days addressed to the Central Government or, as the
case may be, the State Government, resign from his office:
Provided that the President, Vice-President or a member of the
Board, Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the case
may be, shall, unless permitted by the Central Government or, as the
case may be, the State Government, to relinquish office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of a period of thirty days from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as
his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of
office, whichever is earliest.
93. (1) The Central Government or, as the case may be, the
State Government may, by order, remove from office the President or
Vice-President or any member of the Board, Committee, National
Council or the State Council, as the case may be, who—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) being whole-time member has engaged at any time,
during his term of office, in any paid employment; or
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or
Member to
act as
President, or
to discharge
his functions,
in certain
circumstances.
Restriction on
holding office
for more than
two terms.
Resignation of
President,
Vice-President
or a member
of Board,
Committee,
National
Council or
State Council.
Suspension
and Removal
of President,
Vice-President
or a member
of Board,
Committee,
National
Council or
State Council.

117
(d) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting
as such Chairperson or other Member; or
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or
(f) has been removed or dismissed from the service or
office of the Central Government or of a State Government or
from a body owned or controlled by the Central Government or
a State Government or from any Central or State statutory
body;
(g) has acquired such financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functioning as Chairperson or
other Member, as the case may be; or
(h) has so abused his position as to render his continuance
in office prejudicial to public interest; or
(i) has been guilty of proved misconduct; or
(j) has been guilty of proved conflict of interest in the
discharge of functions.
(2) The President, Vice-President or a member of the Board,
Committee, National Council or State Council, as the case may be,
shall not be removed from his office under clause ( g) or clause ( h)
or clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1), unless he has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in the matter:
Provided that the Central Government or, as the case may be,
the State Government may; if it considers necessary in the public
interest, suspend such President, Vice-President or other member.
94. No act or proceeding of the Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall be invalid merely
by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council, as the
case may be; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a
Member of the Board, Committee, National Council or State
Council, as the case may be; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board,
Committee, new Council or State Council, as the case may be,
not affecting the merits of the case.
95. (1) The Board, Committee, National Council or State Council
shall be competent to constitute such other committees for general or
special purposes, as it may consider necessary to carry out the
functions assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Board, Committee, National Council or State Council
may engage such experts for discharging its functions under this Act
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings of
Board,
Committee,
National
Council or
State Council.
Power to
appoint
Committees
or experts.

118
for such period, on such qualification and on payment of such fees
and remuneration as may be specified by regulations made by
Commission.
96. ( 1) Every health educational institution under this Act shall
at all times maintain a website and display all such information as may
be required by the Commission, Board or Committee, as the case may
be.
(2) The Commission, Board or Committee, as the case may be,
shall either themselves or through such other experts, at any time
during the existence of the evaluation or assessment, without any
notice may assess the performance standards and benchmarks as
displayed by the University or health institution on its website.
(3) The Central Government may by notification specify such
procedure as may be necessary to prevent unfair practices by university
or institutions imparting health education.
97. The Commission, Board, Committee or the National Council,
may, with prior approval of the Central Government, establish State or
regional level administrative offices, to perform such functions relating
to information management, coordination and liaison in the State or
region for which such office is set up.
98. Where any dispute arises regarding any recommendation or
advice of Board or Committee or National Council made to the
Commission, it shall be referred to the Central Government whose
decision thereon shall be final and binding.
99. ( 1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the
Commission under section 98 may prefer an appeal to the Central
Government within such period as may be prescribed.
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry
of the period prescribed therefor:
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the
period prescribed therefore if the appellant satisfies the Central
Government that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal
within the prescribed period.
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such
form and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed
against and by such fees as may be prescribed.
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as
may be prescribed:
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall
be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
100. No order refusing to enrol name of any person in the
National Register or the State Register, as the case may be, or
removing a name therefrom shall be called in question in any court.
Reporting by
universities
and
institutions.
State or
regional
administrative
offices.
Reference of
dispute to
Central
Government.
Appeal against
decisions of
Commission.
Bar of
Jurisdiction.

119
101. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against any person for anything which has been done or intended to
be done in good faith under this Act.
102. The Chairperson, President, Vice-President and Members
and the Chief Executive Officer, Executive Director and other officers
and employees of the Commission, Board, Committee, National Council
or State Council, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be public
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
103. (1) Where the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, consider it expedient so to do, it may,
by order in writing—
(a) call upon any health educational institution at any time
to furnish in writing, such information or explanation relating to
its affairs as the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, may require; or
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in
relation to the affairs of any health educational institution;
and
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the
books of account or other documents of any health educational
institution.
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of a health
educational institution has been undertaken under sub-section ( 1),—
(a) every officer of the Government Department, if such
health educational institution is a department of the Government;
(b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if
such health educational institution is a company; or
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if
such health educational institution is a firm; or
(3) Every other person or body of persons who has had
dealings in the course of business with any of the persons mentioned
in sub-section ( 2), shall produce before the Commission, Board,
Committee or National Council, as the case may be, making the
inquiry, all such books of account or other documents in his custody
or power relating to, or having a bearing on the subject-matter of such
inquiry and also to furnish to the Commission, Board, Committee or
National Council, as the case may be, with any such statement or
information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him,
within such time as may be specified by the Commission.
(4) Every health educational institution shall maintain such books
of account or other documents as may be specified by regulations
made by the Commission.
(5) The Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as
the case may be, shall have the power to issue such directions to
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Members, etc.,
to be public
servants.
45 of 1860.
Powers of
Commission,
Board,
Committee or
National
Council to
call for
information
or conduct
investigations,
etc.

120
health educational institution as it may consider necessary for proper
functioning of such institution.
104. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any
student of health educational institutions who, immediately before the
commencement of this Act was studying for a degree, diploma or
certificate in any such institution shall continue and complete his
course for that degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may be, and
such institutions shall provide for the instruction and examination for
such student in accordance with the syllabus of studies as existed
before the commencement of this Act and shall be deemed to have
completed his course of study and awarded degree, diploma or
certificate, as the case may be, under this Act.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the health
educational institution in case of lapse of its recognition whether by
efflux of time or by withdrawal by the Commission or by its voluntary
surrender or for any other reason whatsoever shall continue to maintain
and provide the minimum standards of infrastructure approved by the
Commission till such time that all the candidates are able to complete
their study in such institutions.
105. ( 1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
Act, the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the
case may be, shall, in exercise of its powers and in performance of
its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions
of policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from
time to time:
Provided that the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, shall, as far as practicable, be given an
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under
this sub-section.
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and
the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case
may be, as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the
decision of the Central Government shall be final.
106. ( 1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
Act, the State Council  shall, in exercise of its powers and in
performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such
directions on questions of policy, as the State Government may give
in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the State Council shall, as far as practicable, be
given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given
under this sub-section.
(2) If any dispute arises between the State Government and the
State Council as to whether a question is or is not a question of
policy, the decision of the State Government shall be final.
Completion of
courses of
studies in
health
educational
institutions.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Power of
State
Government
to issue
directions.

121
107. The Commission, Board, Committee and National Council
shall furnish to the Central Government any information with respect
to their activities as the Central Government may from time to time
require.
108. The Central Government may, after consultation with the
Commission, by notification, add to or otherwise amend any of the
Schedules of this Act for the purposes of the Act and thereupon the
said Schedules shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
109. The Central Government may appoint an independent
committee once in every five years to review the functioning of the
Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may
be.
110. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 2), the
provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in
force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other
than this Act.
(2) The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall
be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Indian Medical Degrees
Act, 1916.
111. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of appointment of the Selection Committee
under sub-section ( 1) of section 5;
(b) the term of the Selection Committee under sub-
section ( 3) of section 5;
(c) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members
under sub-section ( 3) of section 6;
(d) the salary and allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer and other
officers and employees of the Commission under sub-
section ( 5) of section 15;
(e) such other functions to be performed by the
Commission under clause ( p) of sub-section ( 2) of section 16;
(f) any other factors to be considered by the Committee
and the Commission while passing an order for approving or
disapproving the scheme under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 8) of
section 17;
Commission,
Board,
Committee
and National
Council to
furnish
information
to Central
Government.
7 of 1916.
Power to
amend
Schedules.
Review.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.

122
(g) the manner of appointment of the chairperson and
members of the Selection Committee under sub-section ( 1) and
their term under sub-section ( 4) of section 25;
(h) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the President and other members
of the Board under sub-section ( 3) of section 27;
(i) such other functions to be performed by the Board
under clause ( ze) of sub-section ( 2) of section 30;
(j) the number of persons to be appointed and
the qualifications and experience of the audit committee under
sub-section ( 1) of section 38;
(k) the procedure and the manner in which the National
Councils are to be constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 47;
(l) the manner of conducting elections under sub-
section ( 4) of section 47;
(m) the manner of elections of the President and Vice-
President of each National Council under section 48;
(n) such other functions which the National Council may
perform under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 2) of section 51;
(o) the manner in which the National Register shall be
maintained under sub-section ( 1) of section 58;
(p) the manner in which a separate National Register shall
be maintained under sub-section ( 3) of section 58;
(q) the data capturing method by which the National
Councils shall maintain the register under sub-section ( 4) of
section 58;
(r) the manner in which the National Council shall update
and publish the Register under sub-section ( 5) of section 58;
(s) such other purposes for which the National Register
may be used under sub-section ( 7) of section 58;
(t) the manner in which an application may be made for
entry of additional qualifications under section 66;
(u) the composition of and the procedure to be followed
by the ethics committee and the ethics appellate committee and
terms and conditions of such members under sub-section ( 4) of
section 70;
(v) the form in which an annual statement of accounts
shall be maintained under sub-section (
1) of section 77;
(w) the time and the form in which an annual report shall
be furnished under sub-section ( 1) of section 78;

123
(x) the period within which appeal may be preferred to
the Central Government under sub-section ( 1) of section 99;
(y) the form of application and the fees to be paid under
sub-section ( 3), and the procedure for disposing of an appeal
under sub-section ( 4) of section 99;
(z) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed,
or in respect of which provision is to be, or may be made by
rules.
112. (1) The Commission may, with prior approval of the
Central Government, by notification, make regulations consistent with
this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the purposes of
this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provision, such regulation may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the conduct of business at the meetings of the
Commission under sub-section ( 5) of section 13;
(b) the functions to be discharged by the Chief Executive
officer under sub-section ( 2) of section 15;
(c) the continuous medical education and the courses
workshops and training activities under clause ( l) and such
other functions under clause ( p) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 16;
(d) the form, particulars and manner in which the scheme
shall be made and the fees for submission of the scheme under
sub-section ( 3) of section 17;
(e) the functions in respect of which fees and charges
may be levied under section 22;
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other
terms and conditions of service of the other officers and
employees of the Board under sub-section ( 4) of section 28;
(g) the manner of conducting examination for entry to
graduate, post graduate, doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality
or diploma courses and fellowship examination by the Board
under section 31;
(h) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the President and other members
of the Committee under sub-section ( 3) of section 36;
(i) the qualifications and experience of, and the manner
of evaluation and assessment of health educational institutions
by, the evaluation and assessment agencies under sub-
section ( 5) of section 37;
Power of
Commission
to make
regulations.

124
(j) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the Executive Director and other
officers and employees of the Committee under sub-section ( 3)
of section 39;
(k) the fees and the conditions for re-entry of name of
the person under sub-section ( 2) of section 59;
(l) the period of suspension of the right of person to
participate in elections to council under sub-section ( 2) of
section 62;
(m) the circumstances and manner of removal of name
of any person enrolled by the National Council, or as the case
may be, the State Council under sub-section ( 1) of section 71;
(n) the manner of filing a complaint with the State
Council under sub-section ( 1) of section 72;
(o) the period for which the Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council may engage committees or experts, the
qualifications of such experts and the fees and remunerations to
be paid under sub-section ( 2) of section 95;
(p) the books of account and other documents to be
maintained by health educational institutions under sub-
section ( 4) of section 103;
(q) any other matter for which provision may be made
by regulations by the Commission under this Act.
113. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner in which the State Councils are to
be constituted and its composition under sub-section ( 1) of
section 53;
(b) the period of State Council to continue under sub-
section ( 5) of section 53;
(c) the manner of election of the President and Vice-
President of the State Council to be elected by the members
under sub-section ( 1) of section 54;
(d) the manner in which the State Register shall be
maintained under sub-section ( 2) of section 58;
(e) the data capturing method by which the State Councils
shall maintain the register under sub-section ( 4) of section 58;
(j) the manner in which the State Council shall update
and publish the Register under sub-section ( 5) of section 58;
(g
) any other matter for which provision may be made
by rules by the State Government under this Act.
Power of
State
Government
to make rules.

125
114. (1) Every rule and every regulation made and every
notification issued by the Central Government under this Act, shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or regulation or notification or
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or notification should not
be made or issued, the rule or regulation or notification shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation or notification.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government and every
regulation made by the State Council shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one
House, before that House.
115. (1) Where the Central Government considers it expedient
so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct the Commission or Board
or Committee or National Council, as the case may be, to make any
regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made within
such period as it may specify in this behalf.
(2) If the Commission or Board or Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, fails or neglects to comply with such
order within the specified period, the Central Government may make
the regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made by the
Commission or Board or Committee or National Council, as the case
may be, either in the form specified in the order or with such
modifications thereof as the Central Government thinks fit.
116. ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
of this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
117. ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may appoint in this behalf, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the
Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956 shall stand repealed and the Nursing Council of
India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental Council of India and
Medical Council of India shall stand dissolved:
Laying of
rules and
regulations.
Powers of
Central
Government
to direct
regulations to
be made or to
make or
amend
regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Repeal and
savings.48 of 1947.
8 of 1948.
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.

126
Provided that during the period between the date of coming into
force of this Act and date of repeal of the enactments mentioned in
this sub-section, the existing Nursing Council of India, the Pharmacy
Council of India, the Dental Council of India and the Medical Council
of India, as the case may be, shall not take any decision or action,
except with the prior approval of the Commission on any matter
specified by it.
(2) On the commencement of this Act, every existing Council
shall be transferred to, and shall vest in, the Commission.
(3) Each existing Council which is transferred to, and which
vest in, the Commission shall be deemed to include all assets, rights,
powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and
immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments and all other
rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were
immediately before the commencement of this Act in the ownership,
possession, power or control of the existing Council, whether within
or without India, and all books of account, registers, records and all
other documents of whatever nature relating thereto and shall also be
deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever
kind then subsisting of the existing Council.
(4) If, according to the laws of any country outside India, the
provisions of this Act by themselves are not effective to transfer or
vest any asset or liability situated in that country which forms part of
an existing Council to, or in, the Commission, the affairs of the
existing Council in relation to such asset or liability shall, on and from
the commencement of this Act, stand entrusted to the Chief Executive
Officer for the time being of the Commission, and the Chief Executive
Officer may exercise all powers and do all such acts and things as
may be exercised or done by the existing Council for the purpose of
effectively transferring such assets and discharging such liabilities.
(5) The Chief Executive Officer of the Commission shall, in
exercise of the powers conferred on him by sub-section ( 4), take all
such steps as may be required by the laws of any such country
outside India for the purpose of effecting such transfer or vesting, and
may either himself or through any person authorised by him in this
behalf realise any asset and discharge any liability of the existing
Council.
(6) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all contracts,
deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal
representation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or
having effect immediately before the commencement of this Act and
to which the existing Council is a party or which are in favour of the
existing Council shall be of as full force and effect against or in
favour of the Commission, and may be enforced or acted upon as
fully and effectually as if in the place of the existing Council, the
Commission had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in
favour of the Commission.

127
(7) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding
of whatever nature in relation to any existing Council which has been
transferred under sub-section ( 2) is pending by or against the existing
Council, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any, way,
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the existing Council
or of anything contained in this Act but the suit, appeal or other
proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against
the Commission.
(8) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as applying to the
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and property, movable
and immovable, cash balances and investments in any country outside
India (and other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such
property) and borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind
subsisting at the commencement of this Act. of any existing Council
operating in that country if, under the laws in force in that country.
(9) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken under the provisions of the aforesaid Acts shall, insofar as such
thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be
deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act
as if the said provisions were in force when such thing was done or
such action taken. and shall continue in force.
118. (1) Every officer or other employee of the existing Council
(except the President, Vice-President and members of the existing
Council) or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be,
serving in the employment immediately before the appointed day shall
become, as from the appointed day, an officer or, as the case may be,
other employee of the Commission and shall hold his office or service
therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration, upon the same
terms and conditions, with the same obligations and with the same
rights and privileges as to leave, leave fare concession, welfare scheme,
medical benefit scheme, insurance, provident fund, other retirement
funds, voluntary retirement, gratuity and other benefits as he would
have held under the existing Council if its undertaking had not vested
in the Commission and shall continue to do so as an officer or, as the
case may be, other employee of the existing Council or until the expiry
of a period of six months from the appointed day if such officer or
other employee opts not to continue to be the officer or other
employee of the existing Council within such period.
(2) The Commission may transfer any officer or other employee
or the services of such officers or other employees as it may deem
fit, to the Board, Committee or the National Council.
(3) Where an officer or other employee of the existing Council
opts under sub-section ( 1) not to be in employment or service of the
Commission, such officer or other employee shall be deemed to have
resigned.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer
Provisions in
respect of
officers and
other
employees of
existing
Council and
National
Board of
Examinations.
14 of 1947.

128
of the services of any officer or other employee of the existing
Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be,
to the Commission shall not entitle such officer or other employee to
any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the time
being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court,
tribunal or other authority.
(5) The officer and other employees who have retired before
the appointed day from the service of the existing Council or the
National Board of Examinations, as the case may be, and are entitled
to any benefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same
benefits, rights or privileges from the Commission.
(6) The provident fund or the gratuity fund of the existing
Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be,
and any other bodies created for the welfare of officer or other
employees would continue to discharge their functions in the
Commission as was being done hitherto in the existing Council or the
National Board of Examinations, as the case may be, and any tax
exemption granted to the provident fund or the gratuity fund would
continue to be applied to the Commission.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the
Companies Act, 1956 or in any other law for the time being in force
or in the regulations of the existing Council or the National Board of
Examinations, as the case may be, the President or Vice-President or
member or the trustees, executive trustee or any other person entitled
to manage the whole or substantial part of the business and affairs of
the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the case
may be, shall not be entitled to any compensation against the
Commission for the loss of office or for the premature termination of
any contract of management entered into by him with the Commission.
119. (1) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Nursing Council
Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the educational standards,
requirements and other provisions of the Indian Nursing Council Act,
1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder
shall continue to be in force and operate till new standards are
specified under this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder:
Provided that anything done or any action taken as regards the
educational standards and requirements under the enactments under
repeal and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall be deemed
to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this
Act and shall continue in force accordingly unless and until superseded
by anything done or by any action taken under this Act:
Provided further that all such courses that are being conducted
by the National Board of Examinations shall continue till the Central
Government on the advice of the Commission notifies the constitution
of the Board under this Act.
1 of 1956.
48 of 1947.
8 of 1948.
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.
Transitory
provisions.

129
(2) The Central Government may, if considered necessary by
notification, take such appropriate measures as may be necessary for
smooth transition of repealed Councils to the corresponding new
Councils and the existing National Board of Examination to the Board
under this Act.
120. In case of any difference of opinion with the National
Commission for Higher Education constituted under the Higher Education
and Research Act, 2011, the same may be referred to the Joint
Mechanism constituted under section 52 of the Higher Education and
Research Act, 2011 for resolution of such difference of opinion in
accordance with the provisions of that Act.
Resolution of
difference of
opinion by
Joint
Mechanism.

130
130
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 2( i) and ( o) and section 41( 1)]
Existing Council Corresponding new National Council
(1) (2)
The Medical Council of India The Medical Council of India for
for medicine medicine
The Dental Council of India for The Dental Council of India for
dentistry dentistry
The Nursing Council of India for The Nursing Council of India for
nursing nursing
The Pharmacy Council of India for The Pharmacy Council of India for
pharmacy pharmacy

131
131
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF M EDICAL Q UALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 ( zc) ( a) and section 18]
Part l— Graduate Medical Qualifications
Graduate Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the 10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Medical Qualifications
Post Graduate Medical Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the graduate medical examination;
Part 3—Super Speciality Medical Qualifications
Super Speciality Medical Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the Post Graduate Medical examination;
Part 4—Doctoral Medical Qualifications
Doctoral Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the Post graduate medical examination;
Part 5—Post Doctoral Medical Qualifications
Post Doctoral Medical Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the Doctoral medical examination;
Part 6—Foreign Medical Qualifications

132
132
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF D ENTAL Q UALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 ( zc) ( b) and section 18]
Part l— Graduate Dental Qualifications
Graduate Dental Courses—Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the 10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Dental Qualifications
Post Graduate Dental Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the graduate Dental examination;
Part 3— Doctoral Dental Qualifications
Doctoral. Dental Courses—Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the Post graduate Dental examination;
Part 4—Post Doctoral Medical Qualifications
Post Doctoral Dental Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the Doctoral Dental examination;
Part 5— Foreign Dental Qualifications

133
133
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF N URSING Q UALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 ( zc) ( c) and section 18]
Part l— Graduate Nursing Qualifications
Graduate Nursing Courses—Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the 10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Nursing Qualifications
Post Graduate Nursing Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the graduate Nursing examination;
Part 3—Doctoral Nursing Qualifications
Doctoral Nursing Courses—Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the Post graduate Nursing examination;
Part 4—Foreign Nursing Qualifications

134
134
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF P HARMACY Q UALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 ( zc) ( d) and section 18]
Part l— Graduate Pharmacy Qualifications
Graduate Pharmacy Courses—Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the 10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Pharmacy Qualifications
Post Graduate Pharmacy Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the graduate Pharmacy examination;
Part 3—Doctoral Pharmacy Qualifications
Doctoral Pharmacy Courses—Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the Post graduate Pharmacy examination;
Part 4—Foreign Pharmacy Qualifications

135
135
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF P ARAMEDICAL Q UALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 ( zc) ( e) and section 18]
Part l— Graduate Paramedical Qualifications
Graduate Paramedical Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the 10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Paramedical Qualifications
Post Graduate Paramedical Courses—Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the graduate Paramedical examination;
Part 3—Foreign Paramedical Qualifications

136
136
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
PROFESSIONAL M ISCONDUCT
[See section 68]
PART I
A health practitioner shall be deemed to be guilty of professional
misconduct, if he—
(1) allows any person to practice in his name as a health
professional unless such person is also a health practitioner and is in
partnership with or employed by him;
(2) pays or allows or agrees to pay or allow, directly or
indirectly, any share in the fees or profits of his professional business,
to any person other than a member of the National Council or the
State Council or a partner or a retired partner or the legal representative
of a deceased partner, or a member of any other professional body or
with such other persons having the recognised qualifications for the
purpose of rendering such professional services from time to time in
or outside India.
Explanation.—In this clause, “partner” includes a person residing
outside India with whom a health practitioner has entered into
partnership which is not in contravention of clause ( 4);
(3) accepts or agrees to accept any part of the profits of the
professional work of a person who is not a member of the National
Council or the State Council:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as
prohibiting a member from entering into profit sharing or other similar
arrangements, including receiving any share or commission in the fees,
with a member of the National Council or State Council or other
person having the recognised qualifications referred to in clause ( 2);
(4) enters into partnership, in or outside India, with any person
other than a health practitioner or such other person who is a member
of any other professional body having the recognised qualifications,
including a resident, who but for his residence abroad would be
entitled to be enrolled as a member of the National Council or the
State Council;
(5) secures any professional business, either through the services
of a person who is not an employee of such health professional or
who is not his partner or by means which are not open to a health
professional:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as
prohibiting any arrangement permitted in terms of clauses ( 2) and ( 3);

137
(6) solicits patients or professional work, either directly or
indirectly, by circular, advertisement, personal communication or
interview or by any other means:
Provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed as
preventing or prohibiting—
(i) any health professional from applying or requesting
for or inviting or securing professional work from another
health practitioner;
(ii) a member from responding to tenders or enquiries
issued by various users of professional services or organisations
from time to time and securing professional work as a
consequence;
(7) advertises his professional attainments or services, uses any
designation or expressions other than health professional on professional
documents, visiting cards, letterheads or sign boards, unless it be a
degree of a University established by law in India or recognised by the
Central Government or by the Commission or of any other institution
that has been recognised by the Central Government or may be
recognized by the Commission:
Provided that a health practitioner may advertise through a write
up setting out the services provided by him or his health Institute and
particulars of his health Institute subject to such guidelines as may be
issued by the Commission;
(8) accepts a position as a health practitioner previously held by
another health practitioner without first communicating with him in
writing;
(9) charges or offers to charge, accepts or offers to accept, in
respect of any professional employment, fees which are based on a
percentage of profits or which  are contingent upon the findings, or
result of such employment, except as permitted under the Act or the
rules or regulations made thereunder;
(10) engages in any business or occupation other than health
profession unless permitted by the Commission so to engage:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall disentitle a health
professional from being a director of a company except as provided
in the Companies Act, 1956;
(11) allows a person not being a member of the National
Councilor the State Council, or a member not being his partner to sign
on his behalf or on behalf of his health Institute, anything which he
is required to certify as a health professional; or any other statements
relating thereto;
(12) discloses information acquired in the course of his
professional engagement to any person other than his patient so
engaging him, without the consent of his patient, or otherwise than as
required by any law for the time being in force;

138
(13) certifies or submits in his name, or in the name of his
health Institute, a report of an examination of the matters relating to
his health and related statements unless the examination of such
statements has been made by him or by a partner or an employee in
his health Institute or by another health practitioner;
(14) permits his name or the name of his health Institute to be
used in connection with any report or statement contingent upon
future treatment in a manner which may lead to the belief that he
vouches for the accuracy of the diagnosis;
(15) fails to disclose a material fact known to him in his report
or diagnosis but the disclosure of which is necessary in making such
report or statement, where he is concerned with such report or
statement in a professional capacity;
(16) fails to report a material mis-statement known to him and
with which he is concerned in a professional capacity;
(17) does not exercise due diligence, or is grossly negligent in
the conduct of his professional duties;
(18) fails to obtain sufficient information which is necessary for
expression of an opinion or its exceptions are sufficiently material to
negate the expression of an opinion;
(19) fails to invite attention to any material departure from the
generally accepted procedure relating to the health practice;
(20) fails to keep moneys of his patient other than fees or
remuneration or money meant to be expended in a separate banking
account or to use such moneys for purposes for which they are
intended within a reasonable time.

139
139
PART II
A health professional shall be deemed to be guilty of professional
misconduct, if he—
(1) does not maintain the health records of his indoor patients
for a period of three years or refuses to provide the same within a
period of 72 hours after the patient or his authorised representative
makes a request for it;
(2) does not display the registration number accorded to him by
the National Council or the State Council, or maintain prescriptions
and certificates, etc., issued by him, in his clinic;
(3) abuses his professional position by committing adultery or
improper conduct with a patient or maintaining an improper association
with a patient;
(4) is convicted by a court of law for offences involving moral
turpitude or criminal acts;
(5) conducts sex determination test with the intent to terminate
the life of a female foetus developing in her mother’s womb, unless
there are other absolute indications for termination of pregnancy as
specified in the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971;
(6) signs or issues certificates, notification, reports and other
documents of similar character in his professional capacity for
subsequent use in the courts or for administrative purposes which is
untrue, misleading or improper;
(7) contravenes the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 and the rules or regulations made thereunder by prescribing
steroids or psychotropic drugs when there is no absolute medical
indication; or sells Schedule ‘H’ and ‘L’ drugs and poisons to the
public, except to his patient;
(8) performs or enables unqualified person to perform an abortion
or any illegal operation for which there is no medical, surgical or
psychological indication;
(9) issues certificates of efficiency in modern medicine to
unqualified or non-medical person:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall restrict the proper
training and instruction of bona fide students, midwives, dispensers,
surgical attendants, or skilled mechanical and technical assistants and
therapy assistants under the personal supervision of the health
professional;
(10) contributes to the press articles and give interviews regarding
diseases and treatments which may have the effect of advertising
himself or soliciting practices:

140
Provided that nothing in this clause shall restrict him from
writing to the press under his own name on matters of public health,
hygienic living or to deliver public lectures, give talks on the radio or
television or internet chat;
(11) advertises about an institution run by him such as a
maternity home, nursing home, private hospital, rehabilitation centre or
any type of training institution in the press, and such advertisements
contains anything more than the name of the institution, type of
patients admitted, type of training and other facilities offered and the
fees;
(12) uses an unusually large sign board containing anything
other than his name, qualifications obtained from a University or a
statutory body, titles and name of his speciality, registration number
including the name of the National Council or the State Council under
which registered, or affixes a sign-board on a chemist’s shop or in
places where he does not reside or work;
(13) discloses the secrets of a patient that have been learnt in
the exercise of his profession except—
(i) in a court of law under orders of the Court; or
(ii) in circumstances where there is a serious and identified
risk to a specific person or community; or
(iii) in case of communicable or notifiable diseases, in
which case public health authorities shall be informed immediately;
(14) refuses on religious grounds alone, to give assistance in or
conduct of sterility, birth control, circumcision and medical termination
of pregnancy when there is medical indication, unless the health
practitioner feels himself incompetent to do so;
(15) fails to obtain in writing, before performing an operation,
the consent from the husband or wife, parent or guardian in the case
of minor, or the patient himself, as the case may be, or in an operation
which may result in sterility, the consent of both husband and wife;
(16) publishes photographs or case reports of his patients without
their permission, in any medical or other journal in a manner by which
their identity could be made out:
Provided that if the identity is not to be disclosed, the consent
is not needed;
(17) uses touts or agents for procuring patients;
(18) claims to be a specialist without a special qualification in
that branch;
(19) undertakes invitro fertilisation or artificial insemination
without the informed consent in writing of the female patient, her
spouse as well as the donor, with sufficient information about the
purpose, methods, risks, inconveniences, disappointments of the
procedure and possible risks and hazards;

141
(20) conducts clinical drug trials or other research involving
patients or volunteers in violation of the guidelines of the Indian
Council of Medical Research;
(21) being a health professional posted in rural area, is found
absent on more than two occasions during inspection by the Head of
the District Health Authority or the Chairman, Zila Parishad and the
same is recommended to the National Council or the State Council, as
the case may be, by the State Government for action;
(22) being a health professional posted in a health college or
institution both as teaching faculty or otherwise, is found absent on
more than two occasions during the assigned duty hours and the same
is certified by the Principal or Medical Superintendent and forwarded
through the State Government to National Council or the State Council,
as the case may be, for action.

142
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Commission for Human Resources for Health
Bill, 2011 seeks to consolidate the law in certain disciplines of health
sector and promote human resources in health sector and provide for
mechanism for the determination, maintenance, co-ordination and
regulation of standards of health education throughout the country to
ensure adequate availability of human resources in all States and for
the said purpose to establish the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health to supervise and regulate professional Councils
in various disciplines of health sector.
2. At present various disciplines of health are supervised and
regulated by their respective professional Council’s, namely, the Medical
Council of India, the Dental Council of India, the Pharmacy Council
of India and the Indian Nursing Council. The broad vision of human
resources in terms of quantity, composition and quality required for
enabling the country’s health system to provide health care for all, is
hidden from the perspective of these individual regulatory bodies. Any
effort to make piecemeal changes in the statutes of the existing
regulatory bodies is not likely to bring any substantial reform in the
field of health education and services. To address these issues it is felt
necessary to establish a National Commission for Human Resources
for Health to provide an institutional framework to promote availability
of health care providers in all parts of the country to reduce shortages,
standardise quality and bridge the uneven distribution of existing work
force in the health sector.
3. In view of the above, it is proposed to enact a law, namely,
the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011
which, inter-alia, makes provision that the Central Government shall
by notification establish the National Commission for Human Resources
for Health with three constituent bodies, namely the National Board of
Health Education, the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
and the National Councils, with distinct responsibilities for regulating
educational standards; enforcing the standards and assuring quality and
governing medical practice along ethical norms. It would also be the
task of the Commission to ensure effective use of linkages in the
entire health system, act as the controlling and co-ordinating agency that
ensures accountability in the system and to facilitate interconnectivity
among and between disciplines to meet the needs of a diverse and
growing health system in the country.
4. The National Commission for Human Resources for Health
Bill, 2011 inter alia, provides for the following, namely:—
(a) to establish the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health consisting of a Chairperson, four whole-
142

143
time members and eight part-time members to be appointed by
the Central Government on the recommendations of the Selection
Committee;
(b) to enable the Commission to formulate action plans
for development of human resources for health in accordance
with the policy and priorities laid down by the Central Government
from time to time and to determine, maintain and coordinate the
minimum standards of and promote the human resources,
indiscipline of health education and training commensurate with
the requirement, of such resources in different States and Union
territories;
(c) to constitute the National Board for Health Education
in the place of the National Board of Examinations to take
measures to facilitate and promote academic studies and research
in emerging areas of health education with focus on professional
health education and to ensure uniform augmentation of trained
specialists and super specialists to achieve excellence in these
and connected areas;
(d) to constitute the National Evaluation and Assessment
Committee to take measures to develop and regulate the process
of evaluation and assessment of institutions imparting health
education and programmes conducted therein, and monitor the
functioning of agencies recommended by the Commission;
(e) to establish new National Councils to be known as the
Medical Council of India for medicine, the Dental Council of
India for dentistry, the Nursing Council of India for nursing,
the Pharmacy Council of India for pharmacy in the place of
existing Councils and also to establish a new Paramedical Council
of India for the discipline of paramedics and to confer powers
upon the State Governments to constitute the respective State
Councils;
(f) to enable the National Councils and the State Councils
to take measures to enroll persons having recognised
qualifications to enable them to practice in respective discipline
of health and to regulate the profession of respective discipline
of health;
(g) to constitute a fund to be called “the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health Fund” ;
(h) to transfer the assets, liabilities, rights, duties, etc., of
the existing Councils to the Commission;
(i) to provide for punishment, penalty or both for
contravening the provisions of the proposed legislation;
(j) to empower the Central Government to supersede the
Commission, Board, Committee or National Council and also to
empower the State Governments to supersede the State Councils;

144
(k) to repeal the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the
Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 and to dissolve the Nursing Council
of India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental Council of
India and the Medical Council of India.
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions
contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
GHULAM NABI AZAD.
N
EW D ELHI;
The 20th December, 2011.

145
145
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 2.—This clause defines various expressions used in the
Bill. It, inter alia, defines expressions “appropriate statutory regulatory
body”, “approved institution”, “code of ethics”, “corresponding new
National Council”, “discipline of health”, “evaluation and assessment”,
“foreign qualifications”, “health professional”, “National Register”,
“recognised qualification”, “trained specialist” and “university” used in
the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause relates to establishment of the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health.
It provides that the Central Government shall, by notification,
establish a body to be called the National Commission for Human
Resources for Health to exercise the powers conferred on, and to
perform the functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation.
The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject
to the provisions of the proposed legislation, to acquire, hold and
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract,
and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
It further provides for the composition of the Commission. The
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, four whole-time members;
and eight part-time members to be appointed by the Central Government
on the recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted under
clause 5.
It also provides that the president of the National Board for
Health Education, the president of the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee, the president of the each National Council and
the Chairperson or a Member of the National Commission for Higher
Education and Research of the proposed legislation—Members, ex
officio and all the Members including ex officio Members shall have
voting rights.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for qualifications for appointment
of Chairperson and Members of the Commission.
It provides that the Chairperson shall be a person of eminence,
integrity, administrative capability and outstanding ability with a post
graduate degree in the discipline of medical science from a university,
and having not less than twenty-five years experience in the profession,
out of which at least fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the
area of health care delivery, growth and development of modern
medicine or medical education and the other Members shall be persons
of eminence, integrity, administrative capability and outstanding ability
with a post graduate degree in the discipline of medical education,

146
dental education, nursing education, pharmacy education, public health,
management, science and technology, or law from a university, and
having not less than twenty years experience in the profession, out of
which at least fifteen years shall be in a leadership role, in the area
of health care delivery, growth and development of modern medicine
or medical education.
It further provides that out of twelve Members, four whole-
time Members shall be appointed by the Central Government from
the disciplines of medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy and
paramedics; and eight part-time Members shall be appointed from the
disciplines of medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, paramedics,
management, science and technology and law and no person, who is
not a citizen of India, shall be eligible to be appointed as the
Chairperson or a Member.
Clause 5.—This clause provides for constitution of the Selection
Committee.
It provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Selection
Committee consisting of a person of eminence having qualification and
experience of at least twenty-five years in medical profession as
Chairperson and five other experts of eminence from the discipline of
medical and allied health sciences, management, science and technology
having qualification and experience of at least twenty years in the
discipline, as members, in such manner as may be prescribed.
It further provides that the Secretary to the Government of
India in charge of the Union Ministry of Health (Department of Health
and Family Welfare) shall be the Convenor and the term of the
Selection Committee shall be in such manner as may be prescribed.
It also provides that the Selection Committee shall finalise the
selection of the Chairperson and Members of the Commission within
two months from the date on which the reference is made to it by
the Central Government in this behalf and shall recommend a panel of
two names for every vacancy referred to it and before recommending
any person for appointment as a Chairperson or a Member of the
Commission, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such
person does not have any financial or other conflict of interest, which
is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as Chairperson or Member.
However, no appointment of the Chairperson or Member of the
Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the
Selection Committee and it may regulate its own procedure.
It also provides that the Central Government shall initiate the
process of appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise in the
office of the Chairperson or of other Members of the Commission, six
months prior to the date of arising of such vacancy. However, in case
a vacancy arises in the Selection Committee for the reason of death
or removal, or resignation from office, such vacancy shall be filled
expeditiously, within six months from the date on which the vacancy
has arisen.

147
Clause 6.—This clause provides for the tenure, terms and
conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
It, inter alia, provides the Chairperson and other Members of
the Commission shall hold office for a term of four years from the
date on which he enters upon his office and be eligible for re-
appointment for another term. The Chairperson or Member shall not
hold office after he has attained the age of seventy years. The
Chairperson and other Members shall hold office during the pleasure
of the Central Government.
It further provides that the salary and allowances payable to and
other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other
Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 7.—This clause provides for declaration of interest.
It provides that the Chairperson and other Members, shall
immediately after entering office and every year thereafter, make a
declaration to the extent of their interest, whether direct or indirect
and whether financial or otherwise, in any health institution or any
other institution which comes under the purview of the Commission
and the same shall be displayed on the website of the Commission.
Clause 8.—This clause relates to restrictions on re-employment.
It provides that the Chairperson and other Members, on ceasing
to hold office shall not, for a period of two years, accept any
employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any
health educational institution whose matter has been dealt with by such
Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, or has been before the
Commission when he held office as such Chairperson or Member. It
further provides that nothing shall prevent the Chairperson or a Member,
to accept any employment in any health educational institution controlled
or maintained by the Central Government or the State Government.
Clause 9.—This clause provides for general superintendence,
direction and management of affairs.
It provides that subject to the other provisions of the proposed
legislation, the general superintendence, direction and control of the
administration shall vest in the Chairperson.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for Member to act as
Chairperson, or to discharge his functions, in certain circumstances.
It provides that in the event of the occurrence of any vacancy
in the office of the Chairperson by reason of death, removal, suspension
or resignation, the senior most whole time Member shall act as the
Chairperson till such time the Chairperson is appointed, to fill the
vacancy. It further provides that when the Chairperson is unable to
discharge his functions owing to absence on account of leave or
otherwise, the senior most whole-time Member shall discharge the
functions of the Chairperson till the Chairperson is able to discharge
his functions.

148
Clause 11.—This clause provides for resignation of Chairperson
or Member.
It provides that the Chairperson or a Member may, by notice
given in writing under his hand of not less than a period of thirty
days, addressed to the Central Government, resign from his office. It
further provides that the Chairperson or the Member shall, unless
permitted by the Central Government to relinquish office sooner,
continue to hold office until the expiry of a period of thirty days from
the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as
his successor enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of
office, whichever is earliest.
Clause 12.—This clause provides for removal and suspension of
Chairperson or Member from office in certain circumstances.
It provides that the Central Government may, by order, remove
from office the Chairperson or any Member, who, has been adjudged
an insolvent; or being a whole-time Member, has engaged at any time,
during his term of office, in any paid employment; or has been
convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or has become physically or
mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson or other Member; or
is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
has been removed or dismissed from the service or office of the
Central Government or of a State Government or from a body owned
or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government or
from any Central or State statutory body; has acquired such financial
or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as
Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be; or has so abused
his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public
interest; or has been guilty of proved misconduct; or has been guilty
of proved conflict of interest in the discharge of his functions. It
further provides that the Chairperson or any Member shall not be
removed from his office, unless he has been given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in the matter. It also provides that the
Central Government may, if it considers necessary in the public
interest, suspend such Chairperson or other Member.
Clause 13.—This clause provides for meetings of the Commission.
It provides that the Commission shall meet at least twice every
month at such time and place as it may appoint and the Chairperson
shall preside over such meetings. It further provides that the decisions
of the Commission shall be by consensus, failing which by a majority
of votes of Members present and voting and in the event of equality of
votes, the Chairperson or in his absence, the Member presiding shall
have a second or casting vote. It also provides that the quorum of a
meeting of the Commission shall be seven members and the Commission
may make regulations for the conduct of business at its meetings.
Clause 14.—This clause provides for vacancies, etc., not to invalidate
proceedings of Commission.

149
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the Commission
shall be invalid merely by reason of, (a) any vacancy in, or any defect
in the constitution of the Commission; or (b) any defect in the
appointment of a person as a Member of the Commission; or (c) any
irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the
merits of the case.
Clause 15.—This clause provides for appointment of the Chief
Executive Officer and other officers and employees of Commission.
This clause confers power upon the Central Government to
appoint a Chief Executive Officer of the Commission, not below the
rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India, who shall be
the Member-Secretary of the Commission, for a fixed term of four
years who shall not be eligible for re-appointment.
It further provides that the Chief Executive Officer shall discharge
such functions as may be specified by regulations made by the
Commission or may be assigned to him by the Commission from time
to time and, shall report to the Commission, through the Chairperson,
on actions taken by him in performance of his duties.
It also provides that the Commission may, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, appoint such officers and other employees
as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions
under the proposed legislation. It also provides that the salaries and
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief
Executive Officer and other officers and employees of the Commission
shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for the powers and functions
of the Commission.
This clause specifies the measures to be taken by the
Commission, subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, to
determine, maintain and coordinate the standards of and promote the
human resources, in discipline of health education and training
commensurate with the requirement of such resources in different
States and Union territories. The functions to be performed by the
Commission, inter alia, shall be to, carry out studies and collect data
required to assess the needs and requirements of human resources for
health in different States and Union territories; assess the requirement
(including the number, type and geographical location) of health training
facilities for education and training in medical and allied discipline;
formulate action plans for development of human resources for health
in accordance with the policy and priorities laid down by the Central
Government from time to time; formulate a plan for financial and
other resources required for creation of human resources; make
recommendations on the measures to strengthen the health care delivery,
operational efficiency and health care infrastructure; coordinate existing
health care infrastructure in Central and State Government for effective
utilisation thereof; facilitate coordination among bodies or Councils
constituted under the proposed legislation, conduct or cause to conduct

150
their social audit and obtain public feedback on their performance and
achievements; grant permission for establishing of health educational
institution, ensure compliance of its terms and conditions, or withdraw
such permission; regulate, in accordance with the law, for the time
being in force, the entry and operation of foreign health educational
institutions if permitted under the law for the time being in force in
consultation with the National Board or such other authority as may
be specified by the Central Government; conduct the elections to the
National Councils established under proposed legislation; promote and
regulate inter-professional co-operation amongst health professions;
specify by regulations the continuous medical education and the courses,
workshops and training activities; provide such grants and moneys to
the Board, Committee and National Council as they may require for
efficient discharge of their powers and functions under proposed
legislation; transfer such assets, properties or liabilities to the Board,
Committee or National Council, as the case may be, as it may
consider necessary; provide such officers and other employees to the
Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, as they
may require for efficient discharge of their powers and functions
under the proposed legislation; perform such other functions as may
be prescribed.
It further provides that the Commission shall exercise the powers
and discharge the functions specified under this clause in such manner
which does not interfere with the autonomous and self-regulatory
nature of universities or institutions.
Clause 17.—This clause provides for establishment of the
Institution for imparting health education or new course of study.
This clause provides that, notwithstanding anything contained in
the proposed legislation or any other law for the time being in force,
provides for, (a) no person shall, without obtaining letter of permission
from the Commission, establish an institution for a course of study or
training in the discipline of health, (including a post-graduate or doctoral
or post doctoral course of study or training), for grant of recognised
qualification; and (b) no institution, which has been granted permission
under sub-clause (1), shall increase its admission capacity in any
course of study or training (including a post-graduate or doctoral or
post doctoral course of study or training), without obtaining the letter
of permission from the Commission. However, any person who has
been granted permission for establishment of the health educational
institution or an institution which has been granted permission to
increase its admission capacity in course of study or training under the
provisions of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy
Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder, or any other
law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to be the health
educational institution established under the provisions of the proposed
legislation or deemed to have validly increased their admission capacity
and the qualifications granted by such institutions shall be the recognised
qualification for the purposes of the proposed legislation.

151
It further provides that every person shall, for the purpose of
obtaining permission under sub-clause ( 1), submit to the Commission
a scheme in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause ( 3) and the
Commission shall refer the scheme to the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee for its recommendations and the scheme referred
to in sub-clause ( 2) shall be in such form and contain such particulars
and be preferred in such manner and accompanied with such fees as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
It also provides that on receipt of the scheme, the Committee
may obtain such other particulars as may be considered necessary by
it from the applicant, and thereafter, it may, ( a) if the scheme is
defective and does not contain any required particulars, give a reasonable
opportunity to the person concerned for making a written representation
and it shall be open to such person to rectify the defects, if any,
specified by it; and ( b) consider the scheme, having regard to the
factors referred to in sub-clause ( 8), and submit the scheme together
with its recommendations thereon to the Commission.
It also provides that the Commission may, after considering
the scheme and the recommendations of the Committee under sub-
clause ( 4) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars
as may be considered necessary by it from the applicant, and having
regard to the factors referred to in sub-clause ( 8), either approve
(with such conditions, if any, as it may consider necessary) or
disapprove the scheme and any such approval shall be a permission
under sub-clause ( 1). However, no scheme shall be disapproved by the
Commission without giving such person a reasonable opportunity of
being heard and nothing shall prevent any person, whose scheme has
not been approved by the Commission, to submit a fresh scheme and
the provisions of this clause shall apply to such scheme, as if such
scheme has been submitted for the first time under sub-clause ( 2).
It also provides that where no order passed by the Commission
has been communicated to the person submitting the scheme, within
a period of one year from the date of submission of such scheme to
the Commission under sub-clause ( 2), the scheme shall be deemed to
have been approved by the Commission in the form in which it had
been submitted, and, accordingly, the permission of the Commission
required under sub-clause ( 1) shall also be deemed to have been
granted and in computing the period specified in sub-clause ( 6), the
time taken by the person concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing
any particulars called for by the Committee or by the Commission,
shall be excluded.
It also provides that the Committee, while making its
recommendations under clause (b) of sub-clause (4) and the Commission,
while passing an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme
under sub-clause ( 5), shall have due regard to the factors such as,
(a) whether the proposed health educational institution or the existing
health educational institution seeking to open a new or higher course
of study or training or increase its admission capacity, would be in a

152
position to offer the course of study or training in the discipline of
health (including a post graduate or doctoral or post doctoral course
of study or training) with the minimum standards of health education
as specified by the Board under the proposed legislation; ( b) whether
the person seeking to establish a health educational institution or
seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or
to increase its admission capacity has adequate financial resources;.
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment,
accommodation, training and other facilities to ensure proper functioning
of the health educational institution or conducting the new course of
study or training or accommodating the increased admission capacity
have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified
in the scheme; ( d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard
to the number of students likely to attend such health educational
institution or course of study or training or as a result of the increased
admission capacity have been provided or would be provided within
the time-limit specified in the scheme; ( e) whether any arrangement
has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to
students likely to attend such health educational institution or course
of study or training by person having the recognised medical
qualifications; ( j) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice
of medicine; and ( g) any other factors as may be prescribed.
It also provides that where the Commission passes an order
either approving or disapproving a scheme under this section, a copy
of the order shall be delivered to the person concerned and explains
that the expression “person” used in this clause includes any university
or a trust or other body corporate, but does not include the Central
Government or a State Government.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for recognition of medical
qualifications granted by the health educational institutions in India.
It provides that the educational qualifications granted by any
health educational institution in India which are included in the Second
Schedule or Third Schedule or Fourth Schedule or Fifth Schedule or
Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, shall be recognised qualifications
of the respective discipline of health for the purposes of the proposed
legislation. However, any qualification recognized under the provisions
of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the
Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the
rules and regulations made thereunder, shall continue to be the recognised
qualifications of the respective discipline of health for the purposes of
the proposed legislation, unless such qualifications are derecognised by
the amendment of the Schedule under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that any health educational institution in
India, which grants any qualification in the discipline of health not
included in the Second Schedule or Third Schedule or Fourth Schedule
or Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the case may be, may apply
to the Commission to have such qualification recognised, and the
Commission, after consulting the Committee, may recommend to the

153
Central Government to amend the Second Schedule or Third Schedule
or Fourth Schedule or Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the case
may be, so as to include such qualification therein and any notification
amending any of the said Schedules may also direct that an entry shall
be made in the last column of the Second Schedule or Third Schedule
or Fourth Schedule or Fifth Schedule or Sixth Schedule, as the case
may be, against such qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised
qualification only when granted after a specified date.
Clause 19.—This clause provides for non-recognition of
qualifications in certain cases.
It provides that no qualification granted by any health educational
institution to any student of such institution shall be recognised
qualification for the purposes of the proposed legislation, unless such
institution has been established with the approval of the Commission
in accordance with the provisions of the proposed legislation or rules
or regulations made thereunder and where any health educational
institution offers a new or higher course of study or training (including
a post-graduate course of study or training), such qualification shall
not be a recognised qualification for the purposes of the proposed
legislation, unless such course of study or training offered has been
approved by the Commission before offering the same to the students.
It further provides that where any health educational institution
increases its admission capacity in any course of study or training
(including a post-graduate course of study or training), such qualification
granted to any student or such institution on the basis of the increase
in its admission capacity shall not be a recognised qualification for the
purposes of the proposed legislation, unless such increase in its
admission capacity in any course of study or training offered has been
approved by the Commission before offering the same to the students.
Clause 20.—This clause provides for entry and operation of
foreign health educational institutions.
This clause provides that the Commission shall regulate the
entry and operation of foreign health educational institutions in
consultation with the National Board and in accordance with the law,
for the time being in force. However, in case no such law is in force,
the Central Government shall regulate the entry and operation of
foreign health institutions in consultation with the Board till such law
comes into force.
Clause 21.—This clause provides for withdrawal of recognition.
This clause provides that when, upon recommendation of the
Committee or the Board, it appears to the Commission that, ( a) the
courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency
required from candidates at any examination held by any university or
other health institution for an approved course in health education; or
(b) the faculty staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other
facilities for instruction and training provided in such university or
other health educational institution, or in any college or other institution

154
affiliated to any such university, do not conform to the standards
specified by the Commission, the Commission may, after making such
inquiry as it may consider necessary, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, withdraw recognition of the course or qualification in respect
of the university or other health institution, or college or other institution
affiliated to such university, as the case may be, with such cut-off
date as it thinks fit. However, no such recognition shall be withdrawn
unless the university or the institution or college, as the case may be,
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 22.—This clause provides for fees.
It provides that the Commission may levy such fees and other
charges in respect of such functions as may be specified by regulations
made by the Commission.
Clause 23.—This clause provides for constitution of National
Board for Health Education.
It empowers the Central Government, by notification, constitute
a Board to be known as the ‘National Board for Health Education’ to
assist the Commission in discharge of its powers and functions for the
purposes of health education.
Clause 24.—This clause provides for the composition of the
Board.
The Board shall consist of a President, two whole-time members
and four part-time members, to be appointed by the Central Government
on the recommendation of the selection Committee constituted under
clause 25.
It further provides that the Chairperson or a Member of the
National Commission for Higher Education and Research referred to in
section 5 of the Higher Education and Research Act, 2011—Member,
ex officio.
It also provides that the President and whole-time members
shall be chosen from the persons possessing a post graduate degree
in the discipline of medicine or medical education from a recognised
university or health institutions, having at least fifteen years of standing
in the profession or teaching and training, out of which seven years
of experience shall be in the discipline of medical education, training,
curriculum design or development and conduct of examinations and
the part-time members shall be chosen from persons possessing a post
graduate degree in the discipline of medical education from a recognised
university or medical institution having at least twelve years of standing
in the profession from the discipline of health or health education out
of which seven years of experience shall be in education, training,
curriculum design or development and conduct of examinations in the
discipline of health.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for the Selection Committee
for selection of the President and members of the Board and committee.

155
It provides that the Central Government shall constitute a Selection
Committee for appointment of the President and members of the
Board and the Committee, consisting of, a person of eminence having
qualification and experience of at least twenty years in medical profession
as Chairperson; three other experts of eminence from the discipline of
medical and allied health sciences, management, science and technology
having qualification and experience of at least fifteen years in the
discipline, as members, to be appointed in such manner as may be
prescribed.
It further provides that the Secretary to the Government of
India in charge of the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of Health and Family Welfare) shall be ex officio member
of the Selection Committee and the Chairperson of the Commission
shall be the Convenor and
It also provides that the term of the Selection Committee shall
be such as may De prescribed and the Selection Committee shall
finalise the selection of the President and members of the Board and
the Committee within two months from the date on which the reference
is made to it by the Central Government in this behalf and the
Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every
vacancy referred to it.
It also provides that before recommending any person for
appointment as a President or a member of the Board or the Committee,
the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that such person does not
have any financial or other conflict of interest, which is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as President or member of the Board or the
Committee, as the case may be and no appointment of the President
or member of the Board or the Committee shall be invalid merely by
reason of any vacancy in the Selection Committee.
It also provides that the Selection Committee may regulate its
own procedure and the Central Government shall initiate the process
of appointment in respect of any vacancy due to arise in the office
of the President or of other members of the Board or Committee, six
months prior to the date of arising of such vacancy and in case a
vacancy arises in the Selection Committee for the reason of death or
removal, or resignation from office, such vacancy shall be filled
expeditiously, within six months from the date on which the vacancy
has arisen.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for the transitory provisions
relating to Board.
It provides that on and from the date-of constitution of the Board,
(a) the National Board of Examinations registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 shall be dissolved; (b) any reference to the
existing National Board of Examinations in any law other than the
proposed legislation or in any contract or other instrument shall be
deemed as a reference to the Board; (c) all properties and assets,
movable and immovable, of, or belonging to, the existing National

156
Board of Examinations, shall vest in the Board; (d) all rights and
liabilities of the existing National Board of Examinations shall be
transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of, the Board; (e) all
debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and
all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the existing
National Board of Examinations immediately before that date, for or in
connection with the purpose of the said existing National Board of
Examinations shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or
engaged to be done by, with or for, the Board; (f) all sums of money
due to the existing National Board of Examinations immediately before
that date shall be deemed to be due to the Board; and (g) all suits and
other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted
by or against the existing National Board of Examinations immediately
before that date may be continued or may be instituted by or against
the Board.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for the appointment and terms
and conditions of office of the President and members of the Board.
It provides that any person appointed as the President or a
member shall hold office for a term of four years from the date on
which he enters upon his office or till the date he attains the age of
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier and be eligible for re-appointment
for another term and such President or a member shall hold office
during the pleasure of the Central Government.
It further provides that the salary and allowances payable to and
other terms and conditions of service of the President and other
members shall be such as may be prescribed.
Clause 28.—This clause provides for the Executive Director and
other officers and employees of Board.
It empowers the Board to appoint an Executive Director to
perform such functions as may be assigned to him and with the
previous approval of the Commission appoint such other officers and
employees as the Board considers necessary for the efficient discharge
of its functions under proposed legislation.
It further provides that the number of, the salaries and allowances
payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the other
officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be specified
by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 29.—This clause provides for the meetings of the Board.
It provides that the Board shall meet at least once in every
month and four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for
the meetings. It further provides that every meeting of the Board shall
be presided over by the President or, if for any reason he is unable
to attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members
present at the meeting from among themselves and a member shall be
deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent, without permission,
and without sufficient cause in the opinion of the Board, from three

157
consecutive meetings of the Board and the Board may regulate its own
procedure for the transaction of business at its meeting.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for functions of the Board.
It provides that the Board shall take measures to facilitate and
promote academic studies and research in emerging areas of health
education with focus on professional health education and to ensure
uniform augmentation of trained specialists and super specialists, to
achieve excellence in these and connected areas and, inter alia,
includes, determination, co-ordination and maintenance of standards
for health education and research; design and approve new courses of
study as recommended by institutes, hospitals, colleges or universities
for imparting training and conducting courses therein; specify schedule
of admissions for admission to various courses of study; specify
calendar of examinations and scheme of examinations; conduct
examinations for entry to any undergraduate, post graduate, doctoral,
post doctoral, super speciality or diploma courses, fellowship
examination and screening test; take such steps as may be desirable
to elevate the standards of training and development of quality health
professionals; advise the Commission regarding establishment of
laboratories, institutes and training centres for continuous medical
education; co-ordinate between medical and other scientific academies,
societies, associations, institutions and Government medical and scientific
departments and services; appoint such number of visitors as it may
consider fit to visit any university or other health educational institution
imparting a recognised course in discipline of health, or to attend any
examination held by any such university or other health educational
institution for the purposes of granting recognition thereof; to prescribe
norms for compulsory disclosure by health educational institutions
engaging in discipline of health education on all aspects related to their
functioning that has a bearing on the interests of students, faculty,
parents, the community and the Government; to approve and notify
norms and standards of maintenance of academic quality for
accreditation and benchmarking of education in recognised health
educational institutions imparting approved courses in the discipline of
health throughout the period of accreditation; promote autonomy of
health educational institutions for the tree pursuit of knowledge and
innovation; promote development of a curricular framework with
specific reference to new or emerging or inter-disciplinary field of
knowledge; develop measures to effectively connect health education
to the needs of society; encourage universities to enable colleges to
evolve into health institutions with powers to award degrees; take
measures to enhance access to, and inclusion in, health education to
remove regional imbalances in the provision of health educational
institutions for such education as well as in access of students to such
health educational institutions; advice the Commission and Central
Government on any matter that may referred; and discharge such
other functions as may be prescribed.
Clause 31.—This clause provides for power to conduct certain
examination.

158
It provides that the Board may, in consultation with the concerned
State Government and university, conduct, with effect from such dare
as may be notified by the Central Government, either by itself or by
an authority authorised by it, examinations for entry to any under
graduate, post graduate, doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or
diploma courses or examination for fellowship in such manner as may
be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 32.—This clause provides for power to require information
as to courses of study and examinations.
It provides that every health educational institution which grants
any recognised qualification shall furnish such information as to courses
of study and examinations as the Board may require from time to time.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for the screening test.
It provides that no person, being a citizen of India or a registered
Overseas Citizens of India, who obtains the recognised qualification
granted by medical institution in any country outside India recognised
for enrolment as medical practitioner in that country shall be entitled
for enrolment by the National Council or the State Council, as the case
may be, unless he qualifies the screening test in India to be conducted
by the Board.
It further provides that no person being a citizen of India shall,
after the commencement of the proposed legislation, obtain any medical
qualification from any medical institution in a country outside India
without obtaining an eligibility certificate from the Board and any
person, who obtains such qualification without obtaining the eligibility
certificate, shall not be eligible to appear in the screening test. However,
any person being a citizen of India who acquired the recognised
qualification or obtained admission in the medical institution outside
India during the period between 15th March, 2002 and the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation, after obtaining an eligibility
certificate from the Medical Council of India under the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956, shall, subject to other provisions of the proposed
legislation, be eligible to be enrolled in the National Register or State
Register.
It also provides that any person, being a citizen of India or a
registered Overseas Citizens of India, who obtains a recognised
qualification in the discipline of health other than medicine from any
health educational institution in any country outside India recognised
for enrolment as practitioner in that country shall not be entitled to be
enrolled in the National Register or State Register unless he qualifies
the screening test in India and the Commission may, by notification,
exempt any person, who possesses the recognised qualification and
enrolled as health practitioner in a country outside India for a period
of not less than three years, from the requirement of the screening
test under this clause.
Clause 34.—This clause provides for constitution of the National
Evaluation and Assessment Committee.

159
It provides that the Central Government shall, by notification,
constitute a Committee to be known as the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee for evaluation and assessment of any university
or institution seeking permission under clause 17 or imparting education
in the discipline of health to assist the Commission in discharge of its
powers and functions under the proposed legislation.
Clause 35.—This clause provides for the composition of the
National Evaluation and Assessment Committee.
It provides that the Committee shall consist of a President, two
whole-time members, and four part-time members, to be appointed by
the Central Government on the recommendation of the selection
Committee constituted under clause 25.
It further provides that the President and members shall be
chosen from the persons of eminence, integrity and outstanding calibre
having post graduate degree in the discipline of health, health policy,
public health, management, technology, law or finance from a recognised
university or institution having ten years of experience in the respective
field.
Clause 36.—This clause provides for terms and conditions of
office of the President and members of the Committee. It provides
that a person appointed as the President or a member of the Committee
shall hold office for a term of four  years from the date on which he
enters upon his office or till the date he attains the age of seventy
years, whichever is earlier and be eligible for re-appointment for
another term and the President or a member of the Committee shall
hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
It further provides that the salary and allowances payable to and
other terms and conditions of service of the President and other
members of the Committee shall be such as may be specified by
regulation made by the Commission.
Clause 37.—This clause provides for functions of the Committee.
It provides that the Committee shall take measures to develop
and regulate the process of evaluation and assessment of institutions
imparting health education and programmes conducted therein, and
monitor the functioning of agencies recommended by the Commission
and, inter alia, specify standards, norms and processes for registration
of evaluation and assessment agencies under any law for the time
being in force; undertake audit and cause to be audited the adherence
to code of ethics including policies on obviating conflict of interest,
disclosure of information, evolving transparency in processes and
procedures of evaluation and assessment; specify and monitor standards
on selection and training of experts for the purposes of evaluation and
assessment; scrutinise the report of the evaluation and assessment
agency on the applications for consideration of grant of permission
for establishing of college, institute or university and make its
recommendations to the Commission; recommend to the Commission
for review or revoke registration granted to the evaluation and assessment

160
agencies and health institutions as the case may be; levy of fees or
other charges for matters relating to evaluation and assessment; advise
the Central Government or any State Government or the appropriate
statutory regulatory authority on any policy matter concerning evaluation
and assessment which may be referred to it; promote research and
innovation in evaluation and assessment; monitor adherence to such
norms, guidelines and standards of academic quality, as may be
specified under any law for the time being in force by the appropriate
statutory regulatory authority, in health educational institutions; and
perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the
Commission.
It further provides that the process of selection of evaluation
and assessment agency for evaluation and assessment shall be in a
transparent manner and the information relating to the selection of
such agency shall be put in the public domain and notwithstanding
anything contained in the proposed legislation or any other law for the
time being in force, the Commission or Committee shall not engage
the same evaluation and assessment agency for successive inspections
or audit inspections, to carry out audit or review inspection of any
institute at least for five years.
It also provides that the evaluation and assessment of a health
educational institution shall be done by the evaluation and assessment
agencies having such qualifications and experience and in such manner
as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 38.—This clause provides for the power of audit and
inspection of evaluation and assessment agency.
It provides that the Commission may, in consultation with the
Central Government, appoint an audit committee consisting of such
number of persons having such qualifications and experience as may
be prescribed, for the purpose of audit, inspections or inquiry into the
affairs of any evaluation and assessment agency or any health
educational institution in so far it relates to their evaluation and
assessment.
It further provides that the Commission may, on the
recommendations of the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee,
at any time, by order in writing, direct the audit Committee specified
in the order to audit or inspect or inquire into the affairs of any
evaluation and assessment agency or any health educational institution
in so far it relates to evaluation and assessment and to report its
findings and recommendations to the National Evaluation and Assessment
Committee or the Commission, as the case may be and on receipt of
the report from the audit committee, the Commission may after giving
such opportunity to the evaluation and assessment agency to make a
representation in connection with the report, in the opinion of the
Commission seems reasonable, by order in writing, take such action
in respect of any matter arising out of the report as the Commission
may think fit; or modify the terms and conditions of certificate of
registration as it thinks fit, and terms or conditions so modified shall

161
be binding upon and be observed by the evaluation and assessment
agency and shall be of like force and effect as if they were contained
in the certificate of registration or approval, as the case may be; or
revoke the certificate of registration of the evaluation and assessment
agency or the approval granted to the health educational institution, as
the case may be.
It also provides that it shall be the duty of every evaluation and
assessment agency and every health educational institution, as the case
may be, to produce before the audit committee all such papers and
other documents in its custody or power and to furnish any statement
and information relating to its affairs, as the audit committee may
require of such agency or institution, as the case may be, within such
time as the audit committee may specify and the audit committee may
examine on oath, any chief executive or officer or other employee of
the evaluation and assessment agency in relation to evaluation and
assessment of any health educational institution or programme conducted
therein, and may administer oaths, accordingly.
It also provides that the audit committee shall submit its report
to the Committee and the Committee shall place the report and the
action taken thereon by it or the Commission, on, its website.
Clause 39.—This clause provides for the Executive Director and
other officers and employees of the Committee.
It provides that there shall be an Executive Director to the
National Evaluation and Assessment Committee to be appointed by the
Central Government for a period of four years. It further provides that
the Committee may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, appoint such other officers and employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under the proposed
legislation.
It also provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and
the other terms and conditions of service of the Executive Director
and other officers and employees of the Committee shall be such as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 40.—It provides for the meetings of the Committee.
It provides that the Committee shall meet at least once in every
three months, at such time and place as it may appoint, the quorum
of a meeting of the Committee shall be two members and the President
of the Committee shall preside over its meetings or, if for any reason
he is unable to attend, such other member as may be chosen by the
members present at the meeting from among themselves.
It further provides that a member shall be deemed to have
vacated his seat if he is absent, without permission, and without
sufficient cause in the opinion of the Committee, from three consecutive
meetings of the Committee and the Committee may regulate its own
procedure for transaction of business at its meetings.
Clause 41.—This clause provides for constitution of corresponding
National Councils.

162
It provides that on the commencement of proposed legislation,
there shall be constituted, from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification, appoint, such corresponding new National Councils
as are specified in the First Schedule annexed to the proposed legislation.
It further provides that on the commencement of the proposed
legislation, the Central Government shall, by notification, constitute the
Paramedical Council of India for the disciplines of paramedics and
National Council for any other discipline of health as may be notified
by it under sub-clause ( j) of clause 2.
It also provides that each corresponding new National Council
and the Paramedical Council of India and the National Council for any
other discipline of health shall be a body corporate by the name
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power,
subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation, to acquire, hold
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract,
and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued and the head office of
each National Council shall be in the National Capital Region referred
to in clause ( f) of section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning
Board Act, 1985.
Clause 42.—This clause provides for vesting of existing councils
in the Commission.
It provides that on the commencement of the proposed legislation,
every existing Council shall be transferred to, and shall vest in, the
Commission.
Clause 43.—This clause provides for President, Vice-President
and other members of Council to vacate their offices.
It provides that every person holding office, immediately before
the commencement of the proposed legislation, as President or Vice-
President or other members of an existing Council shall, on such
commencement, vacate their offices as such President or Vice-President
or other members, as the case may be, and no such President or Vice-
President or other member, as the case may be, shall be entitled to
claim any compensation for premature termination of the term of his
office.
Clause 44.—This clause empowers the Central Government to
guide the corresponding National Councils by its directions.
It provides that every corresponding new National Council shall,
in the discharge of its functions, be guided by such directions in
regard to matters of policy involving public interest as the Central
Government may, after consultation with the Chairperson of the
Commission, give.
Clause 45.—This clause provides for references to existing
Councils on and from commencement of the proposed legislation.
It provides that any reference to any existing Council in any
law, other than the proposed legislation, or in any contract or other

163
instrument shall, in so far as it relates to the undertaking which has
been transferred by clause 42 be construed as a reference to the
corresponding new National Council.
Clause 46.—This clause provides for composition of the National
Councils.
It provides that each National Council referred to in clause 41
shall consist of, one member from each State (other than a Union
territory), to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation
with the State Government concerned; one member from each
University, to be elected from amongst the members of the faculty of
the concerned discipline of health by members of the Senate of the
University or in case the University has no Senate, by members of the
Court; one member from each State in which a State Register in the
respective discipline is maintained, to be elected from amongst
themselves by persons enrolled on such Register; five members to be
nominated by the Central Government from amongst heads of medical
institutions in the respective discipline owned, controlled or managed
by the Central Government; five members to be nominated from
amongst professionals of respective disciplines by the Central
Government; and President of the Board shall be ex officio member
of the National Council for each discipline of health;
It further provides that a member of the National Council shall
cease to be such member if he ceases to be a person enrolled on the
concerned State Register or to hold office by virtue of which he was
elected or nominated, as the case may be, as such member to the
Council.
Clause 47.—This clause provides for elections to National Councils
and its term.
It provides that the Commission shall conduct elections for each
National Council, within a period of six months from the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation for constituting the National
Councils under clause 41 in accordance with such procedure and
manner as may be prescribed and each such National Council shall
continue for a period of four years from the date on which it is
constituted. However, the said period may be extended by the
Commission, with the prior approval of the Central Government, for
a period not exceeding six months in case it is not possible for any
reason to reconstitute the National Council after the expiration of the
said period.
It further provides that the Commission shall commence the
process of conducting the next elections for National Council six
months before the expiration of the term of the National Council or
any extended period as may be provided under sub-clause ( 2).
It also provides that the Commission shall conduct elections to
any vacancy that may arise in the membership of any National Council
on account of death, resignation or removal, in such manner as may
be prescribed.

164
Clause 48.—This clause provides for the President and Vice-
President of the National Council.
It provides that each National Council referred to in clause 41
shall have a President and a Vice-President to be elected by the
members of the National Council from among themselves in such
manner as may be prescribed and the powers to be exercised, and the
functions to be performed, by the President or the Vice-President of
the National Council shall be such as may be specified by regulations
made by the National Council.
Clause 49.—This clause provides for settlement of disputes
regarding election.
It provides that, in case of any dispute regarding any election
under clause 47 or clause 48, the aggrieved person may make an
application within a period of thirty days from the date of declaration
of the result of election, to the Chairperson of the Commission who
shall forward the same to the Central Government.
Clause 50.—This clause provides for meetings of the National
Council.
It provides that the quorum of a National Council for a meeting
shall be one-third of its total membership and the Council shall meet
at least twice in each year at such time and place as may be appointed
by it.
It further provides that the meetings of the National Council
shall be presided over by the President or, if for any reason he is
unable to attend, by the Vice-President, and in case he is also unable
to attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members
present at the meeting from among themselves.
It also provides that a member shall be deemed to have vacated
his seat if he is absent, without permission, and without showing
sufficient cause in the opinion of the National Council, from three
consecutive meetings of the National Council and the National Council
may make regulations for the transaction of business at its meetings.
Clause 51.—This clause provides for functions of the National
Council.
It provides that the National Council shall, subject to the
provisions of the proposed legislation, take measures to enrol persons
having recognised qualifications to enable them to practice in respective
discipline of health and to regulate the profession of respective discipline
of health and such measures may, inter alia, provide matters relating
to, enrolment of persons having recognised qualifications to enable
them to practice in the respective discipline of health and renew the
enrolment from time to time; maintain and publish the National Register;
organise and conduct seminars, conferences, workshops or other
programme from time to time; grant certificate of good standing to the
persons enrolled by it; levy fees or other charges to be paid by the

165
persons seeking enrolment or persons enrolled by it; and perform such
other functions as may be prescribed.
It further provides that a person enrolled under the proposed
legislation, before going abroad for the purpose of employment, service,
professional assignment or post or position or for exploration of career
opportunities or for carrying out any professional or related work,
shall obtain the certificate of good standing from the respective National
Council or the State Council.
Clause 52.—This clause provides for the Registrar and other
officers and employees of the National Council.
It provides that every National Council shall have a Registrar to
be appointed by the Central Government for a fixed term of four years
who shall not be eligible for re-appointment under the proposed legislation
and the National Council may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, appoint such other officers and employees as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under the proposed
legislation.
It further provides that the salaries and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service of the other officers and
employees of the National Council shall be such as may be specified
by regulations made by the National Council.
Clause 53.—This clause provides for the constitution of State
Councils.
It provides that where there is no State Council in any State,
the State Government shall, by notification, constitute the State Councils
for medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy and paramedics, respectively
within a period of three years from the date of commencement of the
proposed legislation, in such manner and with such composition as
may be prescribed by the State Government and the State Government
may, by notification, constitute State Councils for any other discipline
of health notified under sub-clause ( j) of clause 2.
It further provides that until the State Council is constituted in
a State, the National Council of respective discipline of health shall
enrol the persons, in respect of that State, having recognised
qualification in the manner provided under the proposed legislation and
such enrolled person shall be entitled to practice in the respective
discipline of health only in the State for which he has applied for
enrolment.
It also provides that each State Council shall be a body corporate
by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common
seal, with power, subject to the provisions of the proposed legislation,
to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued and the
head office of each State Council shall be at such place as the State
Government may decide.

166
It also provides that each State Council shall continue for a
period of four years from the date on which it is constituted or, such
period as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Clause 54.—This clause provides for the President and the
Vice-President of the State Council.
It provides that each State Council referred to in clause 51 shall
have a President and a Vice-President to be elected by the members
of the State Council from among themselves in such manner as may
be prescribed by the State Government and the powers to be exercised,
and the functions to be performed, by the President or the Vice-
President of the State Council shall be such as may be specified by
regulations made by the State Council.
It further provides that no person shall be eligible to hold office
in any capacity in the State Council whether as a President or Vice-
President or member for more than two terms.
Clause 55.—This clause provides for meetings of the State
Council.
It provides that the quorum of a State Council for a meeting
shall be one-third of its total membership and the State Council shall
meet at least twice in each year at such time and place as may be
appointed by the State Council.
It further provides that the meetings of the State Council shall
be presided over by the President or, if for any reason he is unable
to attend, by the Vice-President, and in case he is also unable to
attend, such other member as may be chosen by the members present
at the meeting from among themselves and a member shall be deemed
to have vacated his seat if he is absent, without permission, and
without showing sufficient cause in the opinion of the State Council,
from three consecutive meetings of the State Council and the State
Council to make regulations for the transaction of business at its
meetings.
Clause 56.—This clause provides for Registrar and other officers
and employees of the State Council.
It provides that every State Council shall have a Registrar to be
appointed by the State Government for a fixed term of four years who
shall not be eligible for re-appointment under the proposed legislation
or as may be provided under regulations made by it and with the prior
approval of the State Government, appoint such other officers and
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its
functions under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the salaries and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service of the other officers and
employees of the State Council shall be such as may be specified by
regulations made by the State Council.

167
Clause 57.—This clause provides for the enrolment of persons.
It provides that every National Council and every State Council
shall enrol, the persons having recognised qualification, in such form,
manner and on payment of such fees and fulfilment of such other
criteria or conditions as may be specified by regulations by the
National Council, for a period of ten years and the person so enrolled
shall be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of health.
It further provides that before the expiry of the period of ten
years, the National Council or the State Council, as the case may be,
may renew the enrolment of such persons for a further period of ten
years, on showing the proof that he has attended such seminar,
conference, workshop or any other programme as may be specified
by the Commission for the purpose of updating his professional
knowledge and skill and this clause declares that no person shall be
required to appear and pass any qualifying examination for the purpose
of renewal of his enrolment.
It also provides that for the purpose of computing the period of
ten years, the period of absence of a person enrolled under this clause
from India, if any, shall also be taken into account.
It also provides that any person enrolled by the National Council
shall be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of health
anywhere in India and the persons enrolled by the State Council shall
be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of health anywhere
in the State in which he is enrolled and any person enrolled with the
existing Medical Council of India or the Dental Council of India or the
Nursing Council of India or the Pharmacy Council of India or any
State Council, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been
enrolled under the proposed legislation and be eligible to continue to
practice for a period of ten years and thereafter he shall be required
to renew his enrolment under the proposed legislation.
Clause 58.—This clause provides for the Registers for enrolment
of persons.
It provides that every National Council shall enter the name of
persons enrolled by it in the National Register to be maintained in such
manner as may be prescribed and every State Council shall enter the
name of persons enrolled by it in the State Register to be maintained
in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government.
It further provides that every National Council shall collect data
of persons enrolled in the State Register from each State Council and
enter the same in separate National Register to be maintained in such
manner as may be prescribed, and the National Council and the State
Councils shall maintain the register by such data capturing method as
may be prescribed by the Central Government or State Government,
as the case may be, and shall, inter alia, contain the biometric and
other details of each health professional which shall be verified at the
time of renewal of enrolment.

168
It also provides that the National Council and the State Council
shall maintain the Register in accordance with the provisions of the
proposed legislation and update it from time to time, and publish the
same in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government or State Government, as the
case may be, and the National Register and the State Register maintained
under this clause shall be deemed to be public document within the
meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
It also provides that the National Register and the State Register
shall also be maintained in electronic form and wherever admissible, be
subject to disclosure in the public domain and made amenable for
electronic voting for selection of representatives of the profession or
for such other purposes as may be prescribed and no person who is
not registered with the State Council or the National Council shall
falsely represent that his name is so entered in the State Register or
the National Register, or use in connection with his name or title, any
words or letters reasonably calculated to suggest that his name is so
entered.
Clause 59.—This clause provides for duty to serve in India.
It provides that any person, who obtains a degree at graduate
or post graduate or doctoral or post doctoral or super speciality from
a university or institution which receives grants from the Central
Government or State Government or institutions owned or controlled
by the Central or State Government; and leave India for the purposes
of updating or acquiring higher education in the discipline of health,
shall endeavour to serve in India for a period of three years after such
updating or acquiring such higher education outside India, failing
which his name shall be removed from the National Register or the
State Register, as the case may be.
It further provides that any person whose name has been
removed under sub-clause ( 1), who opts to return to India shall be
entitled to get his name re-entered subject to payment of such fees
and fulfilment of such conditions as may be specified by regulations
by the Commission.
It also provides that any person, who obtains a degree at
graduate or post graduate or doctoral or post doctoral or super
speciality from a university or institution other than the university or
institution referred to in sub-clause (1); and leaves India for the
purposes of updating or acquiring higher education in the discipline of
health or for employment and does not return within the period of
three years or does not inform the respective Councils of his
whereabouts during such period, then, it shall be construed as
professional misconduct.
Clause 60.—This clause provides for prohibition to practice
without enrolment.
It provides that no person shall, unless he is enrolled on the
National Register or the State Register, as the case may be, as a

169
medical practitioner, hold office as physician or surgeon or any other
office as a medical professional in Government or in any health
institution maintained by a local or other authority; or practice medicine;
or sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other
certificate required by any law for the time being in force; or give
evidence in any court of law as an expert on any matter relating to
medicine.
It further provides that no person shall, unless he is enrolled on
the National Register or the State Register, as the case may be, as a
dentist, hold any appointment in the field of dentistry or dental hygienist
in any dispensary, hospital or other health institution which is supported
wholly or partially from public or local funds; or practice dentistry;
sign or authenticate a certificate required under any law for time being
in force from a dentist; or give evidence in any court of law as an
expert in any matter relating to dentistry.
It also provides that no person shall, unless he is enrolled on the
National Register or the State Register, as the case may be, as a nurse,
hold any appointment in the field of nursing as teacher in nursing,
nurse, auxiliary nurse, midwife, health visitor, or public health nurse,
in any dispensary, hospital or other health institution which is supported
wholly or partially from public or local funds; and as a pharmacologist
to practice pharmacy.
It also provides that no person shall, unless he is enrolled on the
National Register or the State Register, as the case may be, of
Paramedics, hold any appointment as paramedic in any dispensary,
hospital or other health institution which is supported wholly or
partially from public or local funds; or practice as a paramedics.
Clause 61.—This clause provides for privileges of persons enrolled
on National Register or State Registers.
It provides that every person, whose name is for the time being
borne on the National Register or the State Register, as the case may
be, shall subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down by or
under the proposed legislation, be entitled to practice in the discipline
of his enrolment and to recover in respect of such practice any
expenses, charges in respect of medicaments or other appliances, or
any fees to which he may be entitled.
Clause 62.—This clause provides for persons enrolled to notify
change of place of residence or practice.
It provides that any person enrolled under clause 56 shall
inform transfer of his place of residence or practice to the Council
concerned, within a period of thirty days of such transfer and if such
person fails to comply with the requirements, his right to participate
in the elections to the Council concerned shall be liable to be suspended
by an order of that Council, for such period as may be specified by
regulations made by the Council.
Clause 63.—This clause provides for supply of copies of State
Register.

170
It provides that each State Council shall supply to the National
Council printed copies of the State Register as soon as may be after
the commencement of the proposed legislation and subsequently after
the first day of April of each year and the State Council shall inform
the National Council without delay of all additions to and other
amendments in the State Register made from time to time.
Clause 64.—This clause provides for liability of persons enrolled
with respective National Councils.
It provides that a person enrolled with the respective National
Council shall be liable for all the acts of omission, commission, or
professional misconduct arising in the State in which the cause of
action has arisen.
Clause 65.—This clause provides for provisional registration of
persons possessing required qualification from any institution outside
India.
It provides that a citizen of India or  a registered Overseas
Citizens of India possessing recognised qualification in the discipline of
medicine granted by a medical institution outside India, who is required
to undergo practical training, on such terms and conditions as the
Commission may specify shall, on production of evidence that he has
been selected for such practical training in an approved institution, be
entitled to enroll himself provisionally in a State Register and shall be
entitled to practice medicine in the approved institution for the purposes
of such training and for no other purpose.
It further provides that a person who has passed the qualifying
examination of any university or Institution in India in the discipline of
medicine for the grant of a recognised qualification shall be entitled to
enroll himself provisionally in a State Register for the purposes of
enabling him to be engaged in employment in a resident medical
capacity in any approved institution or in the Medical Service of the
Armed Forces of the Union, and for no other purpose, on production
of proper evidence that he has been selected for such employment and
the names of all persons provisionally enrolled in the State Register
shall be entered therein separately from the names of other persons
enrolled therein.
It also provides that a person enrolled provisionally as aforesaid
who has completed practical training or who has been engaged for the
specified period in employment in a resident medical capacity in any
approved institution, or in the medical service of the Armed Forces of
the Union, as the case may be, shall be entitled to enroll himself in the
State Register.
Clause 66.—This clause provides for entry of additional
qualifications in the Registers.
It provides that if any person whose name is entered in the
National Register or the State Register, as the case may be, obtains
any title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in sanitary
science, public health or medicine which is a recognised medical

171
qualification, he shall, on application made in this behalf in such
manner as may be prescribed, be entitled to have any entry stating
such other title, diploma or other qualification made against his name
in such Register either in substitution for or in addition to any entry
previously made.
Clause 67.—This clause provides for code of ethics.
It provides that the National Council shall specify, by regulations,
the standards of professional conduct, etiquette and code of ethics to
be observed by the persons enrolled under the proposed legislation.
Clause 68.—This clause provides for professional misconduct.
It provides that for the purposes of the proposed legislation, the
expression, “professional misconduct” shall be deemed to include any
act or omission provided in the Seventh Schedule but nothing in this
clause shall be construed to limit or abridge in any way the power
conferred or duty cast on the respective Councils under proposed
legislation to inquire into the professional conduct of any person
whose name is included in the National Register or State Register,
under any other circumstances.
Clause 69.—This clause provides for power of National Council
and State Councils to institute inquiry and to impose penalties.
It provides that every National Council and every State Council
shall have power to institute an inquiry into any complaint, charge or
allegation of professional misconduct against any person enrolled by it
under the proposed legislation and on finding such person guilty of
such conduct, to impose any one or more of the penalties, such as,
warning or a reprimand or a reprimand and a warning; suspension of
registration for a period not exceeding two years; or removal of his
or her name from the register; impose a monetary penalty not exceeding
ten lakh rupees and a compulsory period of such professional service
as may be specified by regulations made by the Council.
It further provides that every National Council or State Council,
as the case may be, shall give an opportunity of being heard to the
concerned person before imposing upon him any of the such penalties.
Clause 70.—This clause provides for appeals against decision
under clause 69.
It provides that any person aggrieved by the decision of the
National Council may, within a period of ninety days from the date of
communication of such decision, prefer an appeal to the ethics
committee to be constituted by the Commission and any person
aggrieved by the decision of the State Council may, within a period of
ninety days from the date of communication of such decision, prefer
an appeal to the ethics committee to be constituted by the State
Council.
It further provides that any person aggrieved by an order of the
ethics committee may, within a period of sixty days from the date of

172
receipt of the order of the said Committee, prefer an appeal to the
ethics appellate committee to be constituted by the National Council.
It also provides that the composition of, and the procedure to
be followed by, the ethics committee and the ethics appellate committee
and terms and conditions of such members shall be such as may be
prescribed.
Clause 71.—This clause provides for removal of names from
National Register or State Register and restoration thereof.
It provides that the National Council, or as the case may be, the
State Council may remove the name of any person enrolled by it in
such circumstances and in such manner as may be specified by
regulations made by the Commission and the Commission may, in case
of removal of name of any person from the National Register or the
State Register (except in case of professional misconduct), on an
application, if it is satisfied on the grounds mentioned therein and after
making such inquiry as it deems necessary, may direct, by order, the
National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, to restore
the name of such person on payment of such fees or fulfilment of
such conditions which it may impose in the order.
Clause 72.—This clause provides for grievance redressal
mechanism.
It provides that any person aggrieved from the professional
services rendered by the persons enrolled under the proposed legislation
may file a complaint with the State Council, within a period of sixty
days from the date of rendering of such service, in such manner as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission. However,
the complaint may be admitted after expiry of the said period of sixty
days if the complainant satisfies the Council that he had sufficient
cause for not preferring the complaint within the said period and the
Council shall decide the complaint within a period of one hundred and
twenty days from the date of its receipt.
Clause 73.—This clause provides for power of National Council
to make regulations.
It provides that the National Council may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government, make regulations consistent with
the provisions of the proposed legislation or the rules or regulations
made by the Commission.
It further provides that in particular, and without prejudice to
the generality of foregoing power, such regulations may provide for
all or any of the matters, namely, other ethical principles under sub-
clause ( f) of clause 2; the powers to be exercised and the functions
to be performed by the President or the Vice-President of the National
Council under sub-clause ( 2) of clause 48; the procedure for transaction
of business at meetings of the National Council under sub-clause ( 5)
of clause 50; the salaries and allowances payable to and the other
terms and conditions of the service of the other officers and employee

173
of the National Council under sub-clause ( 3) of clause 52; the form
and manner of enrolment of persons and the fees and such other
criteria or conditions for such enrolment under sub-clause ( 1) of
clause 57; the standards of professional conduct, etiquette and code of
ethics under clause 67; the professional service to be rendered under
item ( e) of sub-clause ( 1) of clause 69 and any other matter which
is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of
which provision is to be or may be made by regulations.
Clause 74.—This clause provides for power of State Council to
make regulations.
It provides that the State Council may, with the previous approval
of the State Government, make regulations consistent with the
provisions of proposed legislation or the rules or regulations made by
the Commission and the National Council and such regulations may
provide for all or any of the matters, namely, the powers to be
exercised, and the functions to be performed, by the President or the
Vice-President of the State Council under sub-clause ( 2) of clause 54;
the procedure for transaction of business at meetings of the State
Council under sub-clause ( 5) of clause 55; the salaries and allowances
payable to and the other terms and conditions of the service of the
other officers and employee under sub-clause ( 3) of clause 56; the
professional service to be rendered under item ( e) of sub-clause ( 1)
of clause 69 and any other matter which is required to be, or may be,
specified by regulations or in respect of which provision is to be or
may be made by regulations.
Clause 75.—This clause provides for grants by the Central
Government.
It provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the
Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central Government
may think fit, for being utilised for the purposes of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 76.—This clause provides for constitution of Fund of
Commission.
It provides that there shall be constituted a fund to be called
“the National Commission for Human Resource for Health Fund” and
there shall be credited thereto, all Government grants, fees and charges
received by the Commission and all sums received by the Commission
from such other source as may be decided upon by the Central
Government.
It further provides that the Fund shall be applied for meeting,
the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers
and other employees of the Commission, Board, Committee and National
Councils; the other expenses of the Commission in connection with
the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of the proposed
legislation and the expenses of the Board, Committee and National
Councils in connection with the discharge of their functions and for
the purposes of this Act.

174
Clause 77.—This clause provides for audit of accounts.
It provides that the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council and State Council shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such
form as may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor- General of India and such accounts of the Commission,
Board, Committee, National Council and State Council shall be audited
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as
may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection
with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India.
It further provides that the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India and any other persons appointed by him in connection with the
audit of the accounts of the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council and State Council shall have the same rights and privileges and
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General generally has in connection with the audit of Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production
of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission, Board,
Committee, National Council and State Council.
It also provides that the accounts of the Commission, Board,
Committee, National Council, State Council as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed
by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be
forwarded annually by the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council and State Council to the Central Government which shall
cause the same to be laid as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
Clause 78.—This clause provides for furnishing of returns and
reports to the Central Government.
It provides that the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council, State Council, and other committee shall furnish to the
Central Government at such time and in such form as may be
prescribed, an annual report giving a summary of their activities during
the previous year and a copy of such report received by the Central
Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is received,
before each House of Parliament.
Clause 79.—This clause provides for punishment for establishing
institution without permission.
It provides that whoever contravenes the provision of clause 17
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one year, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or
with both for the first offence and in case of second or subsequent
offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with fine which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, or
with both.

175
Clause 80.—This clause provides for penalty for contravention
of clause 57.
It provides that any person who contravenes the provisions of
clause 57 relating to enrolment shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both for the first offence and in
case of second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to
twenty-five lakh rupees, or with both.
Clause 81.—This clause provides for penalty for contravention
of section 33.
It provides that any person who contravenes the provisions of
section 33 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees, or with both for the first offence and in case of a second or
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to three years or fine which may extend to twenty five lakh rupees
or with both.
Clause 82.—This clause provides for punishment for furnishing
information contrary to which published by institutions.
It provides that where on assessment under clause 37 it is
found that the information provided by a university or an institution
imparting health education, is not in conformity with the information
displayed at its website or information given to the concerned authorities
for evaluation and assessment, then the Head of the university or
institution in case of Government university or institution and in case
of non-governmental university or institution, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, trusts, societies such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
Clause 83.—This clause provides for offences by companies.
It provides that where an offence under the proposed legislation
has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the
offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly and nothing
shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in the
proposed legislation, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-clause ( 1), where an offence under the proposed legislation has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable

176
to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
It also provides that for the purposes of this clause, “company”
means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of
individuals; and “director” means a whole-time director in the company
and in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Clause 84.—This clause provided for offences by societies or
trusts.
It provides that where an offence under the proposed legislation
has been committed by a society or a trust, every person who, at the
time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible
to, the society or trust for the conduct of the business of the society
or trust, as well as the society or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly and nothing shall render any such person liable to any
punishment provided in the proposed legislation, if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-clause ( 1), where an offence under the proposed legislation has
been committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the offence
has been committed .with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable
to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, trustee
or other officer of the society or trust, such director, manager,
secretary, trustee or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
It also provides that for the purposes of this clause, “society”
means anybody corporate registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 and, “trust” means any body registered under the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882 or any other law for the time being in force; and
“director”, in relation to society or trust means a member of its
governing board other than an ex officio member representing the
interests of the Central or State Government.
Clause 85.—This clause provides for cognizance of offences.
It provides that no court shall take cognizance of any offence
punishable under the proposed legislation, save on a complaint made
by the Commission or by an officer authorised by it and no court
inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of
the first class shall try any offence punishable under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 86.—This clause provides for power of Central
Government to supersede Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council.

177
The Central Government may, by notification, supersede the
Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the
case may be, for such period, not exceeding six months, if the Central
Government is of the opinion that on account of circumstances
beyond the control of the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, it is unable to discharge the functions
or perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of the
proposed legislation; or that the Commission, Board, Committee or
National Council, as the case may be, has persistently defaulted in
complying with any direction given by the Central Government under
the proposed legislation or in the discharge of the functions or
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions
of the proposed legislation and as a result of such default the financial
position of the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National
Council, or the administration of the Commission, the Board, the
Committee or the National Council, as the case may be, has suffered;
or that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public
interest so to do.
It further provides that the Central Government before issuing
any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable
opportunity to the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the
National Council, as the case may be, to make representations against
the proposed supersession and shall consider the representations, if
any, of the Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National
Council, as the case may be.
It also provides that upon the publication of a notification under
sub-clause ( 1) superseding the Commission, the Board, the Committee
or the National Council, as the case may be, the Chairperson, President,
Vice-President and other members shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such; all the powers, functions
and duties which may, by or under the provisions of the proposed
legislation, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the
Commission, the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the
case may be, is reconstituted under sub-clause ( 3), be exercised and
discharged by the person or persons referred to sub-clause ( 1); and
all properties owned or controlled by the Commission, the Board, the
Committee or the National Council, as the case may be, shall, until the
Commission, the Board, the Committee or National Council, as the
case may be, is reconstituted under sub-clause ( 3), vest in the Central
Government.
It also provides that on or before the expiration of the period
of supersession specified in the notification issued under sub-
clause ( 1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the Commission,
the Board, the Committee or the National Council, as the case may be,
by a fresh appointment of its Chairperson, President, Vice-President
and other member and in such case any person who had vacated his
office under item ( a) of sub-clause ( 2) shall not be deemed to be
disqualified for reappointment and the Central Government shall cause
a copy of the notification issued under sub-clause ( 1) and a full report

178
of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading
to such action to be laid before each House of  Parliament at the
earliest.
Clause 87.—This clause provides for power of State Government
to supersede State Council. The State Government may, by notification,
supersede the State Council for such period, not exceeding six months,
if, at any time the State Government is of the opinion that on account
of circumstances beyond the control of the State Council, it is unable
to discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of the proposed legislation; or that the State
Council has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction
given by the State Government under the proposed legislation or in the
discharge of the functions or performance of the duties imposed on
it by or under the provisions of the proposed legislation and as a result
of such default the financial position of the State Council, or the
administration of the State Council, has suffered; or that circumstances
exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do. The
State Government before issuing any such notification, shall give a
reasonable opportunity to the State Council to make representations
against the proposed supersession and shall consider the representations,
if any, of the State Council.
It further provides that upon the publication of a notification
under sub-clause ( 1) superseding the State Council, the President and
other members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their
offices as such; all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of the proposed legislation, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the State Council shall, until the State
Council is reconstituted under sub-clause ( 3), be exercised and
discharged by the person or persons referred to in sub-clause ( 1); and
all properties owned or controlled by the State Council shall, until the
State Council is reconstituted under sub-clause ( 3), vest in the State
Government.
It also provides that on or before the expiration of the period
of supersession specified in the notification issued under sub-clause
(1), the State Government shall reconstitute the State Council, by a
fresh appointment of its President and other members and in such
case any person who had vacated his office under item ( a) of sub-
clause ( 2) shall copy of the notification issued under sub-clause ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before State Legislature
at the earliest.
Clause 88.—This clause provides for declaration of interest.
It provides that the President or Vice-President and other Members
of the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council, as the
case may be, shall immediately after entering office and every year
thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of their interest, whether
direct or indirect and whether financial or otherwise, in any health
institution which comes under the purview of the Board, Committee,

179
National Council or State Council, as the case may be, and the same
shall be placed in the public domain.
Clause 89.—This clause provides for restrictions on re-
employment.
It provides that the President or Vice-President and other members
of the Board, Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the
case may be, on ceasing to hold office shall not for a period of two
years accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or
otherwise) in any health educational institution whose matter has been
dealt with by such President, Vice-President or member, as the case
may be.
It further provides that nothing in sub-clause ( 1) shall prevent
the President, Vice-President or a member; as the case may be, to
accept any employment in any health educational institution controlled
or maintained by the Central Government or the State Government.
Clause 90.—This clause provides for Member to act as President
or to discharge his functions, in certain circumstances. It provides
that in the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office in the
office President or other member of the Board, Committee, National
Council or the State Council, as the case may be, by reasons of death,
removal, suspension or resignation, the senior most whole-time member
of such the Board, Committee, National Council or the State Council,
as the case may be, shall act as the President till such time the
President is appointed, to fill the vacancy and when the President is
unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on account of
leave or otherwise, the senior most whole-time member shall discharge
the functions of the President till the President is able to discharge his
functions.
Clause 91.—This clause provides for restriction on holding
office for more than two terms.
It provides that notwithstanding anything in the proposed
legislation, no person shall be eligible to be appointed or nominated or
elected in any capacity in the Commission, Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council, whether as the Chairperson or President or
Vice-President or member for more than two terms.
Clause 92.—This clause seeks to provide for resignation of
President, Vice-President, or a member of the Board, Committee,
National Councilor State Council.
It provides that the President, Vice-President or a member of
the Board, Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the
case may be, may, by notice given in writing under his hand of not
less than a period of thirty days, addressed to the Central Government
or, as the case may be, the State Government, resign from his office.
However, the President, Vice-President or a member of the Board,
Committee, National Council or the State Council, as the case may be,
shall, unless permitted by the Central Government or; as the case may

180
be, the State Government, to relinquish office sooner, continue to hold
office until the expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor
enters upon office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever
is earliest.
Clause 93.—This clause provides for removal and suspension of
President, Vice-President or a member of the Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council.
It provides that the Central Government or, as the case may be,
the State Government may, by order, remove from office the President
or Vice-President or any member of the Board, Committee, National
Council or the State Council, as the case may be, who, has been
adjudged an insolvent; or being whole-time member has engaged at
any time, during his term of office, in any paid employment; or has
been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or has become physically or
mentally incapable of acting as such Chairperson or other Member; or
is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
has been removed or dismissed from the service or office of the
Central Government or of a State Government or from a body owned
or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government or
from any Central or State statutory body; has acquired such financial
or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functioning as
Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be; or has so abused
his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to public
interest; or has been guilty of proved misconduct; or has been guilty
of proved conflict of interest in the discharge of functions.
It further provides that the President, Vice-President or member
of the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council, as the
case may be, shall not be removed from his office unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. However,
the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government
may, if it considers necessary in the public interest, suspend such
President, Vice-President or other member.
Clause 94.—This clause provides for vacancies, etc., not to invalidate
proceedings of Board, Committee, National Council or State Council.
It provides that any act or proceeding of the Board, Committee,
National Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall not be
invalid merely by reason of, any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council,
as the case may be; or any defect in the appointment of a person as
a Member of the Board, Committee, National Council or State Council,
as the case may be; or any irregularity in the procedure of the Board,
Committee, new Council or State Council, as the case may be, not
affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 95.—This clause provides for power to appoint committees
or experts.

181
It provides that the Board, Committee, National Council or State
Council shall be competent to constitute such other committees for
general or special purposes, as it may consider necessary to carry out
the functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the Board, Committee, National Council
or State Council may engage such experts for discharging its functions
under the proposed legislation for such period, on such qualification
and on payment of such fees and remuneration as may be specified
by regulations made by the Commission.
Clause 96.—This clause provides for reporting by universities
and institutions.
It provides that every health educational institution under the
proposed legislation shall at all times maintain a website and display all
such information as may be required by the Commission, Board or
Committee, as the case may be and the Commission, Board or
Committee, as the case may be, shall either themselves or through
such other experts, at any time during the existence of the evaluation
or assessment, without any notice may assess the performance
standards and benchmarks as displayed by the University or health
institution on its website.
It further provides that the Central Government may by
notification specify such procedure as may be necessary to prevent
unfair practices by university or institutions imparting health education.
Clause 97.—This clause provides for establishment of State or
regional administrative offices.
It provides that the Commission, Board, Committee or the
National Council, may, with prior approval of the Central Government,
establish State or regional level administrative offices, to perform such
functions relating to information management, co-ordination and liaison
in the State or region for which such office is set up.
Clause 98.—This clause provides for reference of dispute to the
Central Government.
It provides that where any dispute arises regarding any
recommendation or advice of Board or Committee or National Council
made to the Commission, it shall be referred to the Central Government
whose decision thereon shall be final and binding.
Clause 99.—This clause provides for appeal against decisions of
Commission.
It provides that any person aggrieved by an order made by the
Commission under clause 97 may prefer an appeal to the Central
Government within such period as may be prescribed and no appeal
shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period
prescribed therefor. However, such appeal may be admitted after the
expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the appellant satisfies the
Central Government that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal within the prescribed period.

182
It further provides that every appeal made under this clause
shall be made in such form and shall be accompanied by a copy of
the order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.
It also provides that the procedure for disposing of an appeal
shall be such as may be prescribed and before disposing of an appeal,
the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Clause 100.—This clause provides for bar of jurisdiction of
courts.
It provides that no order refusing to enroll name of any person
in the National Register or the State Register, as the case may be, or
removing a name therefrom shall be called in question in any court.
Clause 101.—This clause provides for protection of action
taken in good faith.
It provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against any person for anything which has been done or
intended to be done in good faith under the proposed legislation.
Clause 102.—This clause provides for Members, etc., to be
public servants.
It provides that the Chairperson, President, Vice-President and
Members and the Chief Executive Officer, Executive Director and
other officers and employees of the Commission, Board, Committee,
National Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall be
deemed to be ‘public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).
Clause 103.—This clause provides for powers of the Commission,
Board, Committee or National Council to call for information or
conduct investigations, etc.
It provides that where the Commission, Board, Committee or
National Council, as the case may be, consider it expedient so to do,
it may, by order in writing, call upon any health educational institution
at any time to furnish in writing, such information or explanation
relating to its affairs as the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, may require; or appoint one or more
persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any health
educational institution; and direct any of its officers or employees to
inspect the books of account or other documents of any health
educational institution.
It further provides that where any inquiry in relation to the
affairs of an health educational institution has been undertaken under
sub-clause ( 1), every officer of the Government Department, if such
health educational institution is a department of the Government; every
director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such health educational
institution is a company; or every partner, manager, secretary or other
officer, if such health educational institution is a firm; or every other
person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course of

183
business with any of the persons mentioned in sub-clause ( 2), shall
produce before the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council,
as the case may be, making the inquiry, all such books of account or
other documents in his custody or power relating to, or having a
bearing on the subject-matter of such inquiry and also to furnish to
the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council, as the case
may be, with any such statement or information relating thereto, as
the case may be, required of him, within such time as may be
specified by the Commission.
It also provides that every health educational institution shall
maintain such books of account or other documents as may be
specified by regulations made by the Commission and the Commission,
Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, shall have
the power to issue such directions to health educational institution as
it may consider necessary for proper functioning of such institution.
Clause 104.—This clause provides for completion of courses of
studies in health educational institutions.
It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
proposed legislation, any student of health educational institutions who,
immediately before the commencement of the proposed legislation was
studying for a degree, diploma or certificate in any such institution
shall continue and complete his course for that degree, diploma or
certificate, as the case may be, and such institutions shall provide for
the instruction and examination for such student in accordance with
the syllabus of studies as existed before the commencement of the
proposed legislation and shall be deemed to have completed his course
of study and awarded degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may
be, under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
the proposed legislation; the health educational institution in case of
lapse of its recognition whether by efflux of time or by withdrawal by
the Commission or by its voluntary surrender or for any other reason
whatsoever shall continue to maintain and provide the minimum
standards of infrastructure approved by the Commission till such time
that all the candidates are able to complete their study in such
institutions.
Clause 105.—This clause provides for power of the Central
Government to issue directions.
It provides that without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of
the proposed legislation, the Commission, Board, Committee or National
Council, as the case may be, shall, in exercise of its powers and in
performance of its functions under the proposed legislation, be bound
by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government
may give in writing to it from time to time and the Commission,
Board, Committee or National Council, as the case may be, shall, as
far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before
any direction is given under this sub-section. However, if any dispute

184
arises between the Central Government and the Commission, Board,
Committee or National Council, as the case may be, as to whether a
question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the Central
Government shall be final.
Clause 106.—This clause provides for powers of the State
Government to issue directions.
It provides that without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of
the proposed legislation, the State Council shall, in exercise of its
powers and in performance of its functions under the proposed
legislation, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the
State Government may give in writing to it from time to time and the
State Council shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
However, if any dispute arises between the State Government and the
State Council as to whether a question is or is not a question of
policy, the decision of the State Government shall be final.
Clause 107.—This clause provides for furnishing of information
by the Commission, Board, Committee and National Council to furnish
information to the Central Government.
It provides that the Commission, Board, Committee and National
Council shall furnish to the Central Government any information with
respect to their activities as the Central Government may from time to
time require.
Clause 108.—This clause provides for powers to amend Schedules.
It provides that the Central Government may, after consultation
with the Commission, by notification, add to or otherwise amend any
of the Schedules of the proposed legislation and thereupon the said
Schedules shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
Clause 109.—This clause provides for review.
It provides that the Central Government may appoint an
independent Committee once in every five years to review the
functioning of the Commission, Board, Committee or National Council,
as the case may be.
Clause 110.—This clause provides to have overriding effect by
the proposed legislation.
It provides that subject to the provisions of sub-clause ( 2), the
provisions of the proposed legislation shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law
other than the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation
or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in
derogation of, the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916.
Clause 111.—This clause provides for power of the Central
Government to make rules.

185
It confers power upon the Central Government the power to
make rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this, clause enumerates the various matters in
respect of which such rules may be made.
Clause 112.—This clause provides for  powers of the Commission
to make regulations.
It confers powers upon the Commission to make regulations,
consistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder,
to carry out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause ( 2)
enumerates the various matters in respect of which such regulations
may be made by the Commission.
Clause 113.—This clause provides for  powers of the State
Government to make rules.
It confers powers upon the State Government the power to
make rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause enumerates the various matters in respect
of which such rules may be made.
Clause 114.—This clause provides for laying of rules and
regulations.
This clause provides that every rule and every regulation made
and every notification issued by the Central Government shall be
required to be laid before each House of Parliament and every rule and
regulation made by the State Government shall be required to be laid
before the appropriate State Legislature.
Clause 115.—This clause provides for  powers of the Central
Government to direct regulations to be made or to make or amend the
regulations.
It provides that, if the Central Government considers it expedient
so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct the Commission or Board
or Committee or National Council, as the case may be, to make any
regulations or to amend or revoke any regulations already made within
such period as it may specify in this behalf.
It further provides that, if the Commission or Board or Committee
or National Council, as the case may be, fails or neglects to comply
with such order within the specified period, the Central Government
may make the regulations or amend or revoke the regulations made by
the Commission or Board or Committee or National Council, as the
case may be, either in the form specified in the order or with such
modifications thereof as the Central Government thinks fit.
Clause  116.—This clause provides for power to remove
difficulties.
It provides that the Central Government to make, by order
published in the Official Gazette, provisions for removal of difficulties
in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation. Such

186
orders could be made only within two years from the commencement
of the proposed legislation. However, every order issued under this
clause is required to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 117.—This clause provides for repeal and saving.
It provides that with effect from such date as the Central
Government may appoint in this behalf, the Indian Nursing Council
Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 shall stand repealed and the Nursing
Council of India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Dental Council
of India and Medical Council of India shall stand dissolved. However,
during the period between the date of coming into force of the
proposed legislation and date of repeal of the enactments mentioned in
this sub-clause, the existing Nursing Council of India, the Pharmacy
Council of India, the Dental Council of India and the Medical Council
of India, as the case may be, shall not take any decision or action,
except with the prior approval of the Commission on any matter
specified by it.
It further provides that on the commencement of the proposed
legislation, every existing Council shall be transferred to, and shall vest
in, the Commission and each existing Council which is transferred to,
and which vest in, the Commission shall be deemed to include all
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property,
movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments
and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property
as were immediately before the commencement of the proposed
legislation in the ownership, possession, power or control of the
existing Council, whether within or without India, and all books of
accounts, registers, records and all other documents of whatever
nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings,
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of the
existing Council.
It also provides that if, according to the laws of any country
outside India, the provisions of the proposed legislation by themselves
are not effective to transfer or vest any asset or liability situated in
that country which forms part of an existing Council to, or in, the
Commission, the affairs of the existing Council in relation to such
asset or liability shall, on and from the commencement of the proposed
legislation, stand entrusted to the Chief Executive Officer for the time
being of the Commission, and the Chief Executive Officer may exercise
all powers and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or
done by the existing Council for the purpose of effectively transferring
such assets and discharging such liabilities. The Chief Executive Officer
of the Commission shall, in exercise of the powers conferred on him
by sub-clause (4), take all such steps as may be required by the laws
of any such country outside India for the purpose of effecting such
transfer or vesting, and may either himself or through any person
authorised by him in this behalf realise any asset and discharge any
liability of the existing Council.

187
It also provides that unless otherwise expressly provided by the
proposed legislation, all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers
of attorney, grants of legal representation and other instruments of
whatever nature subsisting or having effect immediately before the
commencement of the proposed legislation and to which the existing
Council is a party or which are in favour of the existing Council shall
be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the Commission,
and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in
the place of the existing Council, the Commission had been a party
thereto or as if they had been issued in favour of the Commission
and if, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of
whatever nature in relation to any existing Council which has been
transferred under sub-clause ( 2) is pending by or against the existing
Council, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way,
prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the existing Councilor
of anything contained in the proposed legislation but the suit, appeal
or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by
or against the Commission.
It also provides that nothing in the proposed legislation shall be
construed as applying to the assets, rights, powers, authorities and
privileges and property, movable and immovable, cash balances and
investments in any country outside India (and other rights and interests
in, or arising out of, such property) and borrowings, liabilities and
obligations of whatever kind subsisting at the commencement of the
proposed legislation, of any existing Council operating in that country
if, under the laws in force in that country. However, notwithstanding
such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions
of the aforesaid Acts shall, insofar as such thing or action is not
inconsistent with the provisions of the proposed legislation, be deemed
to have been done or taken under the provisions of the proposed
legislation, as if the said provisions were in force when such thing
was done or such action taken, and shall continue in force.
Clause 118.—This clause provides for provisions in respect of
officers and other employees of existing Council and National Board
of Examinations.
It provides that every officer or other employee of the existing
Council (except the President, Vice-President and members of the
existing Council) or the National Board of Examinations, as the case
may be, serving in the employment immediately before the appointed
day shall become, as from the appointed day, an officer or, as the
case may be, other employee of the Commission and shall hold his
office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration,
upon the same terms and conditions, with the same obligations and
with the same rights and privileges as to leave, leave fare concession,
welfare scheme, medical benefit scheme, insurance, provident fund,
other funds retirement, voluntary retirement, gratuity and other benefits
as he would have held under the existing Council if its undertaking
has not vested in the Commission and shall continue to do so as an
officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the existing Council

188
or until the expiry of a period of six months from the appointed day
if such officer or other employee opts not to continue to be the
officer or other employee of the existing Council within such period
and the Commission may transfer any officer or other employee or the
services of such officers or other employees as it may deem fit, to
the Board, Committee or the National Council.
It further provides that where an officer or other employee of
the existing Council opts under sub-clause ( 1) not to be in employment
or service of the Commission, such officer or other employee shall be
deemed to have resigned.
It also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any other law for the time being
in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee
of the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the
case may be, to the Commission shall not entitle such officer or other
employee to any compensation under proposed legislation or under any
other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority and the officer
and other employees who have retired before the appointed day from
the service of the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations,
as the case may be, and are entitled to any benefits, rights or
privileges shall be entitled to receive the same benefits, rights or
privileges from the Commission.
It also provides to that the provident fund or the gratuity fund
of the existing Council or the National Board of Examinations, as the
case may be, and any other bodies created for the welfare of officer
or other employees would continue to discharge their functions in the
Commission as was being done hitherto in the existing Councilor or
the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be, and any tax
exemption granted to the provident fund or the gratuity fund would
continue to be applied to the Commission.
It also provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
proposed legislation or in the Companies Act, 1956 or in any other law
for the time being in force or in the regulations of the existing Council
or the National Board of Examinations, as the case may be, the
President or Vice-President or member or the trustees, executive
trustee or any other person entitled to manage the whole or substantial
part of the business and affairs of the existing Councilor or the
National Board of Examinations, as the case may be, shall not be
entitled to any compensation against the Commission for the loss of
office or for the premature termination of any contract of management
entered into by him with the Commission.
Clause 119.—This clause provides for transitory provisions.
It provides that notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Nursing
Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948
and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, the educational standards,
requirements and other provisions of the Indian Nursing Council Act,

189
1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956 and the rules and regulations made thereunder
shall continue to be in force and operate till new standards are
specified under the proposed legislation or the rules and regulations
made thereunder. However, anything done or any action taken as
regards the educational standards and requirements under the enactments
under repeal and the rules and regulations made thereunder shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of the proposed legislation and shall continue in force accordingly
unless and until superseded by anything done or by any action taken
under the proposed legislation and all such courses that are being
conducted by the National Board of Examinations shall continue till the
Central Government on the advice of the Commission notifies the
constitution of the Board under the proposed legislation.
It further provides that the Central Government may, if
considered necessary by notification, take such appropriate measures
as may be necessary for smooth transition of repealed Councils to the
corresponding new Councils and the existing National Board of
Examination to the Board under the proposed legislation.
Clause 120.—This clause relates to resolution of difference of
opinion by Joint Mechanism. This clause provides that in case of any
difference of opinion with the National Commission for Higher Education
constituted under the Higher Education and Research Act, 2011, the
same may be referred to the Joint Mechanism constituted under
section 52 of the Higher Education and Research Act, 2011 for
resolution of such difference of opinion in accordance with the provisions
of that Act.

190
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health consisting of a
Chairperson; four whole-time members; and eight part-time members
to be appointed, by the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 3) of clause
6 of the Bill provides that the salary and allowances payable to and
other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other
Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 15 of the Bill provides for the
appointment of a Chief Executive Officer of the Commission, not
below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India,
who shall be the Member-Secretary of the Commission. Sub-
clause ( 5) of said clause provides that salaries and allowances and
other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer
and other officers and employees of the Commission shall be such as
may be prescribed.
3. Clause 23 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Board to
be known as the ‘National Board for Health Education’ consisting of
a President; two whole-time members; and four part-time members to
be appointed by the Central Government.
4. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 28 of the Bill provides for
appointment of an Executive Director to be appointed by the Board.
Sub-clause ( 2) thereof provides for appointment other officers and
employees by the Board with the previous approval of the Commission.
Sub-clause (4) thereof provides that the salaries and allowances payable
to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the other officers
and employees of the Board shall be such as may be specified by
regulations made by the Commission.
5. Clause 34 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Committee
to be known as the National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
consisting of a President; two whole-time members; and four part-
time members to be appointed by the Central Government Sub-
clause (3) of clause 36 provides that the salary and allowances payable
to and other terms and conditions of service of the President and
other members of the Committee shall be such as may be specified
by regulation made by the Commission.
6. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 39 of the Bill provides for
appointment of an Executive Director to the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee by the Central Government Sub-clause ( 2)
thereof provides for appointment of other officers and employees by
the Committee with the previous approval of the Central Government.
Sub-clause ( 3) provides that the salaries and allowances payable to,
and the other terms and conditions of service of the Executive Director
190

191
and other officers and employees of the Committee shall be such as
may be specified by regulations made by the Commission.
7. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 41 read with the First Schedule
provides for constitution of new National Councils, namely, the Medical
Council of India for medicine; the Dental Council of India for dentistry;
the Nursing Council of India for nursing; and the Pharmacy Council
of India for pharmacy. Sub-clause ( 2) thereof provides for constitution
of the Paramedical Council of India for the disciplines of paramedics.
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 46 provides for composition of National
Councils.
8. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 52 of the Bill provides for
appointment of a Registrar to every National Council by the Central
Government. Sub-clause ( 2) thereof provides appointment of other
officers and employees by the National Council with the prior approval
of the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 3) provides that salaries and
allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service
of the other officers and employees of the National Council shall be
such as may be specified by regulations made by the National Council.
9. Sub-clause (1) of clause 53 of the Bill provides for constitution
of State Medical Council for medicine; the Dental Council for dentistry;
the Nursing Council of the State for nursing; the Pharmacy Council
for pharmacy; and the Paramedical Council for paramedics.
10. Clause 75 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf,
make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the Central
Government may think fit, for being utilised for the purposes of this
Act. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 76 provides for constitution of a fund
to be called the National Commission for Human Resource for Health
Fund in which all Government grants, fees and charges received by
the Commission; and all sums received by the Commission shall be
credited.
11. lt is estimated that there would be an expenditure of
approximately forty crore of rupees. Out of this, an amount of thirty-
nine crore of rupees would be towards recurring expenditure and one
crore of rupees would be towards non-recurring expenditure.
12. The Bill does not envisage any other expenditure of recurring
or non-recurring nature.

192
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 111 of the Bill confers power upon the Central
Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The matters with respect to which rules may be made has been set
out in sub-clause ( 2). The matters, inter alia, relate to ( a) the manner
of appointment of the Selection Committee under sub-section ( l) of
section 5; (b) the term of the Selection Committee under sub-
section ( 3) of section 5; ( c) the salary and allowances payable to and
other terms and conditions of the Chairperson and other members
under sub-section ( 3) of section 6; ( d) the salary and allowances and
other terms and conditions of service the Chief Executive Officer and
other officers and employees of the Commission under sub-section ( 4)
of section 15; ( e) such other functions to be performed by the
Commission under clause ( p) of sub-section ( 2) of section 16; ( f) any
other factors to be considered by the Committee and the Commission
while passing an order for approving or disapproving the scheme
under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 8) of section 17; ( g) the manner of
appointment of the chairperson and members of the Selection Committee
under sub-section ( 1) and their term under sub-section ( 4) of
section 25; ( h) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the President and other members of the
Board under sub-section ( 3) of section 27; ( i) such other functions to
be performed by the Board under clause. ( ze) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 30; ( j) the number of persons to be appointed and the
qualifications and experience of the audit committee under sub-
section ( 1) of section 38; ( k) the procedure and the manner in which
the National Councils are to be constituted under sub-section ( 1) of
section 47; ( 1) the manner of conducting elections under sub-
section ( 4) of section 47; (
m) the manner of elections of the President
and Vice-President of each National Council under section 48; ( n)
such other functions which the National Council may perform under
clause ( g) of sub-section ( 2) of section 51; ( o) the manner in which
the National Register shall be maintained under sub-section ( 1) of
section 58; ( p) the manner in which the State Register shall be
maintained under sub-section ( 2) of section 58; ( q) the manner in
which a separate National Register shall be maintained under sub-
section ( 3) of section 58; ( r) the data capturing method by which the
National Councils shall maintain the register under sub-section ( 4) of
section 57; ( s) the manner in which the National Council shall update
and publish the Register under sub-section ( 5) of section 58; ( t) such
other purposes for which the National Register may be used under
sub-section ( 7) of section 58; ( u) the manner in which an application
may be made for entry of additional qualifications under section 66;
(v) the composition of and the procedure to be followed by the ethics
committee and the ethics appellate committee and terms and conditions
192

193
of such members under sub-section ( 4) of section 70; ( w) the form
in which an annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under
sub-section ( 1) of section 76; ( x) the time and the form in which an
annual report shall be furnished under sub-section ( 1) of section 78;
(y) the period within which appeal may be preferred to the Central
Government under sub-section ( 1) of section 99; ( z) the form of
application and the fees to be paid under sub-section ( 3), and
the procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub-section ( 4) of
section 99;
2. Clause 112 of the Bill confers power upon the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health to make regulations
consistent with the Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the
purposes of the Act. The matters with respect to which regulations
may be made has been set out in sub-clause ( 2). The matters, inter-
alia, relate to ( a) the conduct of business at the meetings of the
Commission under sub-section ( 5) of section 13; ( b) the functions to
be discharged by the Chief Executive officer under sub-section ( 2) of
section 15; ( c) the continuous medical education and the courses
workshops and training activities under clause ( I) and such other
functions under clause ( p) of sub-section ( 2) of section 16; ( d) the
form, particulars and manner in which the scheme shall be made and
the fees, for submission of the scheme under sub-section ( 3) of
section 17; ( e) other functions in respect of which fees and charges
may be levied under section 22; ( f) the salaries and allowances payable
to, and other terms and conditions of service of the other officers and
employees of the Board under sub-section ( 4) of section 28; ( g) the
manner of conducting examination for entry to graduate, post graduate,
doctoral, post doctoral, super speciality or diploma courses and
fellowship examination by the Board under sub-section ( 1) of
section 31; ( h) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms
and conditions of service of the President and other members of the
Committee under sub-section ( 3) of section 36; ( i) the qualifications
and experience of, and the manner of evaluation and assessment of
health educational institutions by, the evaluation and assessment agencies
under sub-section ( 5) of section 37; (
j) the salary and allowances
payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the Executive
Director and other officers and employees of the Committee under
sub-section ( 3) of section 39; ( k) the fees and the conditions for re-
entry of name of the person under sub-section ( 2) of section 59;
(f) the period of suspension of the right of person to participate in
elections to council under sub-section ( 2) of section 62; ( m) the
circumstances and manner of removal of name of any person enrolled
by the National Council, or as the case may be, the State Council
under sub-section ( 1) of section 71; ( n) the manner of filing a
complaint with the State Council under sub-section ( 1) of section 72;
(o) the period for which the Board, Committee, National Councilor
State Council may engaged committees or experts, the qualifications of
such experts and the fees and remunerations to be paid under sub-
section ( 2) of section 95; ( p) the books of accounts and other
documents to be maintained by health educational institutions under

194
sub-section ( 4) of section 103; ( q) any other matter for which
provision may be made by regulations by the Commission under this
Act.
3. Clause 113 of the Bill confers power upon the State
Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill.
The matters with respect to which rules may be made has been set
out in sub-clause ( 2). The matters, inter alia, relate to ( a) the manner
in which the State Councils are to be constituted and its composition
under sob-section ( 1) of section 53; ( b) the period of State Council
to continue under sub-section ( 5) of section 53; ( c) the manner of
election of the President and Vice-President of the State Council to be
elected by the members under sub-section ( 1) of section 54; ( d)
manner of enrolment of persons under sub-section ( 2) of section 57;
(e) the data capturing method by which the State Councils shall
maintain the register under sub-section ( 4) of section 57; ( f) the
manner in which the State Council shall update and publish the
Register under sub-section ( 5) of section 58; ( h) any other matter for
which provision may be made by rules by the State Government under
this Act.
4. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 114 of the Bill requires that the rules
and regulations made under the proposed legislation shall have to be
laid before Parliament. Similarly, sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause
requires that the rules made by the State Government under the
proposed legislation shall have to be laid before the State legislature.
5. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations
may be made are generally matters of procedure and administrative
detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

195
195
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to consolidate the law in certain disciplines of health sector and promote human
resources in health sector and provide for mechanism for the
determination, maintenance, coordination and regulation of standards of
health education throughout the country to ensure adequate availability of
human resources in all States and for the said purpose to establish the
National Commission for Human Resources for Health and to supervise
and to regulate professional Councils in various disciplines of health sector
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND
FAMILY WELFARE INVITES SUGGESTIONS ON
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN
RESOURCES FOR HEALTH BILL, 2011
The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011, as introduced in the
Rajya Sabha, on 22 nd December, 2011 and pending therein, has been referred to the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare headed by Shri Brajesh
Pathak, M.P., Rajya Sabha for examination and report thereon within a period of three months.
2. The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011 seeks to consolidate the
law in certain disciplines of health sector and promote human resources in health sector and provide
for mechanism for the determination, maintenance, co-ordination and regulation of  standards of health
education throughout the country to ensure adequate availability of human resources in all the States.
3. In order to have wider consultations, the Committee has decided to invite written memoranda
containing suggestions/views/comments of individuals/institutions/organizations interested in the subject
matter of the Bill.
4. Those desirous of  submitting memoranda to the Committee may send two copies thereof,
either in English or Hindi, to Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director, Room No. 222, Rajya
Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi - 110001 [Tel: 23035428 (O),
Fax: 23012007]  within 30 days of  publication of  the advertisement. Besides, those who are desirous
of giving oral evidence before the Committee on the Bill are requested to indicate so, for consideration
of the Committee.
5. Copies of  the Bill may be obtained on  requisition from Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
(H&FW), Room No. 218, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe, Sansad Marg, New
Delhi - 110001 or downloaded from the Rajya Sabha website 
rajyasabha.nic.in under the head ‘Committees’,
sub-head — ‘Bills with the Committee and Press release seeking opinions/suggestions from public’.
6. The memoranda submitted to the Committee will form part of the records of the Committee
and would be treated as strictly confidential and may not be made public as such an act would
constitute breach of privilege of the Committee.
Website: – rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: 
rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in
196
ANNEXURE-II
Hkkjrh; laln
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
jkT; lHkk lfpoky;
RAJYA SABAH SECRETARIAT
çsl foKfIr
PRESS RELEAS

ANNEXURE-III
List of Individuals Associations from whom Memoranda were Received:
Sl. No. Individual/Associations
1. Dr. Harish Gupta, President Elect, Delhi Medical Association, New Delhi
2. Shri. R.C. Mishra, President, Indian Dental Hygienist & Technologist Association, Allahabad
3. Kunal Saha, People for Better Treatment, USA
4. Amit Kumar Bajpai, General Secretary, Qualified Physiotherapy Society, Sri Niwas Puri,
New Delhi
5. Prof. (Sr.) Gilbert, President, TNAI (Professional Nursing Association), Green Park, New
Delhi
6 Dr. K. Ramesh Reddy, Professor of Paediatric Surgery, Niloufer Hospital, Hydearbad
7. Delhi Optometrist Association, New Delhi
8. K. Karthide, Physiotherapist, Vellore, Bengaluru
9. Tanu Srivastava, Physiotherapist, New Delhi
10. Manjit Rai Bahl, President, Central Government Hospitals Radiographers Welfare Association
(Regd.), Delhi
11. Identity not Revealed: Background and General Comments
12. Rushi Bhatt, Christian Medical Association of India, Bengaluru
13. M. R. Madhavan, Head of Research, PRS, Legislative Research, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi
14. Prof. (Dr) Malvika Kapur, Indian Association of Clinical Psychologists, Mysore
15. Ms. Sneh Jain, Audiologist and Speech Therapist, G .B. Pant Hospital, New Delhi
16. Nalin Kumar, Physiotherapist, Chennai
17. Dr. J.M. Jeyaraj, Consultant Orthodontist, Coimbatore
18. T. Ilango, Registrar, Tamil Nadu Pharmacy Council, Chennai
19. Dr. A. Najeerul Ameen, President, All India Foreign Medical Graduates Association,
Chennai
20. Dr. Sanjiv Kumar, Professor And Principal, Kleuipt, Belgaun
21. Dr. Sushama Anil, Chelannur General Hospital, Kozhikode, Kerala
22. Dr. B. Ramachandran, Secretary, Indian Association of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
Department of Rehabilitation, Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi
23. Dr. K. Kishore Kumar, State Secretary, Qpmpa, Kayamkulam, Kerala
197

198
24. S.C. Bhutani, Joint Secretary, NBE Employees Association, Dwarka, New Delhi
25. Dr. Dheerendra Kumar (PT), The Indian Association of Physiotherapists, Delhi State
Branch, Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi.
26. Rajesh Wadhwa, President, Indian Optometry Federation, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi
27. V .G . Ramachandran, Professor of Microbiology, UCMS & GTB Hospital, Dilshad Garden,
Delhi
28. Dr. Amritpal Singh, MD (Ayurveda), Lecturer, Sri Dhanwantri Ayrvedic College, Chandigarh
29. Dr. Ganesh Kumar Meena, General Secretary , Physiotherapists’ Forum of AIIMS, AIIMS,
New Delhi
30. Dr. Uday K. Sinha, Department of Clinical Psychology, Institute of Human Behaviour and
Allied Sciences, Dilshad Garden, Delhi
31. C. Brahmaranjan, B.E., M.T.P, Chennai
32. Shri Artatran Patra, Executive Council Member and Chairman-Task Force Committee,
Orthotics & Prosthetics Association of India, Dehradun
33. Dr. Jyotika Bijlani, Covenor, All India Occupational Therapists Association, Mumbai
34. Shri. A.N. Sinha, General Secretary, All India Medical Laboratory Technologists Association,
Patna
35. Dr. Devendra Shirole, National Vice President, Indian Medical Association, Pune
36. Dr. M. Shamsudeen, Advisor, Medical Education to ESI Corporation, New Delhi; Ministry
of Labour and Employment, Govt. of India; Freelance Health Care Consultant, NOIDA,
UP, NCR Delhi
37. Dr. Hemant Juneja (PT), Associate Professor and HoD, Amar Jyoti institute of Physiotherapy,
University of Delhi, Karkardooma, Vikasmarg, Delhi
38 Dr. A.G.K. Sinha, Associate Professor and HoD Department of Physiotherapy, Punjab
University, Patiala, Punjab
39. Prof. D.S. Chauhan, Secretary General, Indian Council of Universities and Vice Chancellor,
Uttarakhand Technical University, Dehradun
40. Dr. Rejith Anand, General Secretary, Ayurveda Medical Association of India, Kerala State
Committee, Kerala, (Forwarded by Prof. P.J. Kurian, MP (Rajya Sabha))
41. Dr. D.R. Rai, Hony. Secretary General, Indian Medical Association, New Delhi
42. Dr. V .K. Ajithkumar, Secretary General, Indian Homoeopathic Medical Association,
Ernakulam, Kerala
43. Shri. S.P. Yadav, President, National Opthalmic Association, JIND (Haryana)
44. Dr. Shivkumar. S. Utture, HoD, Surgery Department, St.Georges Hospital, Mumbai
45. Dr. Murlidhar. K., Director, Narayana Hrudayalaya Hospitals, Bangalore, Karnataka
46. Shri. Ramkishore Sah, General Secretary, Vision Council of India, AIIMS, New Delhi.
47. Dr. V .S. Bole, Retd. HoD, Occupational Therapy, Kalawati Saran Hospital/Delhi.

199
48. Shri Vaidya Devendra Triguna, President, All India Ayurvedic Congress, New Delhi.
49. Dr. B. Bindu Kr., Medical Officer Homoeo, Community Health Center, Middle Andaman.
50. Shri. Anand Kr. Chaudhary; Associate Professor, Department of Rasa Shastra, Faculty of
Ayurveda, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu, University, Varanasi.
51. Abhishek Nath Tripathi, Sarthak Advocates and Solicitors, Noida
52. Kaptan Singh Sherawat, General Secretary, Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of
India, New Delhi.
53. Dr. R. D. Dubey, State President, Indian Medical Association, Bengal State Branch,
Kolkata.
54. Suresh Malayath, General Secretary, Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists,
Kerala
55. M.C. Gupta, Advocate, Delhi Bar Council, New Delhi
56. Shri K. Elango et al , Chennai
57. Shri D. Chakraborty, Vice-President, Pharmacy Council of India, Kolkata
58. Prof. S.N. Gaur, Director, (Acting); Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, Delhi

200
ANNEXURE-IV
Comments of MoHFW on the views/suggestions of the various stakeholders and the general public on the NCHRH Bill.
Memo Name of the Stakeholder Views/Comments of MoHFW
No.
12 3
1. Delhi Medical Association
• The Government is proposing for Centralisation of powers
by forming NCHRH and by taking away the autonomy of
all concerned Boards, Councils etc.
• MCI is an autonomous body and majority of its members
were elected and represented different States. The new
Commission is constituted of appointed Members.
• As per Clause 105(1) and (2), the Commission will be
bound by directions of the Central Government.
• There is no representation from professional organisations
like IMA or Health Universities.
• The current regulatory bodies regulate both education and pro-
fession practice within their domain and are over-burdened with
all regulatory functions. NCHRH in fact seeks to decentralise and
trifurcate the regulatory functions among three separate bodies
viz. NBHE, NEAC and National Councils.
• The existing jumbo size Councils comprises of nominated and
elected members who lack the required competencies. The Com-
position of the NCHRH is more compact and the Commission
and its constituent bodies are expected to be guided by eminent
persons in health profession with fresh and up to date outlook.
• The Commission will be guided by a National Policy for Human
Resources for Health that will articulate a strategic vision and
normative framework for the creation of Human Resources for
Health. This policy document, to be updated every five years,
will be developed by public health leaders representing State and
Central Governments through the Central Council for Health and
Family Welfare and shall be in the public domain.
• One of the main functions of the National Board for Health
Education would be to coordinate between medical and other
scientific academies, societies, associations, institutions and Gov-
ernment medical and scientific departments and services. This
ensures participation of professional bodies and health universi-
ties in the functioning of the Commission.

201
• The Bill fails to talks about Rehabilitation Council of India,
Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy
etc.
• No elected Members from professional association are in the
Commission.
• Modern medicine and medical practitioner is not defined
properly.
• No road map of how the Government is going to reduce the
shortage of manpower by forming this Commission.
• Common Entrance Exam by NBHE will affect the students
of various States.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing
Councils by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a
paramedical Council, however, it also leaves room for the
Government to notify the constitution of National Councils for
any other discipline of health. Therefore, the Government is of
the opinion that the issue of more Councils should be left to the
wisdom of the experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and
when it is set up.
• As regards representation of elected members of the Council
finding representation in the Commission is concerned it is
stated that sub clause (4) of clause 3 stipulates that the Presidents
of each of the National Council shall be an ex-officio Member
of the Commission and sub clause (5) of clause 3 stipulates
that all ex-office Members shall have voting rights.
• The bill clearly defines the terms “discipline of health”, “health
professional”, “medical practitioner”, and “medicine” without
leaving any room for misinterpretation.
• The main objective of the National Commission for Human
Resources in Health will be to provide an institutional framework
to promote availability of health care providers in all parts of
the country (doctors, nurses, dentists, pharmacists and
paramedics), to reduce shortages, standardize quality and bridge
the uneven distribution of the existing workforce. Accordingly,
the Commissions’ immediate tasks will be to undertake a work
force study, formulate an action plan, and ensure inter-sectoral
coordination to promote availability of Human Resources in all
parts of the country.
• The Government, under the present dispensation has already
notified common entrance examination i.e. National Entrance
and Eligibility Test (NEET) for admission to UG and PG courses
in medical colleges after arriving at a consensus with most of
the stakeholders.

202
12 3
• The registration in State Council valid only for the State.
• Section 100 bars challenging of removal of name from
State Register and is unconstitutional.
• MCI has been an autonomous body regulating medical
education in the country. As majority members were elected
they were able to give unbiased opinion regarding medical
institutes and medical concerns.
• The bill seeks to introduce the concept of live register for
medical professional and therefore it is essential to segregate the
data. A person registered with the state council is not barred
from practicing anywhere in India; he just needs to register
himself with the National Register to allow him to practice in
any place outside his state that his whereabouts and manpower
planning is made easy.
• In so far as provisions under clause 100 are concerned it is
stated that a commission or tribunal is established with limited
powers to decide and investigate matters falling under its ambit
so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However such
commissions/tribunals are amenable to constitutional courts.
Therefore a person aggrieved with the decision of the Commission
can always file an appeal in the High Court or the Supreme
Court and his fundamental rights would remain intact. The bill
provides for an appellate authority in the Central Government.
• Professional councils such as the Medical Council of India, the
Indian Nursing Council, Dental Council and the Pharmacy Council
have been set up by statutes of Parliament to regulate the
practice of their respective professions, including education.
However, many of these councils have attracted criticism for
their functioning, from health professionals', health administrators
and media. They have also drawn judicial censure on several
occasions. The existence of separate regulatory bodies, each
responsible for an important cadre of health workers, has also
failed to provide a synergistic approach to address the human
resources needs of the health sector in the country. There is
thus an urgent need for innovation in health related education
which encourages cross connectivity across disciplines and
categories of health workers.

203
2.
3.
4.
Indian Dental Hygienist & Technologist Association
• Strengthening the profession of dental hygienists.
• The DCI has failed to promote dental hygiene.
People for Better Treatment (PBT)
• Inclusion of a significant number of “non-doctor” members
in the National Council and State Councils
Qualified Physiotherapist Society
• A separate Council for Physiotherapists.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing
Councils by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a
paramedical Council; however, it also leaves room for the
Government to notify the constitution of National Councils for
any other discipline of health. Therefore, the Government is of
the opinion that the issue of more Councils should be left to the
wisdom of the experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and
when it is set up.
• NCHRH recognises that there is an urgent need for innovation
in health related education which encourages cross-connectivity
across disciplines and categories of health workers. Under the
NCHRH, it would be the Board ( i.e. NBHE) which would
determine, coordinate and maintain standards for health education
and research and also ensure access, inclusion and opportunities
to all.
• The Commission would also comprise of members who are
from outside the medical profession viz., law, technology and
management. However the Councils proposed in the bill seek to
replace the existing councils and therefore their composition
has been retained on the similar lines as that of the existing
councils. Nonetheless the suggestion by PBT is noted and
Government will consider it.
• The aim of NCHRH is to provide a singular overarching
regulatory mechanism for medical education and education in
various other allied fields of health. The Bill seeks to subsume
the existing Councils and create them anew with a mandate of
only enrolling persons with recognised qualifications in the
respective field and specify, monitor and enquire into the

204
12 3
professional conduct etiquette and code of ethics to be observed
by the persons enrolled by the Council. The NCHRH Bill provides
for replacement of the existing Councils by constitution of
corresponding new Councils and setting up of a paramedical
Council. However, it also leaves room for the Government to
notify the constitution of National Councils for any other discipline
of health. Therefore, the Government is of the opinion that the
issue of more Councils should be left to the wisdom of the
experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and when it is set up.
• The Preamble of the Bill clearly brings out that the aim for
setting up of NCHRH is to consolidate the law in certain
disciplines of health sector and promote human resources in
health sector and provide for mechanism for the determination,
maintenance, co-ordination and regulation of standards of health
education throughout the country to ensure adequate availability
of human resources in all States and for the said purpose to
establish the National Commission for Human Resources for
health to supervise and regulate professional Councils in various
disciplines of health sector.
• Different regulatory bodies each responsible for its own cadre
of workers have failed to provide a synergetic approach to
address the human resources needs in the health sector of the
country.
• The question of conflict with State does not arise since the
proposal to set up NCHRH has been extensively discussed with
all stakeholders including the State Governments and only after
taking everyone on board the Government has gone ahead with
the proposal. Moreover, at present separate regulatory bodies
oversee different health care disciplines and there is no cross
5. Prof. (Sr.) Gilbert, President, TNAI
• Reasons for amalgamating the existing Councils and creating
NCHRH.
• Separate Councils decentralised the health sector.
• Taking away the powers of the State Government in
matters related to health education would be anti-
constitutional.

205
connectivity across different health care disciplines. The current
regulatory bodies regulate both education and professional
practice within their domain and are over-burdened with all
regulatory functions. NCHRH seeks to trifurcate the regulatory
functions among three separate bodies viz. NBHE, NEAC and
National Councils.
• Sub-c1ause (4) of clause 3 stipulates that the Presidents of
each of the National Council shall be an ex-officio Member of
the Commission and sub clause (5) of clause 3 stipulates that
all Members including ex-office Members shall have voting
rights.
• The meaning of leadership role is obvious if read in the context
of the position for which it is being sought. The Chairperson
of the Commission need not only have the essential qualification
and experience but a proven track record of successfully leading
an organisation and most importantly a vision and an ability to
articulate that vision to a team.
• Clause 7 stipulates “declaration of interest” by Member/
Chairperson of the Commission before his appointment. As
regards members of the selection committee, they would be
appointed as per ‘prescribed rules’.
• The bill provides a framework for improving the overall
environment of health education in the country and mandates
the Commission to determine, coordinate, and maintain standard
for health education and research in the country. How the
Commission would do it is a matter of detail and cannot be
included in a legislative proposal.
• Clause 57(1) stipulates that every national council and every
state council shall enrol the persons having recognised
Dr. K. Ramesh Reddy,
Vice-Chairman, Andhra Pradesh Medical Council
• NCHRH should have an autonomous status and ex officio
Members should have equal powers as regular Members.
• “Leadership Role” should be clearly defined keeping in
view the autonomous status of the body.
• Members who are eligible to occupy positions should not
have any direct or indirect interest.
• In Evaluation & Assessment of institutes, State Government
should be included; all institutions should be revaluated
etc.
• Each State Register should be updated every five years
with re-registration.
6.

206
qualification for a period of 10 years only; sub-clause (2) of
clause 57 stipulates that on expiry of 10 years the council shall
review the registration of the person.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing Councils
by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a paramedical
Council. However, it also leaves room for the Government to
notify the constitution of National Councils for any other discipline
of health. Therefore, the Government is of the opinion that the
issue of more Councils should be left to the wisdom of the
experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and when it is set up.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing Councils
by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a paramedical
Council. However, it also leaves room for the Government to
notify the constitution of National Councils for any other discipline
of health. Therefore, the Government is of .the opinion that the
issue of more Councils should be left to the wisdom of the
experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and when it is set up.
• Under Sections 2 (k) and 41 of NCHRH Bill, provision has
already been made for constitution of a National Council for any
other discipline of health.
12 3
Delhi Optometrists Association
• A separate Council for Optometrists.
K. Karthic, Vellore District
• A separate Council for Physiotherapists.
Ms. Tanu Srivastava
• A separate individual discipline according the ‘k’ clause of
the NCHRH, 2011 will make recommendations to ensure
the standardisation of such training and the monitoring of
actual performance of Physiotherapists in India.
7.
8.
9.

207
Central Government Hospitals Radiographers Welfare
Association
• A separate Council of Radiographers/Radiological
Technology.
Unknown
• Constitution of the Commission should be more elaborate
and person chosen should be able to perceive HRH in a
holistic manner.
• The CEO should be the health professional.
• National Board of Health Education should be named as
National Board of Health Professional Education.
• The Board should have larger representation & administrative
structure and there should be no overlapping of function
with NEAC.
10.
11.
• The bill contains provision for setting up of additional National
Councils and whether or not, radiographers deserve a separate
council can be decided by the Commission when it is set up.
• The existing jumbo size Councils lack the required competencies.
The Composition of the NCHRH is more compact and the
Commission and its constituent bodies are expected to be
guided by eminent persons in health profession with fresh and
up to date outlook. The Members of the Commission would
represent various streams connected with health education viz.
medicine, dentistry, nursing, pharmacy, paramedics and public
health.
• The Bill only provides that the CEO shall not be below the rank
of Additional Secretary to the Government of India; it does not
necessarily mean that the person would be a bureaucrat.
• This would narrow the mandate of the Board since NCHRH
seeks to regulate all health educational institution which imparts
education in discipline of health beyond 12 years of schooling
leading to the award of a degree or diploma.
• The Board consist of seven members, including the President
and the Chairperson or a Member of the NCHRH shall also be
an ex-officio member of the Board. Further, the Bill provides
that the Board may appoint other officers as it considers
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. The
functions of the Board and NEAC are well defined and there is
no overlap.

208
• The functions of the NEAC should be more specific.
• National Councils and State Councils are both entrusted
with the responsibility of enrolling and registering members.
• To oversee and to protect the new body for HRH from
over centralisation without the participation of other
stakeholders, it is important to have a General Council as
the supreme body of the council.
• The Selection Committee for appointment of various
authorities in the NCHR should be prescribed in the Bill
and it should be ensured that the Members of selection
committee are not puppets of the Central Government.
Dr. Rushi Bhatt
• For eligibility of registration and screening test, the NCHRH
Bill introduces the phrase “recognised qualification” whereas
• The functions of NEAC are clearly specified. The Board will
approve and notify minimum norms and standards of maintenance
of academic quality for accreditation and benchmarking of
education in health institution. The assessment by NEAC would
be based on these norms.
• The bill seeks to introduce the concept of live register for
medical professional and therefore it is essential to segregate the
data. A person registered with the State Council is not barred
from practicing anywhere in India; he just needs to register
himself with the National Register to allow him to practice in
any place outside his state that his whereabouts and manpower
planning is made easy.
• The Commission will be guided by a National Policy for Human
Resources for Health that will articulate a strategic vision and
normative framework for the creation of Human Resources for.
Health. This policy document, to be updated every five years,
will be developed by public health leaders representing State and
Central Governments through the Central Council for Health and
Family Welfare and shall be laid on the table of the Parliament
and in the public domain.
• The composition of Selection Committee is laid down in the Bill
and it shall consist of persons of eminence and experience from
medial and allied fields, to avoid any bias in selection. Further,
the Selection Committee shall only recommend a panel of two
names for every vacancy to the Central Government and the
Central Government shall make the final appointment.
• There is no difference between the provision for screening test
in the IMC Act and the NCHRH Bill. Clause 33 (1) clearly
12 3
12.

20913.
the IMC Act requires any qualified persons to clear a screening
test.
• In the NCHRH Bill, there is no provision for individuals to
petition the commission for recognition of their foreign
qualification.
PRS, Legislative Research
• The size of the National Councils continues to remain big.
• Inclusion of lay persons in the National Councils.
explains that the person who obtains the recognised qualification
granted by medical institution in any country outside India
recognised for enrolment as medical practitioner in that country
shall be entitled for enrolment by the National Council or the
State Council.
• One of the functions of the National Board for Health Education
would be to specify parameters for equivalence between academic
qualification granted by different health institutions in the
discipline of heath whether in India or abroad. Clause 98
provides that where any dispute arises regarding any
recommendation or advice of Court made to the Commission,
it shall be referred to Central Government whose decision
thereon shall be final and binding. Clause 91 (1) provides that
any person aggrieved by an order made by the Commission
under clause 98 may prefer an appeal to the Central Government.
• Though the size of the National Councils remains comparable,
NCHRH seeks to decentralise and trifurcate the regulatory
functions among three separate bodies viz. NBHE, NEAC and
National Councils. Further, the Composition of the NCHRH is
more compact and the Commission and its constituent bodies
are expected to be guided by eminent persons in health profession
with fresh and up to date outlook.
• The Commission would also comprise of members who are
from outside the medical profession viz., law, technology and
management. However, the Councils proposed in the bill seek to
replace the existing councils and therefore their composition
has been retained on the similar lines as that of the existing
councils. Nonetheless the suggestion by PBT is noted and
Government will consider it.

210
12 3
• No specific provision for licensing/exit exam.
• Possibility of misuse of powers - Clause 103(1) allows the
Commission. Board, Committee or the Council to appoint
persons to make an enquiry in relation to affairs of any
health educational institution.
• Inquiry into professional misconduct - lack of clarity on
the jurisdiction of National and State Councils.
Indian Association of Clinical Psychologists
• Including Clinical Psychologists as non-medical professionals.
• Two-tier system for. registration of Clinical Psychologists/
Counsellor under NCHRH.
• One of the main objectives of the NCHRH is to standardise the
quality of health education in the country. Among the immediate
tasks of the Commission would be to formulate an action plan
on how to achieve the objectives and exit exams could be
considered by Commission as one of the option to assess the
skills and knowledge of a student passing out after completion
of a course.
• The powers to withdraw recognition of any course or health
institution would vest only with the Commission (clause 21).
Nonetheless, the suggestion has been noted and if necessary,
changes would be made in the Bill in consultation with Ministry
of Law.
• The point is noted and the necessary clause will be rectified in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• This is a specific request which can be considered by the
Commission itself, once it is set up.
• This is also a specific request which can be considered by the
respective Council or the Commission once the NCHRH is set up.
14.

211
Miss Sneh Jain, Audiologist and Speech Language Pathologist
(ASLP), GB Pant Hospital, New Delhi
• Separate Council of hearing and speech professionals.
• Inclusion of ASLP in the definition of health.
• A separate Register for ASLP.
• ASLP members to be part of the Commission/Board.
Nalin Kumar
• The term paramedical is not clearly defined and different
terminologies should be used for physiotherapy, public
health and hospital management etc.
• The Selection Committee shall include experts from all the
disciplines of health.
• Plow to check the authenticity of qualification.
• A separate allied Council.
• Though the NCHRH Bill provides for a paramedical council, it
also leaves a provision for the Government to notify constitution
of National Councils for any other discipline of health. Therefore,
the Government is of the opinion that the issue of more
Councils and matters related thereto like maintaining separate
register for ASLP etc. should be left to the wisdom of experts
i.e. the Commission as and when it is set up.
• The Bill defines “medicine” separately and all the supplementary
disciplines are included in the definition for “discipline of health”.
• Clause 5(1) (b) provides that the Selection Committee shall
inter alia  consist of an expert of eminence from “allied health
sciences”.
• As per the provisions of the Act, only a person enrolled with
the National Council shall be entitled to practice in the respective
discipline of health and every National Councilor State Council
shall enrol only the persons having recognised qualification.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing
Councils by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a
paramedical Council, however, it also leaves room for the
Government to notify the constitution of National Councils for
any other discipline of health. Therefore, the Government is of
the opinion that the issue of more Councils should be left to the
wisdom of the experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and
when it is set up.
15.
16.

212
• A person should be enrolled for less than 10 years and his
license should be renewed only after showing proof that
he has attended seminars, conferences, workshops specified
by the Commission.
Dr. J.M. Jeyaraj
• The full time or part time members of the Commission,
Board or Committee should be without any affiliation to
any health institution at the time of their names are
proposed.
• Overlap in the roles of Board and Committee in granting
recognition and recommendation to institution.
• Health institutions should be categorised into Central PPP/
private institutions.
• The fee of individual institution should be based on the
budget of the institution and audited by the NCHRH.
12 3
• It Clause 57 (2) stipulates that the National Council or the State
Council may renew the enrolment of a person for a further
period of 10 years on showing the proof that he has attended
such seminars, conferences, workshops or any other programme
as may be specified by the Commission for 'the purpose of
updating his professional knowledge and skill.
• The Bill provides that selection of a member shall be subject to
his satisfying the fact that he does not have any financial or other
conflict of interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his
functions as a member, It is not feasible to keep every health
institution out of the ambit for the selection of the candidate.
• The Bill clearly demarcates the function of the Commission,
Board and the Committee for establishment of institution for
imparting health education or new course of study. While the
application for obtaining permission shall be referred by the
Commission to the Committee for its recommendation, the
Committee while making its recommendations and the
Commission while passing the order, either approving or
disapproving the application shall have due regard to the norms
specified by the Board.
• No comments.
• The function of the Board inter alia  includes prescribing norms
for compulsory disclosure by health educational institution
engaging in discipline of health education on all aspects relating
to their functioning that has a bearing on the interest of the
students, faculty, parents, the community and the Government.
The Committee as one of its functions shall also undertake audit
17.

213
and cost to be audited the adherence to the code of ethics
including policies on obviating conflict of interest, disclosure of
information, involving transparency in process and procedure of
evaluation and assessment.
• The Bill empowers the Central Government to supersede the
Commission, Board, Committee or the National Councils in
extra ordinary circumstances with a view to improve the overall
functioning of the Commission with more transparency and
accountability.
• The Commission while withdrawing recognition shall specify a
cut off date and also prior to that give a reasonable opportunity
to the institution/college. These provisions have been kept to
safeguard the interest of the students.
• The Board will specify minimum requirements for faculty,
infrastructure and clinical workload for establishment of
institutions.
• As one of the primary functions of the Commission would be
to assess the requirement of health training facilities for education
and training in medical and allied disciplines, the Commission
itself would be maintaining a. data of the students emolled in
various courses.
• NEET is not going to disturb the existing reservation policy; as
regards conducting the exam in regional language the matter is
under consideration.
• The Bill provides for the same as per clause 114.
• These issues would be considered while framing of the rules.
The State Governments shall be able to appoint its nominees in
the State Councils.
• Holding of office by the Commission, Board and Committee
members at the pleasure of the Central Government will
reduce the freedom of their functioning.
• Withdrawal of recognition
• Manpower infrastructure etc. should be available at the
time of admission of first batch and deficiency rectified
within six months.
• The Board should maintain a list of students pursuing
various courses.
• Common entrance test to be held in regional languages
and as per reservation policies of the State.
• All regulations including those made under clause 115 to
be laid before the Parliament.
• Composition of National Council.

214
12 3
Tamil Nadu Pharmacy Council.
• Like definition of medical practioners other professions
like Nursing, Pharmacy, etc. to be defined.
• The Chairperson of the Commission could be a person
from any of the allied health fields or a civil servant.
• The Chairperson of the Selection Committee could be a
person from any of the allied health fields or a civil
servant.
• President and whole time members of NBHE could be a
person from any of health disciplines or a civil servant.
• Chairperson of the Selection Committee for NBHE could
be a person from any of health disciplines or a civil
servant.
• The State Council should nominate a member in the National
Council.
• The Bill is salient about election of members to State
Council.
• The enrolment of persons in the respective fields shall be
done only by the State Council.
• All the other professions are included in the definition of a
“health professional” under section 2(s).
• Not acceptable it is considered opinion of the Government that
the Commission should be headed by a renowned person from
the discipline of medical sciences.
• Since the Chairperson of the Commission is from the field of
medical sciences it is logical that the Selection Committee is also
headed by a senior professional from the field of medical
sciences.
• The President and whole time Members shall be from the discipline
of medicine or medical education and the part time members will
be from discipline of health or health education. Being a professional
body, appointment of civil servant is best avoided.
• Same as above.
• It is a better option that the State Council elects a Member from
amongst themselves to the National Council instead of nominating.
• The Bill provides that it is for the State Governments to constitute
the State Councils in such manner and with such composition
as may be prescribed by the respective State Governments.
• The Bill seeks to introduce the concept of live register for
medical professional and therefore it is essential to segregate the
data. A person registered with the state council is not barred
from practicing anywhere in India; he just needs to register
18.

215
All India Foreign Medical Graduates Association
• Indian nationals graduated from the foreign medical
universities/academies may be allowed to start practice in
the rural areas or urban poor areas of our nation before
clearing the Screening Test.
• Indian nationals who are having Post Graduate qualifications
from the foreign medical universities/academies which are
yet to recognise may also be allowed to start consultant
practice in our nation.
• Indian nationals graduated from the foreign medical
universities/academies may be given due representation in
Super Medical Regulatory bodies like NCHRH and also the
bodies such as MCl and DCL
Dr. Sanjiv Kumar, Prof. And Principal, KLEUIPT
• Include and facilitate the formation of separate Central
Independent Physiotherapy Council.
Dr. Sushama Anil
• The Selection Committee should be autonomous bodies
and members of the Selection Committee should be appointed
in consultation with respective Councils.
himself with the National Register to allow him to practice in
any place outside his state that his whereabouts and manpower
planning is made easy.
• The petition does not contain any specific suggestions on the
NCHRH Bill. The issues raised are for the Commission to
consider once it is set up.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing Councils
by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a paramedical
Council, however, it also leaves room for the Government to
notify the constitution of National Councils for any other discipline
of health. Therefore, the Government is of the opinion that the
issue of more Councils should be left to the wisdom of the
experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and when it is set up.
• The Selection Committees are independent of the Commission
since they would be constituted by the Central Government.
19.
20.
21.

216
• NCHRH should be given constitutional status.
• AYUSH has been kept out of NCHRH.
• Bill should clearly define the role of health professionals
like pharmacists, nurses etc.
• Code of Ethics should be framed in consultation with the
professional Councils and associations.
• Definition for medicine should mean modern medicine and
definition for medical profession should mean modem medial
practitioner.
• The objects of the Bill will want be achieved unless all the
health professions are defined clearly.
• The proposed NCHRH would be a statutory body created by the
NCHRH Bill to act as an over arching regulatory body for the
health sector regulating the various professions related to health
under one umbrella.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modem system of medicine
are two different approaches and bringing them together under
a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting relegating
as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.
• The Bill seeks to address the broader issue concerning the
various health professions. The definition of “health disciplines”
includes all disciplines like Pharmacy, Nursing etc.
• The new professional Councils once set up under the Commission
would surely evaluate the existing Code of Ethics for the
profession and revised/updated as per requirement.
• Sectjon 2(u) define medicine as modem scientific medicine in all
its branches and include surgery and obstetrics, but does not
include vetenary medicine and surgery. Similarly, medical
practioners as per Section (2)(t) means medical profession who
holds a qualification granted by an authority notified under
Section 3 of the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916 or recognised
qualification under the NCHRH Act and has enrolled himself as
medical practitioner under the Act.
• The objective of the Bill is clearly defined to create an overarching
regulatory body to regulate and supervise various disciplines of
health and also promote human resources in health sector. The
minute details like defining each and every allied health science
subject or profession would unnecessarily make the legislation
lengthy.
12 3

217
22.
23.
• The Bill does not speak about repealing the Rehabilitation
Council of India Act, Delhi Council of Physiotherapy and
Occupational therapy Act, Gujarat State Council for
Occupational and Physiotherapy Act etc.
Indian Association of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
•. The Bill does not define all categories of health professions.
• The Nursing Council, Pharmacy Council etc. representing.
allied health professionals assist and support medical
practitioners for diagnosis and treatment and therefore
these Councils should have representation of medical
experts.
• The Bill should clearly state that who should be allowed
to use prefix “Dr.”
Dr. K. Kishore Kumar
• AYUSH has been kept out of the NCHRH Bill.
• Commission members must be appointed in consultation
with respective National Councils and professional
organisations.
• The legislation is piloted by Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and it proposes repeal of only those Central Acts which
are administered by the Ministry.
• The objective of the Bill is clearly defined to create an overarching
regulatory body to regulate and supervise various disciplines of
health and also promote human resources in health sector. The
minute details like defining each and every allied health science
subject or profession would unnecessarily make the .legislation
lengthy.
• Not acceptable each professional Council will have members
from its own profession alone. The cross-connectivity between
the professions will be provided by the Commission.
• Such details cannot be incorporated in a Bill.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modern system of
medicine are two different approaches and bringing them together
under a single regulatory body may result in "A YUSH" getting
relegating as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery
system.
• The Selection Committee which will appoint Chairperson,
members and members of the Commission will be independent
of the Commission since it would be constituted by the Central
Government.

218
• The Bill lacks the mechanism of selecting teaching staff.
• The National Commission should be the one and only
sanctioning authority for establishing a teaching institution.
• The Bill does not give any direction or responsibility in the
field of research and development in various fields under
its jurisdiction.
• National Councils must be required by law to issue each
person register under them an identity card.
NBE Employees Association
• The programmes offered by NBE must continue.
• The existing functions of NBE must continue.
• Autonomy and functioning of NBE is required.
• NBE needs to be strengthened.
• NCHRH in its current form is unacceptable.
• The terms arid conditions of NBE employees should be
protected etc.
• These are matters to be included in the regulations.
• The Commission under clause 17 of the Bill shall give permission
for establishment of an institution imparting heath education or
new course of study.
• While the National Board of Health Education under the
Commission would take measures to facilitate and promote
academic study and research, the Board for Research, Promotion
and Innovation under NCHER would formulate research and
innovation policies for the sustained global competitiveness of
the country and also promote transformative and multi-disciplinary
research in higher educational institutions, including health
institutions. The NCHRH will be represented by two members in
the Board for Research, Promotion and Innovation of NCHER.
• Clause 58 of the Bill clearly states the manner in which the
registers are to be maintained and makes it mandatory that the
data pertaining to health professionals should also contain there
biometric and other details.
• The proposal to set up NCHRH has been extensively discussed
with all stakeholders and only after taking everyone on board
the Government has gone ahead with the proposal. The aim of
the Bill is to create an overarching regulatory body for the
health sector regulating the various professions related to health
under one umbrella. Different regulatory bodies each responsible
for its own cadre of workers have failed to provide a synergetic
approach to address the human resources needs in the health
sector of the country.
12 3
24.

219
The Indian Association of Physiotherapists
• To recommend an autonomous regulatory Council for
Physiotherapists.
• To define paramedics and paramedical separately.
• To allow physiotherapists with request to drug prescription.
• Clause 118(1) stipulates that every officer or other employee of
the existing Councils or the National Board of Examination as
the case may be, serving in the employment immediately before
the appointed date shall become, as from the appointed day, an
officer or as the case may be, other employee of the Commission
and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure,
at the same remuneration, upon the same terms and conditions,
with the same obligations, and with the same rights and privileges
as he would have held under the existing Council if its
undertaking has not vested in the Commission and shall continue
to do as an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of
the existing Council or until the expiry of period of six months
from the appointed day if such officer or other employee opts
not to continue to be the officer or other employee of the
existing Councils within such period.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing
Councils by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a
paramedical Council. However, it also leaves room for the
Government to notify the constitution of National Councils for
any other discipline of health. Therefore, the Government is of
the opinion that the issue of more Councils should be left to the
wisdom of the experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and
when it is set up.
• The objective of the Bill is clearly defined to create an overarching
regulatory body to regulate and supervise various disciplines of
health and also promote human resources in health sector. The
minute details like defining each and every allied health science
subject or profession would unnecessarily make the legislation
lengthy.
25.

220
12 3
Indian Optometry Federation
• Consider optometry as an independent health care profession.
Prof. V .G. Ramachandran
• Non-medical persons employed in medical colleges are in
dire need of legislative protection for dignified existence
and preservation of inviolate service condition, minimal
constitutional rights and “law enshrined vaccine” to guard
against the comforting sense of schatenfrude derives out
of inflicted misery by MCI and medical establishments
across the country through vulgar abuse of authority.
Dr. Amritpal Singh
• Include AYUSH systems of medicine as part of Bill.
Physiotherapists’ Forum of AIIMS
• Oral Evidence for 'Independent and autonomous
Physiotherapy Council/Department.
• It is neither desirable nor possible to include each and every
allied health science stream as an independent profession in the
Bill. Nonetheless, the Bill seeks to promote availability of health
care providers standardised quality and bridge the uneven
distribution of the existing work force. The Bill also has the
provision to allow the Government to notify constitution of
National Councils for disciplines of health other than those
mentioned in the Bill. Moreover, the primary aim of NBHE
would be to ensure augmentation of trained specialists and super
specialist in every field of health care.
• The comments do not contain any suggestion on the NCHRH
Bill. The “legislative protection” sought by Prof. Ramachandran
can only be provided only be amending the Teacher Eligibility
Qualification Regulations either by MCI or by the Commission
when the NCHRH is set up.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modem system of medicine
are two different approaches and bringing them together under
a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting relegating
as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing Councils
by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a paramedical
Council. However, it also leaves room for the Government to
26.
27.
28.
29.

221
Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences
• Inclusion of Clinical Psychologists as Non-Medical Health
Professionals.
Shri C. Brahmarajan, Chennai
• Inclusion of Rural Medicine, Preventive Medicine and
Sanitation u/s 2 (k).
• Health Minister being the representative for whole of India
in respect of ensuring health, to be the honorary Chairman
of the Commission.
• Tenure of Chairperson and Members of Commission to be
increased from 4 years to 5 years in line with the tenure
of Health Minister.
Orthotics and Prosthetics Association of India
• Prosthetist and Orthotist cadre need to be an integral of
medical team as Physical Health Care personnel.
notify the constitution of National Councils for any other discipline
of health. Therefore, the Government is of the opinion that the
issue of more Councils should be left to the wisdom of the
experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and when it is set up.
• This is a specific request which can be considered by the
Commission itself, once it is set up.
• These are not separate streams of health education and can be
a part of the discipline “medicine”.
• The NCHRH is proposed to be independent regulatory body
headed by professional. However, the Commission will be guided
by a National Policy for Human Resources for Health, to be
developed by public health leaders representing State and Central
Governments through the Central Council for Health and Family
Welfare which is chaired by the Health and Family Welfare
Minister.
• As indicated above, the Commission would function independently
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and therefore
there is no connection between the tenure of the Chairperson/
Member of the Commission and the term of the Minister.
• The suggestions made by the Association do not relate to the
NCHRH Bill. However, it needs to be underscored that the Bill
30.
31.
32.

222
• This cadre to be operated either with PMR and Orthopaedic
Department.
• At least two professionals should be appointed in each
district hospitals.
• At least, this cadre should be started with Gr. B Gazetted
cadre uniformly across the country.
• All medical colleges need to be equipped with Prosthetics
and Orthotics unit with proper staff pattern.
• The Prosthetics and Orthotics professionals in leading
medical colleges like AIIMS, JIPMER, PGIMER etc. needs
to be upgraded at par with other health care divisions.
• Ministry of HRD should take proper initiation to standardise
the prevailing courses of Prosthetics and Orthotics in the
country and recognition in University Grants Commission.
All India Occupational Therapists Association
• A separate Council for Occupational Therapy.
All India Medical Laboratory Technician Association
• Separate Council for the Medical Laboratory Technologists.
defines “discipline of health” to include medicine, dental, nursing,
pharmacy and paramedical or any other discipline as the Central
Government may notify.
• Though the NCHRH Bill provides for a Paramedical Council, it
also leaves a provision for the Government to notify constitution
of National Councils for any other disciplines of health. Therefore,
the Government is of the opinion that the issue of more Councils
and matters related thereto like maintaining separate register for
ASLP etc. should be left to the wisdom of experts i.e. the
Commission as and when it is set up.
• Though the NCHRH Bill provides for a Paramedical Council, it
12 3
33.
34.

223
also leaves a provision for the Government to notify constitution
of National Councils for any other discipline of health. Therefore,
the Government is of the opinion that the issue of more
Councils and matters related thereto like maintaining separate
register for ASLP etc. should be left to the wisdom of experts
i.e. the Commission as and when it is set up.
• The point is noted and if necessary the clause will be rectified
in consultation with Legislative Department.
• The scheme of registration is the same as is prevalent in the
present set up. In addition, it is also proposed to capture
biometric and other details of each health professional while
capturing the data for enrolment in the National/State Registers.
• The provision is in line with the prevalent provisions under the
IMC Act.
• There is a huge shortage of manpower in the health sector and
the clause is meant to discourage brain drain from the country.
Moreover, it does not compel a person to return within three
years but makes it compulsory for him to keep the Council
informed of his whereabouts during such period.
• The schedule is based on the prevalent MCI regulations on
ethics and professional misconduct. However, the shortcomings,
if any, can be rectified.
Dr Devendra Shirole, National Vice-President, Indian Medical
Association
• The appellate scheme in the Bill needs to be looked into
to avoid complications and confusion.
• The scheme of registration of health professionals is very
confusing.
• The requirement of obtaining a Certificate of Good Standing
from the respective National Councils/State Councils by a
person going abroad for employment/service/professional
assignment is irrational.
• Clause 59(3) which requires a person, who obtains a
degree, from a university or institution which is not funded
or owned by Central or State Governments, going abroad
for higher education or employment and does not return
within a period of three years or does not inform the
respective Councils of his whereabouts during such period
then it shall be construed as professional misconduct is –
illogical and irrational.
• The seventh schedule on misconduct.
35.

224
• Autonomy is lost.
• Reduce the shortage of uneven distribution of existing
workforce in the health sector.
• Do we need more specialist or family physicians?
• Fund transfer is the vision?
• What about AYUSH and Rehabilitation Councils?
• The Commission would comprise of selected as well as elected
members. The existing Councils would also continue to exist in
their new avatar. Therefore, it is not correct to say that autonomy
is lost. The current regulatory bodies regulate both education
and profession practice within their domain and are overburdened
with all regulatory functions. NCHRH in fact seeks to decentralise
and trifurcate the regulatory functions among three separate
bodies viz. NBHE, NEAC and National Councils.
• The main objective of the National Commission for Human
Resources in Health will be to provide an institutional framework
to promote availability of health care providers in all parts of the
country (doctors, nurses, dentists, pharmacists and paramedics)
to reduce shortages, standardize quality and bridge the uneven
distribution of the existing workforce. Accordingly, the
Commission’s immediate tasks will be to undertake a work
force study, formulate an action plan, and ensure inter-sectoral
coordination to promote availability of human resources in all
parts of the country.
• The Commission will be guided by a National Policy for Human
Resources for Health that will articulate a strategic vision and
normative framework for the creation of human resources for
health. This policy document, to be updated every five years,
will be developed by public health leaders representing State
and Central Governments through the Central Council for Health
and Family Welfare and shall be in the public domain.
• This is the part of the repeal and saving provisions of the Act.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modern system of medicine
are two different approaches and bringing them together under a
single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting relegating
as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.
12 3

225
• Clause 100 and 101 puts the Bill above the existing laws.
• No elected members from professional association in the
National Commission.
• Common Entrance Examination by National Board.
• National Evaluation and Assessment Committee (NEAC).
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing
Councils by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a
paramedical Council, however, it also leaves room for the
Government to notify the constitution of National Councils for
any other discipline of health. Therefore, the Government is of
the opinion that the issue of more Councils should be left to the
wisdom of the experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and
when it is set up.
• In so far as provisions under clause 100 are concerned, it is
stated that a Commission or Tribunal is established with limited
powers to decide and investigate matters falling under its ambit
so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However, such
Commissions/tribunals are amenable to constitutional courts.
Therefore, a person aggrieved with the decision of the
Commission can always file an appeal in the High Court or the
Supreme Court and his Fundamental Rights would remain intact.
The Bill provides for an appellate authority in the Central
Government.
• As regards representation of elected members of the Council
finding representation in the Commission is concerned, it is
stated that sub-clause (4) of clause 3 stipulates that the Presidents
of each of the National Council shall be an ex-officio Member
of the Commission and sub-clause (5) of clause 3 stipulates
that all ex-officio Members shall have voting rights.
• The Government, under the present dispensation has already
notified common entrance examination i.e. National Entrance
and Eligibility Test (NEET) for admission to UG and PG courses
in medical colleges after arriving at a consensus with most of
the stakeholders.
• The Bill clearly stipulates that NEAC will work subject to the
provisions contained in any law for the time being in force
relating to accreditation meaning thereby that evaluation and

226
assessment of health institutions will be made by professional
agencies registered with the National Accreditation Regulatory
Authority and recommended by the Commission. The Committee
will only take measures to develop and regulate the process of
evaluation and assessment of institution imparting health education
and programmes conducted therein and monitor the functioning
of the agencies recommended by the Commission.
• The present Councils have not been able to address the human
resources needs of the health sector in the country and are
overburdened with all regulatory functions. NCHRH seeks to
trifurcate the regulatory functions among three separate bodies
viz. NBHE, NEAC and National Councils to bring about efficiency
and accountability in the system.
• Under the prevalent system, a medical practitioner at times has
multiple registrations which does not allow a correct assessment
of the number of registered practioners. This provision would
resolve the issue of multiple registrations. A person registered
with the State Councils is not barred from practising anywhere
in India : he just needs to register himself in the National
Register to allow him to practice in any place outside his State
so that his whereabouts are known and manpower planning is
made easy.
• The meaning of the word “health” in the Bill has to be derived
from discipline of health defined under clause 2 (k): “health
educational institution” defined under clause 2(r), clearly states
that such institutions shall impart education in the discipline of
health.
• The vision and the objectives of the National Council are
thrown to the dustbin.
• Registration in State Councils valid only for the State.
Dr. M. Shamsudeen
• “Health Education” being a misnomer may be replaced
with “Health Science (s) Education” or “Education for
Health Sciences”.
12 3
36.

227
• “Health Educational Institutions” to be replaced with “Health
Science Educational Institutions”.
• Reference of Paramedical Council in the Bill is misleading
as no such Council exist.
• It should be mentioned clearly whether NCHRH is a
statutory body or not.
• Few members in the Councils can be graduates in their
respective fields.
• There is no mention about excess of admission capacity
who will fix the number of students.
• Transitory provisions relating to Board do not speak about
functions of the Board.
• Functions of the Committee are not clear.
• Under Section 37(e) words “making recommendation” may
be replaced by submission of assessment reports and its
recommendations.
• Section 37 (2)(h) recommend for improvement of academic
quality. This is overlapping of functions as it is a function
of the Board.
• What is the function of Committee if it is to advise the
Central Government or any State Government or the
appropriate statutory regulatory authority on any policy
matter concerning evaluation and assessment which may
be referred to it [section 37(2)(i)].
• Clause 41(2) states that on the commencement of the Act,
the Central Government will constitute the Paramedical Council
of India for the discipline of the Paramedics.
• A creation of a statute has to be a statutory body.
• The Act does not stipulate the qualifications for elected members
of the Council.
• Section 17(1)(b) specifies that the increase in admission capacity
can be done with the approval of the Commission only.
• Transitory provisions have been spelt out in Section 26 of 119.
• Functions have clearly been brought out in Section 37.
• Not required. Since the Commission has been empowered to
take a final decision on the recommendations made by the
Committee.
• There is no overlapping as the NAEC shall make recommendation
whereas the Board shall approve and notify norms and standards
of maintenance of academic quality.
• Committee functions have been spelt out clearly in section 37.
This specific provision is regarding tendering advice to various
bodies in case of need.

228
Amar Jyoti Institute of Physiotherapy
• Separate Council for Physiotherapists.
Dr. A.G .K Sinha, Associate Professor & Head Department of
Physiotherapy, Punjabi University, Patiala.
• Separate Council for Physiotherapists.
Indian Council of Universities
• Universities should be excluded from the proposed Bill.
12 3
37.
38.
39.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing Councils
by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a Paramedical
Council. However, it also leaves room for the Government to
notify the constitution of National Councils for any other
disciplines of health. Therefore, the Government is of the view
that the issue of more Councils should be left to the wisdom of
the experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and when it is set
up.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing Councils
by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a Paramedical
Council. However, it also leaves room for the Government to
notify the constitution of National Councils for any other
disciplines of health. Therefore, the Government is of the view
that the issue of more Councils should be left to the wisdom of
the experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and when it is set
up.
• The aim of the NCHRH Bill is to consolidate various disciplines
of health and promote human resources in the health sector and
provide for a mechanism from the determination, maintenance,
coordination and regulation of standards of health education
throughout the country to ensure adequate availability of human
resources in all the States. The Bill empowers the Commission
to only specify minimum standards for health education
institutions. Further, it empowers the Commission to withdraw
the recognition of the course or qualification in respect of a
university or health education or college or other institution
affiliated to such university which do not confirm to minimum

229
• Bar of jurisdiction of judicial courts is against the interest
of students, teachers, institutions etc. (Section 100)
• Withdrawal of recognition should be adopted as last remedy
to deal with non-conformity of standards by institutions.
• Provisions for imposing term imprisonment should be
excluded and amount of fine should also be reduced.
• Penal provisions under section 79, 80, 82 are harsh and
those under 83 and 84 are not justified.
Prof. P.J. Kurien
• The word “certain disciplines” in preamble shall be replaced
by “all approved disciplines”.
standards specified by the Commission. Further, the Bill does
not stop the universities from specifying higher standards of
health education over and above those specified by the
Commission.
• In so far as provisions under clause 100 are concerned, it is
stated that a Commission or Tribunal is established with limited
powers to decide and investigate matters falling under its ambit
so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However, such
Commissions/Tribunals are amenable to constitutional courts.
Therefore, a person aggrieved with the decision of the
Commission can always file an appeal in the High Court or the
Supreme Court and his Fundamental Rights would remain intact.
The Bill provides for an appellate authority in the Central
Government.
• The Commission can consider withdrawal of recognition of the
course or qualification  in respect of a university or health
education or college or other institution affiliated to such
university only on the recommendation of the Committee or the
Board. Further, no such recognition shall be withdrawn unless
the university or institution or college as the case may be has
been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
• In the existing statute the punishment for contravening the
provisions is non-recognition of degree awarded to the student
and not the college itself, which does not have sufficient
deterrent value.
• Disciplines have clearly been defined in the Bill.
40.

230
41.
42.
43.
• Include Indian systems of medicines.
• Number of members of Commission should be increased.
Indian Medical Association
• Same as Delhi Medical Association.
Indian Homoeopathic Medical Association
• Inclusion of AYUSH.
National Ophthalmic Association
• Word “paramedical” should be replaced with “allied
medical”.
• Paramedical Council should be renamed as Allied Medical
Council.
• Part I & II of sixth schedule to read as “Graduate Allied
Medical Qualification” and Post Graduate Allied Medical
Qualification” respectively.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modem system of medicine
are two different approaches and bringing them together under
a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting relegating
as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.
• The suggestions of Indian Medical Association are identical to
those made by Delhi Medical Association and replies to these
have already been provided.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modem system of medicine
are two different approaches and bringing them together under
a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting relegating
as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.
• The Bill provides for a separate Paramedical Council. However,
it also leaves no room for the Government to notify the
constitution of National Councils for any other disciplines of
health. Therefore, the Government is of the opinion that the
issue of more Councils be left to the wisdom of the Commission.
12 3

231
Dr. Shivkumar S. Utture, Executive Member, Maharashtra
Medical Council.
• Indian Medicine Central Council has no mention.
• Commission/Committee/Board should not be having only
nominated members.
• Selection Committee
• The Commission shall be overloaded with the work and a
lot of power is concentrated in the hands of the
Commission.
• The tenure of the Board of President/Member shall be up
to 70 years: the functions of the Board are too exhaustive
for a small group of 8 members; there is lot of overlapping
of functions of NBHE and NEAC.
• State Councils should be audited by State Governments
and not by CAG.
• Clause 100 every aggrieved individual has constitutional
right to appeal in court.
44.
• The Indian Medicine Central Council Act relates to AYUSH.
• The Commission will also comprise elected members since the
President of all the Councils would be its ex-officio Members.
• The Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the
Union Ministry of Health (Department of Health and Family
Welfare) shall be the convenor of the Selection Committee and
the Selection Committee shall recommend the panel of two
names for every vacancy and refer to it to the Central
Government for appointment.
• The regulatory function has been trifurcated between the Board,
Committee and Councils and in most cases the Commission will
be acting on the recommendation of the Board, Committee and
Councils. Furthermore, the Bill empowers the Central Government
to issue directions and even if need be, supersede the Commission.
• The term of the President or Member of the Board is fix for
four years or till the date he attains the age of 70 years. The
Board consists of seven members, including the President and
the Chairperson or a Member of the NCHRH shall also be an
ex-officio member of the Board. Further, the Bill provides that
the Board may appoint other officers as it considers necessary
for the efficient discharge of its functions. The functions of the
Board and NEAC are well defined and there is no overlap.
• This issue shall be looked into.
• In so far as provisions under clause 100 are concerned, it is
stated that a Commission or Tribunal is established with limited
powers to decide and investigate matters falling under its ambit

232
• Clause 117 new rules and regulations are founded for
State Councils but there is no clarity.
• Number of members of NCHRH, NBHE and NEAC should
be increased and at least 50% of the- members should be
elected by members of individual discipline.
• There is no provision for elected members in NEAC and
NBHE.
Dr. Munuidhar K., Professor, Rajiv Gandhi University of
Health Sciences, Karnataka
• National Board of Examinations (NBE) should be
strengthened and DNB course should be equalized to MD
and MS courses.
Vision Council of India
• Formation of Vision Council of India.
so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However, such
Commissions/Tribunals are amenable to constitutional courts.
Therefore, a person aggrieved with the decision of the Commission
can always file an appeal in the High Court or the Supreme Court
and his Fundamental Rights would remain intact. The Bill provides
for an appellate authority in the Central Government.
• Clause 117 is a saving clause and does not formulate any new
rules and regulations for State Councils.
• The Commission and its constituent bodies are expected to be
guided by eminent persons in health profession with fresh and
up to date outlook. Members of the Commission would represent
various streams of health education.
• The National Board of Health Education would subsume NBE.
As regards continuing of DNB qualifications, there is no proposal
in the Bill to discontinue the same.
• The NCHRH Bill leaves a provision for the Government to notify
constitution of National Councils for any other discipline of
health other than those mentioned in the Bill. Therefore, the
Government is of the opinion that the issue of more Councils
and matters related thereto like maintaining separate register for
ASLP etc. should be left to the wisdom of experts i.e. the
Commission as and when it is set up.
12 3
45.
46.

233
Dr. Vijay Batra, Meenakshi Batra and Dr. V .S. Bole
• Separate Central Council for Occupational therapy.
Vaidya Devendra Triguna, President, All India Ayurvedic
Congress.
• Promotion of human resources not possible without
inclusion of AYUSH.
• The Bill is silent in respect of Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha,
homoeopathy etc.
• Whether section 60 is applicable on AYUSH practitioners.
• Definition of AYUSH practitioners not given.
• No clause regarding protection of AYUSH doctors.
Dr. B. Bindu Kumar, Community Health Centre, Rangat,
Middle Andaman
• AYUSH Councils should be included in NCHRH.
• AYUSH qualifications should be included in schedule.
• Disciplines, Medicine should not be confined to allopathy.
• National Councils should include homoeopathy and
indigenous systems.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing
Councils by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a
Paramedical Council. However, it also leaves room for the
Government to notify the constitution of National Councils for
any other discipline of health. Therefore, the Government is of
the opinion that the issue of more Councils should be left to the
wisdom of the experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and
when it is set up.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modern system of
medicine are two different approaches and bringing them together
under a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting
relegating as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery
system.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modern system of
medicine are two different approaches and bringing them together
under a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting
relegating as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery
system.
47.
48.
49.

234
Mr. Anand Kumar Chaudhary, Associate Professor, Banaras
Hindu University
• Ayurveda system of medicines should be included in NCHRH
Mani Gupta, Sarthak Advocates & Solicitors
(i) Clause 1(2) of the Bill – Applicability of certain clauses
to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(ii) Clause 2(1) of the Bill – “distance education”.
(iii) Clause 2(u) – Inclusion of AYUSH.
(iv) Clause 3 of the Bill – Powers of the Central Government
to appoint.
(v) Clause 3(4) of the Bill – Clause shall be redrafted.
(vi) Clause 4(2) of the Bill – Eligibility criteria for Members
of the Commission (other than Chairperson).
• Traditional system of medicine and the modern system of medicine
are two different approaches and bringing them together under
a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting relegating
as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.
• The Bill has been drafted in consultation with Legislative
Department and the proposal has also been concurred by the
Department of Legal Affairs. Nonetheless, the point raised is
noted and the clause shall be suitable redrafted in consultation
with Ministry of Law and Justice if requited.
• Traditional system of medicine and the modern system of medicine
are two different approaches and bringing them together under
a single regulatory body may result in “AYUSH” getting relegating
as an ancillary stream in the overall health delivery system.
• The Selection Committee, consisting of eminent persons and
Secretary, Department of Health as the convenor, is completely
apolitical.
• The error shall be rectified in consultation with Legislative
Department.
• Clause 3(4) states that President's of NBHE, NEAC and all the
National Councils, who are anyway part of the NCHRH, would
also be the ex-officio  members of the Commission. The
Chairperson or a Member of the NCHER the proposed regulatory
body like NCHRH, for higher education shall be the only other
ex-officio Member of the Commission.
12 3
50.
51.

235
(vii) Clause 5(6) and Clause 7 of the Bill – Definition of
“Conflict of Interest”.
(viii)Clause 15(2) of the Bill – Central Government shall
appoint a Chief Executive Officer.
(ix) Clause 16(3) of the Bill.
(x) Explanation of Clause 17(9) of the Bill.
(xi) Clause 19(3) of the Bill – Non recognition of qualifications
granted by a health education institution.
(xii) Clause 24(2) of the Bill – Reword the clause.
(xiii)Clause 28 of the Bill – Appointment of Executive Director
in National Board of Health Education (NBHE).
(xiv) Clause 30(2)(m) of the Bill – Scope of the Bill is
restricted to medical education, the clause should be
restricted to disciplines of health.
• The suggestion is noted and shall be deliberated with Department
of Legislative Affairs.
• The post of Chief Executive Officer of the Commission is a
key post bestowing enormous powers to the holder of the post.
Therefore, it has been kept a rung higher than the post of the
present Secretary, MCI, the tenure has been fixed for four
years with no provision for reappointment and like in case of
appointment of any senior level officer in an autonomous body,
Central Government has been given the Power to make the
appointment which at this level would mean seeking the approval
of ACC.
• This clause is essential to underline that while NCHRH would
be concerned with determination, maintenance and coordination
of minimum standards, indiscipline of health education, it would
not interfere with autonomous and self-regulatory nature of
universities or institutions which are outside its ambit.
• The point is noted and if required the clause will be redrafted
in consultation with Legislative Department.
• The point is noted and if required the clause will be redrafted
in consultation with Legislative Department.
• The error shall be rectified in consultation with Legislative
Department.
• The Commission has been given powers under clause 112(2)(e)
to make regulations for salaries and allowances payable, and
other terms and conditions of service of officers and employees
of the Board.
• The function of the Board is clearly specified under sub-
clause (1) of clause 30. However, there is no harm if the Board
seeks to encourage merit in inter-disciplinary areas.

236
(xv) Clause 38(3) of the Bill.
(xvi) Clause 39 of the Bill – Minimum qualifications and the
role of Executive Director of the Committee.
(xvii) Clause 46(1) of the Bill – Reconsider the Composition
of National Councils.
(xviii) Clause 47(1) of the Bill.
(xix) Harmonising the provisions of clause 53(2) read with
clauses 57(1) and 57(4) of the Bill.
(xx) Clause 64 of the Bill – Substitute the present clause.
(xxi) Clause 70 of the Bill – Ethics Committee to be set up
by National Council.
(xxii) Clause 73(2) of the Bill- Rectify the errors.
(xxiii) Clause 78 of the Bill – State Councils to furnish report
to State Government.
(xxiv) Clause 79 of the Bill – Prescribes penalties.
• The point is noted and if required the clause will be redrafted
in consultation with Legislative Department.
• The Commission has been given powers under clause 112(2)(i)
to make regulations for salaries and allowances payable, and
other terms and conditions of service of the Executive Director
and other officers and employees of the Committee.
• The composition of the National Councils have been proposed in
line with the existing Councils like the MCI.
• The error will be brought to the notice of Legislative Department.
• The point is noted and if required the clause will be redrafted
in consultation with Legislative Department.
• The intent of the clause is clear that a person enrolled with the
respective National Councils (
and not with State Councils) shall be
liable for all acts of omission, commission or professional misconduct
arising in the State in which the cause of action has arisen.
• The point is noted and if required the clause will be redrafted
in consultation with Legislative Department.
• The error will be brought to the notice of Legislative Department.
• The point is noted and if required the clause will be redrafted
in consultation with Legislative Department.
• The Bill proposes severe penalties for contravention of its
provisions. These are first time provisions of their kind and
already quite severe. However, making them more stringent can
always be considered.
12 3

237
• The point is noted and if required the clause will be redrafted
in consultation with Legislative Department.
• This schedule is in line with the existing MCI regulations on
ethics. However, the points made have been noted for consideration.
• The reciprocity provision in the IMC Act has become infructous
with the introduction of Screening Test for all medical graduates
with qualifications obtained abroad and the interested practice in
India.
• The point is noted and if required the necessary corrections
will be carried out with the Legislative Department.
• No comments. The representation only request for the early
passage of the Bill.
• The suggestions of Indian Medical Association are identical to
those made by Delhi Medical Association and replies to these
have already been provided.
• The point is noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• The point is noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
(xxv) Clause 84(2) of the Bill- Request the Parliamentary
Standing Committee to correct the reference of the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882.
(xxvi) Seventh Schedule of the Bill—Professional misconduct.
(xxvii) Provision for recognition of qualifications granted by
health educational institutions in countries with schemes
of reciprocity.
(xxviii)Grammatical errors in the Bill.
Kaptan Singh Sehrawat, General Secretary, Joint Forum of
Medical Technologists of India
• Expediting the legislative process on proposed Bill.
Indian Medical Association, Bengal State Branch
• Same as Delhi Medical Association.
Indian Society of Radiographers and Technologists
• Amending this definition of diploma under clause 2(j)
• Amending the definition of discipline of health under
clause 2(k).
52.
53.
54.

238
• Section 2(e) of the IGNOU Act, 1985 defines “Distance education
systems” as a system of imparting education through any means
of communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting,
correspondence course, seminars, contact programmes or the
combination of any two or more of such means – the definition
is appropriate and meets the requirement of NCHRH Bill.
• Deemed to be universities fall under the ambit of section 3 of
the UGC Act, 1956 and are not covered under State laws but
fall under the purview of the Central Government. Therefore,
there exclusion is not feasible.
• Clause 10 of the Bill provides that the senior most whole time
member shall act as the Chairperson in the event of the
occurrence of any vacancy in the office of Chairperson or
when the Chairperson is unable to discharge its functions owing
to absence on account of leave or otherwise.
• The proposed NCHRH would be a professional body empower
to regulate the health education sector. It is necessary that the
Commission is headed by a person with the medical background
to provide necessary leadership and direction to the Commission.
• It would unnecessary narrow down the definition particularly in
view of the fact that there is no body regulating the whole
health education at present.
• The Selection Committee would only be making a recommendation
for appointment of the Chairperson/member for the Commission
to the Central Government. The final appointment would be
made by the Central Government.
• Amending the definition of distance education under
clause 2(i).
• Amending the definition of university under clause 2(zj) to
exclude deemed university.
• Need for the post of a Vice-Chairperson in the NCHRH.
• Appointment of Chairperson from judicial service/all India
service.
• Inclusion of the term “Regulation in qualification of
members of NCHRH” by amending clause 4(2).
• Making the Prime Minister or Vice-President as Chairman
of Selection Committee under clause 5.
12 3

239
• Restrictions on re-employment of the Chairperson/members
of the NCHRH to four years.
• Appointment of officers and employees in the Commission.
• Amending clause 17(1) to control spurious institutions and
courses.
• Deletion of clause 17(6).
• Amendment of 6th Schedule for inclusion of diploma courses
as basic qualification for paramedics.
• Composition of Board.
• Qualifications and Experience of the Executive Director of
the Board.
• Deletion of clause 33(4).
. The two year restriction is in line with the current provisions
applicable to senior Government functionaries. As regards
allowing re-employment: in all health medical institution controlled
and maintained by the Central Government or the State
Government – sub-clause needs to be with clause 7 and 12
which provide the necessary safeguards.
• Till appointment would be based on the rules prescribed by the
Central Government under clause 111(2)(d).
• NCHRH proposes to bifurcate the regulatory functions, which
under the current dispensation is looked after by single
professional councils like the Medical Council of India. Since
the permission under section 17(1) would be based on the
recommendations from NBHE and NEAC, the proposed
amendment is not necessary.
• It is necessary to retain the position to ensure that the
Commission deals with applications for new courses/
establishment of new institutions in a time bound manner as
prescribed in the Bill.
• The point is noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• The President and whole time Members shall be from the discipline
of medicine or medical education and the part time members will
be from discipline of health or health education. Being a
professional body, appointment of civil servant is best avoided.
• This will be determined by the regulations made by the
Commission under clause 112.
• The exemption will be given by the Commission under this clause
on case to case basis and the clause is necessary to enable experts
of Indian origin coming from abroad to practice in India.

240
• Qualifications and Experience of the officers and staff in
NEAC.
• The quorum for meeting of NEAC should be three instead
of two.
• Separate Councils for various paramedical disciplines.
• Composition and elections in the National Councils.
• Renewal of legislation every five years instead of 10
years.
Shri M.C. Gupta
• The appellate scheme needs clarity.
• The scheme of registration is confusing.
• Provision under clause 51 (3) is irrational.
• This will be determined by the regulations made by the
Commission under clause 112.
• The point is noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• The NCHRH Bill provides for replacement of the existing Councils
by constitution of corresponding new Councils and a paramedical
Council, however, it also leaves room for the Government to
notify the constitution of National Councils for any other discipline
of health. Therefore, the Government is of the opinion that the
issue of more Councils should be left to the wisdom of the
experts i.e. the Commission (NCHRH) as and when it is set up.
• The provisions are similar to the existing provisions under the
present statutes like the IMC Act.
• The point is noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• The point is noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• The scheme of registration is the same as is prevalent in the
present set up. In addition, it is also proposed to capture
biometric and other details of each health professional while
capturing the data for enrolment in the National/State Registers.
• It is similar to the existing provisions. Moreover, it is not just
between the individual and the foreign employer but also involves
the creditability of quality of health education being imparted in
the country.
12 3
55.

241
• Provision under clause 59(3) is irrational.
• Comments related to the Seventh Schedule (Professional
Misconduct) of the Bill.
Shri K. Elango, Chennai
• Amendment in the definition of “approved course” and
“approved institution” under clause 2(b) and 2(e).
• The definition of paramedical courses not given.
• The appointment of members from other fields in the
Commission needs to be specified.
• Persons from health sciences field should be made eligible
to become Chairman of the Commission by rotation.
• The tenure of Chairman/members etc. kept as four years
whereas in NCHER, it is five years.
• Amending section 17(f) to include disciplines other than
medicine.
• Composition of NBHE and NEAC.
• The definition of paramedical and the composition of the
Council
• There is a huge shortage of manpower in the health sector and
the clause is meant to discourage brain drain from the country.
Moreover, it does not compel a person to return within three
years but makes it compulsory or him to keep the Council
informed of his whereabouts during such period.
• These have been noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• Not acceptable. The given definitions are appropriate.
• No course has been particularly defined in the Bill.
• The proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 4 specifies the
representation from the various fields.
• Not acceptable.
• NCHER and NCHRH are two different Bills and therefore
comparison is illogical.
• The point is noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• The Board and the Committee would have the representation
from the discipline of medicine, medical education, allied
disciplines of health and health education as well as public law,
health management, technology and finance.
• The Bill defines “medicine” separately and all the supplementary
disciplines are included in the definition for “discipline of health”.
The composition of Councils have been proposed in line with
the structure of the existing Councils.
56.

242
• The term of the registrar in the National Council should be
increased from four years to five years and he should be
eligible for reappointment.
• The word pharmacologist in section 64 should be replaced
with pharmacist.
• Amendment in the fifth schedule.
Pharmacy Council of lndia
• Representation by Shri D. Chakraborty, Vice-President,
PCI.
Vallabhai Patel Chest Institute
• The four year term is in line with the appointment in the
Commission, Board and the Committee and it has been deliberately
proposed that the registrar should not be eligible for the
reappointment to avoid development of any vested interest.
• The point is noted and if necessary, would be amended in
consultation with Ministry of Law.
• The point has been noted.
• The Vice-President of PCI has given his oral evidence before
the Hon'ble Committee and the issues raised by him have already
been commented upon by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
The issues raised in the written communication are general in
nature and do not call for specific comments.
• The comments are general in nature and do not contain any
specific suggestion on the Bill.
12 3
57.
58.

243
ANNEXURE-V
List of Witnesses heard by the Committee
24th January, 2012
WITNESSES
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Debasis Panda, Joint Secretary
27
th February, 2012
WITNESSES
Department of AYUSH
1. Shri Anil Kumar, Secretary
2. Shri Bala Prasad, Joint Secretary
3. Shri V .S. Gaur, Joint Secretary
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri D. R. Meena, Secretary
2. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri N.R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri P. K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri Debasish Panda, Joint Secretary
Department of Health Research
Dr. V . M. Katoch, Secretary
7
th June, 2012
WITNESSES
Representatives of Pharmacy Council of India (PCI)
1. Shri D. Chakraborty, Vice-President, PCI, Kolkata (West Bengal)
2. Prof. M.D. Karvekar, Bangalore, Karnataka
243

244
3. Dr. F.V . Manvi, Belgaum, Karnataka
4. Mrs. Archna Mudgal, Registrar-cum-Secretary, PCI, New Delhi
5. Shri G. C. Labra, Consultant
6. Shri H. N. Yadav, Consultant
Representatives of Indian Nursing Council (INC)
1. Mr. T. Dileep Kumar, President, INC
2. Dr. Manju Vatsa, Principal, College of Nursing, AIIMS
3. Dr. Surekha Sama, Principal, Deen Dayal Upadhyay School of Nursing
4. Shri V .S.R. Krishna, Advocate, INC
5. Ms. K. S. Bharti, Joint Secretary, INC
Representatives of Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH)
1. Dr. Ramjee Singh, President
2. Dr. Arun N. Bhasme, Vice-President, CCH
3. Dr. Lalit Verma, Secretary
Representatives of Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM)
1. Shri Vaidya Raghunandan Sharma, President, CCIM
2. Dr. Ved Prakash Tyagi, Vice-President (Ayurved)
3. Prof. Hakim Syed Khaleefathullah, Vice-President (Unani)
4. Dr. V . Stanley Jones, Vice-President (Siddha)
5. Dr. P.R. Sharma, Secretary, CCIM
6. Dr. Pradanya, Ayurved Expert, CCIM
Representatives of Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel
8
th June, 2012
WITNESSES
Representatives of Medical Council of India (MCI)
1. Prof. K. K. Talwar, Chairman, Board of Governors (BoG), MCI
2. Dr. (Prof.) H. S. Rissam, Member, BoG, MCI
Representatives of Dental Council of India (DCI)
1. Dr. Dibyandu Majumdar, President
2. Col. S.K. Ojha, Secretary, DCI
3. Mr. M.L. Meena, Law Officer

245
Representatives of Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Council
5
th July, 2012
WITNESSES
I. Indian Medical Association
1. Prof. (Dr). G.K. Ramachandrappa, National President
2. Dr. N. Appa Rao, National Leader
3. Dr. S. Arul Rhaj, Past National President
4. Dr. Ajay Kumar, Past National President
5. Dr. D.R. Rai, Hony. Secretary General
6. Dr. V . C. Shanmuganandan, Joint Secretary
II. Delhi Medical Association, New Delhi
1. Dr. Harish Gupta, President
2. Dr. Anil Aggarwal, President Elect
3. Dr. A. K. Israni, Sr. Vice-President
4. Dr. G. S. Grewal, Vice-President
5. Dr. Vijay K. Kohli, Hony, State Secretary
6. Dr. Atul Gupta, Hony. Finance Secretary
7. Dr. Anil Goyal, Member
III. Indian Association of Physiotherapy (Central)
1. Prof. (Dr.) Umasankar Mohanty, President, Indian Association of Physiotherapists, Karnataka
2. Dr. Sanjiv Jha, General Secretary
IV. Physiotherapists’ Forum of AIIMS, New Delhi
1. Dr. V . P. Gupta, President
2. Dr. Ganesh Meena, General Secretary
V. Indian Association of Physiotherapists, New Delhi
1. Dr. Dheerendra Kumar, Convener
2. Dr. Prabhat Ranjan, Treasurer
VI. Delhi Government Physiotherapy Association
Dr. Anjali Bhatnagar

246
VII. Physiotherapy Forum for Physiotherapists
1. Dr. Praveen Kumar
2. Dr. Ajay Kumar
VIII. Amar Jyoti Institute of Physiotherapy, Delhi
Dr. Hemant Juneja, Associate Professor and Head of Department
IX. Society for Research and Evidence Translation in Physiotherapy, Delhi
1. Shri K. Haider, General Secretary
2. Shri Sushil Gupta, President
3. Shri Fuzail Ahmed, Executive Member
4. Shri Md. Moin, Executive Member
X. Legislative Department
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri N. R. Battu, Additional Legislative Counsel
3. Shri R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel
XI. Department of Legal Affairs
Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Advisor
17
th July, 2012
WITNESSES
National Board of Examinations, New Delhi
1 Prof. K. Srinath Reddy, President
2. Dr. Bipin Batra, Executive Director
3. Prof. P. S. Maini, Vice-President
4. Dr. S. Jalal, Vice-President
Indian Association of Physiotherapists, Mumbai
1. Dr. Ali Irani, President
2. Dr. A.K. Bhatnagar
3. Dr. Koshy Mathai
4. Dr. Deepak Kumar
5. Dr. Nitesh Bansal
Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University, Lucknow
Prof. Aseem Prakash Tikku, Faculty of Dental Sciences

247
Individual
Dr. Rohit Khanna, Lucknow
All India Dental Hygienist Association, New Delhi
1. Shri S. K. Pandey, President
2. Shri Baljeet Singh, Vice-President
3. Shri S. K. Shukla, General Secretary
4. Shri Radhey Shigam, Member
5. Shri Yogender Sharma, Member
6 Ms. Madhu Sharma, Member
18
th July, 2012
WITNESSES
1. Dr. H.N. Tripathi, Chief Medical Superintendent, Sahara Hospital, Lucknow
2. Prof. D. K. Gupta, Vice-Chancellor, Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University, Lucknow
30th July, 2012
WITNESSES
1. Prof. R.C. Deka, Director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
2. Prof. Y .K. Chawla, Director, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh
3. Dr. P.H. Ananthanarayanan, Senior Professor and Head, Department of Biochemistry, Jawaharlal
Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry
4. Dr. P. Satishchandra, Director-Vice-Chancellor, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore
31
st July, 2012
WITNESSES
1. Shri Sanjay Mitra, Principal Secretary, Government of West Bengal
2. Shri Rajesh Kishore, Principal Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Gujarat
17th August, 2012
WITNESSES
1. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri K. Desiraju, Special Secretary
3. Dr. Vishwas Mehta, Joint Secretary

248
248
ANNEXURE-VI
The following observations are made on some of the provisions of the NCHRH Bill, 2011
concerning pharmacy profession:–
Sl. No. Sections of the Bill Our Comments
12 3
Section 1(2)
It extends to the whole of India.
2(b)
“approved course” means a course
recognised and  approved by the National
Board for Health Education under this Act;
2(c)
“approved institution means a medical
college, hospital, health centre or such other
institution recognised by a university as an
institution in which a person may undergo
the training, if any, required by his course
of study for the award of any recognised
qualification to him;
2(j)
“diploma” means such award, not being a
degree, granted by a health educational
institution certifying that the recipient has
successfully completed a course of study
of not less than nine months duration;
2(r)
“health educational institution” or “health
institution” means an institution of learning
including a university, an institution deemed
to be university, a  college, an institute, an
institution of national importance declared
as such by an Act of Parliament, or a
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
The NCHRH Bill, 2011 extends to the whole of
India. The Pharmacy Act, 1948 does not extend
to the State of J&K. It means, the J&K
Pharmacy Council constituted under J&K
Pharmacy Act, 1955 shall be dissolved. A
provision to this effect may be made.
The words ‘recognised and’ may be deleted as
the word ‘recognised’ is generally used for
‘qualification’ and not for ‘course of study’.
The words “medical college” be replaced by
the words “health educational institution’ as
used in section 2(j), 2(m), 2(p), 2(r).
In case of pharmacy education, the duration
of the course is 2 years plus 500 hours of
practical training.
Distance education system is not applicable in
respect of pharmacy education. In fact, the
students passing 10+2 from distance education
system are not eligible for admission to any
approved pharmacy course for the purpose of
registration as a pharmacist.

249
12 3
constituent unit of such institution, which
is imparting education in the discipline of
health (whether through conduct of regular
classes or distance education system)
beyond twelve years of schooling leading to
the award of a degree or diploma;
2(u)
“medicine” means modern scientific medicine
in all its branches and includes surgery and
obstetrics, but does not include veterinary
medicine and surgery;
2(zi)
“trained specialist” means a medical
professional possessing a masters degree
and clinical training in the specific area;
4(1)
The Chairperson shall be a person of
eminence, integrity, administrative capability
and outstanding ability with a post-graduate
degree in the discipline of medical science
from a university, and having not less than
twenty-five years experience in the profession,
out of which at least fifteen years shall be in
a leadership role, in the area of healthcare
delivery, growth and development of modern
medicine or medical education
4(2)
The other Members shall be persons of
eminence, integrity, administrative capability
and outstanding ability with a post-graduate
degree in the discipline of medical education,
dental education, nursing education, pharmacy
education, public health, management, science
and technology, or law from a university,
and having not less than twenty years
experience in the profession, out of which
at least fifteen years shall be in a leadership
role, in the area of healthcare delivery,
growth and development of modern
medicine or medical education:
6.
7.
8.
9.
Under the Pharmacy Act, 1948, veterinary
medicine practitioner is also a medical practitioner.
The word ‘medical’ may be substituted by the
word ‘health’ so as to cover pharmacy
professional also.
The word ‘medical’ may be substituted by the
word ‘health’ so as to cover pharmacy
professional also.
In the last line of the para ‘health education’
should be substituted in place of 'medical
education' so as to cover pharmacy education
also.

250
12 3
5(1)(a)
a person of eminence having qualification
and experience of at least twenty five years
in medical profession as Chairperson;
5(1)(b)
five other experts of eminence from the
discipline  of medical  and allied health
sciences, management, science and technology
having qualification and experience of at least
twenty years in the discipline, as members,
16(2)(b)
assess the requirement (including the
number, type and geographical location) of
health training facilities for education and
training in medical and allied discipline;
16(2)(l)
specify by regulations the continuous
medical education and the courses,
workshops and training activities;
17(8)(e)
whether any arrangement has been  made
or programme drawn to impart proper
training to students likely to attend such
health educational institution or course of
study or training by person having the
recognised medical qualifications;
17(8)(f)
the requirement of manpower in the field of
practice of medicine;
19(2)
Where any health educational institution
offers a new or higher course of study or
training (including a post-graduate or doctoral
or post doctoral or super speciality course
of study or training), such qualification shall
The word ‘medical’ may be substituted by the
word ‘health’ so as to cover pharmacy
professional also.
‘Allied Health Sciences’ should be defined
u/s 2 and should include pharmacy also.
‘Allied discipline’ should be defined u/s 2 and
should include pharmacy.
The words ‘medical education’ should be
replaced by the words ‘health education’ so
that pharmacy is also covered.
The words ‘recognized medical qualifications’
should be replaced by the words ‘recognized
health qualifications’.
The word ‘medicine’ should be replaced by
the word ‘health’.
The words “course of study or training” should
be substituted for the word “qualification”. Also
the word ‘recognised’ should be substituted by
the word ‘approved’.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

251
not be a recognised qualification for the
purposes of this Act, unless such course of
study or training offered has been approved
by the Commission before offering the same
to the students.
19(3)
Where any health educational institution
increases admission capacity in any course
of study or training (including a post
graduate or doctoral or post doctoral or
super speciality course of study or training),
such qualification granted to any student by
such institution on the basis of the increase
in its admission capacity shall not be a
recognized qualification for the purposes of
this Act, unless such increase in its
admission capacity in any course of study
or training offered has been approved by
the Commission before offering the same to
the students.
21
When, upon recommendation of the
Committee or the Board, it appears to the
Commission that—
(a) the courses of study and examination
to be undergone in, or the proficiency
required from candidates at any
examination held by any university or
other health institution for an approved
course in health education; or
(b) the faculty, staff, equipment,
accommodation, training and other
facilities for instruction and training
provided in such university or other
health educational institution, or in any
college or other institution affiliated
to any such university,
do not conform to the standards specified
by the Commission, the Commission may,
after making such inquiry as it may consider
necessary, for reasons to be recorded in
12 3
The words “course of study or training” should
be substituted for the word “qualification”. Also
the word ‘recognised’ should be substituted by
the word ‘approved’.
The words ‘approval of course or recognition
of qualification’ be substituted for the words
‘recognition of the course or qualification’. Also
in proviso, the words ‘approval or recognition’
be substituted for the word ‘recognition’.
17.
18.

252
12 3
writing, withdraw recognition of the course
or qualification in respect of the university
or other health institution, or college or
other institution affiliated to such university,
as the case may be, with such cut-off date
as it thinks fit:
Provided that no such  recognition
shall be withdrawn unless the university or
the institution or college, as the case may
be, has been given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard.
24(3)
The President and whole-time members shall
be chosen from the persons possessing a
post graduate degree in  the discipline of
medicine or medical education from a
recognised university or health institutions,
having at least fifteen years of standing in
the profession or teaching and training, out
of which seven years of experience shall he
in the discipline of medical education,
training, curriculum design or development
and conduct of examinations.
24(4)
The part-time members shall be chosen from
persons possessing a post graduate degree
in the discipline of medical education from
a recognised university or medical institution
having at least twelve years of standing in
the profession from the discipline of health
or health education out of which seven
years of experience shall be in education,
training, curriculum design or development
and conduct of examinations in the discipline
of health.
25(1)(b)
Three other experts of eminence from the
discipline of medical and allied health sciences,
management, science and technology having
qualification and experience of at least fifteen
years in the discipline, as members, to be
The words “discipline of medical education”
should be replaced by the words “discipline of
health education” so as to include  pharmacy
also.
The words “medical institution” should be
replaced by the words “health institution”.
As in 5 (1) (b) above.
19.
19.
20.

253
12 3
appointed in  such manner as may be
prescribed.
30(2)(e)
Organise seminars, trainings or conferences
for continuous medical  education and such
other courses, workshops or programme as
may be specified by regulations made by
the Commission.
30(2)(1)
Advise the Commission regarding establish-
ment of laboratories, institutes and training
centres for continuous medical education.
30(2)(n)
Coordinate between medical and other
scientific academies, societies, associations,
institutions and Government medical and
scientific departments and services.
33 (1)
No person, being a citizen of India or a
registered Overseas citizen of India, who
obtains the recognised qualification granted
by medical institution in any country outside
India recognised for enrolment as medical
practitioner in that country shall be entitled
for enrolment by the National Council or
the State Council, as the case may be,
unless he qualifies the screening test in India
to be conducted by the Board.
33 (2)
No person being a citizen of India shall,
after the commencement of this Act, obtain
any medical qualification from any medical
institution in a country outside India without
obtaining an eligibility certificate from the
Board and any person, who obtains such
qualification without obtaining the eligibility
certificate, shall not be eligible to appear in
The word “medical” may be substituted by the
word “health” so as to cover pharmacy also.
The word “medical” may be substituted by the
word “health” so as to cover pharmacy also.
The word “medical” may be substituted by the
word “health” so as to cover pharmacy also.
As in 30(2)(e), (1) and (n)
As in 30(2)(e), (1) and (n)
21.
23.

254
12 3
the screening test referred to in sub-
section (1): Provided that any person being
a citizen of India who acquired the
recognised qualification or obtained
admission in the medical institution outside
India during the period between 15
th March,
2002 and the date of commencement of
this Act, after obtaining an eligibility
certificate from the Medical Council of India
under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956,
shall, subject to other provisions of this
Act, be eligible to be enrolled in the National
Register or State Register.
46
Each National Council referred to in  sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section
41 shall consist of the following members,
namely:—
(a) one member from each State
(other than a Union territory), to
be nominated by the Central
Government in consultation with
the State Government concerned;
(b) one member from each
University, to be elected from
amongst the members of the
faculty of the concerned discipline
of health  by members of the
Senate of the University or in
case the if university has no
Senate, by members of the Court;
(c) one member from each State in
which a State Register in the
respective discipline is maintained,
to be elected from amongst
themselves by persons enrolled on
such Register;
(d) five members to be nominated
by the Central Government from
amongst heads of medical
institutions in the respective
discipline owned, controlled or
The existing PCI consists of 72 members. The
proposed National Council of Pharmacy will be
too large (138 members) consisting of members
from States (29), Universities (73), States with
State Register (25), Government Medical
Institutions (5), concerned professionals (5)
and President of the Board (1). Moreover, the
volume and complexity of work is also reduced
from granting approvals of the courses of study
and examinations, inspections, maintenance of
the Central Register to only maintenance of the
Central Register.
22.

255
12 3
managed by the Central
Government;
(e) five members to be nominated
from amongst professionals of
respective disciplines by the
Central Government;
(j) President of the Board shall be
ex-officio member of the National
Council for each discipline of
Health.
(2) A member of the National Council
shall cease to be such member if he ceases
to be a person enrolled on the concerned
State Register or to hold office by virtue of
which he was elected or nominated, as the
case may be, as such member to the
Council.
47(1)
The Commission shall conduct elections for
each National Council, within a period of
six months from the date of commencement
of this Act for constituting the National
Councils under section 40 in accordance
with such procedure and manner as may be
prescribed.
52(1)
Every National Council shall have a Registrar
to be appointed by the Central Government
for a fixed term of four years who shall
not be eligible for re-appointment under this
Act.
53(1)
Where there is no State Council in any
State, the State Government shall, by
notification, constitute the State, Councils
for the following disciplines of health,
within a period of three years from the
date of commencement of this Act, in such
manner and with such composition as may
23.
24.
25.
The figure ‘40’ should be substituted by the
figure ‘41’ as ‘40’ appears to be a typographical
error.
At present, the incumbent of the post of
Registrar-cum-Secretary, PCI retires on
superannuation at the age of 60 years. Fixing
the term of ‘four years’ with the condition
that the Registrar shall not be eligible for re-
appointment will be deterrent in finding a good
pharmacist candidate for the post of Registrar.
The manner of constitution and composition
of the State Council is left: to the State
Governments. It may be appropriate if the
composition of the State Council is incorporated
in the Bill  to ensure uniformity and adequacy of
representation of pharmacy experts from the
various fields.

256
be prescribed by the State Government,
namely:—
(a) the Medical Council of ....................
(name of the State) for medicine;
(b) the Dental Council of ....................
(name of the State) for dentistry;
(c) the Nursing Council of...................
(name of the State) for nursing;
(d) the Pharmacy Council of ................
(name of the State) for pharmacy;
(e) the Paramedical Council of
.................. (name of the State) for
paramedics:
60(4)
No person shall, unless he is enrolled on
the National Register or the State Register,
as the case may be, as a pharmacologist,
practice pharmacy.
64
A person enrolled with the respective
National Council shall be liable for all the
acts of omission, commission, or
professional misconduct arising in the State
in which the cause of action has arisen.
73(2)
In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) other ethical principles under clause ( b)
of section 2;
99(1)
Any person aggrieved by an order made by
12 3
26.
27.
28.
29.
The word ‘pharmacologist’ may be substituted
by the word ‘pharmacist’. After the words
practice pharmacy, the following may be
added:–
“and hold any appointment in the filed of
pharmacy as a teacher”.
Liability can be fixed only in those acts of
omission, commission or professional
misconduct in which a registered pharmacist
is involved and not in all cases arising in the
State.
‘Section 2(b) does not mention other ethical
principles’.
There is no mention of any order of
Commission uls 98.

257
12 3
the Commission under section 98 may prefer
an appeal to the Central Government within
such period as may be prescribed.
103(2)
Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs
of a health educational institution has been
undertaken under sub-section ( 1),—
(a)  every officer of the Government
Department, if such health educational
institution is a department of the
Government;
(b) every director, manager, secretary or
other officer, if such health educational
institution is a company; or
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or
other officer, if such health educational
institution is a firm; or
The Fifth Schedule
Part 1 – Graduate Pharmacy
Qualifications Graduate Pharmacy Courses-
Courses where entry is permitted after
passing the 10+2 examination;
Part 2 –  Post Graduate Pharmacy
Qualifications Post Graduate (Pharmacy
Courses-Courses where entry is permitted
after passing the graduate Pharmacy
examination;
Part 3 – Doctoral Pharmacy Qualifications
Doctoral Pharmacy (Courses-Courses where
entry is permitted after passing the Post
graduate Pharmacy examination;
Part 4 – Foreign Pharmacy Qualifications
30.
31.
Sub-section is incomplete.
The Fifth Schedule may be substituted by the
following:—
Part 1 – Diploma Pharmacy Qualification
Diploma Pharmacy Courses where entry is
permitted after passing the 10 + 2 examination
(regular Science stream).
Part 2  – Graduate Pharmacy Qualifications
Graduate Pharmacy Courses – Courses where
entry is permitted after passing the 10+2
examination; (regular Science stream).
Part 3 – Post Graduate Pharmacy
Qualifications Post Graduate Pharmacy Courses
– Courses where entry is permitted after passing
the graduate Pharmacy examination;
Part 4 –  Doctoral Pharmacy Qualifications
Doctoral Pharmacy Courses – Courses where
entry is permitted after passing the Post
Graduate Pharmacy examination;
Part 5 – Foreign Pharmacy Qualifications

258
258
ANNEXURE-VII
Views of Indian Nursing Council
Written Submissions to the NCHRH Bill 2011
(A) OBJECT AND PURPOSE OF THE NEW BILL
(i) The preamble of the bill envisages consolidating disciplines of health sector and to
promote human resources in health sector and to provide for mechanism for the
determination, maintenance, coordination and regulation of standards of health
education throughout the country to ensure adequate availability of human resources
in all states.
(ii) The bill envisages three different organs viz. NBHE, NEAC and NC to ensure that
the purpose and the object of the bill is fulfilled.
(B) “WHETHER THE OBJECT AND PURPOSE OF THE NEW BILL IS NOT ACHIEVED
THROUGH EXISTING LEGISLATION
(i) At present different Councils have been established by various enactments such as
Indian Nursing Council Act 1947, Dental Council Act and Pharmacy Council Act.
(ii) All these three statutory enactments are comprehensive in nature and are applicable
all across the country.
(iii) As perusal of the preamble of the three Acts would show that the purpose and
object of these existing Acts are the same as are stated in the proposed bill.
(iv) In so far as Nursing Profession in the country is concerned, the same is controlled
by Individual State Nursing Councils Act having been empowered with the
responsibility of recognizing various Nursing Institutions and for registration of
Nurses. These State Nursing Council Act are comprehensive in nature and the
State Councils have been vested with the responsibility to ensure that the Nursing
Health Institutions provide a good quality education to all. In case the proposed bill
is accepted then in that event the role of the State Governments to assist
formulations of various Nursing policies would be defeated. As a matter of fact the
various State Governments are stakeholders in the nursing education and its
development and hence the role of the State Governments/State Nursing Councils
cannot be whittled down since they alone are in a position to ensure that various
Government health policies are implemented to the needy citizens.
(v) In terms of Constitutional Provisions also education is in the concurrent list and
hence the framers of Indian Nursing Council Act 1947 have ensured that State
Governments and State Nursing Councils are also co-opted in the developing and
implementation of Nursing policies.
(vi) As per provisions of section 14 of Indian Nursing Council Act the power of
approval and recognition has also been conferred on the State Nursing Councils.

259
This power enables the State Governments/State  Nursing Councils to ensure that
the mandate of the Central enactment is implemented in all its force. As a stake
holder it is necessary to confer such powers so that there is no difficulty in
implementing the projects since the State Governments would also be answerable
for the successful implementation of health policies.
(C) OUR SUGGESTIONS
(i) The bill does not indicate as to what are the reasons for proceeding with such
massive exercise of amalgamating various councils which are admittedly performing
their public duties to the satisfaction of all concerned. It is also not indicated as
to how the amalgamation of the different Councils is going to help promote health
human recourses in the country. In the absence of any valid reasons, the presentation
and introduction of the above bill appears to be neither justified nor required.
(ii) At present the three statutory Councils viz. DCI, INC and PCI are performing
their functions in terms of their respective jurisdictions conferred by statutory
enactments. The respective Councils are discharging their mandate in terms of
statutory Act’s and as a matter of fact, the Counsels have been able to achieve the
goals set by the Government through various National Health Policies like National
Health Mission, National Health Rural Mission etc. In such circumstances no
useful purpose would be achieved by disbanding existing Statutory Councils and
amalgamating them into one big organization since after formation of the mammoth
organization it will be very difficult to manage and ensure completion of all health
goals.
(iii) At the time of constitution of these statutory bodies, the basic thinking was to
have professional councils having expertise in their respective health disciplines, so
that all the health disciplines have an equal opportunity for the growth and
development of each. It is not known as to how a Central Body with limited
professionals at the helm would be able to cater to the massive challenges facing
the health sector of the country.
(iv) The purpose and objects of creating separate statutory councils by the Government
of India is to decentralize the health sector so that the various specialist organizations
i.e. Medical, Dental, Nursing and Pharmacy etc. can develop at a rapid pace.
Introduction of one body though having separate councils would defeat the very
purpose of decentralization. At a time when decentralization is the buzzword,
resorting to having a one organization is a step backwards.
(v) A perusal of the Indian Nursing Council Act would show that the constitution of
the Members of the Council represent all the States of the Union. The basic
purpose is to ensure that all the States have equal opportunity to ensure adequate
health care delivery systems all across the country. The disbanding of the respective
councils will destroy the decentralized component of the council with the policies
being framed from one particular place little realizing the specific requirements of
each state.
(vi) Handling of smaller statutory councils is in the best interest of the country since
health sector requires a rapid growth. The formation of one central council for all
health related categories i.e. Nursing, Medical, Dental and Pharmacy would limit
the growth of Nursing sector as this sector is not given enough priority in terms
of finance, academic development growth of institutions etc.

260
(vii) Even otherwise it is simply not known as to why running statutory institutions are
sought to be disbanded especially when they too have been created after a through
application of mind and study. The factors which led to the creation of the separate
statutory councils still remain and therefore creating a new umbrella body is not
in the public interest since it would lead to uncertainty.
The very fact that different statutory councils have been incorporated having
limited jurisdictions was in keeping in view that at present the subject of “Health”
is in the concurrent jurisdiction. In the present enactments for example INC Act,
the State Governments are given powers to ensure that they too have a say in the
policy decisions relating to health education. Taking away the powers of the State
Governments in matters relating to health education would not be proper.

261
ANNEXURE-VIII
VIEWS OF DENTAL COUNCIL OF INDIA
It is stated that for the purpose of maintaining highest standards in imparting dental
education by the dental colleges/institutions in the country, the Dental Council of India (hereinafter
referred as DCI) was constituted as a statutory body under the provisions of Dentists Act, 1948.
It is the statutory and bounded duty of the Dental Council of India to take all such steps which
are required to be taken for  ensuring the maintenance of highest standards in dental education in
the country.
DCI as a statutory authority has the benefit of inputs from all relevant sections of the society
who are directly concerned with the dental education and practice of dentistry in this country. It is
stated that since its inception DCI is regulating dental education and training of dental practitioners
very smoothly and as of now there are 292 dental colleges all over the country out of which, 197
dental colleges are running PG degree and diploma course.
In view of the provisions of the Dentist Act, 1948, the constitution and composition of the
council has been done in a very democratic manner, there are representatives of all State Governments,
Universities, State Dental Councils, MCI as well as the Central Government. Even the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in catena of cases has accepted the role of DCI and held that the DCI is a statutory
expert authority constituted under an Act of Parliament, has been given the responsibility of discharging
the duty of maintenance of highest standard of dental education in the country.
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RESOURCES
IN HEALTH BILL, 2011
The National Commission for Human Resources in Health Bill 2011, (hereinafter referred as
Health Bill) is being introduced to consolidate the law in the disciplines of health sectors and to
promote human resource in health sectors and provide for mechanism for the determination, maintenance,
co-ordination and regulation of standards of health education throughout the country to ensure
adequate availability of human resource in all States and for the said purpose to establish the National
Commission for Human Resources for Health to supervise and regulate professional Councils in
various disciplines of health sector.
COMMENTS/VIEWS ON NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR
HUMAN RESOURCES IN HEALTH BILL, 2011
• India is a federal country. The constitution of India has delegated and distributed powers
between Central and State. There are some sectors which are controlled by both Central
and State Governments. Health is one such important sector. Till date the health sector
is regulated by regulatory bodies (MCI, DCI, etc.) which has representatives from both
state and Central Governments as well as from the universities. The present bill proposes
to form a committee which will be totally under the control of the Central Government.
None of the States will have any role to play in policy issues relating to health. Thus the
bill is absolutely unconstitutional and against the spirit of federalism.
• Clause 100 and 101 page 34 says that the decision of the Commission cannot be
questioned in the court of law and the aggrieved person cannot seek legal remedies. This
261

262
makes the bill draconian and is against the principles of natural justice. It contravenes
upon the fundamental rights of an Indian citizen guaranteed by the Indian constitution.
• India is the worlds largest democratic country. Its government is formed by the people,
of the people and is for the people. The present bill proposes to form NCHRH, NBHE,
NEAC which will comprise of members totally appointed by Central Government. None
of the members of these bodies will be elected. This is absolutely an undemocratic
procedure and unacceptable. The issues related to the dissolution of the council and its
supersession by a supreme body needs to be viewed in the context of the constitutional
mandate of democracy. The underlying principal of democratic governance is that due
representation be brought in from the States and Centre and that the collective wisdom
of an elected body would then have built in checks and counterchecks to collectively
police, monitor and then regulate the profession. The Parliament while constituting an
expert council such as the DCI took due diligence and care that the said councils are free
from bureaucratic controls and not be just departments of the Government of India
without a voice or a conscience. The substitution of an elected body with due representation
from the State and the universities defeats and challenges the very principal of democratic
process.
• The DCI was created by an Act of parliament after a very long consideration and
deliberation by the stalwarts of the parliament in 1948 including Dr. R. Ahmed, the Father
of Dentistry in India. It has a fantastic democratic setup having representation from
almost all States of India. Such a democratic system is time tested and have proved to
be functioning extremely well and efficiently for such a long time.
• For complaints against individuals, such democratic institutions and statutory bodies
should not be destroyed. Therefore, we would request the Hon’ble members not to
stranglehold the Dental Council of India to death.
• Section 4j, page 54 (...to empower the Central Government to supersede commission,……)
and clause 115 (2) of the bill gives absolute autocratic power to the Central Government
to make the commission to dance to its tune. This again is against the very spirit of
democracy and thus unacceptable.
• The bill in its preamble says ….to supervise and regulate professional councils in various
disciplines of health sector……..But in reality it wants to dissolve all bodies and take
away all their powers and funds. This makes the bill extremely weak for it contradicts
its own principal.
• At present DCI has 70+ members and MCI had over 150 members regulating their
respective fraternity. Inspite of collectively having more than 230+ members both the
councils are finding it taxing to regulate all the teaching institutes. The present bill
proposes to form a commission consisting of one chairperson, 4 whole time members
and 8 part time members which will determine, maintain, co-ordinate and regulate the
standard of health education throughout the country. How 13 members will do the above
job is beyond our wildest imagination. This makes the bill illogical and absurd.
• The bill proposes to dissolve all the existing councils (Medical Council, Dental Council,
Pharmacy Council, Nursing Council, Paramedical Council etc.) and plans to form a
committee which aims to take over the function of the above mentioned councils. How
a single committee can perform such a Herculean task is not known, for this type of

263
challenge has not been taken by any existing developed nation in the world. Every
developed nation has got a separate body (medical, dental, nursing physiotherapy etc.)
comprising of its own professional members to take care of their own needs. India will
be the first country to have such a daring Committee.
• In this bill no road map has been formulated as to how the Government is going to
remove the shortage of manpower in Health sector by forming the Commission.
Professionals from other disciplines like Management Technology and Law were given
place in this Commission will further dilute the standard of education as they are not
technically experts in health sector.
• There is no provision in the Health Bill as to how the Government will ensure the
adequate availability of medical resource in all States to cater to the population. It is stated
that in our country, there is a need to regulate the hospitals to provide free medical
treatment to the population below the poverty line. However, the Health Bill is once again
silent on this aspect.
• According to the Health Bill, the role of the National Council will only  be to enroll and
monitor the individuals, maintain their registers and organize seminars only.
• The new council so proposed is an appointed body, which would necessarily be an
extension of the Government if not a department all together. It is difficult to visualize
as to what autonomy and representation by an appointed body could exercise. A proposal
to be vetted by 70 members in general body imposes a sense of discipline on the system.
An appointed body would in turn have no larger forum for brainstorming an issue and
would perhaps be arbitrary, dictatorial and empirical in its function with no inbuilt
controls. The other issue that emerges is that does the new council have a change in
function? To regulate higher education, imposition and enforcement of standards is a
must, and to that extent we do not see the NCHRH being able to change the mode or
context of inspections and recommendation for approval of institutions.
• The section 54 of  the Dentist Act, 1948 clearly looks at a remedial measure to appoint
an independent commission of  enquiry for any alleged misdemeanors or issues of
corruption. The justice Anil Dev Singh committee went through the structure and function
of the DCI and made specific recommendations, all of  which have since been implemented
save one, which was not, passed by the General Body. Would the newly appointed
council have any such built in measures for investigating issues of corruption or
malpractice or would be all powerful and above any such controls.
• The health education policies will keep changing with the change of power at the centre,
thus lacking consistency in the overall approach to health care resource management. If
any Government in future takes a wrong decision it will definitely jeopardize the whole
health care system. We all know that to spoil a jar of milk all it takes is a drop of a
lemon.
• Finally we will have to realize and think that:
The Bill advocates:
Selection instead of election

264
Autocracy instead of democracy
Dictation instead of Regulation
We are the world’s largest democracy. We have a democratic system which is a matter of
pride for us. Can we accept a bill which is totally against the very spirit of the Constitution,
a bill which is draconian in every nature, killing fundamental rights of its citizens. Can we
afford a bill which revokes 4 standing Acts, which have been created by visionary stalwarts
of our Constitution and have stood the test of time.
Therefore, I will request the Hon’ble Members not to strangle hold the fantastic setup of our
health system and maintain status quo maintaining and further strengthening the existing health
education system.

265
ANNEXURE-IX
VIEWS OF INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
The Medical Council of India was formed by an Act of Parliament, IMC Act, 1956 and functioning
with nominated members from Central/State Governments, Health Universities and Elected members
through Registered Members of Medical Profession.
Dissolved in April, 2010 based on alleged corruption charges. The function of 130 members was taken
over by 7 handpicked persons as Board of  Governors with an assurance that MCI will be restored
within one year.
On completion of  one year, the Hon’ble Minister of Health and Family Welfare requested the Parliament
to accord extension to the BoG for 1 more year assuring the House that no further extension will be
sought. The number of  BoG members was brought down to 6 this time.
Third year NCHRH Bill, 2011 was introduced.
Medical and Health Allied Professionals of  the country vehemently opposed the Bill.
Some Members of  Parliament too opposed the Bill.
Two Chief Ministers of India objected to it in writing.
Bill was referred to Parliamentary committee on Health.
Why MCI was dissolved?
• MCI was dissolved in April, 2010 upon alleged corruption charges.
• Many heads of statutory bodies of India are facing corruption charges.
• However, the Institutions are not dissolved and are still functioning.
• Why should MCI singularly be dissolved?
• MoHFW repeatedly trying to usurp the autonomy of MCI.
• Supreme Court Committee in 2002 testified the need for autonomy of MCI.
Powers of MoHFW on MCI?
• Powers to form  Rules and notify them.
• Prior approval of Government is needed to notify regulations.
• Right to constitute Enquiry Committee.
• 37 Nominated members.
• To start new Medical colleges/Courses, MCI is only a Recommending Authority.
• Direct Control of  PG education rests with Medical Education Committee, 6 of whom are
nominated by the Government out of  a total of 9.
265

266
A perusal of  the existing provisions of Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 would categorically
bring out that the Government of India has substantial and reasonable control on the affairs
of the Medical Council of India.
MoHFW attempt to take over Autonomous MCI
In 2005, the then Union Health minister, Dr Anbumani Ramadoss, tried unsuccessfully to bring
in a legislation to dissolve the MCI and set up another council under the control of the Health
Ministry. After stiff opposition from Professional organisations, the draft Bill which was placed before
the cabinet, was referred to the Standing from Committee of Parliament on Health following the
intervention by the Prime Minister’s Office.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the year 2002 appointed an Ad-hoc Committee of three eminent medical
educationists including Dr. P.N. Tandon, Dr. Rangabhashyam and Dr. Mrs. S Kantha to oversee and
monitor the functioning of Medical Council of India for the purposes of enhancement of its credibility
and credence. The said Committee that justified the need of extension of a meaningful and
bonafide autonomy to the Medical Council of India.
IMA strongly opposes NCHRH Bill, 2011. Why?
The frame-work of the Bill seriously falls short of any evidence affirming at an honest attempt
to achieve its listed objectives.
This Bill does not assure of any improvement in quality of Health Care and accessibility.
Objective/Vision of the NCHRH Bill, 2011
• To consolidate the laws in certain disciplines of Health sector.
• To promote Human Resources in the health sector.
• To provide for mechanism for the determination, maintenance, coordination and regulation
of standards of health education throughout the country.
• To ensure adequate availability of human resources in all the states.
IMA’s Objections NCHRH Bill
• The purported object of the Bill to provide healthcare for all, is hidden from the
perspective of the individual regulatory bodies and is untenable to be considered enough
reason to bring in this Bill with sweeping powers.
• Classical example of colorable exercise of power and abuse of legislative process.
• The case for abolishing the existing institutions is unconvincing and by taking away the
powers of these autonomous councils, the Government loses credibility in the eyes of
people of India.
NCHRH Bill, 2011
Political and  Conceptional Objections:
• Lack of Representative Character.
• Non conducive to the Federal Nature.
• Loss of Autonomy of the only elected bodies, National councils.

267
• Lack of Democratic structure and loss of Federal character in the Commission, Board
and Committee.
• Elected National Councils has been stripped of the power and are meant for Registration
and disciplinary procedures only.
Replacing Democratic Body with Autocratic Nominated Body is nothing but betrayal of democratic
norms and Federalism.
NCHRH Bill, 2011
Technical Objections
• The word “Medical” as “Modern Medical”
• The word “Medical Practitioner” as “Modern Medical Practitioner”
• The Bill has failed in defining Dentistry, Dentists, Nursing, Nurses, Pharmacy, Pharmacists,
Paramedics and para medical Personnel.
• Does not take cognizance of:
✓ Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1991,
✓ Delhi Council for Physiotherapy & Occupational Therapy Act, 1971,
✓ Maharashtra State Council for Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy Act, 2002,
✓ Gujarat State Council for occupation Therapy and Physiotherapy Act, 2011,
✓ Tamil Nadu State Council for Physiotherapy
• State Council Registration entailing practice in that State only
• Engagement of Medical Professional in any other Business is termed as Misconduct – is
unconstitutional
• Governmental control enabling removal of Chairperson/member of Commission is dictatorship
• Funds and Assets of councils to be transferred to NCHRH – cannot be transferred to a
common pool
• Decisions of Commission cannot be questioned in court of Law – Against natural justice
• Non Medical persons govern Medical Profession – Only medical professionals to decide
on medical related issues
National Board of Health Education
• Medical Education will be handled by 7 members of National Board of Health Education –
State representative not included
• Cross disciplinary progress will promote Quackery
National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
• 6 members with a Quorum of 2 will decide on nearly 20,000 Health Institutions in all
disciplines – inadequate Quorum
• Using external evaluation agency will increase discrepancy and inefficiency

268
NCHRH Bill Summarising………
Indian Medical Association does not accept NCHRH Bill 2011, for the undermentioned reasons:
• Democracy is lost to Autocracy:
o Representative character of  the Democratic institution is lost. Only appointed members
with indefinite tenure
Can the Indian Parliament become an Appointed Body?
• Federal Fabric of Indian Constitution is lost.
Right of States being usurped by the Central Government.
• Fundamental Right of Citizen is eroded.
o No legal remedy for Disputes
o Doctors engaging in other Profession is misconduct
o Registration with State Council is valid only for that state
• NCHRH Bill will pave the way for corruption.
External Evaluation Agency is a standing example.
• National Board of Health Education with 6 members  may not be able to control the
vast number of institutions and courses.
• Funds of Democratic Councils cannot be transferred to an Autocratic Body.
Decentralization is the way to better organization and achievements but NCHRH Bill will lead to
Centralization of powers leading to poor performance of the custodian of Medical Education which
will jeopardize tomorrows Health Care and Health science education of India
What is the way forward?
IMA’s Health Vision for India is:
To retain-the Autonomous Representative character of Medical and Allied Councils
functioning in a Transparent manner.
Solutions are:
• Restore the Medical and Allied Councils by conducting elections democratically
immediately
• Increase the number of elected members from the Indian Medical Register (IMR) pro-
rata, Professional Bodies and Health care professionals.
• Let the councils be observed keenly by the MoHFW using the powers vested with them
in a structured manner and adequate checks and balances.
It is pointed out that:-
1. The existing institutions have stood the test of time and have served the nation well.

269
2. They have a democratic structure and a representative character.
3. The plurality of the voices represented reflect the Federal nature of our Union.
4. The nominated/appointed NCHRH can never have either the legitimacy nor the wisdom of
the present institutions.
Sd/- Sd/-
Prof. Dr. G.K. Ramachandrappa Dr. D. R. Rai
National President Hony. Secretary General

270
270
ANNEXURE-X
Views of Delhi Medical Association
1. Decentralization is a slogan of the Union Government for better organization and achievements.
But it is unfortunate to learn that the benign Government is proposing for centralization of powers by
forming National Commission and by taking away the autonomy of all the concerned Boards, Councils
and other wings of the Union Government for health.
2. The Medical Council of India, constituted by Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, has been an
autonomous body regulating medical education in the country. As the majority of the members were
elected and represented different states, they were able to give unbiased opinion regarding medical
institutions and medical courses. This new Commission is constituted by Central Government appointed
members. They will act like a department of union Ministry of health and family welfare and will not
be able to give unbiased opinion.
3. As per the clause 105(1) and (2), the Commission, the Board, committee or the National
Council will be bound by the directions of the Central Government. In other words, the Commission,
the Committee and the Council will execute the orders given by the Central Government. In the
circumstances, it will not be possible for the Commission, Board, committee or Council to provide fair
assessment of the medical education or health care delivery.
4. There is no provision for the representation from the professional organizations, like Indian
Medical Association or Health Universities in the Commission, Board or Council, shunning the voice
of the health care providers.
5. Sec. 100 which bars challenging of removal of name from state register should be deleted. It
is unconstitutional and is against the fundamental principles of constitution. No law can bar the citizen
of India from seeking a judicial recourse for getting relief against the decision of a regulatory body.
Further a single body can’t be investigating, prosecuting, judging and then final super punishing
authority whose decision is un-challengeable in the court of Law. It is against natural justice.
6. The bill fails to talk about Rehabilitation Council of India Act 1991, Delhi Council for
Physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act : 1997, Maharashtra State Council for Occupational
Therapy and Physiotherapy Act-2002,  Gujarat State Council for Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy
Act-20ll, the Tamil Nadu State Physiotherapy order etc.
7. Modern medicine is not defined properly it is defined only as medicine. Health professionals
are not properly, defined to discharge their duties. Without defining properly the objectives of the bill
will not be accomplished.
8. Section 2.(u) of the Bill defines modern medicine as provided under the Indian Medical Council
Act-l956. The definition of modern medicine when defined in this bill should clearly specify it as
modern medicine as not as medicine. Hence the word “medicine” at the beginning of the definition
should be replaced as “modern medicine”.
9. Similarly the words “medical practitioner” in section 2(t), should be replaced with the words
“modern medical practitioner”

271
10. The Bill clearly defines modern medicine under section 2(u) and also defines modern medical
practitioner under section 2(t). The Bill has completely failed in defining other heath professional
branches and professionals clearly and squarely. The Bill fails to Define Dentistry, Dentists, Nursing,
Nurses, Pharmacy, Pharmacists, Paramedics and Paramedical Personal.
The Delhi Medical Association totally rejects the proposed “National Commission for Human
Resources for Health Bill, 2011 for the following reasons:-
(1) Supervision and regulation is not by dissolving
The Bill in its preamble says “…..to supervise and regulate professional Councils in various disciplines
of health sector” Page (1), However subsequently it dissolves all the existing Councils and takes away
all their duties and fund.
(2) Autonomy is lost
(i) In the statement of objects and reasons 4(j), page 54 says “to empower the Central
Government to supersede Commission, Board, Committee or National Council”. It gives
autocratic power to Central Government to make the Commission to dance to its tunes.
(ii) And also clause 115 (2) page says “If the Commission or Board or Committee or National
Council as the case may be fails (or) neglects to comply with such order, Central
Government may make the regulations (or) amend (or) revoke the regulations made by
the Commission, ………… as the Central Government thinks fit.
(iii) National Commission, Board, Committee all will have only appointed or nominated members
by the Central Government and no elected person will be there.
(iv) Clause 12 says Central Government may by order remove from office the chair person
or any members of the Commission.
(3) Reduce the shortage and uneven distribution?
The statement of object and reason for the bill section (2) page 53 says “………. to reduce shortage,
standardize quality and bridge the uneven distribution of existing work force in the health sector”. No
roadmap how the Government is going to reduce the shortage of manpower by forming this
Commission is said without statistical evidence based input. Using attractive words will not solve the
problem. No need to dissolve the existing health Councils to achieve this purpose. Health is a State
subject and resources cannot be redistributed by Central Government.
“There is acute shortage of water and electricity in various parts of country. Will the Central
Government constitute the Commission to make even distribution?”
(4) Do we need more specialist (or)  Family Physicians
Prime Minister of India said India needs more Family physicians and efforts will be taken to increase
the importance of  Family physician
The bill do not talk about this but says 4 (c) page 53 “…… to ensure uniform augmentation of trained
specialist and superspecialist” as its priority.
(b) Fund Transfer is the vision?
4 (g) says “to constitute a fund to be called the National Commission for Human Resources for
Health Fund” and 4 (h) says to transfer the assets, liabilities, rights, duties etc., of the existing
Council to the Commission. There are different Councils with age old registered members and their

272
fees as assets and transferring them to common pool and vesting the authorities with Central
Government appointed Commission is not acceptable. Funds of democratic Councils cannot be
transferred to autocratic body.
(5) What about the Ayush Council and Rehabilitation Council
4(k) page 54 says “to repeal the INC Act, 1947, Pharmacy Act, 1948, Dentist Act, 1948 and IMC
Act, 1956 and dissolve the respective Council. However we are having AYUSH Council dealing with
Health Care and Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1991. What will happen to this Council?
(6) Audit and Accounting
Clause 77 says even the accounts of State Councils will be audited only by the CAG of Central
Government. State will have no role on this.
(7) Is the bill is above the existing laws?
Clause 100 & 101 (Page 34) says the decisions of the Commission cannot be questioned in the court
of law and the agreed persons cannot seek legal remedies.
(8) Doctor doing any other occupation is misconduct?
The seventh schedule in continuation of section 68 in Part 1(10) (page 50) says engage in any
business (or) occupation other than health profession is a misconduct. This prohibits all career
opportunities for health professionals.
(9) No elected members from Professional Associations in. National Commission
(1) National Commission the proposed supreme body with vested powers will have no elected
members and State representatives to represent their needs and demands
(2) Professionals from other discipline of Management technology and law are given place in this
Commission will pave way for dilution and nepotism
(3) It is unfortunate in a democratic country elected representative Council is brought under appointed
non democratic body
(10) Common Entrance Examination by National Board of Health Education
(i) The proposed Common Entrance Examination by National Board, without providing
common syllabus for +2 exams, will affect  the students not having opportunity to study
CBSE syllabus. This will imbibe the social fabric and reservation systems in each State.
Many students study + 2  in their regional language. So entry level common entrance is
not a viable option (Clause 31 page 15)
(ii) Screening test for foreign graduates is welcome. But power of commission to exempt
persons from appearing in screening test will jeopardize the system (Clause 33 (4) page 16)
(iii) Power of National Board for Health Education to give equivalency certificate with foreign
National Course is objectionable.
(iv) The role of democratic National Medical Council responsible for Medical Education is
taken away and handed over to 7 members of National Board of Health Education. It is
strange no representative of Council (or) State is included in the Board
(v) Distance education mode without hands on training is a dangerous move for licensing a
human handler

273
(vi) The vision to promote cross disciplinary programmes in health sector will enhance
quackery (clause 30 (z) )
(11) National evaluation and Assessment Committee
(1) With only 6 members and quorum of 2 will be a mess to evaluate and take decision on the nearly
20,000 health institutions in all disciplines (Clause 37 e).
(2) Using external evaluation agency will increase discrepancy
(12) National Council
(i) The vision and objective with which the National Councils constituted are thrown in to
dustbin and only the power of registration is restored with Councils. State Councils are
made mere the branches of Central Council.
(ii) The membership pattern is unacceptable.
(i) Instead of one member for each state, one member for 5000 doctors must be
emphasized.
(13) Registration in State Council valid only for the state
In contrary to the existing practice as per clause 57 (4),  a candidate who have registered in State
Council can practice only in the State of registration and only when you register in the National
Council can practice anywhere in India. This will negativate State Councils and no one will come
forward to register in the State Council.
- MEDICAL EDUCATION IS A SPECIFIED AREA.
- IN SHORT NCHRH IS OF THE GOVERNMENT BY THE GOVERNMENT AND FOR
THE GOVERNMENT AND NOT FOR THE HEALTH PROFESSION AND EDUCATION.
- NCHRH WILL DEFINITELY AFFECT THE HEALTH EDUCATION AND HEALTH
SCENARIO OF INDIA.
- INDEPENDENT COUNCIL IS THE NEED OF THE MEDICAL PROFESSION.
Sd/- Sd/-
Dr. Harish Gupta Dr. V .K. Kohli
President, DMA Hony. State Secretary, DMA

274
274
ANNEXURE-XI
Views of Indian Association of Physiotherapy (Mangalore), Karnataka
Honorable Member
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
Respected Sir/Madam,
Sub: Submitting Memorandum to create Physiotherapy Council of India for Physiotherapy de
novo as per section 2 (i) and 2 (k) in the proposed  Bill No. LIX of 2011 the National Commission
for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011
We must humbly thank you for giving us the opportunity to present the view of  the Indian Association
of Physiotherapists regarding “The National Commission for Human Resource in Health Bill 2011”. We
hereby submit the memorandum.
The IAP appreciates the  effort of the Health Ministry to bring all disciplines of  health sector in the
proposed bill to coordinate and regulate the standards of health education throughout the country.
In a letter dated 30th September, 2011 from Union Health Minister to the Union Finance Minister
(Annex 1) regarding formation of Central Independent ‘Physiotherapy Council Honorable Health
Minister mentioned that Physiotherapy stream will be included in the NCHRH Bill. We were really
worried to see no mention of  word Physiotherapy in the NCHRH Bill of 2011.
We would like the kind attention of your goodself that, at present there are 296 colleges offering
under-graduate (B.P.T) Physiotherapy programme consisting of 4½  years and 116 colleges offering
Masters in Physiotherapy (M.P.T) with 2 years duration. Ph.D programme in Physiotherapy is
offered at 6 colleges and 5 universities in our country. There are 63,963 qualified physiotherapists
practicing all over India. Till now we have no Central Council for Physiotherapy to regulate the
profession.
We would like to bring to your kind attention the Planning Commission of India Eleventh Five year
Plan (2007-2012) on Health and Family Welfare (Sec 3.1.104 on Accreditation and Regulation Page 84
and 85) stating that “In the field of paramedical education, priority will be given for establishment of
National Para Medical Council as an apex body to determine standards and to ensure uniform
enforcement throughout the country. On similar lines, councils for physiotherapy and occupational
therapy should also be established” (Annex. 2).
The above mention of the Planning commission clearly delineates Paramedics from Physiotherapists.
In the Thirty-First report on Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill, 2007 (Presented to
the Rajya Sabha on 21
st October, 2008 and laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 21 st October, 2008)
discussed elaborately about the status and scope of Physiotherapy practice as following. (Annex. 3)

275
Clause 8.2 “Physiotherapy being considered a discipline distinct from paramedical disciplines finds a
specific mention in the title (Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Act, 2007)”
Clause 9.36 Committee’s attention was also drawn to the parallel position of  Naturopathy and Yoga
when compared with physiotherapy as both were based on physical and psychosomatic methods of
diagnosis and treatment, with both claiming benefit to the patients in a drugless manner. It was argued
that both Naturopathy and Yoga are granted equal status along with Ayurveda under AYUSH. Thus,
physiotherapy also deserved to be granted an independent status. Clause 9.46 “The fact that physiotherapy
education over the years has made significant advancements and has evolved as a distinct profession
seems to be well established. This is strengthened by the considered opinion of  Ministry of  Law that
physiotherapy profession should not be equated with the paramedical professions”
Clause 9.47 “The Committee also takes note of the fact as mentioned by the representative of the
Ministry that in USA, physiotherapy profession has reached a stage where these professionals can
practise independently. Not only this, in some of  the international Acts, it has been specifically provided
that physiotherapists having the required experience can give physiotherapy treatment without a
referral. These Acts also confer upon a physiotherapist the right to practise with or  without referral
governed by the circumstances of  the case.”
Clause 25.6 The Committee feels  that all the allied health professionals including physiotherapists and
occupational therapists play a crucial role in the field of  medicine and physical rehabilitation. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that their legitimate interests should be taken care of  and
their existing pay structure may be revised according to their qualifications and duration of the course
they have to put in before entering into a Government job. The findings and documentation of this
committee are in favour strong of  an independent status and council for Physiotherapists.
We would like to  bring to your kind notice that Independent State Councils for Physiotherapists are
existing in  the state of Delhi, Maharashtra and Gujarat.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has classified physiotherapists in professional group (ISCO
Code 1264) and paramedical professionals have been classified in a separate entity (ISCO code 2240).
Ref:WHO:http://www.who.int/hrh/statistics/Healt_workers_classification.pdf) (Annex . 4)
We Physiotherapists being one of the pre-eminent healthcare professional would like to request you to
look into our following demands:–
1. Facilitate the formation of Physiotherapy Council of India for Physiotherapy de novo .
2. Not to include Physiotherapy in Paramedical section as they are completely different.
3. The members of the Physiotherapy council should be only from  Physiotherapy stream including
Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Registrar so that 2/3
rd members of the council are physiotherapists.
4. The members of the council must be elected and the provision of election must be there in
the Bill.
Thanking you and hoping for your valuable cooperation to solve our above mentioned professional
concerns.

276
276
ANNEXURE-XII
Views of Amar Jyoti Institute of Physiotherapy
(University of Delhi)
Currently the following councils have been proposed in the Health Bill, 2011:
• Medicine under Medical Council of India
• Dentistry under Dental Council of India
• Nursing under Indian Nursing Council
• Pharmacy under Pharmacy Council of India
• Paramedical under Paramedical Council of India
In the draft bill National Council for Health Resources for health Bill, 2009, there were 7 departments
which included Physiotherapy also. But in the current bill the same has not been included which will
lead to a lot of ambiguity about the status of the profession.
The above mentioned councils in the proposed 2011 Bill may not be able to justify regulation of all
healthcare professions specially Physiotherapy. Physiotherapy as a profession has grown tremendously
in the last few decades and the country has witnessed increased demand of the services of the
Physiotherapists. As a result, a large number of Physiotherapy clinics and departments in Government
and non-Government hospitals exist throughout the country like in many developed nations such as
US, UK, Australia etc. (copies regarding the profession of physiotherapy in some countries attached).
Physiotherapy is an extensive 4½  year Bachelor course now in India with a post-graduation in
specialties like musculoskeletal, neurological rehabilitation, sports injuries, cardiopulmonary rehabilitation,
community based rehabilitation. Many Physiotherapists in academia are also doctorates. The current
curriculum in many government Physiotherapy institutions is as elaborate as any other medical
profession.
The Parliamentary Committee Report 2008 (Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare: Thirty-first report on Paramedical and Physiotherapy Central Councils Bill,
2007, presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21
st October, 2008, laid on the table of Lok Sabha on 21 st
October, 2008) also recommended the formation of a separate council for Physiotherapy. Kindly refer
to the following content of the report.
Excerpt from the Parliamentary Committee Report 2008
9.46 The Committee has given deep thought to all the views and opinions aired before it by all
concerned. V oluminous material relating to both national and international arena placed before it has
also received full attention of the Committee. The fact that physiotherapy education over the years has
made significant advancements and has evolved as a distinct profession seems to be well established.
This is strengthened by the considered opinion of Ministry of Law that physiotherapy profession
should not be equated with the paramedical professions.
9.47 The Committee also took an opportunity to go through the definition of physiotherapy as
given in different State Acts of USA, Canada, New Zealand etc. The Committee did not notice the

277
specific use of words ‘medically directed’ in the definition of ‘physiotherapy’ given in these Acts. The
Committee would also like to point out that a definition should only describe the profession enumerating
its different characteristics and not its administrative part. The Committee also takes note of the fact
as mentioned by the representative of the Ministry that in USA physiotherapy profession has reached
a stage where these professionals can practice independently. Not only this, in some of the international
Acts, it has been specifically provided that physiotherapists having the required experience can give
physiotherapy treatment without a referral. These Acts also confer upon a physiotherapist the right to
practice with or without referral governed by the circumstances of the case. The Committee would
also like to point out that the analogy of including the words ‘medically directed’ should have been
followed in the definitions of medical Laboratory technology and radiology technology also. The
Committee is, however, surprised to note that definition of these two professions to be governed by
separate Central Councils is completely ignored by making a mere mention of these two professions
under the definition of ‘paramedical’. This confirms Committee’s apprehension that the words ‘medically
directed’ have been deliberately used defeating the very basis of defining a profession.
• We would also like to bring to your kind notice the following definitions of physiotherapy as
laid down by already existing separate state councils of Physiotherapy.
(i) According to  the Delhi Council for physiotherapy and Occupational Therapy Act, 1997.
“Physiotherapy” means physiotherapeutic system of medicine which includes examination,
treatment, advice and instructions to any persons preparatory to or for the purpose of or
in connection with movement dysfunction, bodily malfunction, physical disorder, disability,
healing and pain from trauma and disease, physical and mental conditions using physical
agents including exercise, mobilization, manipulation, mechanical and electrotherapy, activity
and devices or diagnosis, treatment and prevention.
(ii) According to the Maharashtra State Council for Occupational Therapy and Physiotherapy
Maharashtra Act, 2004.
“Physiotherapy” means a branch of modern medical science, which includes examination,
assessment, interpretation, physical diagnosis, planning and execution of treatment and
advice to any person for the purpose of preventing, correcting, alleviating and limiting
dysfunction, acute and chronic bodily malfunction including life saving measures via chest
physiotherapy in the intensive care units, curing physical disorders or disability promoting
physical fitness, facilitating healing and pain relief and treatment of physical and psycho-
somatic disorders through modulating physiological and physical response using physical
agent, activities and devices using exercises, mobilization, manipulations, therapeutic ultra-
sound, electrical and thermal agents and electrotherapy for diagnosis, treatment and prevention.
As per WCPT (World Confederation of  Physical Therapists), Physiotherapists are qualified and
professionally required to:
• Undertake a comprehensive examination/assessment/evaluation of the patients
• Formulate a diagnosis, prognosis, and plan Physiotherapy management
• Provide consultation within their expertise and determine when patients/clients need to be
referred to another healthcare professional
• Make recommendations for self management
It is interesting to note that in spite of having state councils for Physiotherapy in some states, the
profession lacks a Central council and our professional bodies throughout the country have been
requesting the same.

278
Considering that Physiotherapy cannot be regulated by Medicine, dentistry, Pharmacology and Nursing
councils, it is being assumed that either physiotherapy will be included under the paramedical council
or a separate council will be formed as per Clause2(k) and 41 (2) after the notification of the act.
Therefore it is requested that a separate council for Physiotherapy be included (as per section 2 (k)
& 41(2) before the inception of the National Commission which will not only help the profession
grow in India but will also help the healthcare system of India in following global trends of
healthcare.
Item No.2
The National Board of  Health Education (Chapter III) 24.3 and 24.4  states that the members of
this board should have post graduate degree in medicine and medical education. But in our opinion,
the responsibility vested upon this board will also require them to formulate and implement policies
regarding education in other areas of healthcare.
It is recommended that the Board has members from other fields special1y Physiotherapy in order
to regulate and improve education in the field of Physiotherapy.
OR
It is recommended that sub boards be constituted under the National board for maintaining and
improving the standards of education for areas of healthcare such as Physiotherapy which cannot
be included in any of the proposed councils.
Item No.3
Section 8. ( 1) States that “The educational qualifications granted by any health educational institution
in India which are included in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule or
the Fifth Schedule or the Sixth schedule, as the case may be, shall be recognised qualifications of the
respective discipline of  health for the purposes of this Act”.
However, the schedules I-VI do not include educational requirements of various other disciplines which
cannot be included under paramedical council such as Physiotherapy, Homeopathy, Unani etc. Madam,
we would like to reiterate that Physiotherapy education has changed drastically in the last few years
not only in India but globally in order to match the trends of Physiotherapy practice. Graduate, post
graduate and doctorate courses are being offered in Physiotherapy in many government universities of
India and their curriculum is quite exhaustive.
it is recommended that Physiotherapy education be included separately in the schedules (I-VI)
mentioning the education requirements of different healthcare professions.

279
ANNEXURE-XIII
Views of Physiotherapists’ Forum of AIIMS
Subject-Request for the Oral Evidence for ‘Independent and Autonomous Physiotherapy Council/
Department Under ‘The National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011’ and
Submission of written Memoranda on the subject matter.
Respected/sir,
As a General Secretary, “Physiotherapist Forum of AIIMS”, I would like to request the Honorable
Chairman, Shri Brajesh Pathak Ji, (Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare), to kindly permit us to represent our view/comments/suggestions via oral evidence as
well as written submission of memoranda containing the complete details or the subject matter.
‘Physiotherapist Forum of AIIMS’ is a registered body under Society Act, which represents the issues
related to growth and development of physiotherapy profession time to time with M/o H and FW,
Government of India.
‘Physiotherapist Form of AIIMS’, have already successfully represented the matter related to Independent
and Autonomous Council for Physiotherapy on dated 27
th May, 2008 in front of ‘Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health’ in the year, 2008. Later on the representation was
supported by our “Indian Association of Physiotherapist, (IAP)” when they represented the same
matter on dated 1
st July, 2008.
After taking view from these two Associations, Standing Committee drafted the report which was laid
on the table of both houses of Parliament on dated 21 st October, 2008 and thereafter sent to Ministry
of Health for making it a final Bill,. Unfortunately the 14 th Lok Sabha lapsed at that time and all the
effort made by our Associations and Parliamentary Committee wasted.
As you are already aware that the previous Standing Committee, Chaired by Hon. Shri Amar Singh
Ji, already drafted the recommendations regarding the Physiotherapy Council where they were agreed
upon and granted the following demands:
(1) Statuary and legal Definition: As per Delhi and Maharashtra Council as both are the legal and
statuary bodies and the definitions given in Acts gives Physiotherapy professionals right to assess,
diagnose, investigate and treat the patients as an “first hand practitioners” in hospital or private clinical
set up.
(2) Adequate composition: 2/3 Majority of physiotherapist along with nominated members by
Government.
(3) Independence and autonomy to practice as a first hand practitioner: WHO (World Health
Organization) and ILO (International Labor Organization) are two International Organizations at global
level of repute. These organizations provide Physiotherapy professionals a Independent status and right
to act as a first hand practitioners in health care delivery system throughout the world.
279

280
280
ANNEXURE-XIV
Views of Dr. Ali Irani, President Indian Association of Physiotherapists
Why India need National Physiotherapy Council Urgently
1. Regulation of Professionals:
To regulate the Physiotherapy education, practice and research
Registered Physiotherapist (IAP) 30,000 (apprx.)
BPT-Bachelor of Physiotherapy (41/2 yr. UGC Recog.) colleges about 276
MPT-Masters in Physiotherapy specialization in 16 branch (2-3 yr. UGC Recog.) colleges 46
There are many Institute/University imparting Ph.D ( Viz. AIIMS, Jamia Milia Islamia University,
GGSIP University at Delhi itself)
There is similar number of unregistered Physiotherapy professionals working in different
private/unregulated sector.
2. To curb malpractice and quackery in Physiotherapy and safe-guard the patients’ interest.
3. To advise the government for framing and amending service rules, as per the guideline
given by DOPT, Government of India.
4. To advise the government for framing and amending the cadre of the services as per
guideline given by DOPT, Government of India.
5. To recommend the Government, Central Pay Commission and others regarding pay
structures, allowances, career progression and other service conditions for Physiotherapy
clinicians, academicians and researchers.
6. To provide grants to organize or participate for various activities such as conferences/
seminars/symposiums, workshop, travel grant, scholarships, research activities, in service
training etc.
7. To advise the Government and provide general and specific data regarding manpower
planning, qualifications, specialties, cadre structuring etc. to the Government from time
to time.
8. To provide guideline regarding ethical codes and professional conduct of the professionals
from time to time.
PLEAD
We the 35000 Physiotherapists of India would like to request the Parliamentary
Committee to recognize Physiotherapy as an independent profession and grant
us our Council to standardize the physiotherapy colleges under one syllabus.
Dr. Ali Irani
President,
Indian Association of Physiotherapists

281
281
ANNEXURE-XV
Views of All India Dental Hygienist Association
Request regarding favourable consideration of our genuine and justified Demand for the welfare
and betterment of Dental Hygiene profession and professional in the interest of Public Health care.
1. To make separate Dental Hygienist Council for the inclusion of Dental Hygienist profession
separately in the proposed “National Commission of Human Resources for Health Bill, 201 1”.
2. Provision of Higher Education for Dental Hygienist
(a) Bachelor of Dental Hygiene
(b) Master of Dental Hygiene
(c) Ph.D in Dental Hygiene
(d) Post Doctoral in Dental Hygiene
(e) Foreign Dental Hygienist Qualification.
3. Separate Department of oral and Dental Hygiene in each and every Government/Private
Hospitals and in Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi, Secretariat of state assembly like
Physiotherapist, in the interest of public health care, Hon’ble Ministers and Member of
Parliament/Member of state assembly.
4. Time bound Promotion Avenue after every 5 years of the service to the next post and pay
scale,
5. To rectify clause 60 (2) of proposed NCHRH Bill, 2011.
6. To make provision for The Dental Hygienist for lateral entry in BDS courses. (Regular/
Correspondence)

282
282
ANNEXURE-XVI
Witten views of PGIMER, Chandigarh
Sl. No. Talking Points Reply of PGIMER
12 3
Whether there is a need to strengthen the
existing regulations pertaining to medical/
allied health/para-medical education in the
country?
Do you feel whether there is a need to
strengthen/promote/monitor ethics amongst
the medical/allied health/para-medical
practitioners in the country?
Whether there are reported cases of mal-
practices in the existing structures/bodies
like different councils and National Board of
Examinations?
In your opinion which structure is better
equipped to deal with the two aspects i.e.
regulation and ethics out of the existing
individual councils or overarching body
proposed under the NCHRH Bill and why?
What suggestions/safeguards you would
recommend to strengthen the existing
framework/proposed overarching body under
NCHRH Bill?
Do you support the proposed NCHRH Bill –
yes or no and why (in the order of priority-
wise/clause-wise/section-wise)?
Whether you are covered under any of the
existing councils/boards and if so the details
thereof and if not where ideally you would
belong to and why?
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Yes
Yes
Yes
Ethics and regulatory body should be separate.
It the same body redresses both, there is
chance of imbibing malpractice. Any complaint
should be redressed by the Ethics Body.
50% of the members of each body should be
selected/elected, rest 50% may be nominated.
The nomination should be by three members
body (one member should be from opposition
party). Members chosen should be from
academic colleges – academicians. Private
practitioners preferably should be avoided.
Besides the above suggestion, the role of
commission should be more defined.
PCl does not come under any body and it
should maintain its independence/autonomous
status.

283
12 3
Do you agree with the manner of
appointment of Chairman and members of
the National Commission for Human
Resource for Health, National Board for
Health Education, National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee and the National
Councils and the State Councils as proposed
in the NCHRH Bill as also the manner in
which they may be removed from their
offices by the Central Government?
Do you agree with the composition of the
Selection Committee for selection of Chairman
and members of the National Commission,
National Board and National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee and if not what are
your suggestions in this regard?
Do you agree with the sweeping powers
conferred on the Central Government in the
functioning of the proposed National
Commission, National Board, National
Evaluation and Assessment Committee and
National/State Councils?
Do you agree with the manner in which
powers and jurisdiction of the existing
councils have been curtailed in the proposed
structure of National Councils and State
Councils and if not, what are your
suggestions in this regard?
What should be the ideal definition of medical/
allied health/para-medical practitioners? What
are your suggestions in this regard?
In your opinion what provisions should be
incorporated in the proposed NCHRH Bill
so that the reported cases of mal-practices
in the existing Councils/Boards do not crop
up in the proposed overarching body under
the NCHRH Bill?
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
Yes, Members of Commission/Board of different
council should have their own professional
experts like Dentists, Nursing and Paramedics.
It may be UPSC type of selection panel for all
bodies i.e. same Selection Committee
Yes
Difficult to answer
Graduation should be the minimum degree for
any practitioner i.e. medical, allied health or
paramedical. Diploma in place of degree should
not be substituted.
Basic problem lies with recognition of private
institutes. That is why separate bodies of
regulator and ethics are proposed.
• Check list for minimum requirement should
be clearly planned.
• While choosing inspector only faculty from
government institute should be chosen and
from outside the state. After visit of one
inspection team, second team (completely
unrelated from first) should be sent. The
two reports should be compared.
For entrance of the courses – All India single
examination is a must.

284
12 3
The present Bill has been brought to set up
an overarching body to remove the corrupt
practices prevailing in the existing Councils/
Board. Do you agree with this perception?
Whether there is any possibility of the
proposed National Commission becoming a
bigger monster than the existing smaller
monsters? Do you feel that the treatment
proposed for the disease in the Bill will
itself become a bigger disease? If so, what
should be the alternative?
Difficult to answer till we practise the bill.
Dr. Chawla in his additional written submissions highlighted certain other anomalies observed
in certain clauses of the Bill. He was of the view that the Bill was silent on the manner in which part
time members of the Commission are be appointed, whether these would be from academic institutes
or those m practice. He also had the doubt as to whether the Chairman would be part time or full
time. The Commission should also  ensure maintenance of standards of human resource. The President
of National Board of Health Education should have at least 20-25 years of standing in profession in
teaching and training and there should be same Selection Committee for all boards. Further the
Constitution of Members of National Councils and total number was not clear. There was also a
question mark on the Constitution of Ethics Committee. With regard to Clause No. 30, he was of the
view that the National Board of Health Education must also  be made responsible for exit examinations.
With regard to Clause No. 41, he was of the view that the Commission should not exempt any person,
enrolled as health practitioner in a country outside India as this may dilute the system. With regard
to Clause 35 (2) he was of the view that 10 years experience fo r member of National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee is inadequate as the same is equal to that of Additional Professor. With regard
to Clause 46, he was of the view that a provision must be made to include a member from each Union
Territory in the Council. Lastly with regard to Clause 47, the procedure and manner of Elections to
National Councils must be clearly prescribed.
14.

285
ANNEXURE-XVII
View of JIPMER
Dr. C. Adithan: Remarks on THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HUMAN RESOURCES FOR
HEALTH BILL, 2011
Preamble:
Central Government shall by notification establish the
• National Commission for Human Resources for Health with three constituent bodies, namely
• National Board of Health Education,
• National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
• National Councils,
with distinct responsibilities for regulating educational standards; enforcing the standards and assuring
quality and governing medical practice along ethical norms. It would also be the task of the
Commission to ensure effective use of linkages in the entire health system, act as the controlling and
coordinating agency that ensures accountability in the system and to facilitate interconnectivity among
and between disciplines to meet the needs of a diverse and growing health system in the country.
General Comment:
In general, it is a welcome initiative. The following are some suggestions for your kind consideration
CHAPTER II. National Commission for Human Resources for Health
Existing: Clause 7.  The Chairperson and other Members, shall immediately after entering office and
every year thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of their interest, whether direct or indirect and
whether financial or otherwise, in any health institution or any other institution which comes under
the purview of the Commission and the same shall be displayed on the website of the Commission
Suggestion: In addition to above, the Chairperson and other members should give declaration of
their and family members, immovable and movable properties at the time of assuming charge and
every year thereafter which will be displayed in the website of the commission.
Existing: Clause 8.  ( 1) The Chairperson and other Members, on ceasing to hold office shall not, for
a period of two years,  accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in
any health educational institution whose matter has been dealt with by such Chairperson or Member,
as the case may be, or has been before the Commission when he held office as such Chairperson
or Member.
Suggestion: The duration may be increased from 2 to 5 years.
Existing Clause 10.  ( 2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence
on account of leave or otherwise, the seniormost whole-time Member shall discharge the functions of
the Chairperson till the Chairperson is able to discharge his functions
285

286
Suggestion: It may be included as follows: If the period of absence of Chairperson is less than 1
week, the acting Chairperson shall not take any policy decision or major financial decisions.
Clause 14.  No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of-
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the Commission;
or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits of the case.
Comment: a debatable issue.1f the constitution of committee itself defective, how their decision will
be valid/acceptable?
Clause 17. ( 6) Where no order passed by the Commission has been communicated to the person
submitting the scheme, within a period of one year from the date of submission of such scheme
to the Commission under sub-section ( 2), the scheme shall be deemed to have been approved by the
Commission in the form in which it had been Submitted, and, accordingly, the permission of the
Commission required under sub-section ( 1) shall also be deemed to have been granted.
Comment: This may be removed. Each institution should get permission from the commission in
order to ensure the quality of medical education. In case of delay in getting response from the
commission, a mechanism or agency should be created/named to whom the affected Institution can
approach.
CHAPTER III: “National Board for Health Education” to assist the Commission in discharge of
its powers and functions for the purposes of health education
Clause 30.2.  (e) organise seminars, trainings or conferences for continuous medical education and
such other courses, workshops or programme as may be specified by regulations made by the
Commission;
(f) to undertake faculty development programmes;
Comment: Besides organizing the above, it should also provide financial support for organizing
seminars, trainings etc.
Clause 30.2 ( i) conduct examinations for entry to any under graduate, post graduate, doctoral, post
doctoral, super speciality or diploma courses, fellowship examination and screening test;
Query: Whether admission to PhD program in medical sciences is also included under doctoral
course? If so, is it advisable to have a national level entrance examn. for PhD admission?
Clause 33 ( 4) The Commission may, by notification, exempt any person, who possesses the
recognised qualification and enrolled as health practitioner in a country outside India for a period of
not less than three years, from the requirement of the screening test under this section.
Comment: The purpose is not clear. This may lead to malpractice.

287
CHAPTER IV: National Evaluation and Assessment Committee for evaluation and assessment
of any university or institution seeking permission
Clause 35.
(2) The President and members referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be chosen from the persons of
eminence, integrity and outstanding calibre having post graduate degree in the discipline of health,
health policy, public health, management, technology, law or finance from a recognised university or
institution having ten years of experience in the respective field.
Comment: Why law or finance? They may be consulted/approached as and when needed. They need
not be members of this committee.
Clause 37 ( 4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in
force, the Commission or Committee shall not engage the same evaluation and assessment agency
for successive inspections or audit inspections, to carry out audit or review inspection of any institute
at least for five years
Suggestion: It may be changed from “same evaluation and assessment agency” to “same evaluation
and assessment agency or persons”
Clause 40. ( 1) The Committee shall meet at least once in every three months, at such time and place
as it may appoint.
(2) The quorum of a meeting of the Committee shall be two members.
Suggestions: It may meet at least once in two months (considering their responsibility) and the
quorum should be at least three (Kindly note that the total number of members is 7 in this committee)
CHAPTER V: N
ATIONAL C OUNCILS AND S TATE C OUNCILS
Clause 57.  ( 1) Every National Council and every State Council shall enrol the persons having
recognised qualification, in such form, manner and on payment of such fees and fulfilment of such
other criteria or conditions as may be specified by regulations by the National Council, for a period
of ten years and the person so enrolled shall be entitled to practice in the respective discipline of
health.
Suggestion: It may be reduced to 5 years.
CHAPTER VI: A
UDIT AND ACCOUNTS: No comment
CHAPTER VII: O FFENCES AND PENALTIES: No comment
CHAPTER Vlll: M ISCELLANEOUS.
Clause 88.  The President or Vice-President and other Members of the Board, Committee, National
Council or State Council, as the case may be, shall immediately after entering office and every year
thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of their interest, whether direct or indirect and whether
financial or otherwise, in any health institution which comes under the purview of the Board, Committee,
National Councilor State Council, as the case may be, and the same shall be placed in the public domain.

288
Suggestion: They should give declaration of their and family members immovable and movable
properties at the time of assuming charge and every year thereafter which will be displayed in the
public domain.
Clause 89.  ( 1) The President or Vice-President and other members of the Board, Committee, National
Council or the State Council, as the case may be, on ceasing to hold office shall not for a period
of two years accept any employment (including as consultant or expert or otherwise) in any health
educational institution whose matter has been dealt with by such President, Vice-President or member,
as the case may be.
Suggestion: May be increased to 5 years
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
S
CHEDULE OF M EDICAL Q UALIFICATIONS
[See section 2 (zc) (a) and section 18]
Part 1—Graduate Medical Qualifications
Graduate Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the 10+2 examination;
Part 2—Post Graduate Medical Qualifications
Post Graduate Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the graduate medical
examination;
Part 3—Super Speciality Medical Qualifications
Super Speciality Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the Post Graduate
Medical examination;
Part 4—Doctoral Medical Qualifications
Doctoral Medical Courses-Courses where entry is permitted after passing the Post graduate medical
examination;
Part 5—Post Doctoral Medical Qualifications
Post Doctoral Medical Courses—Courses where entry is permitted after passing the Doctoral medical
examination;
Part 6—Foreign Medical Qualifications
Comment: What about PhD in medical subjects?
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
P
ROFESSIONAL M ISCONDUCT
PART II
A health professional shall be deemed to be guilty of professional misconduct, if he—
(22) being a health professional posted in a health college or institution both as teaching faculty or
otherwise, is found absent on more than two occasions during the assigned duty hours and the same
is certified by the Principal or Medical Superintendent and forwarded through the State Government
to National Council or the State Council, as the case may be, for action.
Comment: I did not know this. Is this feasible to implement?

289
ANNEXURE-XVIII
Views of NIMHANS, Bangalore
Observations and Comments of the Director and Registrar of NIMHANS, Bangalore
on the National Commission for Human Resources for Health Bill, 2011
Ref No.: Your letter RS.11/1/2011– Com(H&FW) dated 23 rd July, 2012.
The efforts of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, to bring out an Over
Arching Body by an Act of Parliament and bring various systems of medicine under one umbrella –
A National Commission for Human Resource for Health (NCHRH), with accountability and regulating
educational standards is laudable and timely. It has envisaged to ensure effective usage of linkages in
the entire health system promoting interconnectivity between various disciplines. It is comprehensive
and is essential to maintain the identity of the health related field from other higher education and
research. This will facilitate taking steps from time to time to give direction and if necessary minor
midcourse corrections. The field of human resource for health is unique with close amalgamation of
health care delivery in the field, translational research in the centres of Higher Health Education and
innovation and exploration in the frontier areas. It has a strong component of social commitment
promoting positive mental health in contrast to phenomenological basic sciences research centres
attached to National Commission for Human Resources for Higher Education and Research.
The following observations of Director and Registrar of the National Institute of Mental Health And
Neurosciences (NlMHANS), Bangalore on the NCHRH bill are being submitted for the consideration
of Standing Parliamentary Committee on Health:
➢➢➢➢➢ 1. It may be worth considering naming it The National Commission for Human
Resources for Health Sciences Bill 2011, instead of The National Commission for
Human Resources for Health Bill.
➢➢➢➢➢ This is similar to University of Health Sciences and not University of Health. Calling
the Bill Human Resource for Health will be confined to health delivery to the society
realizing the shortage in the present state but it may in future cause stunted growth
in the broad field of health science research.
➢➢➢➢➢ The Health Sciences include many new technology intensive diagnostic and treatment
modalities which are essential for the day to day practice of medicine and patient
care. In the present suggested name, many of these go out of the ambit of health
related research and will be dominated by the Human Resources for Higher Education.
In the present form of the name the Health Research that may be carried out will
be mostly around Public Health and Social Sciences and Health Delivery but may not
emphasize translational innovations in technology. By naming it ‘Human Resources
for Health Sciences’ makes it broad and brings basic scientist and their innovations
into the ambit of Health Sciences and promote close interaction. This has helped the
evolution of great medical centres like Harward, Mass General Hospital, MD Anderson
Centre for Cancer, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center etc., in USA offering
advanced medical treatment and at the same time promoting medical research. This
289

290
can be a productive marriage between Human Resources for Health Sciences and
Human Resources for Higher Education and Research. This, to an extent is reflected
in passing in page no.4, chapter 11, 3.4 participating in National Board for Health
Education, Evaluation and Assessment.
➢➢➢➢➢ 2. Page 4, Chapter II, 4.2, lines 44 - 48. Qualification for the Members-
➢➢➢➢➢ For the Member stipulating 20 years of experience in the profession out of which
atleast 15 years in the leadership role in the area of Health Care Delivery, Growth
and Development in Modern Medicine and Medical Education – can be a tall order.
It may be worth considering reducing to 10 years as Professor or Additional
Professor with leadership role for the Members. This can facilitate bringing younger
people familiar with modern technology to steer to future.3. Page 5,
➢➢➢➢➢ Chapter II, 4.2b – Eight part time members, each shall be appointed from the
disciplines of Medicine, Dentistry, Nursing, Pharmacy, Paramedics, Management,
Science and Technology and Law (the word each can be added for equitable
distributions to all the fields in a proactive way) and to avoid two members from
the same field finding a place.
➢➢➢➢➢ 4. Page No. 5, 1 b – Constitution of Selection Committee.
➢➢➢➢➢ Five other experts of eminence from the discipline of Medical and Allied Sciences
Management, Science and Technology having qualification and experience of at
least 20 years in the discipline as Members —
➢➢➢➢➢ It may be worth considering to reduce the experience for the Members to l5 years
to encourage younger people with modern thought and knowledge in newer
technologies to bring it to the point of care in disease management and offer new
ideas.
➢➢➢➢➢ 5 Page No. 14, 30.1 m,n,o,p,q, –
➢➢➢➢➢ It is worth considering to promote exchange of Visiting Professors from Institutions
of Higher Education and Research to Institutions of Health Research. This can be
indicated in one of the clauses. This will facilitate cooperation between Institutes for
Higher Education and Institutions of Health Research. This will promote strong inter
disciplinary interaction. The Biology divisions in IIT’s are carrying out advanced
health related research (IIT, Kanpur) leading to basic understanding of epilepsy, not
addressed in medical centres. The clinical material is shared for research with IIT
with informed consent of the patient.
➢➢➢➢➢ 6. Page 15, lines between 20 and 30, there is a mention of promoting Joint Cross
Disciplinary Programmes among Universities and other Educational Institutions.
Page 15, line 27 - 28, there is a mention of encouraging –
➢➢➢➢➢ Universities to enable Colleges to evolve into Health Institutions with power to award
Degrees – Does it include Basic Science Institutions like IIT’s starting Medical
Colleges. This needs to be clarified.
➢➢➢➢➢ 7. Page no.18, Chapter II, 39 – It is heartening to see a strong will to implement National
Evaluation and Assessment by establishing a Statutory Committee.

291
➢➢➢➢➢ 9. Page no. 41, Chapter VIII, Miscellaneous 118 (2)
➢➢➢➢➢ The Commission may transfer any officer or other employee or the services of such
officer to the Board, Committee and the National Council. This clause may be
applicable to Medical personnel who have gone abroad to update or require higher
education outside India when a doctor from Centres for Excellence goes abroad to
enhance the knowledge and comes back, will that person be posted to rural areas
to undertake service. Needs a comment and clarification when introduced in a Bill.
When doctors are transferred after a stint abroad, it should be to places where
reasonable facilities are available to practice the knowledge acquired and translate to
patient care. A clarification in this matter can be useful to avoid unrest among the
highly qualified people being posted to under developed zones and advising them to
participate in Health Delivery. This can lead to exodus to private sector or indifferent
work to complete the stipulated time and bring pressure to come back to well
equipped centres with the support of pressure groups in the Government. A strong
will is needed to counter it and ensure social equality.
➢➢➢➢➢ 10. Aspects not covered under the Bill:
➢➢➢➢➢ It may advisable to indicate that all the regional medical centres should have a
Department of Medical Biotechnology in addition to all other departments with
facility for training. The close proximaty of this department in a medical centre will
have positive effect in important training which is translatable. At present there are
many Institutions and Centres of Biotechnology bringing out course of student,
majority of them lacking basic aptitude for translational science. This department will
be distinct from a division of Biomedical Engineering in various centres who
essentially do maintenance works for the machines and their electronic components,
but no research.
➢➢➢➢➢ Every regional medical centres should have a separate Department of Disaster
Management and Critical Care. This will facilitate developing needed man power to
meet the natural and manmade calamities. Probably, trained man power in Disaster
Management in North Eastern part of India could have reduced the human suffering
by timely and proactive management. Once incorporate in the Bill training in this
field becomes mandatory and the country will have Rapid Action Medical Officers
in different zones of the country and reduce the pressure on Military and Paramilitary
Forces.
➢➢➢➢➢ Innovative approaches to teaching in Health Sciences especially Medical science is
not addressed anywhere in the bill. The bill should provide for exploring innovative
approaches to teaching which is gaining importance worldwide and emphasize on the
need for such novel approaches.
Sd/-
Date: 28
th July, 2012 Dr. P Satish Chandra
Place: Bangalore Director, NIMHANS,
Bangalore 560029

292
292
ANNEXURE-XIX
Views of Joint Forum of Medical Technologists of India
(National Organisation of Registered Associations of Allied Health Professionals)
Sl.
No.
1
1.
Extract from the proposed
NCHRH Bill
2
Our Suggestion for Change
3
Explanation for the suggestion
4
 CHAPTER I
Preliminary
1. (1) This Act may be called
the National Commission for
Human Resources for Health
Act, 2011.
1. (1) This Act may be called
the National Commission
for Health Professions
(NCHP) Act, 2011.
1. If we take into account the
import of the bill when it comes
into force we consider this Bill
is far more important than the
title reveals.
2. However, as per stated
objectives of the bill, proposed
Bill is not only dealing with
providing trained human
resources rather it is going to
streamline the Health Professions
itself by defining parameters and
coordination for existing and
new health professionals.
3. It. will provide the essential
human resource in a systematic
way, ending quackery, frauds
and malpractices.
4. The Bill is a major initiative
in the efforts to provide and
improve the quality health care
service to the people.
5. The Bill encompasses all
aspects of the health professions
which call for an appropriate
title.

293
12 3 4
2. Definitions:
(c) “approved institution”
means a medical college,
hospital, health centre or such
other institution recognised by
a university as an institution in
which a person may undergo
the training, if any, required by
his course of study for the
award of any recognised
qualification to him;
(g) “Commission” means the
National Commission for
Human Resources for Health
established under section 3;
(j) “diploma” means such
award, not being a degree,
granted by a health educational
institution certifying that the
recipient has successfully
completed a course of study
of not less than nine months
duration;
(k) “discipline of health”
includes medicine, dental,
nursing, pharmacy, paramedical
or any other discipline as the
Central Government may notify
in this behalf;
Definitions:
(c) “approved institution”
means a medical college,
medical research institutions,
hospital, health centre or such
other institution recognised by
a university as an institution in
which a person may undergo
the training, if any, required by
his course of study for the
award of any recognised
qualification to him;
(g) “Commission” means the
National Commission for Health
Profession established under
section 3;
(j) “diploma” means such
award, not being a degree,
granted by a health educational
institution certifying that the
recipient has successfully
completed a course of study
of not less than twelve months
duration;
(k) “discipline of health”
includes all registered
recognized branches of medical
and allied health sciences and
Technology under proposed Act
or any other discipline as the
Central Government may notify
in this behalf;
(c) Medical research institutes
cannot be left outside the
purview of the Bill.
(g) This corresponds to our
suggestion given above in
col. 2
(j) Usually a course running for
less than one year is a Certificate
course.
(k) The word ‘paramedical’ is
an out-of-date concept in view
of the fact that all the major
scientific developments are
taking place in the so-called
‘Paramedical’ field bringing it
at par with any other activity
in the medical field. They are,
now, not subordinate branches
supporting the treatment
procedure; in fact they are
leading the actual course of
treatment into a desired
direction. Diagnostics has
acquired very important place
leading to specialization in
different courses. The new
development has strengthened
the course of treatment and
prevention. Moreover, it would

294
12 3 4
not be improper to ask as to
why nursing and pharmacy are
not ‘paramedical’ branches.
2. The fact that all the other
four disciplines mentioned here
already have their councils does
not wipe the reality off that all
branches of medical science are
now ‘Allies’ in their endeavour
to help a patient. Having a
council does not justify treating
different branches of medical
science as inferior to them.
(o) There are other Councils
also that need to be covered
under the Act as they also deal
with the issues pertaining to
health education and generating
professionals.
(r) Twelve years of schooling
with relevant Science subjects
i.e. (with Physics, Chemistry
and Biology/Mathematics must
be made compulsory.
This should be viewed in the
light of explanation given above
along with our suggestion in
relation to (k).
Explanation as already mentioned
under general submission.
(o) “existing Council” means
the councils specified in
column (1) of the First
Schedule;
(r) “health educational
institution” or “health
institution” means an institution
of learning including a
university, an institution deemed
to be university, a college, an
institute, an institution of
national importance declared as
such by an Act of Parliament,
or a constituent unit of such
institution, which is imparting
education in the discipline of
health (whether through conduct
of regular classes or distance
education system) beyond
twelve years of  schooling
leading to the award of a degree
or diploma;
(w) “National Council” means
the Medical Council of India
or the Dental Council of India
or the Nursing Council of India
or the Pharmacy Council of
(o) The list given in the First
Schedule needs to be amended
to include all existing councils
such as Rehabilitation Council
of India, Central Council of
Homoeopathy, and The Central
Council of Indian Medicine.
(r) “health educational
institution” or “health
institution” means an institution
of learning including a
university, an institution deemed
to be university, a college, an
institute, an institution of
national importance declared as
such by an Act of Parliament,
or a constituent unit of such
institution, which is imparting
education in the discipline of
health (whether through
conduct of regular classes or
distance education system)
beyond twelve years of
schooling in the relevant Science
Subjects leading to the award
of a degree or diploma;
(w) “National Council” means
“Health Professional Council of
India” a common National
health Council with different
departments or  directorate

295
12 3 4
India constituted under sub-
section ( 1), or the Paramedical
Council of India, as the case
may be, constituted under sub-
section ( 2), of section 41;
(x )(v) the Register of
Paramedics maintained by the
Paramedical Council of India;
constituted under sub-
section ( 1), ( 2), and as the
case may be, constituted under
section of  section 41 should
be brought under a common
name of Health Profession
Council of India.
(x)(v) the Register of allied
Health Professionals maintained
by the  health Professionals
Council of India;
 CHAPTER 2
National Commission for Human Resource in Health
Title: National Commission for
Human Resource in Health
3. ( 3) The Commission shall
consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) four whole-time members;
and
(c) eight part-time members.
to be appointed, by the Central
Government, on the recommen-
dations of the Selection
Committee constituted under
section 5.
4. (2) para II
Provided that out of twelve
Members,—
(a) four whole-time Members
shall be appointed by the Central
Title: National Commission for
Health Profession
3. ( 3) The Commission shall
consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) eight whole-time members;
and
(c) sixteen part-time members.
to be appointed, by the Central
Government, on the recommen-
dations of the Selection
Committee constituted under
section 5.
(d) the Chairperson or a
Member of the National
Commission for Higher
Education and Research under
the Ministry of Human
Resource Development shall be
a Member, ex officio.
4. (2) para II
Provided that out of twenty
four Members,—
(a) eight whole-time Members
shall be appointed by the Central
Reasons explained above along
with our suggestions for
amendment in (g) and (k) in
the section ‘Definitions’
1. The number suggested here
is insufficient to handle the
enormous task being assigned
to the Commission.
2. The inclusion of (d) is to
reciprocate the similar provision
in NCHER Bill also introduced
in Rajya Sabha.
As above
1.
2.
3.

296
12 3 4
Government from the
disciplines of medicine,
dentistry, nursing, pharmacy,
paramedics; and
(b) eight part-time Members
shall be appointed from the
disciplines of medicine,
dentistry, nursing, pharmacy,
paramedics, management,
science and technology and
law.
5. ( 1) The Central Government
shall constitute a Selection
Committee consisting of,—
(a) a person of eminence
having qualification and
experience of at least twenty
five years in medical profession
as Chairperson;
(b) five other experts of
eminence from the discipline
of medical and allied health
sciences, management, science
and technology having
qualification and experience of
at least twenty years in the
discipline, as members, to be
appointed in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) The Secretary to the
Government of India in charge
of the Union Ministry of Health
(Department of Health and
Family Welfare) shall be the
Convenor:
16(2) Without prejudice
to....(o)provide such officers...
etc.
Government from the
disciplines of medicine,
dentistry, nursing, pharmacy,
allied health and
(b) sixteen part-time Members
shall be appointed from the
disciplines of medicine,
dentistry, nursing, pharmacy,
allied health, management,
science and technology and
law.
The Central Government shall
constitute a Selection
Committee consisting of,—
(a) the Prime Minister, who
shall be the Chairperson of the
Selection Committee;
(b) the Speaker of Lok Sabha;
(c) the Leader of Opposition in
Lok Sabha;
(d) the Minister in charge of
Health and Family Welfare in
the Government of India; and
(e) the Minister in charge of
Human Resource Development
in the Government of India.
Explanation.—Far the purposes
of removal of doubts, it is
hereby declared that where the
leader of Opposition in the Lok
Sabha has not been recognised
as such, the Leader of the single
largest group in opposition to
the Government in the Lok
Sabha shall be deemed to be
the Leader of Opposition.
The following to be added as
(p) and (q). (The existing ‘p’
to become ‘r’)
(p) Formulate action plan to
bring uniformity in the cadres,
designations/nomenclature and
pay scales in commensurable/
keeping in view the initial
1. The status of the selection
committee is rather low which
may not inspire confidence in
the Commission.
2. The Selection committee
should be at par with that
proposed in the NCHER Bill so
that both the commissions enjoy
equal status in all respects.
These are very important
functions of the commission
once all health professionals
engaged in government sector
are placed under the control of
the Commission.
It will also facilitate the Central
Government to resolve the long
standing issues of Government
4.
5.

297
12 3 4
professionals and will establish
uniformity in cadres
recruitment qualifications, jobs,
duties and responsibilities and
other pay determining factors
of various categories of
persons enrolled with Health
Professional Council.
(r) To help the Central/State
Pay Commission in deciding
uniform pay scales/allowances
and other facilities by sending
its suggestions/recommen-
dations for human resource for
health in view of the
recruitment qualifications, jobs,
duties and responsibilities and
other pay determining factors
of various categories of
persons enrolled with Health
Professional Council.
 CHAPTER 3
National Board for Health Education
24. (1) The Board shall consist
of-
(a) a President;
(b) two whole-time members;
and
(c) four part-time members,
to be appointed by the Central
Government on the
recommendation of the
Selection Committee
constituted under section 25.
24. (2) The Chairperson or a
Member of the National
Commission for Higher
Education and Research
referred to in section 5 of the
National Commission for Higher
Education and Research Act,
20ll-Member, ex officio.
1.
2.
24. (1) The Board shall consist
of—
(a) a President;
(b) two whole-time members;
and
(c) one part-time member from
each of the disciplines based
on the member strength,
to be appointed by the Central
Government on the
recommendation of the
Selection Committee constituted
under section 25.
To be omitted from this clause.
Board is very important
component of the Commission
and it may require in-depth and
precise knowledge of a
particular discipline. Given the
nature of their appointment part-
time members are supposed to
play advisory role.
If no change in the selection
process of the chairman under
the present Bill is accepted,
chairperson of NCHER selected
by a selection committee headed
by Prime Minister is a higher
ranking official and cannot be
expected to work at a lower
level. We have proposed above

298
12 3 4
25. (1) The Central Government
shall constitute a Selection
Committee for appointment of
the President and members of
the Board and the Committee,
consisting of,—
(a) a person of eminence
having qualification and
experience of at least twenty
years in medical profession as
Chairperson;
(b) Three other experts of
eminence from the discipline
of medical and allied health
sciences management, science
and technology having
qualification and experience of
at least fifteen years in the
discipline, as members, to be
appointed in  such manner as
may be prescribed.
25. (1) The Central Government
shall constitute a Selection
Committee for appointment of
the President and members of
the Board and the Committee,
consisting of,—
(a) a person of eminence
having qualification and
experience of at least twenty
years in medical profession as
Chairperson;
(b) Four other experts of
eminence from the discipline
of medical, allied health
sciences, management, science
and technology having
qualification and experience of
at least fifteen years in the
discipline, as members, to be
appointed in such manner as
may be prescribed.
Chapter 2 clause 5 (item No. 4)
inclusion of NCHER chairman
at commission level.
If medical means only
practicing medicine, the allied
health discipline is a varied one
and represents the true
development in  what is known
as medical science. We,
therefore, would like to separate
‘allied health science’ from
‘medical’.
3.
 CHAPTER 4
National Evaluation and Assessment Committee
35 (2) The President and
members referred to in sub-
section ( 1) shall be chosen
from the persons of eminence,
integrity and outstanding calibre
having post graduate degree in
the discipline of health, health
policy, public health, manage-
ment, technology, law or
finance from a recognised
university or institution having
ten years of experience in the
respective field.
35 (2) The President and
members referred to in
sub-section ( 1) shall be chosen
from the persons of eminence,
integrity and outstanding calibre
having post graduate degree in
the discipline of health, health
policy, public health, manage-
ment, medical technology, law
or finance from a recognised
university or  institution having
ten years of  experience in the
respective field.
Use of the vague term like
‘technology’ should be avoided.
It should be specified as
‘medical technology’.
1.

299
12 3 4
 CHAPTER 5
National Councils and State Councils
Clause 46 (1)
53. (1) Where there is no
State Council in any State,
the State Government shall,
by notification, constitute the
State Councils for the
following disciplines of
health, within a period of
three years from the date of
commencement of this Act,
in such manner and with
such composition as may be
prescribed by the State
Government, namely:—
1.
2.
1. Requires to be re-worked
2. should include one
representative from every
discipline or health science as
far as practicable instead of
just five as proposed in ( e)
53. (1) Where there is no State
Council in any State, the State
Government shall, by
notification, constitute the State
Health professionals Councils for
all the disciplines of health,
within a period of two years
from the date of commencement
of this Act, in such manner and
with such composition as may
be prescribed by the State
Government, namely:—
1. The whole scheme of
manning the committee is, in
our view unworkable as it
stretches the strength to a
ridiculous level. It is quite
possible that new universities
may come up in future seeking
representation on the
committee. The number may
run into hundreds in future. For
an efficient discharge of the
committee’s function the
strength itself will become an
obstruction. Rather than genuine
interests it may represent the
vested interests.
2. The committee will require
professional expertise which is
sadly lacking because the
provision of only ‘five members’
reduces the importance of such
expert advice. We therefore,
suggest more representation
from professionals, and not just
stakeholders as provided for in
the list.
3. A scheme to take
representatives on rotational
basis too could be worked out.
As we have already explained
in our suggestions for
amendments in the section on
‘definitions’ we do not think it
necessary to have so many
councils by different names.
Only one council with different
departments for various
disciplines under it would give
a cohesive picture with a
common set of guidelines and
procedural practices. Obviously,
the disciplines that do not have

300
12 3 4
(a) the Medical Council
of…….(name of the State) for
medicine;
(b) the Dental Council of…….
(name of the State) for
dentistry;
(c) the Nursing Council
of……..(name of the State) for
nursing;
(d) the Pharmacy Council
of............(name of the State)
for pharmacy;
(e) the Paramedical Council of
..................(name of the State)
for paramedics
57. ( 1) Every National Council
and every State Council shall
enroll the persons having
recognised qualification, in such
form, manner and on payment
of such fees and fulfillment of
such other criteria or conditions
as may be specified by
regulations by the National
Council, for a period of ten years
and the person so enrolled shall
be entitled to practice in the
respective discipline of health.
60. (5) No person shall, unless
he is enrolled on the National
Register or the State Register,
as the case may be, of
Paramedics,—
(i) hold any appointment as
paramedic in any dispensary,
hospital or other health
institution which is supported
wholly or partially from public
or local funds; or
(ii) practice as a paramedics.
The (name of the State)
Health Professionals Council.
57. (1) Every National Council
and every State Council shall
enroll the persons having
recognised qualification, in such
form, manner and on payment
of such fees and fulfillment of
such other criteria or conditions
as may be specified by
regulations by the National
Council, for a period of five
years and the person so enrolled
shall be entitled to practice in
the respective discipline of health.
60. (5) No person shall, unless
he is enrolled on the National
Register or the State Register,
as the case may be, of allied
health professional,—
(i) hold any appointment as
allied health professional,—in
any dispensary, hospital or
other health institution which
is supported wholly or partially
from public or local funds; or
(ii) practice as an allied health
professional,—
a large number of professionals
could be clubbed together under
one department for a period of
a prescribed number of years
and then the question of having
a separate department could be
examined.
Ten years is too long a period.
The period should be short so
that a practicing person would
need to frequently update his/
her knowledge
It has been explained in section
on definitions. The term
‘paramedics’ is gradually
making way for the new and
all-embracing term ‘allied health
professional’
3.
4.
Other suggestions:
1. There is a need to clearly define Certificate courses (out of purview of the commission),
diploma, degree, post-graduation, post-graduate diploma, and doctoral qualifications
and given Schedule should be amended accordingly in the Bill.

301
ANNEXURE-XX
Comments of MoHFW on the Oral Evidence given by various stakeholders before the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on the NCHRH Bill
AYUSH
Pharmacy
Council of India
(PCI)
Has supported the Ministry’s stand that AYUSH should not be a part of the NCHRH as :–
(i) They are completely two different streams of medicine and bringing them under one regulatory body, the
separate focus on AYUSH would be lost.
(ii) A YUSH needs to be propagated by having a separate standing.
(iii) Recognising that AYUSH needs to be developed more strongly and requires a separate focus, Department of
AYUSH was created 17-years back – bringing them together under one regulatory body would amount to
effectively reverting to pre-1995 status.
The Council has agreed with the vision of the NCHRH Bill and is not totally opposed to the proposal. However, it
has raised certain issues like:–
Issue
The new Council under
NCHRH would only maintain
the central register.
In the proposed Bill, there is
no mention about the
composition of State Councils.
Comment
The reconstituted Council will not only maintain the central register of pharmacists,
but also regulate the profession, renew the enrolment from time to time, grant
certificate of good standing and organise programmes for CME.
The present Councils like PCI are over-burdened with regulatory functions. The basic
objective of the NCHRH is to trifurcate the regulatory functions among three separate
bodies, viz. the National Board of Health Education, the National Evaluation and
Assessment Committee and the National Councils (like the PCI) to bring about and
accountability in the regulatory functions.
The Bill stipulates that where there are no State Councils, the State Government shall
constitute the State Councils within a period of three years from the date of
commencement of the NCHRH Act in such manner and with such composition as may
be prescribed by the State Government.

302
Issue
PCI is facing a lot of problems
because of dual regulation of
Pharmacy education by AICTE
and the Pharmacy Act. In
future also there will be a
conflict between NCHRH and
NCHER.
The Board does not have a
member from the field of
pharmacy.
Comment
After the setting up of NCHRH, all the allied fields of medical education like Pharmacy
would be brought under the ambit of the Commission and NCHER would only have
a say in matters of setting higher standards in these areas over and above the
minimum standards that would be notified by NCHRH.
The four part time members in NBHE will be from the discipline of health or health
education which includes Pharmacy.
Indian Nursing
Council
Central Council for
Indian Medicine
Central Council
of Homoeopathy
Medical Council of
India
The Council largely supports the Bill. However, it is of the opinion that the Bill should come after consultation and
discussions with the States.
Comments
The NCHRH Bill has been drafted after consulting all the stakeholders including the State Governments. Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare had held regional consultation on the proposal in six different cities wherein besides
representatives of the State Government, Vice Chancellors, Principals of medical colleges, medical practitioners,
academicians and representatives of regional IMA participated. The proposal was also unanimously approved by the
Central Council of Health and Family Welfare in the conference held on 30
th August, 2010.
The Council has supported the Ministry’s stand to keep AYUSH out of the purview of the NCHRH on the grounds
that both the streams have different pharmacopeia, concept and ideology.
The Council has also supported that AYUSH (Homoeopathy) should be kept out of the purview of NCHRH since
otherwise the stream of homoeopathy would lose its identity.
The Council supports the Bill and the idea that the regulatory functions should be trifurcated among three separate
bodies. The Council has, however, stressed the need for a strong selection committee for selection of members to
the Commission. The Council has also pointed out that NCHRH would provide cross connectivity between various
health disciplines leading to a synergistic approach to address the human resources needs of the health sector in the
country.

303
Dental Council of
India
Dr. R.C. Deka,
Director, AIIMS
The NCHRH would be totally
under the control of the
Central Government and none
of the States will have any
role to play in policy issues
relating to health.
Clause 100 of the Bill bars
challenging the decision of
the Commission in a court
of law.
NCHRH will have no elected
members.
The Bill gives absolute
autocratic powers to Central
Government under clause
115(2).
Issue
The Bill is not based on any
survey or study. The
Government or the Parliament
should constitute a committee
like Bhore Committee to find
out the need and deficiencies
for both in educational and
health care sectors.
The Central Council for Health and Family Welfare is an apex advisory body comprising
of all State Health Ministers of the country. NCHRH will be guided by a National
Policy for Human Resources for Health to be developed by public health leaders
representing State and Central Government through the Central Council for Health and
Family Welfare. The present Councils like the Medical Council of India and the Dental
Council of India are not guided by any such policy.
Insofar as provisions under clause 100 are concerned, it is stated that a Commission
or tribunal is established with limited powers to decide and investigate matters falling
under its ambit so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However, such
Commissions/tribunals are amenable to constitutional courts, Therefore a person
aggrieved with the decision of the Commission can always file an appeal in the High
Court or the Supreme Court and his fundamental rights would remain intact. The bill
provides for an appellate authority in the Central Government.
The President of each of the National Councils shall be an ex-officio member of the
Commission; therefore the Commission would comprise of both nominated as well as
elected members.
The provision is required to be exercised by the Government in extraordinary
circumstances with a view to improve the overall functioning of the Commission/
Board/Committee/Council and bring in more transparency and accountability.
Comment
The Government had appointed a Task Force for setting up of the NCHRH in June,
2009 under the chairmanship of the then Union Health Secretary and 11 other
members. The task force. proposed a model for NCHRH as an overarching body
responsible for setting the mandate, coordinating and determining standards for health
and medical education, and providing an overall framework for the regulation of
human resources in health in the country. The report of the task force and the draft
NCHRH bill were placed on the website of MoHFW to invite comments and suggestions
of the stakeholders and general public.
Subsequently, the Ministry also held regional consultation on the proposal in six different
cities wherein besides representatives of the State Government, Vice Chancellors, Principals
of medical colleges, medical practitioners, academicians and representatives of regional

304
Comment
IMA participated. The proposal was also unanimously approved by the Central Council
of Health and Family Welfare in the conference held on 30 th August, 2010.
Lastly, the National Knowledge Commission and the Yashpal Committee have both
recommended reforms in medical education in the country. The High Level Expert Group
report on Universal Health Coverage of India has supported the setting up of NCHRH.
The problem started after 1993 probably because the private sector was allowed entry
into medical education and permitted to set up medical colleges.
The NCHRH Bill specifies the Acts which it seeks to repeal after being set up. The
institutions like AIIMS would continue to function under their respective Acts.
The composition of Selection Committee is laid down in the Bill and it shall consist
of persons of eminence and experience from medical and allied fields, to avoid any
bias in selection. Further, the Selection Committee shall only recommend a panel of
two names for every vacancy to the Central Government and the Central Government
shall make the final appointment.
The Bill clearly stipulates that NBHE would approve and notify minimum norms and
standards of maintenance of academic quality for accreditation and benchmarking of
education in recognised health educational institutions imparting approved courses in
the discipline of health throughout the period of accreditation. Nothing contained in the
NCHRH Bill will prevent NCHER or the concerned statutory regulatory body to specify
higher standards for health educational institutions.
Issue
The problem in MCI started
after the amendment in the
IMC Act in 1993 wherein it
was made mandatory that
permission from Central
Government was required for
opening of an institution.
There is no specific mention
whether institutions like
AIIMS would continue to
remain under their respective
Acts or whether they will
also come under the
provisions of the NCHRH.
Selection of people appears
too much Governmental. It
should be more autonomous.
The Bill does not empower
the universities or medical
schools which ultimately have
to make changes in
curriculum and practice.

305
Prof. Y.K. Chawla,
Director, PGIMER,
Chandigarh
JIPMER, Puducherry
NIMHANS, Bangalore
Supports the Bill. However, the Director, PGIMER sought a clarification about the status of the Institutions like
PGIMER and AIIMS under the Bill.
Comments
It may be stated that the NCHRH Bill specifies the Acts which it seeks to repeal after being set up i.e. the Indian
Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
The institutions like PGIMER and AIIMS would continue to function under their respective Acts.
The status of the institutions
like PGIMER and AIIMS
under the Bill.
There should be a Council in
the UT of Chandigarh for
registration of doctors passing
out from PGlMER, Chandigarh.
The Bill should have provision
for signing MoUs with reputed
international universities.
Supports the Bill. However, Prof. P.H.Ananthanarayanan suggested few changes e.g. the Chairperson and other
members of the NCHRH on ceasing to hold office shall not accept any employment for a period of five years instead
of two years, National Board of Health Education should be named as National Board of Health Professional Education,
the registration of doctors should be for a period of five years instead of ten years, etc.
Supports the Bill. However, suggested certain changes viz. renaming the Bill as National Commission for Human
Resources for Health Sciences  Bill, reducing the length of experience for the Chairperson and members of the
Commission, etc.
It may be stated that the NCHRH Bill specifies the Acts which it seeks to repeal after
being set up i.e. the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the
Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. The institutions like
PGIMER and AIIMS would continue to function under their respective Acts.
It is for the Government of UT to decide the setting up of a medical council in the
UT of Chandigarh. However, a professional passing out form the PGIMER, Chandigarh,
if enrolled with the National Council, can practice anywhere in India as per the
NCHRH Bill.
The Commission under the NCHRH Bill is empowered to regulate the entry and
operation of foreign health educational institutions if permitted under the law for time
being in force in consultation with NBHE or such other authority as may be specified
by the Central Government.

306
Issue
Innovative approaches in
teaching in health sciences,
especially medical sciences,
should have been addressed
in the Bill.
There should be no bar as
the Commission has
mentioned, for filing an
appeal in the Court of law.
Penalty provisions would give
rise to corrupt practices.
Comment
The functions of NBHE inter alia  include taking such steps as may be desirable to
alleviate the standards of development of training and development of qualify of health
profesionals. The Board will also take measures to facilitate and promote academic
studies and research emerging areas of health education.
In so far as provisions under clause 100 are concerned, it is stated that a Commission
or tribunal is established with limited powers to decide and investigate matters falling
under its ambit so that ordinary courts are not overburdened. However, such
Commissions/tribunals are amenable to constitutional courts. Therefore a person
aggrieved with the decision of the Commission can always file an appeal in the High
Court or the Supreme Court and his fundamental rights would remain intact. The bill
provides for an appellate authority in the Central Government.
In the existing statutes, the punishment for contravening the provisions is non-
recognition of degree awarded to the student and not to the college itself, which does
not have sufficient deterrent value. Under the provisions of the NCHRH Act
contraventions will be punishable for a term which may not be less than 1 year and
may extend up to 3 years and a fine which may extend to Rs.25 lakhs.
Dr. H.N. Tripathi,
Chief Medical
Superintendent,
Sahara Hospital,
Lucknow.
Chhatrapati Sahuji
Maharaj Medical
University, Lucknow
Delhi Medical
Association
Supports the Bill. However has given certain suggestions like the Secretary to the Commission should not be from
bureaucracy, the selection committee should comprise of the DO, ICMR, a former judge of the Supreme Court, etc.
The representative character
of the existing Councils
would be lost.
The existing Councils would continue to exist in the same manner under NCHRH.
Further, the President of each of the National Councils shall be an ex-officio member
of the Commission; therefore the Commission would comprise of both nominated as
well as elected members.

307
How six-members can
evaluate and set standards for
hundreds of institutions.
A doctor registered with the
State Council cannot practice
outside the State.
The NCHRH Bill does not
help in improving medical
education or health care
system in the country.
The NCHRH will trifurcate the regulatory functions among three separate bodies, viz.
the National Board of Health Education, the National Evaluation and Assessment
Committee and the National Councils. The NBHE would determine, coordinate and
maintain standards for health education and also specify the minimum requirements for
faculty, infrastructure. and clinical work load for establishment of institutions. The
evaluation and assessment of health educational institutions shall be done by the
Evaluation and Assessment agencies having such qualification and experience and in
such manner as may be specified by regulations made by the Commission. The NEAC
shall take measures to develop and regulate the process of evaluation and assessment
of institutions imparting health education and programmes conducted therein, and
monitor the functioning of the agencies recommended by the Commission.
Any person can practice anywhere provided he is registered with the National Council.
The person enrolled with a State Council can practice in that State only. This is
necessary because under the current system, there is lot confusion and there are cases
where doctors other have multiple registration. The proposed system would enable the
Government to have an accurate picture of the number of practitioners in a given state
and to work out the distribution of human resources in health accordingly.
The Central Council for Health and Family Welfare is an apex advisory body comprising
of all State Health Ministers of the country. NCHRH will be guided by a National
Policy for Human Resources for Health to be developed by public health leaders
representing State and Central Government through the Central Council for Health and
Family Welfare. The present Councils like the Medical Council of India and the Dental
Council of India are not guided by any such policy.
Indian Association
for Physiotherapists,
Karnataka
Supports the Bill. However, wants a separate Council for Physiotherapists.
Comments
The Bill has the provision to allow Government notify constitution of a National Council for any other discipline of
health other than those mentioned in the first schedule of the Bill.

308
Government of
West Bengal
Issue
The State Government is of
the view that the Bill should
not be in its present form.
The State Government does
not have anything on record
that it was consulted at any
stage during the drafting of
the Bill.
The Bill appears to encroach
upon some powers of the
States because public health
is a State subject.
The Bill takes away of the
power of self-regulation and
self-governance of various
activities in certain professions.
There should be a greater
role for the States in the,
NCHRH.
Comment
The NCHRH Bill has been drafted after consulting all the stakeholders including the
State Governments. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had held regional consultation
on the proposal in six different cities including Kolkata wherein besides representatives
of the State Government, Vice Chancellors, Principals of medical colleges, medical
practitioners, academicians and representatives of regional IMA participated. The minutes
of the meeting held in Kolkata has been furnished to the Committee. The proposal was
also unanimously approved by the Central Council of Health and Family Welfare in the
conference held on 30
th August, 2010.
The NCHRH does not seek to usurp any powers that currently vest with the State
Governments. At present Councils like the Medical Council of India, the Dental Council
of India and the Nursing Council of India, each created under a separate central
statute, regulate education and practice of profession in their respective fields. All these
Councils are autonomous in nature and State Governments do not have any specific
role in their functioning.
The existing Councils comprise of members elected by the professionals themselves
and nominated by the Central Government. The States do not play any role in the
constitution of these Councils, as well.
The Government is open to increasing representation of State Governments in some
appropriate form both in the Apex institution and in the NBHE and NEAC. It may also
kindly be noted that during the course of the debate in the Rajya Sabha on the recent
amendments to the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 Hon'ble Health and Family
Welfare Minister assured the House, in response to a statement by an AIADMK
member, that he would hold detailed all party consultations before bringing the NCHRH
Bill back to the House, after it has been considered by the Department related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

309
The State Government feels
that the bill attempts to create
a mechanism which is so
overarching that it is likely
to lead to delays, difficulties
and so on. The specific roles
of the existing Councils are
being broken into three and
therefore, coordination will
become difficult and lead to
delay in execution.
The Commission as well as
other bodies under it are
nominative in nature and is
no democratic element.
Commission is expected to
make assessment of
requirement of manpower in
order to ensure better
geographical spread, and
meeting the local needs. In this
situation the State Governments
have a role to play.
The present regulatory bodies like MCI and DCI are overburdened with all regulatory
functions with little time available for other major functions. Further, there is no cross
connectivity between various health disciplines which has led to uneven distribution of
health professionals in the country. Separate Councils each responsible for an important
cadre of health workers has fragmented the health educational sector from a policy
perspective and could not failed to provide a synergistic approach to address the
human resources needs of the health sector of the country.
The composition of the Commission and its constituent bodies are to be guided by
eminent persons not only from discipline of health education but also from other
disciplines like management, law etc. with a fresh and up to date outlook to enable
to respond to the societal, economic and aspirational changes in a manner that is in
cognisance with the current era.
Further, the President of each of the National Councils shall be an ex-officio member
of the Commission; therefore the Commission would comprise of both nominated as
well as elected members.
The Central Council for Health and Family Welfare is an apex advisory body comprising
of all State Health Ministers of the country. NCHRH will be guided by a National
Policy for Human Resources for Health to be developed by public health leaders
representing State and Central Government through the Central Council for Health and
Family Welfare. The present Councils like the Medical Council of India and the Dental
Council of India are not guided by any such policy.
Government of
Gujarat
Dr. K. Srinath
Reddy, National
Board of
Examinations (NBE)
The NCHRH Bill is welcome development. However, Dr. Reddy has raised the following issues;

310
Issue
The Bill does not define as
how on abolition of NBE the
DNB qualifications are going
to preserved, protected and
promoted within the ambit of
the Bill.
Clause 16(f) of the Bill says
that the Commission will
coordinate existing health care
infrastructure in Central and
State Governments for
utilisation thereof. However,
health care infrastructure is
not really the part of the
Commission’s remit because
it is supposed to deal with
health professional education
and standards thereof.
There is an overlap in the
functions of the Board and
the Committee.
Comment
Clause 26(e) of the NCHRH Bill inter-alia clearly stipulates that all matters and things
engaged to be done by, with or for the existing NBE shall be deemed to be engaged
to be done by with or for, the Board.
Statutes of the present regulatory bodies do not mandate planning and provisioning of
human resources in their respective streams and therefore human resource management
in the health sector remains a neglected area. The NCHRH is being set up with the
twin objective of strengthening and reforming the current regulatory framework and
also to enhance supply of skilled manpower as per the need. The Commission will be
guided by a National Policy for human resources for health to be developed by public
health leaders representing State and Central Governments through the Central Council
for Health and Family Welfare.
One of the primary functions of the Commission would be to determine and promote
human resources in discipline of health education and training commensurate with the
requirement of such resources in different States and Union Territories. In doing so,
the Commission has to coordinate with the existing health care infrastructure in Central
and State Governments for effective utilisation thereof.
The functions of the Board and Committee are well defined and there is no overlap.
The Board will approve and notify minimum norms and standards of maintenance of
academic quality for accreditation and benchmarking of education in health institutions.
The assessment by the Committee would be based on these norms.
Indian Association
of Physiotherapists,
Mumbai
Faculty of Dental
Supports the Bill. However, wants a separate Council for Physiotherapists.
Comments
The Bill has the provision to allow Government notify constitution of a National Council for any other discipline of
health other than those mentioned in the first schedule of the Bill.

311
They have welcomed the Bill and suggested that there should be no elected members in the Council but selected
members. Further, it has also been suggested that the Commission should be given ministerial powers and that
Commission should have people from law, administration etc.
Comments:
The Bill has penal provisions which would be attracted if certain provisions of the Bill are contravened. Further, the
Commission also has members from the disciplines of management, science and technology, public health and law.
Sciences,
Chhatrapati
Sahuji Maharaj
Medical University,
Lucknow

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.