PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 23  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2007-2008 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
 
 
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2007-2008 (DEMAND NO. 47) OF 
THE DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH 
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE) 
LITERACY 
(MINISTRY O 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 3RD MAY, 2007) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA)


CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)—(ii) 
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................ (iii) 
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—22 
4. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE..................... 23—33 
5. MINUTE …...............................................................................……….…………………...... 36—38 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
( 2006-2007 )
 
 1. Shri Amar Singh  — Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 #2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur  
 @3. Shri A.K. Antony 
 4. Prof. P. J. Kurien 
 5. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar 
 6. Shrimati Maya Singh 
 7. Shri Digvijay Singh 
 8. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
 9. Shri Lalhmingliana 
 *10. Shri Manohar Joshi 
 $$11. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
  LOK  SABHA  
 @12. Shri M. Ambareesh  
 ^13. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli 
 14. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 15. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 16. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
 17. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 18. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman 
 19. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah 
 20. Shri Rasheed Masood 
 21. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 22. Shri Nihal Chand 
 23. Shri D.B. Patil 
 24. Shrimati K. Rani 
 25. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
 26. Dr. R. Senthil 
 27. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin 
 28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 29. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
 30. Shri Uday Singh 
 31. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
 **32. Shri Rajnarayan Budholiya 
 ^^33. Shri Vinod Khanna  
 $34. Shri R.L. Jalappa 
 
# Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 15th December, 2006 on demise. 
@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 24th October, 2006. 
* Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 4th  September, 2006. 
$$ Nominated w.e.f. 30th November, 2006. 
^ Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2006. 
** Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2006. 
^^ Nominated w.e.f. 3rd September, 2006. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 28th November, 2006. 
 

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
  Shrimati Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri H.C. Sethi, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Under Secretary 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer  

PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Par liamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
Twenty-third Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.47) of the Department of 
AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2007-08. 
2. The Committee considered the vari ous documents and relevant papers received from the Department of 
AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary and other officials of that 
Department on the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 11th April, 2007. 
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on  
27th April, 2007. 
  AMAR SINGH 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman, 
27th April, 2007 Department-related Parliamentary 
Vaisakha 7, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
I. INTRODUCTION  
1.1 The Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) was established in Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare in March, 1995 and renamed as Department of Ayurveda. Yoga and Naturopathy, 
Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November, 2003. AYUSH meaning ‘long life’ includes Indian 
Systems of Medicine like Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopath y, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy and is a part of 
old heritage of Indian Medical and health sciences. Th e Department is entrusted with the task of policy 
formulation and implementation for propagation and development of AYUSH system and integration of Indian 
System of Medicine with the modern medicine. The emphasis has been on development and promotion of 
AYUSH systems through implementation of schemes for upgradation of AYUSH educational standards, quality 
control and standardization of drugs, improving the availability of medicinal plant material, research and 
development, mainstreaming of AYUSH in health care and awareness generation about the efficacy of these 
systems domestically and internationally. 
 The broad objectives/goals of the Department are as follows: - 
 • To promote good health and expand the outreach of health care to the people, particularly those 
not provided health cover, through preventive, promotive, mitigating and curative intervention 
through AYUSH. 
 • To upgrade standard of AYUSH education by improving the quality of teachers and clinicians by 
revising curricula to contemporary relevance an d by creating Model Institutions and Centres of 
Excellence and extending assistance for creating infrastructural facilities. 
 • To ensure affordable AYUSH services and drugs which are safe and efficacious. 
 • To facilitate availability of raw drugs which are authentic and contain essential components as 
required under pharmacopoeial standards to help improve quality of drugs, for domestic 
consumption and export. 
 • Integrate AYUSH in health care delivery sy stem and National Programmes and ensure optimal 
use of the vast infrastructure of Hospitals, Dispensaries and Physicians. 
 • Re-orient and prioritize research  in ISM andH to gradually valida te therapy and drugs to address 
in particular the chronic and new life style related emerging diseases. 
 • Create awareness about the strengths of these systems in India and abroad and sensitize other 
stakeholders and providers of health. 
 • To provide full opportunity for the growth a nd development of these systems and utilization of 
the potentiality, strength and revival of their glory. 
1.2 The Secretary in her presentation apprised the Committee about the achievements of the Department 
during the Tenth Plan, various concerns and constraints and vision for the AYUSH Sector for the future. Some 
of the achievements/activities of the Department as informed by the Secretary are as follows: - 
 • AYUSH facilities now available in 3464 PHCs and 990 CHCs. 
 • Supply of essential medicine to 15,000 AYUSH dispensaries. 
 • Pharmacopoeial standards of 418, single drugs of Ayurveda, 150 Unani, 70 of Siddha and 200 of 
Homoeopathy have been published during 2000-06. 
 • Use of techniques like chromatographic fing erprint profiles and use of active therapeutic 
ingredients and marker compounds of standardization and quality control of herbal and herbo-
mineral preparations. 
 • Enforcement of GMP in 4000 Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani manufacturing units. 
 • Assistance provided to 28 State Drugs Testing Laboratories for upgradation. 

 • Chromatographic finger print profiles of 50 ASU drugs worked out by PLIM. 
 • During Tenth Plan, CCRAS has carried out clinical trials on 46 formulations for 23 prioritized 
disease conditions and compilation of research work in respect of 15 conditions have been 
completed. 
 • Standardization and safety standards of 17 medicines for RCH programme have been completed. 
1.3 The presentation made by the Secretary also entailed the initiatives proposed in the Eleventh Plan as given 
below:- 
 In Central Sector Schemes  
 (a) Development of common faciliti es for AYUSH industry clusters 
 (b) Re-orientation Training Programme and Continuing Medical Education. 
 (c) Funding of NGOs for Revitali zation of local health traditions 
 (d) Assistance to accredited AYUSH Centres of Excellence in non-governmental/private sector 
engaged in AYUSH education/drug development an d research/clinical research/folk medicine 
etc. 
 (e) Scheme for cataloging, digitization and AYUSH IT network 
 (f) AYUSH in public health and 
 (g) Extending international co-operation ac tivities for promotion of AYUSH exports. 
 In Centrally sponsored Schemes  
 (a) Upscaling financial assistance to AYUSH UG/PG  institutions and also in cluding private but not 
profit institution within the ambit of the scheme. 
 (b) Public-private partnership in “Hospitals and Dispensaries Scheme” for setting up of speciality 
clinics in existing AYUSH hospitals by renowned NGOs. 
 (c) Upscaling assistance to Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani manufacturing units from Rs. 5.00 lakhs in 
Tenth Plan to Rs. 50.00 lakh in Eleventh Plan per unit for establishing in-house quality control 
laboratory. 
 (d) Online monitoring of Central Grants given to States and pending UCs by software prepared by 
NIC. 
 (e) Special drive launched over the last three months to liquidate pending UCs.  
 (f) Release of funds to States now to be sorted through State Health Societies. Also, an effective 
Area Officer system to be put in place wherein Officers from this Department will go once in a 
quarter to the States and review the matter of outstanding UCs. 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
2.1 Initial Tenth Plan outlay for the Department was Rs. 775.00 crore which was increased to  
Rs. 1214.00 crore. Financial achievement reported at the end of Plan period is Rs. 1033.46 crore. Overall 
utilization position of allocated funds during the Te nth Plan can thus be considered satisfactory. The 
Committee notes that proposed outlay of Rs. 4102.75 crore for Eleventh Plan shows a manifold increase. 
While welcoming this enhanced allo cation, the Committee would like to point out that the Department 
has to keep pace with the same by making optimum and judicious utilization. 
2.2 Performance level of the Department under differ ent schemes during the last two years has led the 
Committee to make such a statement. Allocation of Rs. 381.60 crore was made for the Department in 2006-07 
which was reduced to Rs. 320.00 crore at the RE stage.  Expenditure reported as on  28th February, 2007 was 
Rs. 277.24 crore. Year 2005-06 was also no different. BE  allocation of  Rs. 345.00 crore had to be reduced to 
Rs. 300.00 crore at the RE stage. Expenditure figure reported at the end of the year was Rs. 290.95 crore. Last 

two years of the Tenth Plan receiving half of the total Plan allocation also reported the maximum level of under-
achievement. 
2.3 The Committee observes that Plan allocation of Rs. 488.00 crore for 2007-08 is at a very high level when 
compared with RE allocation of Rs. 320.00 crore for 2006-07. 
 Inspite of overall utilization position of allocated funds during the Tenth plan being satisfactory, the 
Committee on reviewing the trend of utilization of  funds scheme-wise, finds that allocated funds 
remained under-utilized in some areas. These very schemes have re ceived higher allo cation during the 
Eleventh plan also. 
 Details given below are self revealing: - 
(Rs. in crore) 
Name Initial Tenth Plan Actual BE Financial Eleventh Plan 
 Approved outlay received Achievement Allocation 
Educational Institutions 116.50 147.75 130.36 189.50 
Hospital and Dispensaries 28.94 61.69 17.49 213.50 
Strengthening of 
pharmacopoeial labs 
26.50 36.17 10.33 27.50 
2.4 The Committee is also constrained to note that th e physical targets set for the Tenth Plan could not 
be achieved under some schemes as mentioned below:- 
Sl. Name Physical Target Achievement 
No.    
1 2 3 4 
1. Strengthening of 314 compound ASU formulations  75 compound ASU formulations 
 Pharmacopoeial  allocated to 16 labs for development found suitable for final approval 
 Committee on ASU of pharmacopoeial standards and  and 114 formulations are in the 
  shelf-life studies. pipeline. Work on the remaining 125 
   formulations is in progress. 
  Authentication of 47 mineral and  Work on 10 minerals and metal 
  metals raw drugs comp leted. Other remaining  
   minerals and metals are under study. 
2. Expansion of CGHS Opening of 7 Ayurvedic,  One Ayurveda, 2 Homoeopathic, 1 
 Dispensaries 7 Homoeopathic, 3 Unani, 2 Siddha  Unani, 1 Siddha dispensary and 1 
  dispensaries and  2 Yoga centres  Yoga centre were established during 
  under CGHS Tenth Plan. 
3. Ayurveda Hospital,  Upgradation of the Hospital The hospital has been upgraded 
 Lodhi Road,   from 25 bed capacity to 50 bed 
 New Delhi  capacity for the benefit of the 
   public. For this purpose civil 
   construction work is being carried 
   out and the work is on the verge 
   of completion. 
  Filling up the posts of Doctors  Six posts of Doctors are being filled 
  and paramedical staffs which have  up on regular basis. 
  been created newly for the hospital.   
4. PLIM, Ghaziabad   
 (a) Survey and  30 20 (Short due to one vehicle is out 

  Collection tour  of order from last so many years) 
 (b) Strengthening of  Creation of additiona l posts 12 additional posts in the grade of 
  PLIM / HPL  Scientists and other got created 
    with approval of Ministry of 
   Finance. 
5. Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha 
 Literary Research   
 (a) Studies on drugs    
  and diseases 8 3 
 (b) Books/   
  Monographs/jour
nals 
33 19 
2.5 Another area of concern during the Tenth Plan noticed by the Department is the status of separate 
provision made for N.E. States and Sikkim. The Co mmittee observes that ini tial approved outlay of  
Rs. 77.46 crore under this head enhanced to Rs. 121.40  crore at the RE stage vi rtually remained unutilized 
reporting an expenditure of only Rs. 32.00 crore. The Committee is of the firm view that such a position 
clearly indicates that NE Region remained unaffect ed by the advancements made under AYUSH during 
the Tenth Plan. The Committee is not aware about th e level of funds earmarked for N.E region during 
the Eleventh Plan. The Committee would,  however, emphasize that every conceivable measure is 
required to be taken so as to ensure that the experience of Tenth Plan is not repeated during the Eleventh 
Plan. 
2.6 The Committee observes that a number of new sc hemes were announced during the Tenth Plan. Token 
Provision for each of these schemes was approved at  the beginning of the Plan Period which was further 
reduced at the time of actual allocation, even that me agre amount remained under-utilised. It would not be 
wrong to conclude that these new initiatives remained on paper only during the Tenth Plan. The Committee 
finds that another set of new schemes have been announced for Eleventh Plan for which Rs. 630 crore have 
been earmarked. The Committee would impress upon the Department to finalise these new schemes, if not 
already done, so that they can be implemented at the earliest from the very first year of the Eleventh 
Plan. The Committee has been  given to understand that Department is in the process of obtaining 
administrative and financial approval for new an d revised Central Sector and Centrally sponsored 
Schemes. The Committee would appreciate if this pr ocess is expedited and the new schemes are launched 
at the earliest. 
2.7 The Committee is aware that such a situation has arisen as most of the States did not have an effective 
Commissionerate/Directorate of AYUSH for proper planning, implementation and monitoring of AYUSH 
Schemes. The Committee understands that States have been advised to have effective Commissionerate of 
AYUSH ably supported by a technical directorate. The Committee feels that this is a step in the right 
direction, as absorption capacity of States is re quired to be increased and the enforcement of Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1944 and regulati on of AYUSH institutions is also to be ensured. The Committee 
recommends that this matter should be pursued with al l the concerned States at regular interval to have 
the desired results. 
2.8 The Committee has been observing that with the quan tum jump in Plan allocation, number of outstanding 
Utilization Certificates has also been steadily increasing. In respect of f unds released upto 31.03.2005, these 
were 372 UCs pending, involving total amount of Rs. 107.55 crore. The Committee is aware that the 
Department is a very young Departme nt and outlays have been increasing very substantially from one Plan 
Period to another every year. The Committee has also been  informed that State Directorates, being very weakly 
organized have not been in a position to get timely rele ases from their State Finance Departments. Due to time-
consuming and long-winding procedures , utilization of funds at their level also becomes slow and tardy. The 
Committee is happy to note that the position is being constantly reviewed with the State Directorates and 
matter is also being taken up at the highest administrative level, as and when required. The Committee 

hopes that with such co-ordinated measures, the De partment will be able to contain the number of 
outstanding UCs, increase in the fund allocation notwithstanding. 
III. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  
National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur 
3.1 Budget allocation for the institution for Tenth Plan was Rs. 25.00 crore which has been primarily utilized. 
Achievement level of physical targets during the Tenth Plan also shows no underachievement. Provision of Rs. 
50.00 crore is proposed for the Eleventh Plan, with Rs. 14.82 crore provided for  2007-08. The Committee has 
been given to understand that this enhanced allocation is due to many targets, the institute has set for itself like:- 
 * Development of adequate infrastructure comm ensurating with the enha ncement in the intake 
capacity of the students due to implementation of the 27 per cent reservation policy for OBCs in 
educational institutions in a span of 3 years. 
 * Additional land to be bought to establish a separate campus. 
 * Development of a Herbal Garden. 
 * Purchase of equipments for laboratories, furniture for hospital, books for library etc. 
3.2 The Committee is hopeful that thes e set targets would be achieved by the Institute and there would 
be optimum and judicious utilizations of funds for the above-mentioned purposes. 
3.3 Last year, Committee’s attention has been drawn by the observations made in the Performance Audit of 
Department of AYUSH for the period 2000-01 to 2004 -05 regarding status of teaching and para-medical 
vacancies in the Institute. 
3.4 On a specific query about the progress made in the filling up of vacant posts, the Committee has been 
informed that as of now, a total of 23 posts (Professo r-4, Associate Professor- 6,  Lecturers-13) were lying 
vacant. 2 posts of Professor and 6 posts of Associate Prof essor were notified in September, 2006. Last date for 
receipt of applications for these posts was 16th October, 2006. A High Court stay was issued against filling up 
of these 8 posts. Subsequently 7 posts have been cleared and only one post stayed by the High Court. The 
meeting of the Selection Committee was fixed for 22nd Ma rch, 2007. Two remaining posts of Professor to be 
filled on promotion basis, could not be filled for want of  suitable candidates. Process of direct recruitment has 
begun for these posts. Out of the 13 posts of Lecturers, applications have been invited for 4 posts, 9 posts of 
lecturers to be filled up during 2004, have not been filled up till date due to court case. As a result, the 
remaining posts of Lecturers are also lying vacant. 
3.5 The Committee expresses its serious concern on th e status of vacancies in teaching posts in a 
premier Institute of Ayurveda. Inspite of CAG observations, situation has not improved, rather 
worsened. The Committee has been observing that due to court cases, vacancies continue to exist for a 
very long period. The Committee would like to point out that prolonged vacancies, that too of as many as 
23 posts cannot be considered satisfactory at any co st for a teaching institution. The Committee hopes 
that selection process for 7 posts of Professor and A ssociate Professor must have been over and selected 
candidates must have joined. For th e remaining 16 posts, concerted effo rts need to be made for getting 
the High Court stay vacated, wherever applicab le and expedite the recruitment procedure. The 
Committee is also of the view that  there is a need for review of exis ting selection process/recruitment 
procedure so as to make the same foolproof and expeditious. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Department should take up this matter with the institute authority. 
RASHTRIYA AYURVEDA VIDYAPEETH, DELHI 
3.6 Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth (RAV) is an autonomous organisation under the Department of AYUSH, 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and registered  under Societies Act, 1860 in 1988. RAV is a unique 
effort to revive and sustain Ayurvedic traditional knowledge through informal mode of education. RAV imports 
practical training to Ayurvedic graduates and post graduates below the age of 45 years through Guru Shishya 

Parampara i.e. the traditional method of transfer of knowledg e. RAV runs two-year course like MRAV, One-
year certificate course like CRAV, organises seminars an d workshops to disseminate traditional knowledge and 
research outcome to practitioners and researchers. 
3.7 The Committee takes note of the observation ma de in the Performance Audit of Department of 
AYUSH of 2000-01 to 2004-05 by  CAG that CCIM did not recognize the courses run by the RAV. In 
response to this, the Department submitted that RAV is no t to confer degrees but to carry forward the informal 
system of learning through Guru-Shishya Parampara. 
3.8 The Committee is of the opinion that imparting traditional Ayurvedic knowledge is the end goal of 
RAV and imparting this knowledge through the trad itional method of Guru-Shishya Parampara is the 
means to that end. The Committee opines that RAV m ay not confer degree but this exercise can be made 
more authentic if the courses run by RAV are rec ognized by CCIM leading to systematic, orderly and 
authentic dissemination of traditional Ayurvedic kn owledge through its Guru-S hishya Parampara. The 
Committee does not understand th e reluctance of the Department in recognizing RAV courses which 
would not in any way dilute the objectives of the RAV. 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA 
3.9 NIH was established on 10th December, 1975 in Kolkata as an autonomous organisation under the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India. It was established to function as a  model 
institution for Homoeopathy teaching and practice. The institute has been offering UG and PG courses along 
with a 60 bed Hospital. 
3.10 The Committee is constrained to observe that the phys ical target for Tenth Plan for this Institute to 
increase the bed capacity from 60 to 100 has not been completed. The hospital building is still in the process 
of renovation and construction. The Committee has been given to understand that this 60 bedded hospital 
is now proposed to be expanded to 250 bedded ho spital in view of the additional requirements for 
increase in seats on account of 27 per ce nt reservation for OBC, creation of new  PG faculties and 
provision of seats for BIMSTEC countries. Apart from the extension of hospital building, projects of 
expansion of UG hostel blocks and intern ational blocks are under implementation. The Committee is doubtful 
about the timely completion of these projects, as even after the end of the Tenth Plan, the 60-bedded 
hospital could not be expanded to 100-bedded one.  The Committee however, hopes that during the 
Eleventh Plan, this long pending project would be completed in a time-bound manner, under close 
monitoring by the Department as well as the Institute authorities. 
3.11 The Committee is perturbed regarding the way the selection of Director of NIH has been handled so 
far. The Committee has been given to understand that the selection for the post of Director, NIH was made but 
the appointment process was kept pending because of a vigilance case against the selected candidate. The 
Inquiry Report also has been submitted thereafter, orders  on which are to be obtained from the Disciplinary 
Authority. Action to fill-up the post can only be taken after a final decision is taken in the vigilance case. 
3.12 The Committee is specially disturbed by the fact that there was a CBI case against the  
ex-Director also which led to his suspension. Thereafter, when a prolonged search for a regular Director was 
nearing a successful end, it was noticed that new incumbent was also having a vigilance case against him. The 
Committee does not understa nd the basis for selecting a candidat e against whom a vigilance case is 
pending. The Committee wonders whether the appointi ng authority was aware of these details of the 
candidate or not. Moreover, the Committee would like to know the reasons for undue delay in the 
disposal of Inquiry Report. The Committee hopes that the case is expedited soon so that the post of 
Director is filled to avoid a situation which allows running of a premier institute like NIH, Kolkata 
without the supervision of institutional head. 
 
 

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF UNANI MEDICINE, BANGALORE 
3.13 The National Institute of Unani Medicine, Bangal ore was registered under th e Societies Registration Act 
on 19th November, 1984 as a centrr of excellence to develop and propagate Unani system of Medicine. 
N.I.U.M. is a joint venture of the Government of India a nd the State Government of Karnataka. It is affiliated 
with the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Science,  Bangalore, Karnataka. National Institute of Unani 
Medicine is spread in more than 55 acres of land and th e first phase of construction was completed at a cost of 
Rs. 14.00 crore having 100 bedded hospital, academic block, hostel building, administrative block and library. 
3.14 Initial Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 15.00 crore for the Institute was enhanced to Rs. 31.15 crore. The 
Committee is, however, constrained to observe that the enhanced provision remained under utilized. An 
expenditure of only Rs. 17.50 crore has been reported by the end of Tenth Plan. The Committee observes that 
1st and 2nd phases of hospital, college and hostel build ings were to be completed during the Tenth Plan. 
However, only 1st phase of construction could be completed and construction of 2nd phase could only be 
started. The Committee notes that an al location of Rs. 25.00 crore has been made for the Institute for Eleventh 
Plan, out of which Rs. 10.00 crore are allocated for the 1st year. i.e. 2007-08. The Committee has been given to 
understand that on completion of project, establishment of 4 more post graduate disciplines can be started. The 
Committee, therefore, impresses upon  the Department to make concerted efforts to get the 2nd phase of 
construction completed during 2007-08. Whatever bottleneck, have been experienced in getting the works 
completed in time, should be got removed, in close coor dination with the Institute authorities. At no cost, 
allocated funds remaining unutilized  like in 2005-06 and 2006-07, should be allowed to be repeated in  
2007-08. It is high time that NIUM moves towards it s objective of becoming a centre of excellence for the 
development and propagation of Unani system of medicine. 
IV. STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS  
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF INDIAN MEDICINE 
4.1 The Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) is a statutory body with the following objectives:- 
 • To maintain Central Register of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Practitioners. 
 • To lay down the minimum standards of education of Ayurveda Siddha and Unani medicine. 
 • To recommend to the Central Government regarding grant of permission to a new college, 
increase of seats or starting of a new or higher course of study. 
4.2 The Committee observes that the process of review of  curriculum of Post Graduate courses of Ayurveda, 
Unani, and Siddha and also of syllabus of Siddha graduate courses was to be taken up during 2006-07. 
However, only process of review of curriculum of Post Graduate courses could be initiated during the year. The 
Committee is constrained that this work does not find any place under the physical targets set for the 
Council for 2007-08. Report on modernization of Under Graduate education including restricting of 
syllabus is to be taken up during 2007-08 instead. The Committee can only recommend that the process 
of modernization/review of both Under Graduate  and Post Graduate AYUSH courses should be 
completed in a time-bound manner. This is required to  be accomplished on an urgent basis, keeping in 
view increasing acceptance of AYUSH system of medicine both in the country and abroad. 
4.3 The Committee has been continuous ly expressing its concern on th e undue delay in updation of 
Central Register of Indian Medicine. Latest status ma de available to the Committee reveals that position 
is deteriorating with the passage of each year. As per the information made available to the Committee, in 
respect of a number of States, Register has been notifi ed years ago, Maharashtra (1 992), Gujarat (1999), Delhi 
and Bihar (1997), Punjab (1998), U.P. (2000). The Committee also notes that the process of updation on receipt 
of required information from the concerned State also takes considerable time. All the States have pendency 
with regard to submission of information, with Mahara shtra to furnish the details of AYUSH practitioners from 
April, 1992 onwards. This is indeed a sorry  state-of-affairs. The Department cannot escape  by taking the 
plea that maintenance and updating of Central Register of Indian Medicine is the statutory responsibility 
of the Central Council. 

4.4 The Committee observes that due to its consistent observing the Department has taken some initiative. 
The workshop convened by the Central Council with Registrars of State Boards was held in March, 2007. A 
meeting was also held with those State Boards where th e position of updation of Register is particularly 
alarming. One fallout of such a meeting was that the Department became aware that there was no regular and 
full-time Registrar to attend to the regular functioning of State Board. The Committee is happy to note that 
all the Chief Secretaries have been asked to get a regu lar fulltime Registrar posted in all the State Boards 
with minimum complementary staff. One time financial assistance is also to be  given on the condition 
that State Boards are made function ing. The Committee feels that the steps initiated by the Department 
were long overdue. The Committee would appreciate if  the process started by the Department is brought 
to its logical end. 
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF HOMOEOPATHY, NEW DELHI 
4.5 The Central Council of Homoeopathy is a statutory body constituted by the Government of India under 
the provisions of Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 19 73. Its main objectives are: (a) the regulation of 
Homoeopathy medical education, (b) the maintenance of a Central Register of Homoeopathic Practitioners in 
the country and (c) prescribing standards of professi onal conduct, etiquette and a code of ethics for the 
practitioners of Homoeopathy. The Central Council is  constituted of elected members from the State 
Boards/Councils of Homoeopathy and from the Univer sity Faculties/Departments of Homoeopathy and of 
members nominated by the Central Government. 
4.6 The Committee had been reiterating on timely updation of Central Regi ster by identifying the 
bottlenecks in the process. As per the latest status made available about the Central Register of Homoeopathy, 
updated information is yet to be received from majority  of the States. There are States like Bihar, Nagaland, 
where it seems no record is being maintained about the number of Homoeopathic Practitioners by the State 
Boards/Councils. With respect to Goa and Tripura, what ever information has been received is under process. 
Another problem area noticed is the considerable gap between notification  and publication of Registers. It 
seems that right from the beginning, required information is being over-delayed, followed by another prolonged 
exercise for its publication. In major ity of the States, although the Registers have been published in 1993, but 
they contain the information only for a period ranging from 1984 to 2001. 
4.7 The Committee notes that a number of steps have now been initiated for updating the Central Register of 
Homoeopathy. In the workshop of Registrars of all St ate Councils/Boards organized in October, 2006, the 
following suggestions were received:- 
 (a) Various State Homoeopathic Acts should be made uniform on the pattern of the Homoeopathy 
Central Council Act, 1973; 
 (b) Financial assistance should be given to the States for updating the Registers; 
 (c) Central Council of Homoeopathy should conduct periodical training workshops for the State 
Registrars. 
4.8 Department of AYUSH has also convened a meeting w ith some State Registrars of Indian Medicine and 
Homoeopathy on 12.2.2007 to take stock of the problems in timely maintenance of Central and State Registers. 
Following problems were identified:  
 (i) Many State Boards do not have a fulltime regu lar Registrar and requisite complement of staff to 
carry out regulatory functions,  
 (ii) There is no provision in many of the States  for re-registration and renewal of registration as a 
result of which practitioners who have died continued to be on the State Registers, 
 (iii) Many State Boards do not get requisite grants from the States for carrying out their regulatory 
functions. 
4.9 Subsequently, Secretary (AYUSH) approached all the State Chief Secretaries suggesting the following: 
 (a) To ensure that every State Board has a regular fulltime Registrar and a minimum complement of 
staff to carry out regulatory functions. 

 (b) To introduce the practice of re-registration/renewal of registration to ensure periodic updating of 
registers and to obviate the need for issue of regi stered notices to those whose name is proposed 
to be deleted. 
 (c) Charging of a reasonable fee of Rs.200 0/- for initial registration and Rs. 1000/- for  
re-registration and renewal of registration for ever y five years to make the Board self-sustaining. 
Offer of one time Central assistance to State Bo ards for updation of regi ster provided States 
ensure that regular and fulltime Registrars and minimum complement of staff is provided to the 
State Boards. 
4.10 The Committee appreciates the pro-active role adopted by the Departme nt. The Committee hopes 
that things will now improve. Howev er, constant monitoring will have to be done by the Department in 
close co-ordination with State Go vernments/Councils/Boards. The Committee would appreciate if a 
status note on the progress made during 1st quarter of 2007-08 is forwarded to it. 
4.11 The Committee understands that names of about 43500 practitioners published in 1993 are to be 
removed from the Central Register of Homoeopathy. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
progress made in this regard. 
V.  RESEARCH COUNCILS  
5.1 The four Research Councils i.e. Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, Central Council 
for Research in Unani Medicine, Central Council for Research for Homoeopathy and the Central Council for 
Research in Yoga and Naturopathy are the apex bodies for research in the concerne d systems of medicine. The 
mandate of these Councils is to initiate and guide, develop and coordinate scientific research in different aspects 
of respective systems, both fundamental and allied. The Committee notes that against an allocation of Rs. 
206.78 crore for Tenth Plan and enhanced allocation of Rs. 424.50 crore has been proposed for the Eleventh 
Plan with a substantive enhancement for all the four Research Councils. 
5.2 The Committee was informed that during the Tenth Plan, CCRAS had carried out clinical trials on 46 
formulations for 23 prioritised disease conditions and compilation of research were in respect of 15 
compilations have been completed. Another noteworth y achievement was the filing of 12 applications on 
patents and commercialization of 6 products namely AYUSH- 64, 777 Oil, AYUSH Ghutty, Bal Rasayana, 
AYUSH Poshak Yoga and Antarctica-TEAT. CCRUM ha d carried out clinical trials of 30 drugs in 
respect of 18 disease conditions, besides filing of 11 patent applications. Both these Councils have been 
declared the permanent Secretariat for Ayurveda, Pharmacopoeia Committee a nd Unani Pharmacopoeial 
Committee respectively. 8 Research Monographs have been published by the CCRH, besides undertaking a 
Pilot research study on AIDS  Prevention and Clinical Trials in Homoeopathy preparation in HIV infection. 
Lastly, the CCRYN had undertaken work for meditation of  efficacy of Yoga therapy in reversal of Coronary 
Artery disease, Irritable Bowel Syndrome, computer rela ted health problems and improvement in quality of life 
of cancer patients. 
5.3 The Committee appreciates the extensive research wo rk carried out by all the four Councils during 
the Tenth Plan period. The Committee observes that  a number of research projects when completed 
would make meaningful contribution in providing healthcare facilities to our people. The Committee 
supports the proposed enhanced al location of Rs. 424.50 crore for these Research Councils for the 
Eleventh Plan Period and hopes that all the research  projects at present under implementation will be 
brought to a logical end and also new projects will be undertaken during this period. 
VI. YOGA AND NATUROPATHY  
6.1 Yoga and Naturopathy are being widely accepted by Public and its popularity its growing day by day. Due 
to their increasing popularity, there has been enhancemen t in allocation in 2007-08 for the implementation of 
various project activities to be carried out by Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy, Morarji 
Desai National Institute of Yoga and National Instit ute of Naturopathy. The budget has been gradually 
increasing in the last five years for research and development purposes in Yoga. The Committee expresses its 
concern regarding:- 

 • regulation of education of Naturopathy 
 • regulation of training, propagation and treatment by Yoga and Naturopathy 
6.2 There are ten degree colleges of Naturopathy in th e country. The number of centres getting grants-in-aid 
from CCRYN under the Patients Care Scheme and Treatment-cum-Propagation scheme is 74. Apart from 
CCRYN aided institutions, there are about 200 privately run institutions wherein outdoor and indoor treatment 
is provided to the patients. Apart from them, there ar e about 500 privately run clinics centres of Yoga and 
Naturopathy. Due to the rising number of institutions  and Centres of Yoga and Naturopathy, regulation and 
standardization of courses and practice of Yoga and Naturopathy becomes of immense importance. 
6.3 The Committee in its earlier Repo rt had expressed its concern regard ing standardization of Naturopathy 
courses. The Committee was given to understand that Mo rarji Desai National Institute of Yoga was 
preparing draft curriculum for various courses and norms for accreditation of yoga institutions. The 
National Institute of Natu ropathy, Pune was also p reparing similar guidelines. These guidelines were to 
be circulated to the Stat es for their guidance and  enforcement. The Committee has now been given to 
understand that the guidelines on the accreditation of Naturopathy practiti oners and institutions have been 
circulated to all the States and Union Territories by the Department. The Committee would like to know 
whether any State has brought out any legislation with regard to guidelines on the accreditation of 
naturopathy practitioners and institutions. The Co mmittee also urges the Department to rethink 
seriously about the establishment of a regulatory Council for yoga and naturopathy. The Committee is of 
the opinion that the setting up of a Council would help in standardization of education and practice of 
yoga and naturopathy and benefit the public at large.  The Committee also feels that there is a need for 
wider publicity of yoga and naturopathy so that the public at large benefit from it. 
VII. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES  
NATIONAL AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, DELHI 
7.1 National Ayurveda Hospital, New Delhi is to be cons tructed as a state-of-art ayurvedic hospital which will 
promote research, discharge clinical sciences of high quality and impart PG teaching in Ayurveda. Committee 
has been monitoring the progress being made in the completio n of this prestigious project for the last few years. 
The Committee notes that initial approved outlay of Rs. 15.00 crore for Tenth Plan was enhanced to Rs. 54.00 
crore. However, the project remained in the proposal stage during the plan period, resulting in expenditure of 
only Rs. 15.10 crore. 
7.2 The Committee observes that the fo undation stone of the institute was laid on 14th February, 2004. It took 
more than a year for the proposal to be considered by EFC, i.e. in October, 2005. On a special query about the 
present status of the project, the Committee was given to understand that as per the advice of EFC, the proposal 
was to be recast so as to avoid any duplication on facilities available in National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur. It 
was also suggested that additional research and referred act ivities needed to be built in addition to the proposed 
tertiary care facilities. The proposal has been reca st as per the observations of EFC and is awaiting 
consideration by it. 
7.3 The Committee observes that an allocation of Rs. 200.00 crore has been proposed for the Institute. The 
Committee would like to point out that one plan period is over and another has started. However, it is not 
known whether final approval from  EFC could be obtained by the Department. The Committee is of  the 
firm opinion that had there been better coordina tion between the Department and the Ministry of  
Finance, such a situation would not have continued for so long. The Committee would like to point out 
that at the initial stage only, had the ground-work been done properly, the complication arising due to 
DDA demanding commercial cost of land in view of there being publ ic-private partnership could not 
have been there. The Committee fails to understand th e rationale of going for private partnership on 
public land. The Committee would like to point out that  such confusion at the initial stage has resulted in 
a delay of three years. The Committee can only emph asize that all the loose ends may be tied now and 

formal approval obtained from all concerned so that construction work starts at the earliest. The 
Committee would also appreciate if Department closely monitors the progress made in this project. 
EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS 
7.4 Expansion of AYUSH dispensaries in CGHS is a Ce ntral Sector Scheme to provide funds for establishing 
Ayurveda, Homoeopathy, Unani and Siddha dispensaries and Yoga units is being implemented with the total 
outlay of Rs. 700 lakhs for the Tenth Plan. Under this Scheme, a sum of Rs. 50.00 lakhs has been provided for 
the current financial year. Presently, number of dispensaries/units having AYUSH systems of medicine are as 
follows:- 
System of Medicine No. of Dispensaries/Units 
Homoeopathy 33 
Ayurveda 36 
Unani 10 
Siddha 03 
Yoga 04 
 New dispensaries for Ayurveda, Homoeopathy and Unani at the following locations have been 
approved:— 
 (1) Ayurveda- Delhi, Kanpur, Chandigarh 
 (2) Homoeopathy- Jabalpur, Bhopal, Chandigarh 
 (3) Unani-Bhopal 
7.5 The Committee has been given to  understand that due to financ ial constraints, not many AYUSH 
dispensaries under CGHS could be opened during the Eighth and Ninth Plan. To overcome this problem, the 
Department introduced a  scheme in the Tenth Plan to extend financ ial assistance to Dire ctor, CGHS to open 
AYUSH CGHS dispensaries. However, all the administ rative and follow up action related to opening of 
AYUSH CGHS dispensaries are to be dealt by Director , CGHS. Due to this dual control, some inherent 
constraints were being faced so far. The Department has now assured that Additional dispensaries would be 
opened before 31.03.08 provided all necessary approvals are available for opening new dispensaries. Director 
CGHS has been requested to create necessary posts of Medical Officers etc. according to staffing pattern 
prescribed by SIU. The Department has also nominated a Nodal Officer for AYUSH dispensaries to ensure 
better co-ordination and improvement in management of AYUSH dispensaries in CGHS. 
7.6 The Committee observes that again st 7 dispensaries for Ayurveda, 7 for Homoeopathy, 3 for Unani, 
2 for Siddha and 1 Yoga Centre dispensaries to be  opened, only 1 for Ayurve da, 2 for Homoeopathy and 
1 each for Unani, Sidd ha and Yoga Centre could be opened so far. In respect of 10 dispensaries, locations 
have been identified and for 5, locations are yet to be identified. However, as per the information made 
available to the Committee, for the 5 di spensaries opened/to be opened, action  is yet to be taken by CGHS for 
creation of posts. The Committee would like to emphasize that there is need for better co-ordination 
between the two authorities if creation and filling up of posts leading to opening and functioning of more 
AYUSH dispensaries under CGHS has to be effected. 
7.7 The Committee would like to draw attention of the Department towards increasing popularity of AYUSH 
in southern India especially in Kerela. None of the locations approved by the Department for opening new 
dispensaries are in the Southern region. Committee is of the view that an  Ayurveda Dispensary under the 
e x i s t i n g  s c h e m e  m a y  a l s o  b e  s e t  u p  i n  K e r e l a, preferably in Trivandrum. Hence, the Committee 
recommends that new dispensaries of  ASU&H should be opened in the Southern region so as to promote 
AYUSH all over the Country and benefit the people at large. 
AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI 

7.8 Ayurveda Hospital, New Delhi was set up in 19 78 and is meant for extending Ayurvedic treatment 
facilities to CGHS beneficiaries and several provisions. There was an initial Tenth Plan outlay of Rs. 6.50 crore. 
However, only Rs. 3.00 crore were allocated and expenditure of only Rs. 1.14 crore could be incurred by the 
end of plan period. The Committee notes that same provision not been proposed for the hospital in Eleventh 
Plan also. The Committee has been expressing its concern over the tardy progress made in the upgradation from 
25-bed capacity to 50-bed capacity for the benefit of the public. The Committee has been given to 
understand that the work of upgradation involving civil construction work is on the verge of completion. 
Also, work of repair and renovation of  the hospital is also in the process and Rs. 15.28 lakhs has been 
sanctioned. Hence, the Committee hopes that it starts functioning as soon as possible. 
7.9 The Committee has been given to  understand that major problem affecting the functioning of 
CGHS Ayurveda hospital, is the fa ct that there is dual control over the functioning of the Hospital. Even 
though the Department of AYUSH is supposed to be in ad ministrative control of the Hospital, it is the DGHS 
which still effectively has administrative control because  of its cadre controlling authority for Group ”B”, “C” 
and “D” staff and all administrative matters like the posting and transfers of staff, supply of medicine, etc. are 
also done by the DGHS. The Department has contended th at it has already referred Group “A” posts to the 
UPSC for being filled. Action to fill the remaining posts and outsourcing of other staffs is to be taken by the  
DGHS. The Committee is of the view that the Depart ment is merely shifting all the blame for non-
fulfillment of posts on the DGHS. Since the Department  has the administrative control over the Hospital, 
matter of filling up of vacant post s and outsourcing should have been  taken up with the DGHS and the 
urgency of the matter explained. Non-filling of posts of the Hospital affects the efficient functioning of the 
Hospital in delivering treatment facilities to CGHS beneficiaries. Hence, concerted efforts should be made by 
the Department in filling up of the vacant posts without playing the blame game. 
VIII. NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD 
8.1 The National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) has been set up as a follow up of recommendations of the 
Task Force on conservation and sustainable utilization of medicinal plants by Planning Commission. The main 
objective of establishing the Board is to have an agen cy at National level which would be responsible to co-
ordinate all matters relating to development of medicinal plants including drawing up policies and strategies for 
conservation, proper harvesting, cost-effective cultivation and marketing etc. of raw material in order to protect, 
sustain and develop this sector. Development of medicinal plants sector have also been taken up at 
regional/State land and uptill now 35 State Medicinal Pl ants Board have been constituted and more than 42.50 
projects have been sanctioned under 2 major schemes i.e. Promotional and Contractual Farming Scheme. 
8.2 Plan allocation for 2006-07 fo r NMPB was Rs. 50.00 crore and actua l expenditure till 28. 2.07 has been 
Rs. 41.01 crore. Plan allocation for the year 2007-08 is Rs. 80.00 crore (including Rs. 14.80 crore for North-
East region). Budgetary allocation for NMPB has been  increased keeping in view the recommendation of 
Steering Committee of Planning Commission which has also recommended an allocation of Rs. 1080 crore 
during the Eleventh Plan for the implementation of various schemes of NMPB as mentioned below:— 
 (1) Centrally sponsored scheme for cultivatio n, processing and marketing of medicinal  
Plants:— 
 (a) Implementation of new projects for cultivation of medicinal plants on about 
10,000 hectare land. 
 (b) Raising of about 8 lakh seedlings of 25 destructively harvested tree varieties. 
 (c) Setting up of seed centres for Quality Pl antation Material (QPM) in 3 States for 150 for 
traded medicinal plants species 
 (d) Setting up of Medicinal Plants processing Zones (MPPZs) in 2 States for 20 prioritized 
species. 
 (e) Supporting programmes for valu e addition, processing, marketing 
 (f) Organization of training programme s, workshops, seminars to increase 
capacity/awareness. 

 (g) Creation of Market Development Assist ance fund (MDAF) for development of brand 
and market support. 
 (2) Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, development and sustainable management of medicinal 
plants. 
 (a) In situ  conservation, sustainable management and augmentation of wild gene Pool of 
medicinal Plants through:— 
 • documentation and threat assessment for 3 States 
 • setting up of 30 medicinal plants co nservation Areas of about 200 hectare 
each for in situ conservation. 
 • 200 hectare forest/non-forest area in  15 States @ 4-5 acres per State to be 
brought under sustainable management for prioritized medicinal trees through 
JFM. 
 (b) Ex-situ conservation of prioritized medicinal plants through setting up of 20 Field 
Gene Banks (FGBs). 
 (c) Implementation of programmes, research, development and extensional activities 
including development of Good Harvesting Practices (GHPs), Good Agricultural 
Practices (GAPs), Creation of database, setting up of herbaria. 
 (d) Implementation of programmes for quality control and certification. 
 (e) Creation of awareness, programmes for extension, capacity building and setting 
up of herbal gardens in about 3000 schools. 
 (f) Providing of management  support to NMPBs/SMPBs. 
8.3 The Committee believes that these elaborate quantifiable deliverabl es outlined by the Department 
for the Eleventh Plan are overwhelming. An allocation of Rs. 1080 crore are to be used for the 
accomplishment of these above-mentioned targets. The Committee observes that these quantifiable 
deliverable given by the Department should be divided in five groups to be achieved in the five years of 
the Eleventh Plan. The Committee is unclear about what all is expected to be achieved in the current year 
2007-08. Further, the Committee recommends that:  
 (i) A detailed examination of all projects alongwit h its feasibility or viability studies should be 
undertaken. 
 (ii) Allocation for each project should be earmarked.  
 (iii) Proposals for various projects should be invited early so that the Board does not come with 
the excuse that lack of suitable proposals rece ived led to non-utilization of funds and non-
completion of projects on time. 
 (iv) Identification of States in which seed cent res for QPM are to be set up, Medicinal Plants 
processing zones are to be set up, documentation and threat assessment to be done etc. 
 (v) Concepts like Good Harvesting Practices, Good Agricultural Practices need to be 
elaborated upon so as to make the farmers aware of them leading to cultivation and  
availability of good quality medicines. 
8.4 Hence, the Committee wants to impress upon the Department that  preparatory exercises for the 
high-sounding targets must be done beforehand for the timely completion of projects and judicious and 
optimum utilization of funds. 
8.5 The Committee takes into cognizance the achievem ents of the NMPB up to 31.12.06 which entailed the 
following:— 
 • about 37,000 Hectare land covered under contractual farming scheme. 
 • about 34,000 Hectare land covered under programmes for conservation of medicinal plants. 

 • 267 project sanction ed under IEC activities 
 • 158 projects sanctioned for production of about 895.62 lacs of quality planting material 
 • implemented scheme of setting up herbal gardens in schools. 
 The Committee without any pessimism hopes that the NMPB would be able to accomplish its target 
so that sustainability and availability of Good Qu ality Medicines is assured. The Committee hence 
expects that the enhanced budgetary allocation for the NMPB stands ju stified in view of the expected 
accomplishments of tasks outlined for the NMPB. 
8.6 The Committee also takes into consideration the recommendations entailed in the Report of Indian 
Council of Forestry Research and Education, Dehradun and Indian Institute of Forest Management, 
Bhopal in strengthening the NMPB . The Committee believes that these recommended measures should 
be adhered to by the NMPB and SMPB for strengthening the Board in the various areas like linkage 
between buyers and sellers, networking for the supply of quality Planting materi al to cultivators, better 
organization structure of SMPBs and effective monitoring mechanism of SMPBs. 
8.7 The Committee is dismayed to find that the problem of pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs) 
still persists. The Committee had urged the Department to make concerted effort in this regard and the 
Department in order to tackle this problem had come up with steps like:— 
 • monitoring by the Secretary (AYUSH) in active co-ordin ation with State Health 
Secretaries, Chief Secretaries, Programme offi cers and State Health societies for proper 
utilization of funds. 
 • Release of funds of CSS to States through th e State Health Societies (SHSs) for onward 
release of funds to the implementing agencies. 
 However, there has only been slight improveme nt in the reduction in the pendency of UCs. 
8.8 As per the information given to the Committee last year and the present date the status of pendency of 
UCs for Contractual farming Scheme is as follows:  
Status of Pendency of UCs for Contractual Farming Schemes 
 Information submitted last year As per the latest information 
Scheme 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 Total 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 Total 
No. of Pending UCs 35 306 986 1327 24 321 744 1089 
Amount for which  114 368 046 1528 77.95 461.02 1421.56 1960.53 
UCs pending (in lakhs)         
Status of Pendency of UCs for Promotional Schemes.  
 Information submitted last year As per the latest information 
Scheme 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2001-02 2002-
03 
2003-04 2004-05 
No. of Pending UCs 68 59 40 97 28 19 18 85 
Amount for which  656 343 273 501 202.76 232.59 181.91 509.62 
UCs pending (in lakhs)         
8.9 In spite of reduction in the pendency of UCs, as many as 1089 UCs are pending under the Contractual 
Farming Scheme and 150 pending UCs of Promotional Schemes involving huge amount of funds. The 
Committee fails to understand the reason for the pendency of UCs. The Committee emphasizes the need 
to accelerate the process of reduction of pendency of UCs.  Funds of Centrally sponsored Schemes are to be 
released on time directly to the impl ementing agencies directly by the Stat e Health Society, there should not be 

any reason now for delay in submission of UCs. The Co mmittee has been given to understand that 225 projects 
worth Rs. 1281.20 lakhs in 2005-06 and 157 projects worth Rs. 1005.594 lakhs in 2006-07 (upto December 
2006) have been sanctioned under the Promotional Scheme. Similarly, 1231 projects worth Rs. 1606.82 lakhs in 
2005-06 and 1189 projects worth  Rs. 1728.51 in 2006-07 (up to December 2006) have been sanctioned under 
the Contractual Farming Scheme. The Committee has been given to understand that consultants from NABARD 
have been engaged to appraise the proposals received by the NMPB and also to monitor the implementation of 
the projects. 35 States and UTs have set up State Boards but some of them are not full time Boards. The 
Committee believes that ad-hocism of such kind is a hindrance. The st ate of poor infrastructure at State 
and Central level also poses problems. However, new initiatives like having State Boards/Councils, full-time 
Registrars, funds released through State Health Societ ies, monitoring mechanism etc. may help in better 
implementation and completion of projects. The Committee expects the Department to start the 
preparatory exercises for ensuring State Health Societ y in each State and a monitoring mechanism to be 
put into practice for better results. Due to new measures adopted by the Department, the Committee 
hopes that these sanctioned projects would be completed well in time with no pendency of UCs involved 
herein. The Committee has been given to understand that a Report of a consultancy organization conducting the 
study regarding status, organizational structure etc. of NMPB is still awaited. The Committee would 
appreciate if the report is submitted without any del ay so as to make clear the status and organizational 
structure of the Board. 
IX. STRENGTHENING OF PLIM  
9.1 Strengthening of Homoeopathy Pharmacopoeial Laboratory and Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian 
Medicine is a Central Sector Scheme with the objectiv e of capacity augmentation of testing of AYUSH drugs, 
through construction of separate buildings for the institutes and procurement of additional equipments and other 
infrastructure. 
9.2 The Committee has been informed that work of co nstruction of buildings is over and the completed 
buildings have been handed over to the Director, HPL/PLIM. However, the Committee is dismayed to point 
out that the post of Director, PLIM which became  vacant on 28.2.04 is st ill vacant. The Committee 
expresses its serious concern on the process followed in filling up the post of Director. The post had to be 
advertised twice but still no suit able candidate could be selected. Now the Department believes that 
upgradation of pay scale from Rs. 12000-16500/-to Rs. 18400-22500/- may help in getting a well-qualified and 
experienced person. The Department has accordingly taken up the issue with Ministry of Finance to upgrade the 
pay scale. The present situation is that the matter is pending in the Ministry of Finance. 
9.3 The Committee finds it very disturbing at the manner in which such an important matter of filling 
up the post of Director, PLIM was handled. One should not target the fact that PLIM is the nodal agency 
in the country which handles the sensitive issue of quality control of AYUSH drug. The Committee would 
like to point out that unless and until the post of Director is filled by a suitable and well- qualified person, 
one cannot hope for developing this laboratory as an  institute of international standards. The Committee 
has also been given to understand that  12 addition al posts in the grade of Scientists and others got 
created with the approval of the Ministry of Fina nce. The Committee urges the Department to make 
efforts to fill these 12 posts soon and not follow th e way the post of Director, PLIM which is still lying 
vacant. 
X. ACQUISITION OF MANUSCRIPTS AND PUBLICATION OF TEXT-BOOK/OUT POINT 
BOOKS 
10.1 The objectives of this Central sector scheme is to prepare and public good quality text book written by 
highly experienced teachers of AYUSH colleges and to  acquire, preserve and publish manuscripts and out of 
point books which will provide easy access on the manuscripts of ISM. 
10.2 Budget allocation for this scheme in the year 2006-07 was Rs. 0.25 crore which was reduced to Rs. 0.15 
crore at RE stage. Reduction at the RE stage wa s because of less number of proposals received. The 
Committee takes note of the fact that actual expenditure as on 28.2.07 has been nil. Rs. 1.25 crore have 

been provided for 2007-08. The Commi ttee is unclear about how this allocation of  Rs. 1.25 crore would 
be spent in the current year when one takes note of the trend of non-utilization of funds in the last year. 
10.3 The Committee has been informed that various agen cies/institutions/organization have been given grant 
under this scheme to compile, translate, publish etc. the rare books and manuscripts from  
2003-04 onwards. A perusal of the present status if funds released under this scheme so far indicates that very 
few text books/manuscripts have been published so far. In majority of the cases, either the work has in the 
initial stages or Hindi version is under progress. On a specific inquiry in this regard, the 
Committee was given to understand that no time frame is given to complete the proposals under this 
scheme. The Committee finds that giving no time fram e for any project is uncalled for and would lead to 
non-completion of projects, as there would not be  any hurry or seriousne ss to complete the task. The 
Committee notes that the Department now has decided to revise the guidelines of the time to include a time 
frame for completing the work. The Committee is of the opinion that this revision of guidelines for having a 
time frame for completion of projects should be  expedited to avoid pending and incomplete tasks 
defeating the very purpose and objective of the Scheme. 
10.4 The Committee is surprised to note that the Depart ment does not have at present its own set up for 
keeping the manuscripts. The Committee has been informed  that peripheral units of AYUSH research councils 
have undertaken the task of acquisition and preservation of manuscripts. The Department also proposes to have 
collaboration with National Manuscripts Mission for Systematic preservation of Manuscripts. The Committee 
is not impressed with these temporary arrangements of the Department. However, collaboration with 
National Manuscripts Mission would be a fruitful step . The Committee opines that the very objective of 
the Scheme would be defeated if these rare manuscr ipts are acquired but not preserved properly. The 
Committee emphasizes the importance of these rare manuscripts and books which, if preserved properly, 
would really benefit the students, teachers and research scholars of ISM. 
XI. NORTH-EASTERN INSTITUTE OF AYUSH / FOLK MEDICINE  
11. The Committee has been given to understand that the North Eastern Institute of Folk Medicine will be 
established at Passighat, Arunachal Pradesh and North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy at 
Shillong. The Committee has been given to understand that approval of CCEA/EFC and Planning Commission 
is awaited for the set up of these Institutes. The Committee had recommended in its earlier Report that 
preparatory exercises should be started based on the Detailed Project Report (DPR). The Committee is 
interested in knowing what preparatory exercises have  been done by the Department for setting up of 
these two Institutes. The Committee hopes the construction activities of both the Institutes would start in 
full swing once they get the required approval. 
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES 
XII. DEVELOPMENT OF AYUSH INSTITUTIONS  
12.1 This Centrally sponsored Scheme for develo pment of AYUSH institutions has the following 
components:— 
 (i) Development of AYUSH UG colleges (financial assistance to the tune of Rs. 566.90 lakh was 
provided to 18 colleges till 30.9.06.) 
 (ii) Assistance to PG medical Education (Assistance  of Rs. 70.84 lakhs was sanctioned to 2 colleges 
till 30.9.06). 
 (iii) Re-orientation Training Programme for AYUSH Personnel (Assistance of Rs. 22.36 lakhs has 
been released for organizing ROTP and CME programme to 11 institutions by 30.9.06.) 
 (iv) Renovation and strengthening  of AYUSH teaching hospitals. (One time financial assistance upto 
Rs. 20 lakh per hospital under scheme for Govt. institutions and Rs. 10.00 lakhs for govt. aided 
institutions.) 
 (v) Establishment of Computer Laboratory in selected AYUSH Colleges- assistance of Rs. 10.00 
lakhs to each PG AYUSH college). 

 (vi) Upgradation of academic institutions to the status of State Model Institute of Ayurveda/ 
Siddha/Unani/Homoeopathy. (In 2006-07, total assistance of Rs. 625.00 lakhs has been provided 
to 4 institutions by 30.9.06.) 
12.2 BE 2006-07 for this scheme was Rs. 50.01 crore which was reduced substantially to Rs. 25.01 crores at 
the RE stage. Actual expenditure till 28.2.07 was Rs. 23.34 crore. Reduction at the RE stage was because of low 
expenditure due to pending/incomplete UCs and lack of adequate number of fresh proposals. The Committee 
has taken note of the fact that as per the records till 31.12.06, 341 UCs are pending involving an amount of Rs. 
6304.97 lakhs. The erring States with maximum number of pending UCs are Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, 
Orissa, U.P., Kerala, Karnataka etc. However, the Committee takes into cognizance the result of clearing of 
pending UCs. Uptill 28.2.07, 130 UCs worth  Rs. 1942. 04 lakhs have been cleare d. This means that there 
are still 211 pending UCs worth  Rs. 4362.93 lakhs. The Committee reiterates that the pending UCs be 
cleared as soon as possible taking into consideration the Department’s initiatives of online monitoring of 
funds and pending UCs so that there is optimum utilization of funds and completion of projects in time. 
12.3 The Committee observes that when achievement of physical targets set for the Tenth Plan are 
considered as a whole, the results are not satisfactory for schemes like ROTP, Renovation and 
Strengthening of hospital wards of Government/Government aided teaching hospitals of ISM &H and 
establishment of computer laboratories in ISM&H Colleges as mentioned below:— 
Development and upgradation of AYUSH institutions/colleges 
Name of the Activities/Schemes Physical Target Physical   
 for 10th Plan Achievements 
  for 10th Plan 
Development of ISM and HUG colleges. 140-150 170 
Assistance to PG Medical Education. 30-35 42 
Re-orientation Training Programme for ISM& H personnel 250-260 178 
Renovation and Strengthening of hospital wards of  70-80 35 
Government/Government aided teaching hospitals of ISM&H.   
Establishment of Computer Laboratory in ISM and H colleges. 240-250 21 
Upgradation of academic institutes to the status of State Model 25-30 31  
Institute of Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani/Homoeopathy.   
12.4 Further, the Committee while analyzing the achievem ents of physical targets set for the year 2006-
07 found the results to be dissatisfactory as mentioned below:—  
Main Activities Components Physical   Physical 
  Targets Achievements 
  2006-07 2006-07 
1. Development of AYUSH UCs colleges 60-65 26 
2. Assistance to PG Medical Education 15-18 2 
3. R.O.T.P/CME for AYUSH personnel 110-120 13 
4.  Renovation and strengthening of Hospital wards  12-15 2 
 of Teaching Hospit al of AYUSH.   
5. Up-gradation of Academic Institutes to the status of State    
 Model Institute of Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani/Homoeopathy 15-20 6 
6. Establishment of computer Laboratory in selected AYUSH Colleges 10-15 - 
12.5 The Committee is of the opinion that the outcome or accomplishment of the physical targets when 
taken for the entire 10th Plan gives a mixed picture, the level of achievement of targets set for the various 

components within the scheme for the year 2006-07 is highly dissatisfactory. The Committee was under 
the impression that the components in their re vised form was being closely monitored. However,  instead 
of the expected improvement in the achievement level, the results have been otherwise. 
12.6 The Committee’s attention has been drawn to the Evaluation Study of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
by M/s A.F. Ferguson. The study was based on an indicative sample conversing 160 units across 17 States in 
the country. The study identified various problems in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes implemented by the 
Department like delays in the release of funds by the State Finance Departments to the beneficiaries, lack of 
interest and support by the State Govts. absence of a MIS for monitoring the schemes at the Central level, 
insufficient flexibility in implementation in some aspect s of the schemes etc. The Department has alleged that 
these delays in the release of funds are on account of weak administrative infrastructure for AYUSH in the State 
and budgetary constraints of the States. The Committee has been informed about the problems identified by 
the Ferguson Commission but not about the recommendations given by it. The Committee has been given 
to understand that from 2007-08, funds would now be released through State Health Societies. An 
effective area Officer System and online monitoring of Central Grants and Pending UCs is to be 
introduced soon. The Committee however, wonders ab out the preliminary exercises initiated for having 
State Health Societies. The Committee is hopeful that these preliminary exercises are done before hand to 
avoid delays in release of funds and lead to better implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes like 
Development of AYUSH institutions. 
XIII. AYUSH HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES AND NRHM 
13.1 Centrally sponsored Scheme of AYUSH Hospitals andDispensaries provides extending AYUSH facilities 
and health care in allopathic hospitals and supply of  essential AYUSH medicines in State dispensaries. This 
Scheme has been subsumed under NRHM to facilitate AYUSH services within the primary health network of 
PHCs, CHCs and District Hospitals as per the road map of mainstreaming of AYUSH. 
13.2 The Committee has been informed of  the achievements of this scheme in 2006-07 as given below:- Total 
number of 13,673 of dispensaries/units located in rural and backward/remote areas were provided funds for 
essential drugs during 2006-2007 (upto 28.2.2007). This includes 11731 dispensaries of Ayurveda, 1247 of 
Homoeopathy, 686 of Unani and 9 dispensaries of Siddha. 
13.3 During 2006-07 an amount of Rs. 76.33 crore has been sanctioned to the States to set up AYUSH wing in 
76 District Hospitals, Specialized AYUSH therapy centers in 31 allopathic hospitals and AYUSH clinics in 726 
PHCs, CHCs and other allopathic hospitals. 
13.4 Financial support of Rs. 35.77 crore was provided to  the States for procurement of medicines for 14332 
AYUSH dispensaries. 
13.5 The Committee notes that apart from these achiev ements of the Department in 2006-07, utilization 
of funds has been more or less satisfactory during the entire Tenth Plan. 
13.6 During the Eleventh Plan (including 2006-07) the component of Dispensaries with a provision of Rs. 
45.00 crore was also included under NRHM. This explai ns the increase in the provision for AYUSH Hospitals 
and Dispensaries under National Rural Health Mission  during 2007-08. The Committee has been given to 
understand that the Department would be in a position to  utilize an amount of Rs. 120.00 crore (including Rs. 
12.00 crore for the North East Region ) during 2007-08 as during the year i.e. 2006-07 about Rs. 100.00 crore 
has already been released for Hospitals and Dispensaries and in addition to this, an amount of Rs. 25.00 crore 
has been released for North-Eastern States. 
13.7 BE for 2007-08 for this Centrally Sponsored Scheme  is Rs. 108.00 crore. The Department has given an 
outcome of quantifiable deliverables for both AYUSH hosp itals and dispensaries to be achieved by the end of 
March, 2008 as mentioned below:- 
 Scheme For Ayush Hospitals  

 • establishment of 190 speciality clinics 
 • establishment of 100 ISM&H wings in allopathic hospitals 
 • setting up of 50 Regimental therapy like panchakarma etc. (poly clinics) 
 Scheme For Ayush Dispensaries  
 • to provide financial assistance to Rs. 55 crore to State Government for essential drugs. 
 • establishments of 30 units of ISM and H polyclinics. 
 • establishment of 315 units of specialists clinics of ISM&H. 
 • setting up of 75 units of ISM wi ngs in Govt. District Hospitals. 
 • supply of essential drugs including medicinal kits. 
13.8 The Committee expects that these quantifiable deliverable are achieved by the Department by 
March end 2008 as promised. Subsuming these schemes into NRHM will make available the treatment 
facilities to the several public in th e allopathic hospitals thereby giving an alternative choice to patients. 
This will also provide financial assistance to Stat e Governments for essential drugs which will help in 
ameliorating the situation of short supply of drugs of ISM&H dispensaries in states thereby benefiting 
the people at large. The Committee has been given to  understand that the sub-scheme for the supply of 
drugs to AYUSH dispensaries has been found to be useful and beneficial for the people but the financial 
assistance of Rs. 25, 000 per dispensary has been found to be inadequate and in proposed to be revised. 
The Committee recommends this revision of financial a ssistance for this sub-scheme be done soon so that 
enhanced funds can be allocated for the utmost success of this scheme. 
13.9 The Committee observes that the number of pendi ng UCs for this Centrally Sponsored Scheme as on  
31.12.06 was 107 involving an amount of Rs. 13428.54 lakhs. However, the number of pending UCs was 
substantially reduced to 37 involving a sum of Rs . 2149.70 lakhs as 70 UCs were cleared till 28.2.07. The 
Committee appreciates the efforts of  the Department in clearing of pending UCs and hopes that 
pendency of UCs would not be a hindrance in the successful implementation of these schemes.  
XIV. DRUGS QUALITY CONTROL 
14.1 Quality Control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy Drugs is a Centrally Sponsored scheme 
with the following objectives:- 
 • Strengthening and establishing of Drug Testing Laboratories (DTLs) 
 • Strengthening and establishing of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathic Pharmacies of the 
State Government/UTs for manufacturing quality Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy 
drugs. 
 • Strengthening of State Drug Controll ers of ASU and H Enforcement Mechanism. 
 • To provide assistance to Ayurveda, Siddha andUnani (ASU) drug manufacturing Units to 
improve their infrastructure to meet Good Manufacturing Pr actices (GMP) Schedule “T” 
equivalent. 
14.2 BE 2006-07 for this Centrally Sponsored Scheme was Rs. 11.00 crore which was reduced to Rs. 7.00 
crore at the RE stage due to lack of adequate number of proposals. Actual expenditure till 28.2.07 has been Rs. 
7.94 crore. BE 2007-08 for this Scheme has been Rs. 10.00 crore (including al location for No rth-Eastern 
Region). The Committee has been reiteratin g the need for increasing the qu antum of financial assistance 
under this component so that GMP compliant manufacturing units have their own quality control lab for 
testing of heavy metals. The Committee has been given to understa nd that the Department has proposed to 
increase the assistance from Rs. 5.00 1akhs to Rs. 50.00 lakhs to GMP compliant units having a turnover up to 
25 crore in the Eleventh Plan. The Committee appreciates this propos al of the Department in enhancing 

assistance to GMP compliant units. The Committee also has been informed that Department is taking urgent 
action to strengthen State Drug Tes ting Laboratories, by enhancing grants-in-aid upto Rs. 150.00 lakh to each 
Drug Testing Laboratory. Apart from this, Private Drug Testing Laboratories are also being recognized for the 
testing of 
ASU drugs. However, the Committee recommends for enhanced budgetary outlay for this Scheme, as the 
present allocation of Rs. 10.00 crore seems inadequate. 
14.3 The Committee observes that as on 31.12.06, 150 UCs were pending for this Scheme involving a sum 
of Rs. 4856.95 lakhs. The Committee however, apprecia tes the Department for substantial clearance of 
UCs in the next two months and as per the records on 28.02.07, only 33 UCs were pending involving a 
sum of Rs. 1394.28 lakhs. 
14.4 The Committee has observed that the physical targets of Tenth Plan for this Scheme has been 
satisfactory but the Committee is of the opinion that due to the critical importance of this scheme, special 
focus of the Department on this Scheme is required  to ensure Drug Quality Control and prevent the 
usage of spurious drugs. The Committee has been given to understand that out of 9000 units, 
approximately 4000 units are GMP compliant. The Committee believes that serious efforts are to be 
continued for making all remaining 5000 units GMP compliant. Non-GMP compliance units have been 
issued show cause notices and their licenses have not been renewed. Also, the quantifiable deliverables outlined 
by the Department to be achieved by March 2008 are setting up of 5 DTLS, 5 pharmacies, 5 enforcement 
mechanism and 20 GMP units. The Committee hopes that the Department  is able to achieve these within 
the stipulated time period. 
14.5 The Committee has been given to understand that the Department of AYUSH has initiated a research 
project under the Golden Triangle Project in collaboration with the Central Council for Research in Ayurveda 
and Siddha (CCRAS), Council of Scientific and Industri al Research (CSIR) and Indian Council of Medical 
Research (ICMR) for physiochemical characterization and safety study of 8 most widely used Bhasmas (herbo- 
metallic compounds) prepared in accordance with the cl assical texts. The Committee would like to know when 
this research project is likely to be completed. 
14.6 The Secretary in her presentation assured the Comm ittee that Department is dealing with the problem of 
poor quality of AYUSH drugs by focusing on:- 
 (i) Strengthening the State Drug Testing Laboratori es both in terms of infrastructure and also in 
terms of enforcement. 
 (ii) Supporting State Govt. with enha ncing the quality of drug testing. 
 (iii) Building a system where certain private labora tories which are accredited to NABL standards can 
do the task. 
14.7 The Committee has been informed that in order to protect the health andsafety of the public against 
hazardous products, the Department of AYUSH has streng thened 29 State Drug Testing Laboratories, and also 
approved 26 Private Drug Testing Laboratories and NABL Accredited Laboratories for testing of A.S.U. drugs. 
Random testing of ASU medicines has been introduced by PLIM, Ghaziabad. The Department of AYUSH has 
also introduced mandatory testing of heavy metals for Arsenic, Lead, Mercury and Cadmium in all purely 
herbal Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs for export purposes w.e.f 1st January, 2006 to ensure that medicine 
which are to be exported do not contain any heavy meta l by way of contamination. There should be proper 
labeling, packing and display of all ingredients on the label/ container or leaflet inserted in the container 
alongwith the quantities contained in the herbal medicine. The Committee would like to know about the 
feedback if received during 2006 after the introduction of mandatory testing to heavy metals for AYUSH 
drugs for export purposes. The Committee also has been informed by the Department that the Export 
Inspection Council has been asked by the Department to introduce export certification for monitoring of 
AYUSH drugs for export purposes ensuring their quality control. The Committee believes that the 
Department should move cautiously as the same Council was entrusted with the job of quality control for 

marine products for export purposes and result wa s not positive. The Committee  is also unclear about 
the role of Pharmexcel for the promotion of ASU drug exports.  
14.8 The Committee is still awaiting the decision of the Department regarding introduction of 
mandatory’ testing for heavy metals for AYUSH dr ugs for domestic consumption. The Committee would 
like to know the reason for delay in introducing such a mechanism for domestic usage of AYUSH drugs. 
14.9 On a specific query about any mechanism for inspection of both private and State Drug Testing Labs, the 
Committee has been informed that State Drug Testing Labs are controlled by the State authorities and 
inspection is carried out by them only and not by the Central team. Reports are sent to State Govt. and not to the 
Central Government As regards the inspection of private Drug Testing Labs, inspection is carried out by a joint 
team of inspection from the State Government and th e Central Government as per the Drugs and Cosmetic 
rules. The Inspectors appointed by the Central Government  are supposed to send th eir Reports to the Central 
Government and also to the approving authority. The Committee opines that in vi ew of the fact that state 
and private drugs testing labs are provided financial assistance by the Central Government, it would be 
proper if the Central Government along with the St ate Government monitors th e proper functioning of 
these labs. Further, Committee would also like to know whether any Inspection Reports of inspectors 
conducted were received by the Central Government during 2006-07. 
XV. MISCELLANEOUS  
15.1 Last year, Committee had drawn the attention of the Department toward the increasing popularity of 
Tibetan Medicine. The Committee has been informed that  a Bill for recognition of new medicinal systems is 
likely to be introduced in Parliament. 
15.2 The Committee would like  to emphasize that Tibetan System of Medicine is practiced at many 
places and is not confined to J&K or Leh and a Region al Institute for it at Leh will not address the issue 
properly. There are few good Institutes of Tibetan Medicine  in the Country like the Institute of Tibetan 
Medicine in Patna. The Committee recommends that the Inst itutes like this should be given due 
importance and funds allocated for proper development and promotion of Tibetan System of Medicine. 
 

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
II. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
2.1 The Committee notes that proposed outlay of Rs. 4102.75 crore for Eleventh Plan shows a manifold 
increase. While welcoming this enhanced allocation , the Committee would like to point out that the 
Department has to keep pace with the same by making optimum and judicious utilization. (Para 2.1) 
 Inspite of overall utilization position of allocated funds during the Tenth plan being satisfactory, the 
Committee on reviewing the trend of utilization of  funds scheme-wise, finds that allocated funds 
remained under-utilized in some areas. These very schemes have re ceived higher allo cation during the 
Eleventh plan also. 
 Details given below are self revealing: - 
(Rs. in crore) 
Name Initial 10th Plan Actual BE  Financial Eleventh Plan 
 Approved outlay  received  Achievement  Allocation 
Educational Institutions 116.50 147.75 130.36 189.50 
Hospital and Dispensaries 28.94 61.69 17.49 213.50 
Strengthening of 
pharmacopoeial labs 
26.50 36.17 10.33 27.50 
  (Para 2.3) 
 The Committee is also constrained to note that th e physical targets set for the Tenth Plan could not 
be achieved under some schemes as mentioned below:- 
Sl. Name Physical Target Achievement 
No.    
1 2 3 4 
1. Strengthening of 314 compound ASU formulations  75 compound ASU formulations 
 Pharmacopoeial  allocated to 16 labs for development found suitable for final approval 
 Committee on ASU of pharmacopoeial standa rds and  and 114 formulations are in the 
  shelf-life studies. pipeline. Work on the remaining 125 
   formulations is in progress. 
  Authentication of 47 mineral and  Work on 10 minerals and metal 
  metals raw drugs completed. Other remaining  
   minerals and metals are under study. 
2. Expansion of CGHS Opening of 7 Ayurvedic,  One Ayurveda, 2 Homoeopathic, 1 
 Dispensaries 7 Homoeopathic, 3 Unani, 2 Siddha  Unani, 1 Siddha dispensary and 1 
  dispensaries and  2 Yoga centres  Yoga centre were established during 
  under CGHS Tenth Plan. 
3. Ayurveda Hospital,  Upgradation of the Hospital The hospital has been upgraded 
 Lodhi Road,   from 25 bed capacity to 50 bed 
 New Delhi  capacity for the benefit of the 
   public. For this purpose civil 
   construction work is being carried 
   out and the work is on the verge 
   of completion. 
  Filling up the posts of Doctors  Six posts of Doctors are being filled 
  and paramedical staffs which have  up on regular basis. 
  been created newly for the hospital.   

4. PLIM, Ghaziabad   
 (a) Survey and  30 20 (Short due to one vehicle is out 
  Collection tour  of order from last so many years) 
 (b) Strengthening of  Creation of additional posts 12 additional posts in the grade of 
  PLIM / HPL  Scientists and other got created 
    with approval of Ministry of 
   Finance. 
5. Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha 
 Literary Research   
 (a) Studies on drugs    
  and diseases 8 3 
 (b) Books/ Monographs/   
  journals 33 19 
  (Para 2.4) 
 The Committee is of the firm view  that such a position clearly in dicates that NE Region remained 
unaffected by the advancements made under AYUSH during the Tenth Plan. The Committee is not 
aware about the level of funds ea rmarked for N.E region during the Eleventh Plan. The Committee 
would, however, emphasize that every conceivable measure is required to be taken so as to ensure that 
the experience of Tenth Plan is not repeated during the Eleventh Plan. (Para 2.5) 
 The Committee would impress upon the Department to finalise these new schemes, if not already 
done, so that they can be implemented at the earliest  from the very first year of the Eleventh Plan. The 
Committee has been given to understand that Department  is in the process of obtaining administrative 
and financial approval for new and revised Central Sector and Centrally sponsored Schemes. The 
Committee would appreciate if this process is expedited and the new schemes are launched at the earliest.   
  (Para 2.6) 
 The Committee feels that this is a step in the righ t direction, as absorption capacity of States is 
required to be increased and th e enforcement of Drugs and Cosmetic s Act, 1944 and regulation of 
AYUSH institutions is also to be ensured. Th e Committee recommends that this matter should be 
pursued with all the concerned States at regular interval to have the desired results. (Para 2.7) 
 The Committee is happy to note that the position is being constantly reviewed with the State 
Directorates and matter is also being taken up at the highest administrative level, as and when required. 
The Committee hopes that with such co-ordinated meas ures, the Department will be able to contain the 
number of outstanding UCs, increase in the fund allocation notwithstanding. (Para 2.8) 
III. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS  
National Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur 
 The Committee is hopeful that thes e set targets would be achieved by the Institute and there would 
be optimum and judicious utilizations of funds for the above-mentioned purposes. (Para 3.2) 
 The Committee expresses its serious concern on th e status of vacancies in teaching posts in a 
premier Institute of Ayurveda. Inspite of CAG observations, situation has not improved, rather 
worsened. The Committee has been observing that due to court cases, vacancies continue to exist for a 
very long period. The Committee would like to point out that prolonged vacancies, that too of as many as 
23 posts cannot be considered satisfactory at any co st for a teaching institution. The Committee hopes 
that selection process for 7 posts of Professor and A ssociate Professor must have been over and selected 
candidates must have joined. For th e remaining 16 posts, concerted effo rts need to be made for getting 
the High Court stay vacated, wherever applicab le and expedite the recruitment procedure. The 
Committee is also of the view that  there is a need for review of exis ting selection process/recruitment 

procedure so as to make the same foolproof and expeditious. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Department should take up this matter with the Institute authority. (Para 3.5) 
RASHTRIYA AYURVEDA VIDYAPEETH, DELHI 
 The Committee takes note of the observation ma de in the Performance Audit of Department of 
AYUSH of 2000-01 to 2004-05 by CAG that CCIM did not recognize the courses run by the RAV. 
  (Para 3.7) 
 The Committee is of the opinion that imparting traditional Ayurvedic knowledge is the end goal of 
RAV and imparting this knowledge through the trad itional method of Guru-Shishya Parampara is the 
means to that end. The Committee opines that RAV m ay not confer degree but this exercise can be made 
more authentic if the courses run by RAV are rec ognized by CCIM leading to systematic, orderly and 
authentic dissemination of Traditional Ayurvedic knowledge through its Guru-Shishya Parampara. The 
Committee does not understand th e reluctance of the Department in recognizing RAV courses which 
would not in any way dilute the objectives of the RAV. (Para 3.8) 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY (NIH), KOLKATA 
 The Committee is constrained to observe that the phy sical target for Tenth plan for this Institute to 
increase the bed capacity from 60 to 100 has not been completed. The Committee has been given to 
understand that this 60 bedded hospital is now proposed to be expanded to 250 bedded hospital in view of 
the additional requirements for increase in seats on account of 27 pe r centreservations for OBC, creation 
of new PG faculties and provision of seats for BIMSTEC countries.  
 The Committee is doubtful about the timely completi on of these projects, as  even after the end of 
the Tenth Plan, the 60-hedded hospital could not be expanded to 100-bedded one. The Committee 
however, hopes that during the Eleventh plan, this long pending project would be completed in a time-
bound manner, under close monitoring by the Department as well as the Institute authorities. (Para 3.10) 
 The Committee is perturbed regarding the way the selection of Director of NIH has been handled so 
far.  (Para 3.11) 
 The Committee is specially disturbed by the fact that there was a CBI case against the  
Ex-Director also which led to his suspension. The Committee does not understand the basis for selecting a 
candidate against whom a vigilance case is pendin g. The Committee wonders whether the appointing 
authority was aware of these details of the candidate or not. Moreover, the Committee would like to 
know the reasons for undue delay in the disposal of Inquiry Report. The Committee hopes that the case is 
expedited soon so that the post of Director is filled  to avoid a situation which allows running of a premier 
Institute like NIH, Kolkata without the supervision of Institutional head. (Para 3.12) 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF UNANI MEDICINE, BANGALORE 
 The Committee is, however, constrained to obs erve that the enhanced provision remained under 
utilized. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon th e Department to make concerted efforts to get the 
2nd phase of construction completed during 2007- 08. Whatever bottleneck, have  been experienced in 
getting the works completed in time, should be got removed, in close coordination with the Institute 
authorities. At no cost, allocated funds remaining unutilized like in 2005-06 and 2006-07, should be 
allowed to be repeated in 2007-08. It is high time that NIUM moves towards it s objective of becoming a 
center of excellence for the development and propagation of Unani system of medicine. (Para 3.14) 
IV. STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS  
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF INDIAN MEDICINE 
 The Committee is constrained that this work does not find any place under the physical targets set 
for the Council for 2007-08. Report on modernization of Under Graduate education including restricting 
of syllabus is to be taken up during 2007-08 in stead. The Committee can only recommend that the 
process of modernization/review of both Under Grad uate and Post Graduate AYUSH courses should be 

completed in a time- bound manner. This is required to  be accomplished on an urgent basis, keeping in 
view increasing acceptance of AYUSH system of medicine both in the country and aboard. (Para 4.2) 
 Committee has been continuously expressing its co ncern on the undue delay in updation of Central 
Register of Indian Medicine. Latest status made av ailable to the Committee reveals that position is 
deteriorating with the pass age of each year. This is indeed a sorry state of affairs. The Department 
cannot escape by taking the plea that maintenance and updating of Central Register of Indian Medicine 
is the statutory responsibility of the Central Council. (Para 4.3) 
 The Committee is happy to note that all the Chie f Secretaries have been asked to get a regular 
fulltime Registrar posted in all the State Boards wi th minimum complementary staff. One time financial 
assistance is also to be given on the condition that State Boards are made functioning. The Committee 
feels that the steps initiated by the Department we re long overdue. The Committ ee would appreciate if 
the process started by the Department is brought to its logical end. (Para 4.4) 
CENTRAL COUNCIL OF HOMOEOPATHY, NEW DELHI 
 The Committee had been reiterating on timely updation of Central Register by identifying the 
bottlenecks in the process. (Para 4.6) 
 The Committee appreciates the pro-active role adopted by the Departme nt. The Committee hopes 
that things will now improve. Howev er, constant monitoring will have to be done by the Department in 
close co-ordination with State Govts./Councils/Boards.  The Committee would appreciate if a status note 
on the progress made during 1st quarter of 2007-08 is forwarded to it. (Para 4.10) 
 The Committee understands that names of about 43500 practitioners published in 1993 are to be 
removed from the Central Register of Homoeopathy. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
progress made in this regard. (Para 4.11) 
V.  RESEARCH COUNCILS  
 The Committee appreciates the extensive research wo rk carried out by all the four Councils during 
the Tenth Plan period. The Committee observes that  a number of research projects when completed 
would make meaningful contribution in providing health care facilities to our people. The Committee 
supports the proposed enhanced allocation of Rs.424.50 crore fo r these Research Councils for the 
Eleventh Plan Period and hopes that all the research projects at present under implementation will be 
brought to a logical end and also new projects will be undertaken during this period. (Para 5.3) 
VI. YOGA AND NATUROPATHY  
 The Committee expresses its concern regarding:— 
 • regulation of education of Naturopathy 
 • regulation of training, propagation and treatment by yoga and Naturopathy 
   (Para 6.1) 
 The Committee was given to understand that Mo rarji Desai National Institute of Yoga was 
preparing draft curriculum for various courses and norms for accreditation of Yoga institutions. The 
National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune was also preparing similar gu idelines. These guidelines were to 
be circulated to the States for their guidance and enforcement. 
 The Committee would like to know whether any State has brought out any legislation with regard 
to guidelines on the accreditation of Naturopathy practitioners and institutions. The Committee also 
urges the Department to rethink s eriously about the establishment of a regulatory Council for Yoga and 
Naturopathy. The Committee is of the opinion that the setting up of a Council would help in 
standardization of education and practice of Yoga a nd Naturopathy and benefit the public at large. The 
Committee also feels that there is a need for wider publicity of yoga and naturopathy so that the public at 
large benefit from it. (Para 6.3) 

VII. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES  
NATIONAL AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, DELHI 
 The Committee would like to point out that one plan period is over and another has started. 
However, it is not known whether final approval from  EFC could be obtained by the Department. The 
Committee is of the firm opinion that had there been better  coordination between the Department and 
the Ministry of Finance, such a situation would not have continued for so long. The Committee would like 
to point out that at the initial stage only, had th e ground-work been done properly, the complication 
arising due to DDA demanding commercial cost of land  in view of there being public-private partnership 
could not have been there. The Committee fails to understand the rationale of going for private 
partnership on public land. The Committee would like to point out that such confusion at the initial stage 
has resulted in a delay of three years. The Committee ca n only emphasize that a ll the loose ends may be 
tied now and formal approval obtained from all co ncerned so that construction work starts at the 
earliest. The Committee would also ap preciate if Department closely mo nitors the progress made in this 
project. (Para 7.3) 
EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS 
 The Committee observes that again st 7 dispensaries for Ayurveda, 7 for Homoeopathy, 3 for Unani, 
2 for Siddha and 1 Yoga Centre dispensaries to be  opened, only 1 for Ayurve da, 2 for Homoeopathy and 
1 each for Unani, Siddha and Yoga Centre could be  opened so far. The Committee would like to 
emphasize that there is need for better co-ordination between the two authorities if creation and filling up 
of posts leading to opening and functioning of more AYUSH dispensaries under CGHS has to be effected.  
  (Para 7.6) 
 Committee is of the view that an Ayurveda Dispensary under the existing scheme may also be set up 
in Kerela, preferably in Trivandrum. Hence, the Committee recommends that new dispensaries of ASU 
and H should be opened in the Southern region so as to promot e AYUSH all over the Country and 
benefit the people at large. (Para 7.7) 
AYURVEDA HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI 
 The Committee has been given to understand that the work of upgradation involving civil 
construction work is on the verge of completion. Also, work of repair and renovation of the hospital is 
also in the process and Rs. 15.28 lakhs has been sanc tioned. Hence, the Committee hopes that it starts 
functioning as soon as possible. (Para 7.8) 
 The Committee has been given to  understand that major problem affecting the functioning of 
CGHS Ayurveda hospital, is the fact that there is dual control over the functioning of the Hospital.  
 The Committee is of the view that the Department is merely shifting all the blame for non-fulfilment 
of posts on the DGHS. Since the Department has the administrative control over the Hospital, matter of 
filling up of vacant posts and outsourcing should have  been taken up with the DGHS and the urgency of 
the matter explained. Non-filling of posts of the Hospital affects the efficient functioning of the Hospital in 
delivering treatment facilities to CGHS beneficiaries. Hence, concerted efforts should be made by the 
Department in filling up of the vacant posts without playing the blame game. (Para 7.9) 
VIII. NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD 
 The Committee believes that these elaborate quanti fiable deliverables outlined by the Department 
for the Eleventh Plan are overwhelming. 
 The Committee observes that th ese quantifiable deliverable given by the Department should be 
divided in five groups to be achieved in the five years of the Eleventh Plan. The Committee is unclear 
about what all is expected to be achieved in the current year 2007-08. Further, the Committee 
recommends that:  
 (i) A detailed examination of all projects along with its feasibility or viability studies should be 
undertaken. 

 (ii) Allocation for each project should be earmarked.  
 (iii) Proposals for various projects should be invited early so that the Board does not come with 
the excuse that lack of suitable proposals rece ived led to non-utilization of funds and non-
completion of projects on time. 
 (iv) Identification of States in which seed cent res for QPM are to be set up, Medicinal Plants 
processing zones are to be set up, documentation and threat assessment to be done etc. 
 (v) Concepts like Good Harvesting Practices, Good Agricultural Practices need to be 
elaborated upon so as to make the farmers aware of them leading to cultivation and  
availability of good quality medicines. 
   (Para 8.3) 
 Hence, the Committee wants to impress upon the Department that  preparatory exercises for the 
high-sounding targets must be done beforehand for the timely completion of projects and judicious and 
optimum utilization of funds. (Para 8.4) 
 The Committee without any pessimism hopes that the NMPB would be able to accomplish its target 
so that sustainability and availability of Good Qu ality Medicines is assured. The Committee hence 
expects that the enhanced budgetary allocation for the NMPB stands ju stified in view of the expected 
accomplishments of tasks outlined for the NMPB. (Para 8.5) 
 The Committee also takes into consideration the rec ommendations entailed in the Report of Indian 
Council of Forestry Research and Education, Dehradun and Indian Institute of Forest Management, 
Bhopal in strengthening the NMPB . The Committee believes that these recommended measures should 
be adhered to by the NMPB and SMPB for strengthening the Board in the various areas like linkage 
between buyers and sellers, networking for the supply of  quality Planting material to cultivators, better 
organization structure of SMPBs and effective monitoring mechanism of SMPBs. (Para 8.6) 
 The Committee is dismayed to find that the problem of pendency of Utilization Certificates (UCs) 
still persists. The Committee had urged the Department to make concerted effort in this regard and the 
Department in order to tackle this problem had come up with steps like:- 
 • Monitoring by the Secretary (AYUSH) in ac tive co-ordination with State Health 
Secretaries, Chief Secretaries, Programme offi cers and State Health societies for proper 
utilization of funds. 
 • Release of funds of CSS to States through th e State Health Societies (SHSs) for onward 
release of funds to the implementing agencies. 
 However, there has only been slight improveme nt in the reduction in the pendency of UCs. 
  (Para 8.7) 
Status of Pendency of UCs for Contractual Farming Schemes 
 Information submitted last year As per the latest information 
Scheme 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 Total 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 Total 
No. of Pending UCs 35 306 986 1327 24 321 744 1089 
Amount for which  114 368 046 1528 77.95 461.02 1421.56 1960.53 
UCs pending (in lakhs)         
Status of Pendency of UCs for Promotional Schemes.  
 Information submitted last year As per the latest information 
Scheme 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2001-02 2002-
03 
2003-
04 
2004-05 
No. of Pending UCs 68 59 40 97 28 19 18 85 

Amount for which  656 343 273 501 202.76 232.59 181.91 509.62 
UCs pending (in lakhs)         
         (Para 8.8) 
 The Committee fails to understand the reason for the pendency of  UCs. The Committee emphasizes 
the need to accelerate the process of reduction of pendency of UCs.  
 The Committee believes that ad-hocism of such ki nd is a hindrance. The state of poor infrastructure 
at State and Central level also poses problems.  
 The Committee expects the Department to start th e preparatory exercises for ensuring State Health 
Society in each State and a monitoring mechanism to be  put into practice for better results. Due to new 
measures adopted by the Department, the Committee hopes that these sanctioned projects would be 
completed well in time with no pendency of UCs involved herein.  
 The Committee would appreciate if  the report is submitted without any delay so as to make clear 
the status and organizational structure of the Board. (Para 8.9) 
IX. STRENGTHENING OF PLIM  
 However, the Committee is dismayed to point out that the post of Direct or, PLIM which became 
vacant on 28.2.04 is still vacant. The Committee expre sses its serious concern on the process followed in 
filling up the post of Director. The post had to be adve rtised twice but still no suitable candidate could be 
selected.  (Para 9.2) 
 The Committee finds it very disturbing at the manner in which such an important matter of filling 
up the post of Director, PLIM was handled. One should not target the fact that PLIM is the nodal agency 
in the country which handles the sensitive issue of quality control of AYUSH drug. The Committee would 
like to point out that unless and until the post of Director is filled by a suitable and well- qualified person, 
one cannot hope for developing this laboratory as an  institute of international standards. The Committee 
has also been given to understand that 12 additional  posts in the grade of Sc ientists and others got 
created with the approval of the Ministry of Fina nce. The Committee urges the Department to make 
efforts to fill these 12 posts soon and not follow th e way the post of Director, PLIM which is still lying 
vacant. (Para 9.3) 
X. ACQUISITION OF MANUSCRIPTS AND PUBLICATION OF TEXT-BOOK/OUT POINT 
BOOKS 
 The Committee takes note of the fact that actual expenditure as on 28.2.07 has been nil. Rs. 1.25 
crore have been provided for 2007-08. The Committee is unclear about how this allocation of  Rs. 1.25 
crore would be  spent in the current year when one takes note of the trend of non-utilization of funds in 
the last year. (Para 10.2) 
 On a specific inquiry in this re gard, the Committee was given to und erstand that no time frame is 
given to complete the proposals under this scheme. The Committee finds that giving no time frame for 
any project is uncalled for and would lead to non-completion of projects, as there would not be any hurry 
or seriousness to complete the task. The Committee is of  the opinion that this re vision of gu idelines for 
having a time frame for completion of projects sh ould be expedited to avoid pending and incomplete 
tasks defeating the very purpose and objective of the Scheme. (Para 10.3) 
 The Committee is not impressed with these tempor ary arrangements of th e Department. However, 
collaboration with National Manuscripts Mission would be a fruitful step. The Committee opines that the 
very objective of the Scheme would be defeated if  these rare manuscripts are ac quired but not preserved 
properly. The Committee emphasizes the importance of these rare manuscripts and books which, if 
preserved properly, would really benefit the students, teachers and research scholars of ISM. (Para 10.4) 
XI. NORTH-EASTERN INSTITUTE OF AYUSH / FOLK MEDICINE  

 The Committee had recommended in its earlier Report that preparatory exercises should be started 
based on the Detailed Project Report (DPR). The Comm ittee is interested in knowing what preparatory 
exercises have been done by the De partment for setting up of these two Institutes. The Committee hopes 
the construction activities of both the Institutes would start in full swing once they get the required 
approval. (Para 11) 
CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEMES 
XII. DEVELOPMENT OF AYUSH INSTITUTIONS  
 However, the Committee takes into cognizance the result of clearing of pending UCs. Uptill 28.2.07, 
130 UCs worth  Rs. 1942.04 lakhs have been cleared. This means that there are still 211 pending UCs 
worth  Rs. 4362.93 lakhs. The Committee reiterates that  the pending UCs be cleared as soon as possible 
taking into consideration the Department’s initiative s of online monitoring of funds and pending UCs so 
that there is optimum utilization of funds and completion of projects in time. (Para 12.2) 
 The Committee observes that when achievement of physical targets set for the Tenth Plan are 
considered as a whole, the results are not satisfactory for schemes like ROTP, Renovation and 
Strengthening of hospital wards of Government/Government aided teaching hospitals of ISM i&H and 
establishment of computer laboratories in ISM&H Colleges as mentioned below:- 
Development and upgradation of AYUSH institutions/colleges 
Name of the Activities/Schemes Physical Target Physical   
 for 10th Plan Achievements 
  for 10th Plan 
Development of ISM and HUG colleges. 140-150 170 
Assistance to PG Medical Education. 30-35 42 
Re-orientation Training Programme for ISM& H personnel 250-260 178 
Renovation and Strengthening of hospital wards of  70-80 35 
Government/Government aided teaching hospitals of ISM&H.   
Establishment of Computer Laboratory in ISM and H colleges. 240-250 21 
Upgradation of academic institutes to the status of State Model 25-30 31  
Institute of Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani/Homoeopathy.   
  (Para 12.3) 
 Further, the Committee while analyzing the achievem ents of physical targets set for the year 2006-
07 found the results to be dissatisfactory as mentioned below:-  
Main Activities Components Physical   Physical 
  Targets Achievements 
  2006-07 2006-07 
1. Development of AYUSH UCs colleges 60-65 26 
2. Assistance to PG Medical Education 15-18 2 
3. R.O.T.P/CME for AYUSH personnel 110-120 13 
4.  Renovation and strengthening of Hospital wards  12-15 2 
 of Teaching Hospit al of AYUSH.   
5. Up-gradation of Academic Institutes to the status of State    
 Model Institute of Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani/Homoeopathy 15-20 6 
6. Establishment of computer Laboratory in selected AYUSH Colleges 10-15 — 

  (Para 12.4) 
 The Committee is of the opinion that the outcome or accomplishment of the physical targets when 
taken for the entire 10th Plan gives a mixed picture, the level of achievement of targets set for the various 
components within the scheme for the year 2006-07 is highly dissatisfactory. The Committee was under 
the impression that the components in their re vised form was being closely monitored. However,  instead 
of the expected improvement in the achievement level, the results have been otherwise. (Para 12.5) 
 The Committee has been informed about the proble ms identified by the Fe rguson Commission but 
not about the recommendations given by it. The Committee has been given to understand that from 2007-
08, funds would now be released through State Health  Societies. An effective area Officer System and 
online monitoring of Central Grants and Pending UCs is to be introduced soon. The Committee however, 
wonders about the preliminary exerci ses initiated for having State Heal th Societies. The Committee is 
hopeful that these preliminary exercises are done before hand to avoid delays in release of funds and lead 
to better implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes like Development of AYUSH institutions. 
  (Para 12.6) 
XIII. AYUSH HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES AND NRHM 
 The Committee notes that apart from these achiev ements of the Department in 2006-07, utilization 
of funds has been more or less satisfactory during the entire Tenth Plan. (Para 13.5) 
 The Committee expects that these quantifiable de liverable are achieved by the Department by 
March end 2008 as promised. Subsuming these schemes into NRHM will make available the treatment 
facilities to the several public in th e allopathic hospitals thereby giving an alternative choice to patients. 
This will also provide financial assistance to Stat e Governments for essential drugs which will help in 
ameliorating the situation of short supply of drugs of ISM&H dispensaries in States thereby benefiting 
the people at large. The Committee has been given to  understand that the sub-scheme for the supply of 
drugs to AYUSH dispensaries has been found to be useful and beneficial for the people but the financial 
assistance of Rs. 25,000 per dispensary has been found to be inadequate and in proposed to be revised. 
The Committee recommends this revision of financial a ssistance for this sub-scheme be done soon so that 
enhanced funds can be allocated for the utmost success of this scheme. (Para 13.8) 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in clearing of pending UCs and hopes that 
pendency of UCs would not be a hindrance in the successful implementation of these schemes.  (Para 13.9) 
XIV. DRUGS QUALITY CONTROL 
 The Committee has been reiterating  the need for increasing the quantum of financial assistance 
under this component so that GMP compliant manufacturing units have their own quality control lab for 
testing of heavy metals. The Committee appreciates this proposal of the Department in enhancing 
assistance to GMP compliant units. However, the Committee recommends for enhanced budgetary outlay 
for this Scheme, as the present allocation of Rs. 10.00 crore seems inadequate. (Para 14.2) 
 The Committee observes that as on 31.12.2006, 150 UCs were pending for this Scheme involving a 
sum of Rs. 4856.95 lakhs. The Committee however, a ppreciates the Department for substantial clearance 
of UCs in the next two months and as per the records on 28.02.2007, only 33 UCs were pending involving 
a sum of Rs. 1394.28 lakhs. (Para 14.3) 
 The Committee has observed that the physical targets of Tenth Plan for this Scheme has been 
satisfactory but the Committee is of the opinion that due to the critical importance of this scheme, special 
focus of the Department on this Scheme is required  to ensure Drug Quality Control and prevent the 
usage of spurious drugs. The Committee has been given to understand that out of 9000 units, 
approximately 4000 units are GMP compliant. The Committee believes that seri ous efforts are to be 
continued for making all remaining 5000 units GMP compliant. The Committee hopes that the 
Department is able to achieve these within the stipulated time period. 
  (Para 14.4) 

 The Committee would like to know about the feedback if r eceived during 2006 after the 
introduction of mandatory testing to heavy metals for AYUSH drugs for export purposes. The 
Committee believes that the Department should move ca utiously as the same Council was entrusted with 
the job of quality control for marine products for export purposes and resu lt was not positive. The 
Committee is also unclear about the role of Pharmexcel for the promotion of ASU drug exports. (Para 14.7) 
 The Committee is still awaiting the decision of the Department regarding introduction of 
mandatory testing for heavy metals for AYUSH drug s for domestic consumption. The Committee would 
like to know the reason for delay in introducing such a mechanism for domestic usage of AYUSH drugs.  
  (Para 14.8) 
 The Committee opines that in view of the fact that State and private drugs testing labs are provided 
financial assistance by the Central Government, it would be proper if the Central Government along with 
the State Government monitors the proper functionin g of these labs. Further, Committee would also like 
to know whether any Inspection Reports of insp ectors conducted were received by the Central 
Government during 2006-07. (Para 14.9) 
XV. MISCELLANEOUS  
 The Committee would like to emphasize that Tibetan System of Medicine is practiced at many 
places and is not confined to J&K or Leh and a Region al Institute for it at Leh will not address the issue 
properly. The Committee recommends that the Institutes like this sh ould be given due importance and 
funds allocated for proper development and promotion of Tibetan System of Medicine. (Para 15.2) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
VIII 
 EIGHT MEETING 
 The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday the 11th April, 20 07 in Committee Room "D", Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
  RAJYA SABHA 
 1. Shri Digvijay Singh — In the Chair 
 2. Prof. P. J. Kurian 
 3. Shrimati Maya Singh 
  LOK SABHA  
 4. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli 
 5. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
 6. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 7. Shrimati Sushee la Bangaru Laxman 
 8. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 9. Shri Nihal Chand 
 10. Shri Uday Singh 
 11. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
 12. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
 13. Shri Ajit Kumar Singh 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Pradeep Chatur vedi, Under Secretary 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  Representatives of the Department of AYUSH  
 1. Shrimati Anita Dass, Secretary (AYUSH)  
 2. Shri Shiv Basant, Joint Secretary  
 3. Shri Raghubir Singh, Additional Secretary & FA  
 4. Shri B.S.Sajwan, CEO (NMPB)
  
2. In the absence of the Chairman of the Committee, Shri Digvijay Singh presided over the meeting. At 
the outset, he welcomed the Secretary and othe r officials of the Department of AYUSH and 
requested the Secretary to make a brie f presentation on the Demand for Grants (2007-08) of the Department.   
The Secretary made the presentation on the activities u ndertaken and achievements of the Department during 
the last year. The Members sought clar ifications on the activities and achievements of the Ministry, which were 
replied by the Secretary. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 P.M. 
 
 
 
 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 1.00 P.M. on Friday the 27th April, 2007 in  Committee Room "A", Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
  RAJYA SABHA 
 1. Shri Digvijay Singh — In the Chair 
 2. Shrimati Maya Singh  
 3. Shri Lalhming Liana 
 4. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
  LOK  SABHA  
 5. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 6. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 7. Shrimati Sushee la Bangaru Laxman 
 8. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 9. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
 10. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri H.C. Sethi, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer 
2. In absence of the Chairman, Sh ri Digvijay Singh, Member, Rajya Sabha, presided over the meeting. 
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the memb ers of the Committee. The Committee then considered 
the draft 22nd and 23rd Reports on Demands-for-Grants (2007-08) relating to the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare and the Department of AYUSH respec tively. After some discu ssion, the Committee adopted 
both the reports with some minor modifications. 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the 
table of Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 3rd of May, 20 07. The Committee authorized the Chairman of the 
Committee and in his absence Shri Digv ijay Singh and in the absence of bo th, Shrimati Maya Singh to present 
the reports in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Karan Singh Yadav, and in his absence Dr. Chinta Mohan and in the 
absence of both, Smt. Susheela Bangaru Laxman to lay the reports on the table of Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2.00  P.M. 
 