5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
FIFTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE SECOND REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS     2004-2005 (DEMAND NO. 49) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE
 (MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 11TH MARCH, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 11TH MARCH, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2005/PHALGUNA, 1926 (SAKA)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                  
2.PREFACE                                                                                                   
3.REPORT                                                                                                                                                                                
CHAPTER  I   Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government
CHAPTER II   Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the
                        Government’s replies
 CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been             
                         accepted by the Committee                     
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final replies of the Government are still awaited
4.Annexure              
5.Observations/Recommendations at a glance
6.MINUTES
                                                                                                               
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-2005)
 
 
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
MEMBERS
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur          
3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Dr. A.K. Patel
5. Shrimati Maya Singh
 *6.   Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri R. Sarath Kumar
8. Shri Lalming Liana
 **9.    Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
 $10.    Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
11.   Vacant
 
            LOK SABHA
 
12.
  Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
13.  Shri M.H. Ambareesh
14.  Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
15.  Dr. M. Baburao
16.  Dr. R.C. Dome
17.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi
18.  Smt. Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali
19.  Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
20.  Dr. Chinta Mohan
21.  Shri Rasheed Masood
22.  Ms. Archana Nayak
23.  Shri D.B. Patil
24.  Shri Nakul Das Rai
25.  Shri Rajendra Kumar
26.  Smt. K. Rani
27.  Md. Shahabuddin
28.  Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29.  Shri Uday Singh
30.  Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
31.  Shri Kailash Nath Yadav
32.  Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
             Shri N.C. Joshi,           Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg,    Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guharoy,      Director
Shri  Momraj Singh     Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,            Committee Officer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 14
th December, 2004
*Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2004
** Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2004      
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, having
been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Fifth Report of the Committee
on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Second Report on Demands for Grants
(Demand No.49) of the Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2004-2005.
2.         The Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare was
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26 th August, 2004.  Replies of the Government on the

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
recommendations contained in the Report, received from the Department of Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare were considered by the Committee at its meeting held on the 3rd March, 2005.   
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same at its meeting held on the 3rd March, 2005. 
NEW DELHI;            
March 3, 2005
Phalguna 12, 1926 (Saka)
AMAR SINGH
 Chairman,    
  Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on      
Health and Family Welfare
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT
            The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
its Second Report on Demands for Grants for the year 2004-2005 (Demand No.49) of the Department of Family Welfare,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
2.         Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of the recommendations contained in the Report, have
been categorized as follows:-
(i)
                  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 2.5;  4.4(E)(ii); 5.1,5.2, 6.0; 7.3;
7.4; 9.1;9.2, 10.1;10.2; 11.1,11.2; 12.1; 12.2 (Chapter I) Total- 15
(ii)                Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies: 4.4(F); 8.0    (Chapter II)  Total- 2
(iii)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:  3.4&3.5; 3.6&3.7; 3.8;3.9; 3.10;3.13;  4.2&4.3;4.4(A);4.4(B);4.4(C);4.4(D);4.4(E)(i);     (Chapter-
III)  Total-15
(iv)               Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited:   (Chapter
– IV) Total- NIL
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
 II        BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations/Observation
2.5       The approved outlay of the Department for the Ninth Plan was Rs. 15,120.00 crores. Against this, the total funds
available were Rs. 14,102.35 crores and the expenditure incurred was Rs.13,968.72 crores.
The Committee notes that the approved outlay for Tenth Plan is Rs. 27,125.00 crores, almost double of the Ninth
Plan provision of Rs. 14,102.35 crores.  The Committee observes that there was a shortfall in the utilisation of Ninth Plan
allocation.  Utilisation position has not improved in the first two years of the Tenth Plan also.  In both the years, Plan
allocation had to be reduced at the RE stage and even this reduced allocation remained under-utilised.  The Committee
observes that there is a difference of Rs. 800.00 crores between the RE allocation of 2003-04 and BE provision of 2004-05. 
Additional Rs. 680.00 crores have been agreed to by the Planning Commission. The Department has also identified the
areas/schemes for which these additional funds are meant for.  The Committee feels that in view of status of utilisation of
allocated funds in the first two years of Tenth Plan, the Department should plan a time-bound strategy for the optimum and
judicious utilisation of allocated funds.  Year 2004-05 is the third year of the Tenth Plan. The Committee feels that this is the
appropriate time for making a mid-term appraisal of all the programmes being run by the Department and taking corrective
measures wherever required
Action Taken
The Department has noted for compliance the comments of the Committee for planning a time-bound strategy for the
optimum and judicious utilisation of allocated funds. The background note for Mid-Term Appraisal (MTA) has already been
sent to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission has initiated a detailed exercise on MTA for National Family
Welfare Programme. The Department of FW will undertake necessary action after MTA Report of Tenth Five Year Plan is
received from the Planning Commission.
 
 
IV.       REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME
4.4     (E)           HIRING OF PRIVATE GYNECOLOGISTS
     Recommendations/Observation

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
 (ii)       The Committee appreciates that intervention made by the Department to make the implementation of RCH
Programme more effective.  The Committee is, however, of the view that there is a need for having a monitoring mechanism
where
under both regular and surprise inspections are conducted by the Central teams also.  This is all the more required as the
quantum of financial assistance released under these interventions is not commensurate with the services/facilities provided.
 
Action Taken
The Maternal Health Schemes under RCH are reviewed by holding of national and regional workshops. Officers
from the Department visit States from time to time and get feedback on implementation of the scheme. The suggestions of
the Committee are noted.
 
V.        JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA (National Maternity Benefits    Scheme)
Recommendations/Observation
5.1       This scheme has been transferred from the Department of Rural Development to the Department of Family Welfare
in April, 2001.  This centrally sponsored scheme provides 100% central assistance to States /UTs for extending financial
assistance @ of Rs. 500 per pregnancy for first two live births to the women belonging to BPL families. The Committee
notes that during 2001-02, Rs 75.04 crore were disbursed to 545 districts, an amount of Rs. 52.19 crore was released to 554
districts in 2002-2003 and Rs. 35.35 crore have been released to various districts in 2003-04.  State wise details in respect of
the financial assistance reveal a very interesting picture. Some examples are given below:- 
(Rs. in crore)
Name 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04
Andhra Pradesh 18.82 12.17 12.31
Karnataka 4.24 3.36 1.7
Tamil Nadu 8.43 6.15 5.90
Bihar 3.01 2.69 1.43
Rajasthan 1.00   .89 .44
 
Recommendations/Observation
5.2       It seems that States where population control measures have not been effective have failed to avail the benefit under
the scheme, may be due to lack to awareness.  In contrast, States reported to be performing well in  population control
measures, seem to be the major beneficiaries.   The Committee would like to be apprised about the monitoring mechanism
existing under the scheme.  The Committee would like to mention that a similar scheme, Balika Samiridhi Yojana under the
Department of Women and Child Development has not proved to be very successful and is proposed to be recast/transferred
to the States.  The Committee feels that the experience of the Department of Women and Child Development should be
made use of by the Department in the implementation of Janani Suraksha Yojana.
Action taken
National Maternity Benefit Scheme (NMBS) provides that the State/UT Government will constitute State Level and
District Level Committees for monitoring and evaluation of the Scheme and matters concerned therewith and report to the
Government of India. Further, the State/UT Committee, constituted as para 13 (iv), shall institute adequate and appropriate
arrangements for monitoring and evaluation of the scheme. The State/UT Governments are being advised from time to time
to activate their monitoring mechanism.  For this purpose, workshops are also being organized to make the State fully aware
of the position.
 
The Advisory Committee, established at the All India level by the Ministry of Rural Development for the Monitoring
& Evaluation of the NSAP (including NMBS) and to advise on matters related to its effective implementation, is presently
not functional.
 
In keeping with the objective of reducing maternal mortality as also the infant mortality, the Department proposes to
amend the scheme to provide for comprehensive service and care to the expectant mothers so as to meet their requirement in
a more focused manner. The amended scheme has in-built provisions of more effective monitoring at the Center/State Level.
 
The suggestion of Committee that experience of Department of Women & Child Development should be made use
of by the Department in the implementation of Janani Suraksha Yojana has been noted for compliance.
 

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
VI.       VANDEMATRAM SCHEME
Recommendations/Observation
 6.0      The aim of the Vandematram scheme launched on 9 th February, 2004 is to reduce maternal mortality of pregnant
women by involving and utilizing resources of specialists/trained work force available in the private sector.  It has been
informed that till now 1320 doctors and 517 nursing homes/maternity centres have volunteered for enrolment under the
Scheme.  Besides, Federation of Obstetrics and Gynecological Society of India has submitted a list of 685 FOJSI members
enrolled under the Scheme.   The Committee welcomes this initiative and hopes that private involvement will continue to
increase.
Action Taken
The States are implementing the activities outlined under the Vande Mataram Scheme as a public-private
partnership. 
VII STENGTHENING OF IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMME & ERADICATION OF    POLIO
Recommendations/Observation
7.3       The Committee was informed that in three districts of UP –Badayun, Muradabad and Bulandsahar, Pulse Polio
campaign is yet to succeed. The Department has planned five more National Immunization Rounds with one on the 23
August, 2004.  The Committee was given to understand that the visible    high level support at national and state level,
political and public leaders as well as intensive work in these areas will result in success in elimination of Polio.  The
Committee hopes that with the completion of these rounds, the Sates of U.P. and Bihar would ultimately become polio free.
Action taken
       During this year till 3
rd September 2004, 46 cases of Polio have been reported out of which 28 are from Uttar Pradesh
and 9 from Bihar. Out of the 28 cases reported from UP, 10 each cases are from Badaun and Moradabad district. To control
the situation and achieve the target of zero incidence of polio, regular review of the programme at the National and State
level are being undertaken to identify the gaps in the implementation of the polio programme and take corrective action at
appropriate level.
 
Recommendations/Observation
7.4       The Committee notes that the current coverage under the Routine Immunisation is only 57 % with States like Bihar
and UP having a  coverage below 30/40 percentage.   Introduction of AD syringes, provision for carrying medicines to the
immunisation sites rather than making the ANM fetch the vaccine from PHC, arrangement for mobilization of children on
the fixed immunisation day, setting up of National Vaccine Cell for ensuring timely supply of Vaccine to the States are some
of the initiatives proposed for making the coverage for under routine immunisation go up from 57 to  90%.  The Committee
appreciates the initiatives proposed to be taken for increasing the coverage under routine immunisation and hopes that this
programme would also receive the same level of satisfaction as Pulse-Polio.
Action taken
Action has been initiated for introduction of AD syringes in all immunization sessions in the country in the year
2005. With the introduction of AD syringes and provision for alternate vaccine delivery to immunization site and intensified
social mobilization activities, the coverage of routine immunization will increase.
 
IX.       COMPENSATION
Recommendations/Observation
9.1       Plan allocation under ‘Compensation’ for 2004-05 is Rs. 200.15 crore against an allocation of Rs. 186.46 crore in
2003-04. The increase in the allocation for  2004-05 has been proposed in view of expected increase in the number of
acceptors of sterilization / IUD insertion  specially in EAG States.  The Committee was informed that on the basis of inputs
received from these States and also to meet the excepted level of achievement as indicated in the Tenth Plan, compensation
package for undergoing Tubectomy/Vasectomy in the EAG States has been revised from               Rs. 300/200 respectively
to Rs. 400 per sterilization for the year 2003-04.  The State Governments/UT Administrations have been given full
flexibility for drawing up their schemes, including the amount for diet, transport, payment to motivators and service
providers, within the total amount.  The same package has also been extended to accredited private/NGO health facilities in
EAG States. 
 
9.2       The Committee notes that there has been over all improvement in the achievement level of various family planning
measures in 2003-04 (April-December-2003) as compared to the corresponding period of 2002-03. With regard to
sterilization methods there was coverage of 3.05 million persons in 2003-04 against a coverage of 2.90 million in 2002-03. 

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
The Committee, however, notes that breakup of acceptance of Vasectomy and Tubectomy has not been indicated for the
year 2003-04 as done in the previous years.  The Committee feels that separate details regarding acceptance level of these
two methods will alone give the actual position of the success rate of family planning measures.
Action taken
         A Statement showing the break up of acceptance of vasectomy and tubectomy for 2002-03 & 2003-04 is at Annexure-
III.
 
X         ANNUAL REVIEW REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR 2002-03
Recommendations/Observation
10.1     As per Annual Review Report for 2002-03 of the Central Internal Audit Party of the Department, financial
irregularities/variations amounting to Rs. 92.95 crore have been noticed. Out of 21 defaulter States/UTs, financial
irregularities amounting to Rs. 27.61 crore and Rs. 32.73 crore in Andhra Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh respectively are worth-
noting.  Some of the irregularities noticed in the Report are indicated below: -
*          Misutilisation/delayed utilisation of Miscellaneous Purpose fund
*          Irregular charging of States general side expenditure to the Family Welfare Budget.
*          Non-adjustment of temporary advances drawn on abstract contingent bills.
10.2     The Committee views with serious concern the irregularities in Annual Review Report 2002-03 of the Department. 
The Committee strongly feels that irregular charging of States general side expenditure to the Family Welfare budget is a
very disturbing trend. The Committee apprehends that this shortcoming might have been noticed in previous years also.  If
that be so, the Committee would like to be apprised about the corrective measures taken in this regard. 
Action taken
This irregular charging of State General side expenditure to Family Welfare Budget has also been noticed in previous
year, i.e., 2001-02 also wherein an amount of Rs. 66.28 lakhs was objected on the same grounds.
As regards corrective actions/measures taken, it is stated that after issuing Audit Reports to concerned units, a copy
of the Audit Report is sent by Central Internal Audit Party (CIAP) to Secy (H&FW) of respective States/UTs for Para-wise
compliance.
 
XI.       PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES (REGULATION AND PREVENTION OF MISUSE) ACT,
1994   
Recommendations/Observation
11.1     The Committee notes that the details regarding sex ratio in respect of some of States where per capita income is high,
as compared to the National sex ratio as indicated below: -
                        State
                                        Sex ratio
                        Haryana                                   861
                        Punjab                                      874
                        Delhi                                        821
                        Chandigarh                               773
                        All India                                   933
Recommendations/Observation
11.2     Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1994 makes the offence of pre-natal
sex determination punishable by removal of the guilty doctor from the Register of the Council and, consequently, cancel
his/her license to practice. The Committee feels that implementation of the Act, 1997 has not yielded the desired results so
far.  Only 21 cases (12 in Haryana and 6 in Punjab) were filed against clinics/doctors during the last three years as on
31.3.04.  The Committee feels that there is a need for review of this Act especially due to the very low sex ratio in some of
the States.
Action taken
Keeping in view the difficulties experienced in the implementation of the Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques
(Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1994 and Rules and the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the
matter of implementation of the law, the Act as well as the Rules has been amended to make it more comprehensive. The
amended Act and Rules came into force with effect from 14
th February 2003.
 

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
The technique of pre-conception sex selection has been brought within the ambit of the Act so as to pre-empt the use
of such technologies, which significantly contribute to the declining sex ratio. Use of ultrasound machines has also been
brought within the purview of the Act more explicitly so as to curb its misuse for detection and subsequent disclosure of sex
of the foetus lest it should lead to female foeticide. The sale of ultrasound machines has been restricted only to those centres,
which are registered under the Act. Further, they shall have to obtain an affidavit from such body or person purchasing the
ultrasound machine/image scanners that the machine/equipment shall not be used for detection of sex of foetus. The
manufacturers and suppliers have also been advised to furnish details of doctors/clinics to whom they have sold the
ultrasound machines.  It enables the implementing agencies to cross check the registration of these centres in their respective
jurisdiction.
It is, nevertheless, recognized that mere legislation is not enough to deal with this problem that has roots in social behaviour
and prejudices.  Various activities have been undertaken to create awareness against the practice of pre-natal determination
of sex and female foeticide through Radio, Television, and print media units.  ‘Atmaja’, a tele serial being telecast on
Doordarshan on the plight of the girl child has been appreciated widely  all over the country. Workshops and seminars are
also been organized through Voluntary Organizations at State/regional/district/ block levels to create awareness against this
social evil.  Cooperation has been sought from religious leaders, as well as medical fraternity to curb this practice. The
Government of India has launched ‘Save the Girl Child’ Campaign with a view to lessen son preference by highlighting
achievements of young girls. Ms. Aruna Kesavan has been appointed as the brand ambassadress for the Government’s ‘Save
the Girl Child’ Campaign, 2005.  The efforts are also being made to organize a short-term training course for Lower
Judiciary & Public Prosecutors with the intention to sensitize them about the Act for its efficient implementation at legal
level.
 
XII      IMPLEMENTATION OF FAMILY WELFARE   PROGRAMMES
Recommendations/Observation
12.1    The Committee notes that monitoring and evaluation of the performance of the Family Welfare Programme is
conducted by eight Regional  Evaluation Teams located  at Delhi, Bangalore, Bhopal, Pune, Patna, Lucknow, Kolkata  and
Chennai.   Each evaluation   team undertakes tour of 20 days  every month and covers two adjoining districts selected
randomly covering an average of 700  acceptors of family planning.   The committee would like to be apprised about the
feedback received regarding UP, Bihar, Orissa, MP and NE States.
 
 
Action taken
At present practically Seven Regional Evaluation Teams (RETs) located at Delhi, Bangalore, Bhopal, Patna,
Lucknow, Chennai, and Kolkata are functioning under the guidance and supervision of Statistics Division (previously
known as M&E Division) of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Family Welfare but under the
administrative control of the concerned Regional Health Offices for Health  & Family Welfare. The State-wise sample
verification of FW acceptors undertaken by the RETs Lucknow, Patna, Kolkata and Bhopal during 2003-04 in the selected
districts of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland are given in
the Statement given below:
 
Sl.
No.
Name of RETs Name of States No. of Districts
covered
No. of cases
selected
No. of cases
contacted
1 Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 13 1551 1119
2 Patna Bihar 12 1132 605
3 Kolkata Orissa 5 479 362
4 Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 7 1037 550
5 Kolkata NE States
-
                   Assam
-Arunachal  Pradesh
-                   Mizoram
-                   Nagaland
 
5
1
2
2
 
291
165
153
60
 
236
118
111
35
 
            During 2003-04, the numbers of FW acceptors were verified in the selected districts of Uttar Pradesh (1119), Bihar
(605), Orissa (362), Madhya Pradesh (550), Assam (236), Arunachal Pradesh (118), Mizoram (111), Nagaland (35) by the
RETs Lucknow, Patna, Kolkata and Bhopal. No sample verification was conducted in the States of Tripura, Manipur,
Meghalaya and Sikkim during the period under review.
 
            The RETs have provided many important observations during their field visit for sample verification of Family

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
Welfare acceptors in various selected districts of the aforesaid States.  Some of them are listed below:
 
(i)                  Maintenance of Records and Registers, particularly E.C. Register, was found very poor.
(ii)                Lack of supervision by the senior level officers was observed.
(iii)               No. of posts were found lying vacant affecting the FW Programme.
(iv)              Doctors do not generally reside at the posted PHCs/CHCs.
(v)                Full attention is not being paid to the Community needs by Medical and Para-medical units of PHCs/Sub-
Centres.
(vi)              General conditions of the Sub-Centres were very poor in almost all the States.  In many Sub-Centres, drinking
water and electricity is not available. Due to poor infrastructure facilities, ANMs are not able to render the best of
their services in spite of their good knowledge & skills.
(vii)             Annual Action Plan was not prepared according to CNAA manual in most of PHCs/ Sub-Centres and districts.
(viii)           Wrong/incomplete addresses are recorded in registers being maintained by PHCs/Sub-Centres.
(ix)              Medical and Paramedical staff need necessary training on RCH/CNAA for effective implementation of FW
programme.
(x)                Short supplies of stationery were observed in the Centres visited.
(xi)              Most of the eligible couples in the reproductive age group do not know any thing about danger sign of ARI, side
effects of contraceptive methods, for which diseases immunization is to be given to the child, at what age measles
vaccine is to be given to their child and vaccine preventable diseases etc. in the rural areas of most of the districts
of above States.
              
These findings are sent to the concerned States/District Authorities from time to time for removal of shortcomings
 
Recommendations/Observation
                       12.2     The Committee feels that availability of funds is there for carrying out Family Welfare Programmes.  
However, problem lies in their effective implementation.    The Committee is of the view that a number of
initiatives need to be taken by the Department in this regard.   Instead of routine publicity campaigns on the
need of family planning, the Department should have a publicity programme which is region-specific.    Mass
leaders, leading actors etc. need to be involved for popularizing positive aspects of family planning methods. 
Surrogate advertisements in the form of dialogues in films can be another measure.   The Department may
coordinate with Ministry of Information & Broadcasting in this regard.   Similarly Panchayati Raj Institutions
and community at large can play an effective role in this field.    The Committee is of the view that the
Department should evolve a mechanism where under Panchayati Raj institutions as well as Anganwadi
Centres are actively involved in Family Planning measures.   A beginning can be made by ensuring
availability of condoms etc. in Anganwadi Centres/Panchayats.    Cooperation of the Department of
Panchayati Raj /Women & Child Development may be sought in this regard.   Another effective initiative can
be about the NGOs who are actively involved in the implementation of family welfare measures.  The
Committee feels that in order to make them more accountable and also to assess the work being done by
them, it would prove to be very fruitful if a list of NGOs working in a particular area/district is given to the
local MP.  The Committee is of the view that instead of depending only on the State reports indicating
achievement in implementation of different programmes, the Department should evolve a strategy where
under all the agencies as indicated above make useful and far-reaching contributions in an area which is of
prime importance for the growth and development of the country. 
Action taken
Regarding Publicity Campaigns:  the Department is already taking up region-specific publicity campaign on the need of
Family Planning such as :-
 
(a)
                Radio Programme “Khushion Bhara Aangan” in regional languages.
(b)               Telecast of Spots in regional languages in NE States.
(c)                Printing & distribution of manuals & other print materials in regional languages.
(d)               Media Advocacy with the assistance of NGOs is also under operation wherein three reputed NGOs are working to
promote FW/RCH/Adolescent Programme with the financial assistance from the Ministry. These NGOs are sensitizing
the leaders through workshops & other interactive programmes.
 
As regards involvement of leading actors, the Department is utilizing the services of celebrities like Amitabh
Bachchan, Shah Rukh Khan, Shabana Azmi, etc. for production of TV spots.
            In so far as to surrogate advertisements in the form of dialogues is concerned, the Department will make efforts to

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
get this done.
Regarding Involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions: The Government of India intends to launch a National Rural
Healthcare Mission (NRHM) throughout the country to improve healthcare facilities at grassroot level.  Initially, the Mission
will focus on the 17 States, namely, U.P., M.P., Bihar, Rajasthan, Orissa, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, J&K,
Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. The Strategy of this Mission
includes broad systemic and structural reform for ensuring intra and inter-sectoral convergence and greater role of
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) for planning and supervising discharge of public health duties. It also aims at increasing
community ownership of the HFW programmes through a cadre of voluntary female Accredited Social Health Activists
(ASHAs) etc.
 
For greater role of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and community participation at various levels, District, Block
and village level Health Committees will be constituted. The Panchayats will monitor the ASHA, Panchayat Samitis will
supervise the PHC/CHC, and the Chairman, Zila Parishad will head the District Health Mission. It is proposed to give
greater role to the PRIs in improving the availability of doctors and paramedics in primary public health institutions. 
Consultations have been held with 22 States, of which 12 were represented at the level of the Minster, to build a
consensus on the proposed Strategy of the Mission. It is proposed to sustain this dialogue in future through various
platforms, including the meeting of the National Development Council.
            It is proposed that the ASHA will assist the Village Committee for the HFW Programmes.  She will manage the
village level Drug & Contraceptive Depot, containing basic generic drugs (both AYUSH and Allopathic), and also provide
counseling, referral and escort services for an identified comprehensive package of preventive and promotive healthcare.
The Anganwadi worker, and also the ANM shall supervise the ASHA in the discharge of her duties. The Anganwadi shall be
the hub of health and nutrition activities in the village. Monthly Health Camps shall be organized at the Anganwadi levels.
            Detailed Consultations have been undertaken with the Department of Women & Child Development, requesting for
revision in the duty chart of the Anganwadi worker, and also for wider convergence on the agenda of WCD and HFW,
through the ASHA at village levels.
Regarding availability of Condoms:  Department of Family Welfare under National FW Programme of the GOI is basically
engaged in procurement and supply of FW material including contraceptives (condoms etc.) under Free Supply and Social
Marketing of Contraceptives Schemes. Under Free Supply Scheme, contraceptives viz. condoms (Nirodh), oral
contraceptive pills – OCPs (Mala-N) & IUDs (Cu-T) are procured and supplied to States for further distribution to users free
of cost through Government machinery like PHCs, Sub-Centres, CHCs, Hospitals, Dispensaries, etc. However, under Social
marketing Scheme, branded contraceptives (condoms & OCPs) are sold at highly subsidized prices through network of
Social Marketing Organizations (SMOs), NGOs, Trusts, etc. Condoms are also supplied to State AIDS Control Societies
under free supply as well as under social marketing scheme for distribution in HIV/high-risk areas. SMOs are making all out
efforts to market contraceptives throughout the country including rural areas through grocers, pan shops, chemist shops, etc.
Funds by way of sales promotion incentives are being provided to SMOs/NGOs for conducting local publicity of
contraceptives. NGOs and Trusts operating in limited areas of a few States have access to Anganwadi Centres/Panchayats
and avail of their services in distribution of contraceptives (condoms, etc.) among users in villages.
 
Regarding involvement of NGOs :  The Department welcomes the suggestion of the Committee of taking measures for
accountability & assessment of the work of NGOs by involving local MPs. Presently, there are 221 districts already covered
by the Mother NGO Scheme and selection process is on for the rest of the districts. After the selection process is over, the
MPs will be supplied the list of NGOs of their constituency.
Regarding achievement of different Programmes: In addition to State reports, the impact of Programme is also monitored
through sample surveys conducted by the Department from time to time.
The National Family Health Surveys (NFHS) were conducted in 1992-93 and 1998-99 which gives information at
State level on various indicators of family planning, maternal & child health. For example, contraceptive uses by currently
married women, unmet need for family planning, ANC coverage, safe delivery, institutional delivery, immunization, ARI
etc.
In addition to NFHS I & II, district level household surveys are also conducted under RCH Programme to generate
district level data on the utilization of services provided by Government health facilities. First round of the survey was
conducted in two phases during 1998-99 covering 50% of total districts in each phase. The second round of the survey was
initiated in the year 2001 and the field work of second phase is currently going on. First phase has already been completed.
The data collected under the survey include aspects on coverage of ANC and Immunization Services; Proportion of Safe
Delivery; Contraceptive Prevalence Rate; Unmet need for Family Planning; Awareness about RTI/STI & HIV/AIDS and
Utilization of Health Services and Users Satisfaction.
Besides, the Department also conducts a Facility Survey to assess the availability of health care facilities and their
utilization in terms of infrastructure, staff, supply of health care items and equipments in all the Government health care

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
establishments in the district covering Sub-Centres/ PHCs/CHCs and District hospitals. First survey was conducted in 1999.
Second survey was completed recently with reference period of 2002-03.
 
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
 PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENTS’ REPLY
 
  4.4 (F)           SAFE MOTHERHOOD
Recommendations/Observation
 
(i)         Maternal mortality is a cause of great concern. Maternal mortality details available with RGI indicate that position in
a number of States is not very encouraging.
 
Name MMR/1 Lakh Year (1998)
India 407
Bihar 452
Madhya Pradesh 498
Rajasthan 670
U.P 707
 
(ii)        The Department has informed that the reliable estimates of maternal mortality are not available. Any intervention to
check it will only be effective if reasonable accurate data in this regard is available.  An expert group has, accordingly, been
constituted by the Department, which is looking into the modalities of carrying out a survey for collection of data on
Maternal Mortality.  While welcoming the initiative taken by the Department, the Committee would like to point out that
such a survey should have been conducted much earlier.   The Committee recommends that the said survey should be
conducted on priority basis.  
 
Action taken
Acknowledging the concern regarding the need to have a reliable estimate of maternal mortality, it is stated that the
Registrar General of India has been the main agency for providing estimates of maternal mortality at the national and State
level.  Maternal mortality being a rare event, its estimation through direct method, calls for huge expenditure towards
collection of information through surveys.  Further, currently there is no standard method for estimation of maternal
mortality.  The proposed survey would adopt a new technique called snowballing technique. A pilot study has been
conducted in 5 States in two PHCs each to test the instrument of survey and methodology.   The department is examining the
pilot study in conjunction with Institute for Research in Medical Statistics (IRMS), an Institute of the ICMR. Thereafter, a
decision would be taken to conduct the study at the national level.
 
 
VIII.    JANSANKHYA STHIRATA KOSH (JSK)
      Recommendations/Observation
8.0  The objective of Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh (JSK) registered in 2003 is to facilitate the attainment of the goals of
National Population Policy, 2004.  A contribution of Rs. 100 crores has been made out of the Plan budget of the Department
of Family Welfare and Planning Commission which would provide an identity to the Kosh to start its operations.   First
meeting of the Governing Board was held on 25
th August, 2003.  A Concept Paper has been circulated to the members of the
Governing Board on the options for the operationalisation of the Kosh.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the
progress made in this regard. 
Action taken
The Department of Family Welfare recently moved a Note for Cabinet proposing the reconstitution of the

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh (JSK), which has been approved by Cabinet in its meeting held on 13 th October 2004.  The
process of such reconstitution is underway.  The next meeting of the Governing Board of the Kosh will be convened shortly.
 
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
III   RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES
 
Recommendations/Observation
3.4       The Committee notes that the number of Sub-Centres/ PHCs/ CHCs in position and the resultant shortfall as on
31.3.03 is as follows: -
Name In Position Shortfall
Sub-Centre 1,38,368 8127
PHC 22936 1666
CHC 3076 2541
           
Out of 138368 Sub-Centres, 137311 Sub-Centres are being funded by the Govt. The Committee observes that 8669
Sub-Centres are targeted to be established during the Tenth Plan.  The Committee notes that there are number of states
where there is a shortfall in the required number of Sub-Centres.  Some of the major defaulter States are as indicated below:-
 
State Existing Sub-Centre To be established
Bihar 10,337 1210
Chattisgarh 3818 874
Maharashtra 9725 808
Orissa 5927 447
Rajasthan 9926 461
UP 18,629 1944
W. Bengal 8126 2230
Delhi 42 148
 
Recommendations/Observation
3.5       The Committee notes that the requirement of Sub-Centres is as per 1991 population norms. Requirement must have
increased as per Census 2001.  Shortfall in the number of Sub-Centres is targeted to be fulfilled during the Tenth Plan. The
Committee is not aware about the progress made so far in the achievement of this target.   The Committee would, however,
like to emphasize that the Department  should make all efforts to get established the targeted Sub-Centres during the Tenth
Plan.  The Committee feels that 2004-05, being the mid year of the Tenth Plan period,  is the right time to make an
assessment about the shortfall in the number of Sub-Centres as per Census 2001 and start preparatory exercise for specific
allocation of funds for this purpose   from the first year of the Eleventh Plan.  At the same time, the Department should also
approach the concerned State Govts. so that ground work for establishing the required Sub-Centres is not delayed for want
of preparedness on the part of State Govts
Action Taken
 Additional Sub-Centres required as per 1991 Census are 8669 and as per 2001 population are 26478.  The 10
th Plan target
for opening of Sub-Centres has been fixed by Planning Commission as 8181. The annual target for 2003-04 was 1941 and
annual target for 2004-05 is 1941. The approval of the Cabinet for opening of 8669 Sub-Centres as per 1991 Census was
obtained in January 2004 and funds for establishing the new Sub-Centres @ Rs.10,000 each was released in February 2004.

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
The concerned State/UT Governments are being asked regularly for expeditious establishment of Sub-Centres. Preparatory
exercise for allocation of funds during 11th Plan will be started well in time.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee views with serious concern the achievement level with regard to setting-up of Sub-Centers as per
1991 census. The Committee notes that shortfall of 8669 Sub-Centers was targeted to be fulfilled by the Planning
Commission with annual target of 1941 for each of the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, second and third year of Tenth
Plan. The Committee has been given to understand that approval of Cabinet for opening of 8669 Sub-Centers was obtained
in January,2004 and funds for establishing the new Sub-Centers @ Rs.10,000/- each were duly released in February,2004.
The Committee feels that no further information about the progress made in actual establishment of new Sub-Centers since
February, 2004 is available with the Department. The Committee would like to emphasize that the responsibility of the
Department does not end with regular reminders to the State Govts. The Department should make all conceivable efforts for
getting the required Sub-Centers set up as per 1991 census. Progress being made specially in the major defaulter States
should be constantly monitored by the Department. Preparatory exercise for fulfilling the gap of 26,478 Sub-Centers as per
the 2001 census should start from 2005-2006 itself.  
 
Recommendations/Observation
3.6       The activities of PHCs involve curative, preventive and also Family Welfare Services.  CHC provides facilities for
obstetric care and specialist consultation.  The Committee is constrained to observe that the existing shortfall in the number
of PHCs and CHCs means that as many as 9996 Sub-Centres and 9164 PHCs are deprived of the facilities of PHCs and
CHCs respectively.  The Committee therefore, feels that the Department should approach the State Govts. for establishing
the required number of PHCs and CHCs.  The Committee is of the view that if the Sub-Centres are not served by PHCs and
CHCs, then the very purpose of establishing and running them gets defeated.   If a well established and functional setup of
Sub-Centres, being served by PHCs and CHCs is there, heavy burden on the secondary and tertiary care hospitals will
automatically lessen, resulting in better services being provided by them.
 
Recommendations/Observation
3.7       The Committee notes that out of the 22,926 PHCs functioning in the country, 14435 are in Govt. building and
remaining 8491 PHCs are functioning in rented/rent free Panchayat building.   Similarly, out of 3106 CHCs functioning in
the country, 2387 are in Govt. building and remaining 719 CHCs are functioning in rented / rent free Panchayat buildings. 
The Committee observes that the Govt. has taken a number of steps for strengthening the centres which include revision in
the norms for rent, drug supply, additional fund for sub-centre under Pradhan Mantri Gramodyaya Yojana (PMGY),
Financial assistance for minor repair works, construction / repair of Operation Theatre, Labour Room etc.  The Committee
feels that the ideal position will be if all the PHCs and CHCs are functioning in the Govt. buildings. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department may explore the possibility of having more PHCs operating from Govts.
building.
Action Taken
     The PHCs and CHCs are established and maintained by the State Governments under the Minimum Needs
Programme/Basic Minimum Services Programme, renamed as Prime Minister Gramodaya Yojana (PMGY). As per 2001
population, 4977 more PHCs are needed to be established in the country.  However, some States have already established
PHCs in excess of the prescribed norm. The capital cost of one PHC is Rs.24.50 lakhs with a recurring liability of Rs.13.00
lakhs. This expenditure is met by the State Government under the PMGY Programme. 
As per 2001 population, 3577 more CHCs are required in the country. The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal
Pradesh, Mizoram, Maharashtra, A&N Islands, Lakshdweep and Pondicherry have excess infrastructure in terms of CHCs.
Capital cost of one CHC is Rs.80.50 lakhs with a recurring liability of Rs.27.00 lakhs, currently met by State Governments
under the PMGY Programme. 
            Even though the number of PHCs and CHCs needs to be increased, yet it is highly unlikely that there would be any
Sub-Centre that would not be linked to any existing PHC/CHC.
            As far as functioning of PHCs and CHCs in Government buildings is concerned, the Department of Family Welfare
is of the view that the mere absence of Government building may not affect the routine functioning of the PHC/CHC.  What
is required is a proper building with water supply and electricity facility for improving the quality of service delivery.  
Whether it is run in a Government or rented building, or one that is provided by voluntary organizations/Panchayats, is not
the really crucial issue from the point of view of service delivery.
            The States are time and again requested to achieve annual targets fixed for establishment of PHCs and CHCs.
 
Comments of the Committee

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
The Committee has been given to understand that in spite of there being shortfall in the number of required
PHCs/CHCs in different parts of the country, possibility of any Sub-Center being not linked to any existing PHC/CHC is not
there. The Committee is, however, not inclined to accept this assessment. As per the norms prescribed by the Department,
each PHC acts as a referral unit for six Sub-Centers. Similarly, each CHC serves as a referral unit for four PHCs. As per the
information available with the Committee, these norms are not being adhered to, by many States. While some of the States
are having excess number of these Centers, in some States there is acute shortage. Both the situations cannot be considered
satisfactory. Position in the following States is self-explanatory :-
 
States having excess Sub-Centers
                                                    As per 1991 census
State  Sub-Centre PHC CHC
 R P S R P S R P S
Assam 4356 5109   excess
centers
 
726 610 116     18 100 81
   
610 PHCs are serving 5109 Sub-Centers whereas as per norms, only 3660 Sub-Centers should be linked with 610
PHCs. Similarly 100 CHCs should be serving only 400 PHCs
State  Sub-Centre PHC CHC
 R P S R P S R P S
Andhra
Pradesh           
10242 10568 excess
centers
1707 1386 321     427 219 208
 
 
1386 PHCs are serving 10568 Sub-Centers whereas, as per norms, only 8316 Sub-Centers should be linked with 1386 PHCs.
Similarly, 219 CHCs should be serving only 876 PHCs. The Committee is constrained to observe that the position is worse
in States where shortfall is there in the required number of all the three categories of Centers. The Committee would like to
draw the attention of the Department towards the following  States :-
 
State  Sub-Centre PHC CHC
 R P S R P S R P S
Bihar
 
West
Begal 
11547
10356
10337
8126   
1210
2230
1961
1726
1648
1262
313
464     
490
431
101
99
389
332
 
The number of CHCs in position in Bihar and West Bengal as indicated above is nowhere near the prescribed norms.
Position is also bad in respect of ratio of Sub-Centers and PHCs. The Committee would like to point out that effective
linkage between a Sub-Center and PHC/ CHC  at the ground level so that beneficiaries are in a position to avail of services
offered at all these Centers is required to be there in all the States, specially in those states not performing well. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should monitor the setting up of required Sub-Centers/PHCs/CHCs
as per 1991 census during the Tenth plan period.     
            The Committee agrees with the views of the Department that mere absence of Govt. building may not affect the
routine functioning of PHC/CHC. The Committee, however, apprehends that condition of PHC/CHC buildings whether
Govt.or rented, may not be generally satisfactory. Infrastructure status may also be equally bad. The Committee would also
like to point out that as per the information available with it as on 31.03.03, out of 22,926 functional PHCs only 13,938
PHCs are in Govt. buildings 4153 are in rented/rent- free Panchayat buildings. As many as 1815 PHC buildings are under
construction and 3755 buildings are yet to be constructed. Similarly, out of 3106 functional CHCs, 2367 CHCs are in Govt.
building, 414 are in rented/rent free buildings, 254 buildings are under construction and 241 are yet to be constructed. The
Committee would appreciate if a sample survey about the status of functional Sub-Centers, PHCs and CHCs in some
selected states- both good and bad performing ones, is got conducted under the supervision of the Department and corrective
steps taken thereafter.
Recommendations/Observation

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
3.8       Each Sub-Centre is manned by one Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM) and one Male Health Worker.  One Lady
Health Visitor is entrusted with the task of the supervision of six Sub-Centres. Govt. bears the salary of ANM/LHV, whereas
the salary of the Male Worker is borne by the State Govts.  The Committee notes that there is a shortfall in the number of
different functionaries in the country as indicated below: -
Name Required Strength In Position
ANM 16,0153 1,37,407
LHV 22,842 19855  
MPW (M) 137317 70153
Recommendations/Observation
3.9       The Committee fails to understand the reason for existing vacancies of ANM and LHV, specially because the
expenditure on salary of these workers is the responsibility of the Govt. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
state-wise shortfall in the number of these functionaries.   The Committee views with serious concern that there is acute
shortage of MPW with almost half the vacancies of required strength not being filled up.   The Committee is of the view that
the Department should pursue with the concerned State Govts. for bridging this glaring gap.
Recommendations/Observation
3.10     Committee’s attention has been drawn towards the acute shortfall in the number of functionaries in Centres in the NE
region.  The Committee has been given to understand that shortfall in respect of ANM vis-à-vis sanctioned strength is quite
high in Tripura (63%), Nagaland (53%) and Manipur (16%).  The MPW (M) Centre is largely vacant in Assam and Tripura
while large vacancies are also existing in Manipur.  Vacancies in respect of LHV is high in Assam (33%) Arunachal Pradesh
(25%), Meghalaya (41%) and Tripura (64%).  The Committee feels that there is an urgent need of filling up the number of
vacancies in the posts of different functionaries of Centres in NE region without any further delay. The Department should
approach the concerned State Govts. for actively pursuing this aspect.
 
Action taken
The number of sanctioned posts of Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM) is 1,48,668, out of which 9,681 are vacant as at
Annexure-I
.  The number of vacancies of ANM in NE States is 305 out of sanctioned posts of 8,568. The State of Sikkim has
surplus number of ANMs. 
Total number of posts for Lady Health Visitor (LHV) is 24,331, out of which 3,315 are vacant. The State-wise list of
number of LHVs is at Annexure-I
. The total number of vacancy of posts in NE States is 167 out of sanctioned posts of 854. 
The State of Tripura has excess number of LHVs functioning. 
            Salary of Male Health Worker (one per Sub-Centre) is borne by the State/UT Governments.  There is large shortfall
due to difficulty of the States to support the salary of these workers, resulting in non-appointment of MPW(M). The number
of sanctioned posts of Male Worker is 82,966, out of which 14,948 are vacant. The State-wise list is at Annexure-I
. The total
number of vacant post of MPW(M) in NE States is 397 out of total number of posts of 2,700. In North-Eastern States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Nagaland, not even one MPW(M) is there. 
 
            Some States have requested the Government of India to fund the salary of MPW(M). The States/UTs are constantly
reminded to fill up the gaps in the manpower especially at the grassroots level. 
 
Comments of the Committee
The Committee has noted that the total sanctioned posts of ANMs are 1,48,668 in the country, out of which  1981
posts are lying vacant. Situation is particularly bad in Bihar, J&K, Madhya Pradesh Tripura, Uttar Pradesh & Pondicherry.  
Similarly in respect of LHVs, out of the total sanctioned posts of 24331, 3315 posts are lying vacant. The defaulting States
are Gujarat, Haryana,Kerala, Madhya Pradesh Mizoram, Punjab, Sikkim, and Utter Pradesh. The Committee also observes
that information given by the Department is as on 31.03.2003 The Committee finds it surprising that in the present IT
dominated scenario the Department is relying on figures about two years old. Not only this, specific information about new
states like Jharkhand, Chattisgarh and Uttaranchal are not available with the Department. 
            In view of the fact that the salary of ANMs and LHVs are borne by the Central Government, Committee fails to
understand as to why some State Governments have failed to fill up the vacant posts of ANMs and LHVs. The Committee,
therefore recommends that the Department should impress upon these states to fill up the vacancies in respect of
ANMs/LHVs expeditiously.
The Committee further notes that out of 82,966 posts of MPW (Male),14948 are lying vacant. The states where 10%
or more posts are lying vacant, are  Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh Karnataka,

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
Maharashtra,Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The long list of states as
mentioned above shows that most of the states in our country have defaulted in appointing the required number of MPWs
(Male). The Committee feels that the MPW(Male) is a very important health functionary at the village level.   He not only
educates the men folk about their general and reproductive health, but also makes them aware about benefits of small family
and various methods to keep the family small. The Committee, notes that some states have requested the Govt. to fund the
salary of MPW(Male). The Committee would like to emphasise that the Department should take a decision in this regard at
the earliest.
 
III   RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES
Recommendations/Observation
3.13     The Committee was given  to understand that majority of the training institutions funded by the Department were
established in early 80s and require repair or upgradation.   The Committee was informed that a new scheme has been
launched in the Tenth Plan which envisages to strengthen the basic training School of ANM/LHV and the provision under
the scheme is maximum of Rs. 21.50 Lakhs per ANM/LHV School.  The Committee notes that under this scheme financial
assistance has been given to Sikkim,Uttarnchal, Chhatisgarh  and Rajasthan during 2003-04.  It has been decided to
implement the scheme initially in the EAG States and NE states and later on the scheme will be extended to all other states . 
The  Committee feels that maintenance works of 478 training schools and 42 promotional training schools will take a long
time.  The Committee would like to have the information about  the number of training schools provided funds during 2002-
03 and 2003-04.  This work long over due now needs to be looked into without any further delay.   The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should implement this scheme under a time-bound action plan.  At the same
time, the Committee would like to emphasize that there is a need for getting an assessment done of the 144 training schools
being managed by the State Govts. and NGOs.
Action taken
Strengthening of Basic Training Schools’ is a new scheme with X Plan allocation of Rs.10 crores. SFC approved the
scheme during 2003-04. The ANM/LHV Training Schools provided funds under the scheme during 2003-04 are given
below:
  (Rs. in lakhs)
Name of the State Name of the ANM Training School Funds released
Uttaranchal Almora 20.75
 Pauri 9.65
Chhatisgarh Rajnandgaon 21.08
 Jagdalpur 1.50
 Kondagaon 1.50
 Raigarh 1.50
 Ambikapur 1.50
 Dhamtari 1.50
Rajasthan Jhunjhunu 21.50
 Dholpur 21.50
 Dungarpur 21.50
 Alwar 21.50
 Udaipur 21.50
 Karauli 9.65
 Gangapur 21.50
Sikkim Gangtok 21.50
Total – 4 States Total – 16 Training Schools 213.13
 
            As regards the assessment to be done of 144 Training Schools managed by the State Governments and NGOs, it may
be mentioned that this Department does not have any control over such Training Schools. Further, State Governments/NGOs
are independent to open/close/run these Schools without the approval of the Department.  However, as per observations of
the Committee, action is being initiated for getting the assessment done of these Training Schools run by State
Governments/NGOs.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee notes that under the scheme of “ Strengthening of Basic Training Schools”, Rs. 213.13 lakhs have
been released to 16 ANM/LHV Training schools located in Uttaranchal, Chattisgarh, Rajasthan and Sikkim during 2003-
2004. While appreciating the initiative taken by the Department for repair/ strengthening of ANM/LHV Training Schools,

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
the Committee would like to reiterate that a time-bound action plan should be formulated and implemented as only about
22% ANM/MPW(F) Training Center buildings are in good condition and 42.5% buildings require major repairs. Status of
LHV and MPW(M) Training Centers is also similar. In view of majority of ANM/MPW (F) Training Centers and all LHV
Training Centers being funded by the Department, the Committee feels that the Department should monitor at all levels the
work of strengthening of these Training Centers.
         
IV.       REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observation
4.2              Plan allocation for RCH Programme for 2004-05 is Rs. 783.16 crore, out of which DBS component is Rs. 69.50
crore and EAP component is Rs. 713.66 crore.  The Committee notes that almost similar provision was made during
2003-04. However, BE 2003-04 of Rs. 712.41 crore was reduced to Rs. 442.34 crores at RE Stage and the actual
expenditure incurred is only Rs. 388,53 crore.  Two of the main reasons cited for reduction in the allocation at RE
stage and even lesser actual expenditure are non submission of utilisation certificates and Audit reports and
availability of unspent balance with the States/UTs. The Committee is disturbed to note that out of total allocation of
Rs. 2217.00 crore under this programme since its inception in 1997-98, only Rs. 1304.47 crore could be utilized and
unspent balance is  Rs. 912.8 crore.  The position is very alarming in respect of the following states.
                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                  (Rs. in crores)
State Grant Released Amount Utilized Balance with State
Bihar 160.67 67.49 93.18
Jharkhand 26.07 7.12 18.95
Gujarat 151.58 59.83 91.75
MP 150.45 89.97 60.47
Chattisgarh 28.04 14.10 13.94
Maharashtra 132.84 82.20 50.63
Orissa 77.20 42.01 35.19
Rajasthan 160.32 78.63 81.69
UP 451.89 247.57 204.31
W. Bengal 120.74 78.20 42.53
Recommendations/Observation
4.3       Unspent balances amounting to Rs. 912.8 crore, that too with the major States which require the maximum focus for
achieving the targeted goals under the Family Welfare Programme is a cause for serious concern.   The Committee is of the
view that the Department should pursue the matter of settlement of unspent balances with the concerned State Govts, if
required at the highest level, without any further delay. 
Action taken
     To expedite early settlement of the unspent balances, regular reminders are being sent to the States/UTs by the Ministry.
Also, a series of meetings were planned and held with clusters of States/UTs to obtain Utilisation Certificates and settle
pendencies, as detailed below:
 
Sl. No. Workshop/Meeting For the States/UTs of Dates
1 Regional Workshop at
Kolkata
West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar and Jharkhand 16-17
th Sept. 2004
2 Reg. Workshop at
Thiruvananthapuram
Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, A&N
Islands and Lakshadweep
23-24
th Sept. 2004
3 Regional Workshop at
Lucknow
Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir
27-28
th Sept. 2004
4 Regional Workshop at
Daman
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Goa, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhatisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu
28-29
th Oct. 2004
5 Regional Workshop at
Guwahati
All NE States and Sikkim 4-5
th Nov. 2004
 
            The officers from this Department are in touch with the respective State Government by holding workshops and

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
personal contacts. Further, these States are unable to provide the actual expenditure due to non-receipt of the reports from
the interior districts for consolidation. However, unspent balances are now reduced to Rs.809.26 crores from Rs.912.80
crores till date whereas the actual unspent balances are even less. Further, all the concerned Programme Officers are now
informed to take further vigorous steps so that the unspent balances should remain with the States to the minimum extent.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee notes that the amount of unspent balances under Reproductive and Child Health Programme lying
with different State Govts. has come down from Rs. 912.80 crores to Rs. 809.26 crores as a result of some initiative taken by
the Department during the last year. But the fact remains that level of unspent balances remains too high. The Committee is
not inclined to accept the justification, namely, inability of State Govts. to provide actual expenditure due to non-receipt of
reports from the interior districts for consolidation, advanced by the Department. The Committee strongly feels that there is
an urgent need for streamlining the entire procedure of disbursal of Funds and accounting thereof. The Committee
understands that Programme Officers of the Department have been assigned the state-wise duties to carry out routine
monitoring and surprise inspections. The issue of unspent balances and the factors responsible therefore and remedial steps
taken/ to be taken should be an essential part of the reports submitted by these Programme Officers.
 
IV        REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD  HEALTH PROGRAMME
4.4  Recommendations/Observation
The Committee observes that a number of interventions as indicated below have been made to make the implementation
of RCH effective so that facilities available under the Programme are within the reach of targeted beneficiaries.
 
(A)   CONTRACTUAL APPOINTMENT OF ADDITIONAL ANMS         
            All category   ‘C’ districts of 17 States are being supported for providing additional ANM in 30% of Sub-Centres of
these districts.   In addition Delhi has been permitted for appointing 140 ANM, for extending services to slum areas. 
Approximately, Rs. 110 crore has been released to the States for appointment of additional ANMs since 1997-98 and till
date 6335 additional ANMs have been appointed.   The Committee would like to have details of state wise and district wise
ANMs appointed under the scheme and also funds allocated for the programme. 
Action taken
State-wise list of the additional ANMs appointed and funds released is placed at Annexure-II
.  The concerned State
Governments are being requested to send the district-wise details of additional ANMs and the same will be made available
to the Committee.  
 
 (B)      CONTRACTUAL APPOINTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH/STAFF NURSES
            For improving services, public health /staff nurses on contractual basis are also provided in 25% PHCs /CHCs in C
category districts and 50% PHCs in B category.  1467 PHN/ SN have been appointed and Rs. 31 crore have been released to
the states. The Committee would like to have details of state wise and district wise PHN/SN appointed under the scheme and
also funds allocated for the programme.
Action taken
State-wise list of the PHNs/SNs appointed and funds released is placed at Annexure-II
.  The concerned State Governments
are being requested to send the district-wise details of PHNs/SNs and the same will be made available to the Committee.  
 
 (C)      CONTRACTUAL APPOINTMENT OF LAB TECHNICIANS
            For improving services under maternal health care, 2 lab technicians on contractual basis are also provided to each
district.  So far 391 Lab technicians have been appointed and Rs. 8.37 crore released to the State Govts. The Committee
would like to have details of state wise and district wise Lab Technicians appointed under the scheme and also funds
allocated for the programme.
Action taken
State-wise list of the Lab Technicians appointed and funds released is placed at Annexure-II
.  The concerned State
Governments are being requested to send the district-wise details of Lab Technicians and the same will be made available to
the Committee.  
 
 (D) HIRING OF PRIVATE ANESTHETISTS  
             The Sub District hospital, CHC and FRUs are entitled to hire service for conducting emergency operation for which
they are to be paid Rs.1000 per case.  Rs. 83.73 Lakhs have been released to the States. However, services of Private

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
Anesthetists have been hired for only 1059 operations so far. The Committee would like to have details of state wise and
district wise Anesthetists appointed under the scheme and also funds allocated for the programme. 
Action taken
The scheme provides for hiring of Anesthetists for case-to-case basis on payment of Rs 1000 per case. The purpose was to
permit the States to access anesthetists from private sector since they are not available in the CHCs. However, the
experience from the States suggests that even in the private sector, anesthetists are not available in most areas at sub district
level. While a number of States have accessed the funds, the State-wise reports (Annexure-II
) suggest very little utilization
of funds. The concerned State Governments are being requested to send the district-wise details of Anesthetic consultations
done from private sector and the same will be made available to the Committee.
 
 (E)      HIRING OF PRIVATE GYNECOLOGISTS
Recommendations/Observation
 (i)        To ensure availability of Gynecologists for essential and emergency obstetric care, there is a scheme for hiring of
SM Consultants at PHCs and CHCs where regular Gynecologists are not available.  Rs. 3.61 crore have been released to the
states so far. The Committee would like to have details of state wise and district wise Gynecologists appointed under the
scheme and also funds allocated for the programme. 
Action taken
State-wise list of the Safe Motherhood Consultant’s visit and funds released is placed at Annexure-II
.  The concerned
State Governments are being requested to send the district-wise details of Safe Motherhood Consultant’s visit and the same
will be made available to the Committee.
 
Comments of the Committee
 
The Committee`s attention had been drawn towards a number of initiatives taken by the Department for making the
implementation of RCH effective. The Committee had asked for specific details about the achievement made by State
Govts. in this regard. As per the details made available to the Committee, the Department does not have any record about the
level of physical achievements of the schemes as made by States/UT of Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttaranchal and Andman &
Nicobar Islands under the following schemes-:
(a)
               Contractual Appointment of Additional ANMs
(b)               Contractual Appointment of Public Health/Staff Nurses
(c)                Contractual Appointment of Lab Technicians.
The Committee also notes that under the schemes of ‘Hiring of Safe Motherhood Consultants at PHCs/CHCs’ and
‘Hiring of Private Anesthetists’, the Department is not aware about the utilization position of allocated funds by a number of
states. The Committee strongly feels that mere holding of national workshops on the national health schemes under RCH
and state visits by the Department officials will not serve the purpose. The Committee reiterates that there is a need for
having an effective monitoring mechanism where under both regular and surprise inspections are conducted by the Central
teams in co-ordination with state authorities followed by corrective steps.        
   CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
---NIL---
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
III   RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee views with serious concern the achievement level with regard to setting-up of Sub-Centers as per
1991 census. The Committee notes that shortfall of 8669 Sub-Centers was targeted to be fulfilled by the Planning

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
Commission with annual target of 1941 for each of the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, second and third year of Tenth
Plan. The Committee has been given to understand that approval of Cabinet for opening of 8669 Sub-Centers was obtained
in January,2004 and funds for establishing the new Sub-Centers @ Rs.10,000/- each were duly released in February,2004.
The Committee feels that no further information about the progress made in actual establishment of new Sub-Centers since
February, 2004 is available with the Department. The Committee would like to emphasize that the responsibility of the
Department does not end with regular reminders to the State Govts. The Department should make all conceivable efforts for
getting the required Sub-Centers set up as per 1991 census. Progress being made specially in the major defaulter States
should be constantly monitored by the Department. Preparatory exercise for fulfilling the gap of 26,478 Sub-Centers as per
the 2001 census should start from 2005-2006 itself.           (Para 3.4&3.5)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee has been given to understand that in spite of there being shortfall in the number of required
PHCs/CHCs in different parts of the country, possibility of any Sub-Center being not linked to any existing PHC/CHC is not
there. The Committee is, however, not inclined to accept this assessment. As per the norms prescribed by the Department,
each PHC acts as a referral unit for six Sub-Centers. Similarly, each CHC serves as a referral unit for four PHCs. As per the
information available with the Committee, these norms are not being adhered to, by many States. While some of the States
are having excess number of these Centers, in some States there is acute shortage. Both the situations cannot be considered
satisfactory. Position in the following States is self-explanatory: -
States having excess Sub-Centers
                                                    As per 1991 census
State  Sub-Centre PHC CHC
 R P S R P S R P S
Assam 4356 5109   excess
centers
 
726 610 116     18 100 81
   
610 PHCs are serving 5109 Sub-Centers whereas as per norms, only 3660 Sub-Centers should be linked with 610 PHCs.
Similarly 100 CHCs should be serving only 400 PHCs
State  Sub-Centre PHC CHC
 R P S R P S R P S
Andhra
Pradesh           
10242 10568 excess
centers
1707 1386 321     427 219 208
 
1386 PHCs are serving 10568 Sub-Centers whereas, as per norms, only 8316 Sub-Centers should be linked with 1386 PHCs.
Similarly, 219 CHCs should be serving only 876 PHCs. The Committee is constrained to observe that the position is worse
in States where shortfall is there in the required number of all the three categories of Centers. The Committee would like to
draw the attention of the Department towards the following  States :-
 
State  Sub-Centre PHC CHC
 R P S R P S R P S
Bihar
 
West
Begal 
11547
10356
10337
8126   
1210
2230
1961
1726
1648
1262
313
464     
490
431
101
99
389
332
 
The number of CHCs in position in Bihar and West Bengal as indicated above is nowhere near the prescribed norms.
Position is also bad in respect of ratio of Sub-Centers and PHCs. The Committee would like to point out that effective
linkage between a Sub-Center and PHC/ CHC at the ground level so that beneficiaries are in a position to avail of services
offered at all these Centers is required to be there in all the States, specially in those states not performing well. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should monitor the setting up of required Sub-Centers/PHCs/CHCs
as per 1991 census during the Tenth plan period.     
            The Committee agrees with the views of the Department that mere absence of Govt. building may not affect the
routine functioning of PHC/CHC. The Committee, however, apprehends that condition of PHC/CHC buildings whether

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
Govt.or rented, may not be generally satisfactory. Infrastructure status may also be equally bad. The Committee would also
like to point out that as per the information available with it as on 31.03.03, out of 22,926 functional PHCs only 13,938
PHCs are in Govt. buildings 4153 are in rented/rent- free Panchayat buildings. As many as 1815 PHC buildings are under
construction and 3755 buildings are yet to be constructed. Similarly, out of 3106 functional CHCs, 2367 CHCs are in Govt.
building, 414 are in rented/rent free buildings, 254 buildings are under construction and 241 are yet to be constructed. The
Committee would appreciate if a sample survey about the status of functional Sub-Centers, PHCs and CHCs in some
selected states- both good and bad performing ones, is got conducted under the supervision of the Department and corrective
steps taken thereafter. (Para 3.6&3.7)
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee has noted that the total sanctioned posts of ANMs are 1,48,668 in the country, out of which 1981
posts are lying vacant. Situation is particularly bad in Bihar, J&K, Madhya Pradesh Tripura, Uttar Pradesh & Pondicherry.  
Similarly in respect of LHVs, out of the total sanctioned posts of 24331, 3315 posts are lying vacant. The defaulting States
are Gujarat, Haryana,Kerala, Madhya Pradesh Mizoram, Punjab, Sikkim, and Utter Pradesh. The Committee also observes
that information given by the Department is as on 31.03.2003 The Committee finds it surprising that in the present IT
dominated scenario the Department is relying on figures about two years old. Not only this, specific information about new
states like Jharkhand, Chattisgarh and Uttaranchal are not available with the Department. 
            In view of the fact that the salary of ANMs and LHVs are borne by the Central Government, Committee fails to
understand as to why some State Governments have failed to fill up the vacant posts of ANMs and LHVs. The Committee,
therefore recommends that the Department should impress upon these states to fill up the vacancies in respect of
ANMs/LHVs expeditiously.
The Committee further notes that out of 82,966 posts of MPW (Male), 14948 are lying vacant. The states where 10%
or more posts are lying vacant, are Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The long list of states as
mentioned above shows that most of the states in our country have defaulted in appointing the required number of MPWs
(Male). The Committee feels that the MPW (Male) is a very important health functionary at the village level.   He not only
educates the men folk about their general and reproductive health, but also makes them aware about benefits of small family
and various methods to keep the family small. The Committee, notes that some states have requested the Govt. to fund the
salary of MPW (Male). The Committee would like to emphasise that the Department should take a decision in this regard at
the earliest. (Para 3.8,3.9&3.10)
 
III   RURAL FAMILY WELFARE SERVICES
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee notes that under the scheme of “ Strengthening of Basic Training Schools”, Rs. 213.13 lakhs have
been released to 16 ANM/LHV Training schools located in Uttaranchal, Chattisgarh, Rajasthan and Sikkim during 2003-
2004. While appreciating the initiative taken by the Department for repair/ strengthening of ANM/LHV Training Schools,
the Committee would like to reiterate that a time-bound action plan should be formulated and implemented as only about
22% ANM/MPW(F) Training Center buildings are in good condition and 42.5% buildings require major repairs. Status of
LHV and MPW (M) Training Centers is also similar. In view of majority of ANM/MPW (F) Training Centers and all LHV
Training Centers being funded by the Department, the Committee feels that the Department should monitor at all levels the
work of strengthening of these Training Centers. (Para 3.13)
         
IV.       REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee notes that the amount of unspent balances under Reproductive and Child Health Programme lying
with different State Govts. has come down from Rs. 912.80 crores to Rs. 809.26 crores as a result of some initiative taken by
the Department during the last year. But the fact remains that level of unspent balances remains too high. The Committee is
not inclined to accept the justification, namely, inability of State Govts. to provide actual expenditure due to non-receipt of
reports from the interior districts for consolidation, advanced by the Department. The Committee strongly feels that there is
an urgent need for streamlining the entire procedure of disbursal of Funds and accounting thereof. The Committee
understands that Programme Officers of the Department have been assigned the state-wise duties to carry out routine
monitoring and surprise inspections. The issue of unspent balances and the factors responsible therefore and remedial steps
taken/ to be taken should be an essential part of the reports submitted by these Programme Officers. (Para 4.2&4.3)

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
 
IV        REPRODUCTIVE AND CHILD HEALTH PROGRAMME
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
The Committee`s attention had been drawn towards a number of initiatives taken by the Department for making the
implementation of RCH effective. The Committee had asked for specific details about the achievement made by State
Govts. in this regard. As per the details made available to the Committee, the Department does not have any record about the
level of physical achievements of the schemes as made by States/UT of Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttaranchal and Andman &
Nicobar Islands under the following schemes-:
(a)        Contractual Appointment of Additional ANMs
(b)        Contractual Appointment of Public Health/Staff Nurses
(c)        Contractual Appointment of Lab Technicians.
The Committee also notes that under the schemes of ‘Hiring of Safe Motherhood Consultants at PHCs/CHCs’ and
‘Hiring of Private Anesthetists’, the Department is not aware about the utilization position of allocated funds by a number of
states. The Committee strongly feels that mere holding of national workshops on the national health schemes under RCH
and state visits by the Department officials will not serve the purpose. The Committee reiterates that there is a need for
having an effective monitoring mechanism where under both regular and surprise inspections are conducted by the Central
teams in co-ordination with state authorities followed by corrective steps.        (Para 4.4)
             -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES
 
 MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
 
X
 
TENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 3
rd March, 2005 in Committee Room 63, Parliament House, New
Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur
3. Shri R. Sarath Kumar  
4. Shri Lalming Liana
 
     LOK SABHA
 
5. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
6. Dr. M. Baburao
7. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Shri Nakul Das Rai
10. Shri Uday Singh
11. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
   SECRETARIAT

5th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/5th%20Report%20.htm[29-06-2016 14:39:54]
              
  Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
              Shri P.R.Guha Roy, Director
              Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
              Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. The Committee then considered and adopted
the draft 4
th, 5 th and 6 th Action Taken Reports of the Committee on action taken by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare on the     1st, 2nd and 3rd Reports of the Committee on Demands-for-Grants (2004-05) relating to the Departments of
Health, Family Welfare and AYUSH respectively. 
 
2A.      The Committee also decided that the 4 th, 5th and 6th Reports will be presented in Rajya Sabha by the Chairman and
in his absence by Smt. Sukhbuns Kaur and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha by Shri Uday Singh and in his absence by Dr.
Karan Singh Yadav on the 11th March, 2005.
 
3.         The Committee decided that the next meeting on Demands-for-Grants (2005-06) relating to the Departments within
its purview will be held on 28th and 29th March, 2005.
 
4.         The Committee adjourned at 10:25 a.m.
NEW DELHI   
3rd March, 2005
MOMRAJ SINGH
UNDER SECRETARY
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------