PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
53 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
ON 
 
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEURO-SCIENCES, 
BANGALORE BILL, 2010 
 
 
 (PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH MARCH, 2011)             
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH MARCH, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
  ON 
 
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEURO-SCIENCES, 
BANGALORE BILL, 2010 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH MARCH, 2011)             
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH MARCH, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/ PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 


C O N T E N T S 
 
       PAGES 
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE---------- -----------------           (i) 
 
2. PREFACE------------ ------------------------------------------------------           (ii) 
  
3. REPORT-------------- ------------------------------------------------------         1-17         
   4. RECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS  AT A GLANCE        18-22  
   5.         MINUTES-----------------------------------------------------------------        23-27      
 6. ANNEXURE (copy of the Bill)-----------------------------------------         28-44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-2011) 
        
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak    -     Chairman 
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
5. Shri Balbir Punj 
6. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
7. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
9. Shri Rasheed Masood  
*10. Shrimati B. Jayashree 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Ashok Argal 
12. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh 
13. Shri Vijay Bahuguna 
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan 
15. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
16. Shri S. R. Jeyadurai 
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi 
18. Shri Nimmala Kristappa 
19. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
20. Shri Datta Meghe 
21. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
22. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
23. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
24. Shri R.K. Singh Patel 
25. Shri M. K Raghavan 
26. Shri J. M. Aaron Rashid 
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha  
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma  
29. Shrimati Meena Singh  
30. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
31. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
              
 Shrimati Vandana Garg,          Additional Secretary 
Shri R.B.Gupta,                           Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta,   Joint Director 
               Shri Dinesh Singh,                     Assistant Director 
 Shri Satis Mesra                          Committee Officer 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
*     nominated to the Committee w.e.f  21/9/2010 
 
(i) 

PREFACE 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been author ized by the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, present this Fifty-third Report of the Committee on the National Institute of 
Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore Bill, 2010,.* 
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of  Procedure and Conduct of Business in the 
Council of States relating to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the 
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Natio nal Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-
Sciences, Bangalore Bill, 2010,  (Annexure)  as introduced in th e Rajya Sabha on the 7 th 
December, 2010 and pending therein, to the Committee on the 8 th December, 2010 for 
examination and report, by 6th March, 2011. 
3. The Committee considered the Bill in its meeting held on the 5 th January, 2011. 
4.         In its meeting held on the 5 th January, 2011, the Committee heard the Secretary and 
other officers of the Department of Health  and Family Welfare and Director, NIMHANS. 
Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft Report and adopted the same on the 1st March, 
2011.  
5.         The Committee has relied on the following documents in finalizing the Report: 
(i)          Background Note and Clause-b y-Clause Note on the Bill received from the   
Department of Health and Family Welfare;  
(ii)        Presentation, clarification and Oral evidence by Secretary of the Department; 
(iii) Memoranda received on the Bill from various 
bodies/associations/organizations/experts; and  
(iv) Replies to the questions/queries raised  by Members in the meeting on the Bill 
received from the Department. 
 
6.        On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions 
made by those who deposed before the Committee. 
7.     For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.    
 
NEW DELHI  
1st March , 2011 
Phalguna 10, 1932 (Saka) 
BRAJESH PATHAK 
           Chairman,  
 Department-related Parliamentary  
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
______________________________________________________________________ 
*          Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated 7th December, 2010. 
**        Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No 47225, dated 8th December,  2010. 
 
      ( i i )  
 

REPORT 
 
 The National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore Bill, 2010 was 
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 7 th December, 2010 and referred  to the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare for examination and report on 8 th 
December, 2010.  The Statement of Objects a nd Reasons appended to the Bill gives the 
background justifying the need for bringing a Bill in the following manner: 
 
“The Institute in its present form faces constraints in (a) growing further and 
in evolving new courses in diverse fiel ds relevant to the present national 
scenario in India; (b) giving greater thru st to inter- disciplinary research and 
innovation and (c) evolving strategies  for enhanced service delivery, 
rehabilitation of patients with neurological and mental disability. 
 
 It is proposed to make the Institu te a statutory body corporate and to 
declare it as an institution of nationa l importance under Entry 64 of List I of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constituti on so that it may develop as a high 
level institution of Mental Health an d Neuro Sciences on the pattern of the 
All India Institute of Medical Scie nces, New Delhi, the Post-Graduate 
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh and the Jawaharlal 
Institute of Post-Graduate Education and Research, Puducherry. 
 
 This Bill will empower the Instit ute with academic autonomy to 
develop its own curriculum, set new tr ends in mental health and neuro 
sciences, award its own degrees and al so enable it to have appropriate 
delegated administrative a nd financial powers.  The conferring of statutory 
status on this Institute will enable it to grow into a model centre of 
excellence.” 
 
2. Initiating the process of cons ideration of the Bill, the Committee heard the views of the 
Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, alongwith the Director, NIMHANS in its 
meeting held on 5th January, 2011.  Tracing the evolution of the Institute, the Director informed 
the Committee that Lunatic Asylum of 1848 was converted into Mental Hospital in 1926.  
Thereafter, to meet the needs of independent India, it took the shape of a Postgraduate Training 
Institute as the All India Institute of Mental Health in 1954.  After a gap of twenty years, 
amalgamation of 120 years old State Mental Hosp ital and the All India Institute of Mental 

Health took place in 1974.  This was followed by its elevation as a Deemed University in 1994, 
keeping in view its academic excellence and ma npower training.  Since then, the Institute has 
continued to grow with faculty  strength increasing from 107 in 1994 to 145 in 2009.  This is 
reflected in the number of students whose enro lment has increased from 186 in 1990-94 to 867 
in 2004-09.  Number of courses offered also has increased to 23 at present from 14 courses 
being offered in 1990-94.  The Committee was further informed that the Institute was a tertiary 
care medical and academic Institution, dedicated to the care of neurological, neurosurgical and 
psychiatric disorders and manpower developmen t in super specialty branches related to 
neurosciences, including nursi ng and basic sciences.  Inte grating mental health and 
neurosciences, the Institute has gained international recognition in patient care and education.  
It was not only the country’s only Brain Bank but also enjoyed the status of WHO Regional 
referral Lab for Rabies, JE and HIV. 
3. The Committee was given to understand th at NIMHANS, as a sp ecialty hospital for 
secondary and tertiary care for neurological and psychiatric diso rders, was entrusted with the 
mandate to develop trained manpower to cater to the needs of the co mmunity and carry out 
research in the field of mental health and ne urosciences.  The Institute also had the added 
responsibility of formulating a nd evolving policy statements for implementation in the sphere 
of community mental health. 
 
 4. The Secretary emphasized that given the achievements made by the National Institute 
of Mental Health and Neurosciences, there was a widely articulated need to grant the Institute 
greater administrative and academ ic autonomy.   It was proposed to make the Institute a 
statutory body corporate and to declare it as an institution of national importance under Entry 
64 of List 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the C onstitution so that it may develop as a high level 
institution of Mental Health and Neurosciences  on the pattern of the All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, 

Chandigarh and the Jawaharlal Institute of Post-Graduate Education and Research, Puducherry.  
  
 
5. The proposal for declaring NIMHANS as In stitution of National Importance was first 
mooted by the Governing Body of the Institu te in 1987.  The proposal was subsequently 
approved by various bodies of the Institute including NIM HANS Society.  Following positive 
developments were anticipated as a result of   NIMHANS being declared an Institute of 
National Importance:-  
¾ Greater impetus, autonomy and flexibility in  initiating new course s in diverse fields 
some of which are unique to NIMHANS, re levant to the nation, thus enhancing the 
scarce human resource in the broad field of Mental Health and Neurosciences. 
¾ Greater thrust to interdisciplinary research and innovations in the field of mental health 
and neurosciences. 
¾ Enhanced service delivery and rehabilitation of patients with neurological and mental 
disorders and disability closer to the community. 
¾ An opportunity to play a pivotal role in fo rmulating national and international policies 
related to Mental Health, Human Rights i ssues, Disaster Management, Neurological 
and Mental Disability Management. 
 
Consultation process 
6.   Keeping in view the present status of  NIMHANS being registered under the Karnataka 
Societies Registration Act, 1960, a specific query  was made about the response of the State 
Government of Karnataka about the proposed legislation.  In response, the Committee was 
informed that the Government of Karnataka ha d communicated their endorsement, as early as 
on 21st April, 2006 to the Ministry’s proposal to declare NIMHANS as Institute of National 
Importance. They had requested Government of India to approve this proposal at the earliest. 
7. When asked to clarify the stand of faculty members, medical and para-medical staff and 
other entities associated with the Institute in the matter, the Committee was categorically 
informed that all cadres of NIMHANS had una nimously approved the proposal without any 
reservation.  
 

8. The Committee was very much concerned a bout the interests of the existing employees 
of the Institute. As a matter of abundant precaution, the Committee approached all the 
Employees’ Associations of the Institute seeking their views on the proposed legislation.  The 
Committee received comments from the following Associations:- 
1) The NIMHANS Faculty Association (Regd.) 
2) NIMHANS Employees Association (Regd.) 
3) NIMHANS SC/ST Employees Welfare Association (Regd.) 
4) NIMHANS Group “D” SC/ST Employees Association (Regd.) 
 
In identical response, all th ese Associations informed th e Committee that they had no 
reservations on the proposed le gislation since all their serv ice conditions, emoluments and 
other benefits remained unaltered and ex pressed their solidarit y with the NIMHANS 
Administration to take the Institute forward as an Institute of National Importance. 
9.   The Committee’s attention was drawn by the reference made in the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons about a number of constrai nts being faced by the Institute at present. 
When asked to elaborate, the Committee was informed that NIMHANS was currently involved 
in the manpower development in the field of Mental Health a nd Neurosciences by offering 
traditional courses such as MD, DM, M.Ch, M. Phil(Clinical Psychology), M.Phil (Psychiatric 
Social Work), etc. However, two-fold limitations  were being faced by the Institute.  Firstly, at 
present there was a limited scope of evolving new innovative, interdisci plinary, need-based 
postgraduate course of variab le duration, especially MD/DM in Community Mental Health, 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Family Psychi atry, De-addiction Medicine, Geriatric Mental 
Health, Neuro-rehabilitaiton and others. Be sides that, many of these courses were 
interdisciplinary in nature like integration of  traditional  systems (Ayurveda and Yoga) with 
modern systems of medicine requiring approval from multiple statutory bodies such as Medical 
Council of India, Rehabilitation Council of India, Indian Nursing Council, and Central Council 
for Ayurveda and Allied Sciences, etc. There was also a limitation on the intake of number of 

students/ trainees by statutory bodies (MCI, RCI, INC) with limited scope to evolve need-
based curricula of interdisciplinary courses. 
10.  It was emphasized that the present d eemed university status of NIMHANS posed 
several limitations in obtaining research grants, undertaking collaboration of multidisciplinary 
research, exchange of faculty a nd students, establishing collaborat ion in any part of the world 
with objectives similar in nature . It was pointed out that such constraints were not coming in 
the way of other institutes  (such as A IIMS, PGIMER, IITs and IIMs), which had been 
declared as “Institute of National Importance”. 
 
11. The Committee’s attention was also drawn to  the fact that by declaring NIMHANS as 
an Institute of National Importance, it would be  outside the purview of the Medical Council of 
India, Rehabilitation Council of India, Nursing Council of India, etc.  Thus, the Institute would 
have the requisite freedom to develop its own courses and to issue degrees/diplomas. Not only 
this, it would provide academic and administrativ e freedom to evolve and experiment effective 
teaching methods and develop new courses, and evolve translational research to meet the 
national needs and challenges.  
 
12. Keeping in view the fact that  the present Bill is on the patt ern of All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, the PGIMER, Chandigarh, Jawaharlal Institute of Post-graduate 
Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Puducherry, Sreechitra Tirunal Institute for 
Medical Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, the Committee requested directors and 
renowned scientists of the above institutes to offer their valuable comments for the benefit of 
the Committee.  The Committee received comments from most of the experts and scientists. 
 
13. The clauses where the Committee has sugge sted amendments are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.   
 

Clause 4: Incorporation of Institute 
14. Clause 4 lays down that the National Institu te of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, 
Bangalore, an Institute register ed under the Karnataka Societie s Registration Act, 1960 on the 
27th day of December, 1974, is hereby constitute d a body corporate by the name aforesaid and 
as such body corporate, it shall have perpet ual succession and a common seal with power, 
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire , hold and dispose of prop erty and to contract 
and shall, by that name, sue and be sued. 6 h 
 
15. This clause seeks to provide for incorporati on of the National Institute of Mental Health 
and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore into a body corporate by the same name having perpetual 
succession and common seal with certain po wers.  Apprehensions were voiced by the 
Committee about the likely adverse impact of the incorporation of the institute as body 
corporate as the Institute might be registered  under the Companies Act thereby leading to 
profit- making activities.  
 
16. When asked to clarify the basis for incl usion of such a provision, the Department 
informed the Committee that the use of the phrase “institute as a statutory body corporate” was 
similar to the phrase used in other Acts pertaini ng to institutes of nati onal importance such as 
AIIMS, New Delhi; PGIMER, Chandigarh; JI PMER, Puducherry; IITs, etc. Statutory body 
corporates were public enterprises which came into existence by a special Act of the 
Parliament.  The Act defined its powers and functions, rules and re gulations governing its 
employees and its relationship w ith the Government.  Intention of the Government was not to 
make the NIMHANS a corporate body. Committ ee’s attention was drawn to clause 25 
whereunder the Institute was mandated to carry  out the directions issued by the Central 
Government from time to time for the efficient administration of the Act.  Further, clause 26 
laid down that if any dispute or difference arose between the Institute and the Central 

Government with regard to the exercise of powers and discharge of functions by the Institute, 
the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
 
17. The Committee is not convinced by the clarification given by the Department 
about the incorporation of the Institute as a body corporate. The argument that it was 
based on similar provisions included in the Acts governing AIIMS and PGI fails to allay 
the apprehensions of the Committee. Doubt remains about the exact status of the 
Institute- a non-profit Institute or not-for-prof it Institute or a profit-making Institute as 
per the connotation of the term ‘body co rporate’. The Committee takes note of the 
assurance given by the Secretary of the Departme nt for getting a legal clarification in the 
matter. The Committee would a ppreciate if all the apparent ambiguity arising due to the 
use of the term ‘body corporate’  is removed at the earliest. It  would not be out of context 
to draw the attention of the Government to the Memorandum of Association governing 
NIMHANS at present which clarif ies specifically that the In stitute had been established 
for public benefit and accordingly its object s had been incorporated and restricted to 
meet such objectives and purposes as were re garded in law to be of public charitable 
nature. The Committee is of the firm opinion that conferring a status of national Institute 
should be a further step towards this nobl e objective only. Any deviation therefrom was 
not acceptable to the Committee.   
  
Clause 5: Composition of Institute 
18. As per this clause, the Institute shall consist of the following members, namely:- 
(a) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare, President: 
(b) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or Department of Health 
and Family Welfare, ex officio; 
(c) the Director of the Institute, ex officio; 
(d) Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary) Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, ex officio; 
(e) Secretary to the Government of India or his nominee (not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary) in the Department of  Higher Education, Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, ex officio; 

(f) the Director-General of Health Services, Government of India, ex officio; 
(g) the Vice-Chancellor of Rajiv  Gandhi University of Health Sciences, Karnataka, 
ex officio; 
(h) the Chief Secretary or his nominee of the Government of Karnataka, ex officio; 
(i) seven persons of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist representing the 
Indian Science Congress Associati on to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such  manner as may be prescribed; 
(j) four representatives of medi cal faculties of Indian Universities to be nominated 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 
(k) three Members of Parliament of wh om two shall be elected from among 
themselves by the members of the House of the People and one from among 
themselves by the members of the Council of States. 
 
 
19. This clause seeks to provide for the compos ition of the Institute with the Minister in 
charge of Health & Family Welfare as its Pr esident and twenty-one other members consisting 
of seven ex officio members, medical specialists , etc., and three Members of Parliament (two 
from Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha) as its me mbers.  It also provides that the office of 
a member of the Institute shall not disqualify its holder for be ing chosen as, or for being, a 
member of either House of Parliament. 
 
20. A comparative analysis of proposed  composition of NIMHANS with other 
Institutes like AIIMS and PGI reveals a di stinctive feature. Whereas relevant provisions 
of the Acts governing these two Institutes simp ly give the details of different categories of 
Members, proposed provision for NIMHANS sp ecifies that the Minister of Health and 
Family Welfare would be the president of the Institute. Not only this, another provision 
(Clause 7) relating to ‘Powers and function s of President’ again mentions that the 
Minister of Health and Family  Welfare, Government of I ndia, New Delhi shall be the 
President of the Institute.  
 
21. The Committee is constrained to observe that  this is a case of bad drafting. What 
is more disturbing is that both the AIIMS an d PGI Acts have a specific provision which 
clearly lays down that the President of the Institute shall be nominated by the Central 

Government from among the members other than the Director of the Institute. The 
Committee fails to understand the reasons fo r such a departure on the part of the 
Government. On drawing the attention of the Department towards the JIPMER Act, 
2008 whereunder the Jawaharlal Institute of Medical Education and Research, 
Puducherry was conferred the status of National  Institute having a provision similar to 
AIIMS and PGI Act, clarification given by the Department was far from satisfactory. The 
Committee was informed as follow: - 
 “The JIPMER Bill was passed with an amendment by which Minister 
of Health and Family Welfare was not retained as Ex-officio President. 
Accordingly, the original clause relat ing to appointment of the President 
was modified to the effect that th ere shall be a President which will be 
nominated by the Central Government from amongst the members of 
JIPMER. However, the Minister of Health and Family Welfare is the 
President of the Institute body in AIIMS and PGI Act.” 
 
 
22. The Committee views with serious con cern the justification given by the 
Department on such a crucial issue. The very  fact that the JIPMER Bill had to be passed 
in Parliament with an amendment so far as P resident of the Institute is concerned should 
have made things very clear to the Depa rtment. The Committee would have appreciated 
if the Department had taken note of its st rong recommendations in this matter in its 
Report on the JIPMER Bill, 2008. The Commi ttee can only reiterate that its stand 
remains unchanged. Head of the Institute body pertaining to very specialized areas has to 
be an eminent person having full command on such matters. 
 
23. On this provision, the Committee sought the opinion of a number of experts who were 
not in favour of appointing a political head as President of the Institu te Body as well as its 
Governing Body.  Similarly, the Sreechitra Ti runal Institute for Medical Sciences and 
Technology, Thiruvananthapuram always has a re nowned scientist/medical professional as its 
President approved by the Central Government.  It  was pointed out that it would be advisable 

to have an eminent medical professional/renowned scientist as the President of the Institute and 
Chairperson of its Governing B ody who will be able to provide expert advice and supervision 
on the functioning of the Institute far better th an a political head over-burdened with multiple 
activities.  
 
24. The Committee strongly feels that the appo intment of a political head as President 
of the Institute Body of national import ance cannot be considered advisable in any 
respect.  It is a well known fact that th e Ministers are entrusted with manifold 
responsibilities and functions. It becomes very  unpractical to expect full attention at all 
times from Ministers, that too in the func tioning of premier Institutes like NIMHANS 
and other similar bodies. Therefore, the Committee is not in favour of proposed provision 
in clause 5(1)(a) as well as clause 7(1). Th e Committee, accordingly, recommends that the 
above sub-clause relating to appointment of He alth Minister as President of the Body of 
the Institute may be deleted from Clause 5 and clause 7( 1) may be modified on the 
pattern of relevant provisions in AIIMS and PGI Acts as indicated below:- 
Clause 7(1) 
  
“There shall be a Presiden t of the Institute who sh all be nominated by the 
Central Government from among the me mbers other than the Director of 
the Institute”. 
 
25. Clause 5(1)(h) provides that the Chief S ecretary or his nominee of the Government of 
Karnataka will be a member (ex-officio) of the Institute Body. 
26. Some of the experts suggested that th e above clause should be replaced by the 
following provision:- 
 
 “The Chief Secretary or his nominee ( not below the rank of Secretary ) of the 
Government of Karnataka should be an ex-officio”. 
 
27. The reason given for the above modification  was that it would be in conformity 
with the sub-clause (d) & (e) to clause 5(1). The Committee is in agreement with the 

above suggestion and, therefore, recommends th at the above sub clause may be modified 
accordingly. 
 
28. Clause 5(1)(i) lays down that seven pe rsons of whom one shall be a non-medical 
scientist representing the Indi an Science Congress Associati on shall be nominated by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under the Act.  
 
 29. It was pointed out to the Committee that since this Institute is a unique one - 
specializing in medical/physical, behavioral scie nces, it would therefore, be in the interest 
of the Institute to have eminent scientists  from these disciplines and from different 
universities.  The Committee would like to emphasize that over the years the Institute has 
emerged as a premier tertiary care medical and academic institution dedicated to the 
care of neurological, neurosurgical a nd psychiatric disorders and manpower 
development in super specialty branches.  Havi ng the status of Deemed University, it has 
gained international recognition in patient-care and education. It would, therefore, be in 
the fitness of things to have very eminent persons/ experts in the very specialized medical 
sciences.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends  that clause 5 (1) (i) may be modified 
as follows: 
“Seven persons of repute of whom one shal l be a non-medical scientist representing 
the Indian Science Congress Association and  one each from biological, behaviourial 
and physical sciences from any universit ies to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.” 
 
30. As per clause 5(1)(j), four representatives of medical faculties of Indian Universities are 
to be nominated by the Central Government in  such manner as may be  prescribed by rules.
  
 

31. One of the suggestions placed before the Co mmittee was that it would be better to have 
one more faculty in addition to the Director of the Institute as Member of the Institute Body as 
it would facilitate better decision making. 
 
32. The Committee finds some merit in the above suggestion and recommends the 
Ministry to modify the sub-clause as indicated below:  
 “Four representatives of medical faculties of Indian Universities of whom one shall 
be from NIMHANS to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may 
be prescribed”. 
  
Clause 12  - Objectives 
33. Clause 12 provides for the follo wing objectives of the Institute: 
a) to develop patterns of teaching in undergraduate and postgraduate medical 
education in all its branches with a fo cus on mental health, neuro-sciences and 
allied specialties so as to demonstrate a high standard of medical education; 
b) to bring together, as far as may be, in  one place educational facilities of the 
highest order for the training of personnel in all important br anches of health 
activity; 
c) to attain self-sufficiency in postgr aduate medical education to meet the 
country’s needs for specialists and medical teachers, particularly in the field of 
mental health, neuro-sciences and allied specialties.” 
   
34. The Committee’s attention was drawn to th e fact that the propos ed objectives did not 
cover all the aspects as envisage d by the founders of the Institut e of Mental Health.  A perusal 
of the Aims and Objects as given in the Me morandum of Association of NIMHANS confirms 
this fact. The Committee takes note of following additions/ modifications suggested in the 
objectives of the Institute by one of the Directors associated with NIMHANS since 1956: 
Modification suggested: 
(a) To evolve innovative strategies to offer diagnostic and comprehensive therapeutic 
service facilities to reach all corners of India in th e field of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, utilizing the advances in information technology and to be nodal 
centre. 

(b) To attain self sufficiency in manpower development to meet the country’s needs for 
specialists, teachers, service providers at  various levels, including technicians and 
others through undergraduate and postgra duate education and training programmes 
in the field of mental health and neurosciences and all allied sciences. 
(c) To develop and establish new and cohesive patterns of teaching and training and to 
impart knowledge in the field of mental h ealth and neurosciences to all parts of 
India and to all the developing countries through institutional and distance learning.  
(d) To make an in-depth study and resear ch to understand and integrate physical, 
physiological, psycho-social, behavioral and metaphysical aspects of functioning of 
the brain and mind. 
(e) To be the nodal center for the country in Research and Development in the field of 
genetically transmitted neuropsychiatri c disorders and vaccinology of tropical 
infectious diseases.  
(f) To be at par with World leadership in the field of neurosciences and behavioral 
sciences.  
35. The Committee is of the opinion that besi des the above proposed objectives, the aims 
and objects as included in the Memorandum of Association of NIMHANS need to be reviewed 
and in view of its present status as well as further anticipated growt h, appropriate objectives 
may be redrawn and included in the Bill.  
 
Clause 13:  Functions of Institute  
36. As laid down in clause 13 (f) (i), the Institute sh all establish and main tain one or more 
medical institutions with different departments staffed and equipped to undertake education in 
different subjects. 
 
37. It has been pointed out th at service delivery and research were not included in the 
above sub-clause.  Accordingly it was suggested that the Institute may be entrusted with the 
power to establish and maintain one or more me dical institutions with different departments, 
staffed and equipped to undertake education, research and medicare in different specialties.   

38. The Committee appreciates the above sugge stion and desires the Ministry to 
modify the sub-clause accordingly. 
  
39. The Committee’s attention was drawn by two specific powers and functions of 
JIPMER, Puducherry.  One of them relates to reservati on of at least 20 seats out of every 75 
seats in undergraduate courses in the Institute for local applicants.  The other was provision of 
free treatment to the poor patients in the same  manner as being provided by medical institutes 
of the Central Government.  On a specific que ry with regard to existing provisions in 
NIMHANS, the Committee was informed that since its inception in 1994, NIMHANS has been 
offering all post graduate seats on an all India basis without any regional reservation except in 
the case of Diploma in Psychological Medicine (D PM) wherein six seats are reserved for local 
applicants (domiciles of the state of Karnataka).  It was clarified that this shall continue in 
future also.  Secondly, NIMHANS since its inception has been providing free treatment to poor 
patients and the same shall continue in future also. 
 
40. Keeping in view the above clarification, the Committee str ongly feels that in order to 
remove any ambiguity in future, the above existing provisions should also find place in the 
proposed legislation.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary additions may be 
made in the relevant provisions.  
 
Clause 28: Transfer of service of existing employees 
41. Clause 28 is reproduced below:- 
“Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person who is employed in the National Institute 
of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalo re, immediately before the commencement of 
this Act, shall, on and from such commenceme nt, become an employee of the Institute and 
shall hold this office or service therein by th e same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon 
the same terms and conditions and with the same  rights and privileges as to pension, leave, 
gratuity, provident fund and othe r matters as he would have held the same on the date of 
commencement of this Act if this Act had not b een passed, and shall continue to do so unless 
and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and 
conditions are duly altered by regul ations.  Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms 
and conditions of service of any such person shall not be altered to his disadvantage without 
the previous approval of the Central Government.” 
 

42. Almost all members of the Committee were  very much concerned about the service 
conditions of the existing employees of the Inst itute.  They were of the view that under no 
circumstances service conditions of the employees  of the existing institute should be adversely 
affected.  In this regard the representative of  the Ministry informed the Committee that all the 
faculty members, medical and para-medical staff and other entities with the Institute had been 
consulted on the proposed legislation by th e NIMHANS Management.  All cadres of 
NIMHANS unanimously approved the proposal without any reservation. 
 
43. Keeping in view the sen timents of Members, commen ts of all the Faculty and 
Employees’ Association associated with the Institute were sought for.  A perusal of the views 
and comments received from all four Faculty and Employees’ Associations, namely, (i) The 
NIMHANS Faculty Association (R egd.); (ii) NIMHANS Employees  Association (Regd.); (iii) 
NIMHANS SC/ST Employees Welfare Associat ion (Regd.); and (iv) NIMHANS Group “D” 
SC/ST Employees Association (Regd.)   reveals th at they have expressed their solidarity with 
the NIMHANS Administration to take the Inst itute forward as an Institute of National 
importance. 
 
44. The Committee hopes that the Ministry/Insti tute would keep it promise given to 
the Committee that none of the existing employees would be adversely affected as a result 
of the proposed legislation.  The rules governing service conditi ons of the employees 
should be framed within three months from th e date of enactment and laid on the Table 
of both the Houses for their s crutiny.  All such rules should be framed in such a way so 
that service conditions of the existing employe es remain unaltered so far as it is possible 
and under no circumstances the existing employees should be placed under any 
disadvantageous position under the new rules. 
 

45. The Committee further recommends that no ne of the employees should face any 
sort of retrenchment or other similar measures  on the pretext of la cking proper training, 
expertise and professional and technical sk ills.  They should be provided with all 
opportunities of imparting proper training, expertise, technical and professional skills 
required for development of the Institut e.  The Committee hopes that any funds 
constraints would not come in the way of de veloping and growing the Institute into a 
model centre of excellence a nd fulfilling the goals as enum erated in the statement of 
Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill.  The Committee, therefo re, recommends the 
Ministry to allocate adequate funds to the In stitute to enable it to grow into a model 
centre of excellence and to acquire additi onal manpower and other infrastructure to 
fulfill its objectives. 
 
46. The Committee hopes that with the new auto nomous status as proposed in the Bill, 
the Institute will grow and develop into centre of excellence in the field of Mental Health 
and Neuro-Science and a premier Institute of National importance. 
 
47. The Committee adopts the remaining Clau ses of the Bill, including enacting 
formula and the title without any amendment.  

 RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS  AT A GLANCE 
 
Clause 4: Incorporation of Institute 
 
 The Committee is not convinced by the clarification given by the Department 
about the incorporation of the Institute as a body corporate. The argument that it was 
based on similar provisions included in the Acts governing AIIMS and PGI fails to allay 
the apprehensions of the Committee. Doubt remains about the exact status of the 
Institute- a non-profit Institute or not-for-prof it Institute or a profit-making Institute as 
per the connotation of the term ‘body co rporate’. The Committee takes note of the 
assurance given by the Secretary of the Departme nt for getting a legal clarification in the 
matter. The Committee would a ppreciate if all the apparent ambiguity arising due to the 
use of the term ‘body corporate’  is removed at the earliest. It  would not be out of context 
to draw the attention of the Government to the Memorandum of Association governing 
NIMHANS at present which clarif ies specifically that the In stitute had been established 
for public benefit and accordingly its objects had been incorporated and restricted to 
meet such objectives and purposes as were re garded in law to be of public charitable 
nature. The Committee is of the firm opinion that conferring a status of national Institute 
should be a further step towards this nobl e objective only. Any deviation therefrom was 
not acceptable to the Committee.                (Para 17) 
   A comparative analysis of proposed composition of NIMHANS with other 
Institutes like AIIMS and PGI reveals a di stinctive feature. Whereas relevant provisions 
of the Acts governing these two Institutes simp ly give the details of different categories of 
Members, proposed provision for NIMHANS sp ecifies that the Minister of Health and 
Family Welfare would be the president of the Institute. Not only this, another provision 
(Clause 7) relating to ‘Powers and function s of President’ again mentions that the 

Minister of Health and Family  Welfare, Government of I ndia, New Delhi shall be the 
President of the Institute.       (Para 20)                                
 The Committee is constrained to observe that this is a case of bad drafting. What 
is more disturbing is that both the AIIMS an d PGI Acts have a specific provision which 
clearly lays down that the President of the Institute shall be nominated by the Central 
Government from among the members other than the Director of the Institute. The 
Committee fails to understand the reasons fo r such a departure on the part of the 
Government. On drawing the attention of the Department towards the JIPMER Act, 
2008 whereunder the Jawaharlal Institute of Medical Education and Research, 
Puducherry was conferred the status of National  Institute having a provision similar to 
AIIMS and PGI Act, clarification given by the Department was far from satisfactory. The 
Committee was informed as follow: - 
 “The JIPMER Bill was passed with an amendment by which Minister 
of Health and Family Welfare was not retained as Ex-officio President. 
Accordingly, the original clause relat ing to appointment of the President 
was modified to the effect that th ere shall be a President which will be 
nominated by the Central Government from amongst the members of 
JIPMER. However, the Minister of Health and Family Welfare is the 
President of the Institute body in AIIMS and PGI Act.”   
                          (Para 21)                                                                     
 
 The Committee views with serious con cern the justification given by the 
Department on such a crucial issue. The very  fact that the JIPMER Bill had to be passed 
in Parliament with an amendment so far as P resident of the Institute is concerned should 
have made things very clear to the Depa rtment. The Committee would have appreciated 
if the Department had taken note of its st rong recommendations in this matter in its 
Report on the JIPMER Bill, 2008. The Commi ttee can only reiterate that its stand 
remains unchanged. Head of the Institute body pertaining to very specialized areas has to 

be an eminent person having full command on such matters.                       
(Para 22) 
 
 The Committee strongly feels that the appo intment of a political head as President 
of the Institute Body of national import ance cannot be considered advisable in any 
respect.  It is a well known fact that th e Ministers are entrusted with manifold 
responsibilities and functions. It becomes very  unpractical to expect full attention at all 
times from Ministers that too in the functioning of premier Institutes like NIMHANS and 
other similar bodies. Therefore,  the Committee is not in favou r of proposed provision in 
clause 5(1)(a) as well as clause 7(1). The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the 
above sub-clause relating to appointment of He alth Minister as President of the Body of 
the Institute may be deleted from Clause 5 and clause 7( 1) may be modified on the 
pattern of relevant provisions in AIIMS and PGI Acts as indicated below:- 
Clause 7(1) 
  
“There shall be a Presiden t of the Institute who sh all be nominated by the 
Central Government from among the me mbers other than the Director of 
the Institute”.              (Para 24)  
                                         
 
 The reason given for the above modification  was that it would be in conformity 
with the sub-clause (d) & (e) to clause 5(1). The Committee is in agreement with the 
above suggestion and, therefore, recommends th at the above sub clause may be modified 
accordingly.               (Para 27) 
 
 It was pointed out to the Committee that since this Institute is a unique one - 
specializing in medical/physical, behavioral scie nces, it would therefore, be in the interest 
of the Institute to have eminent scientists  from these disciplines and from different 
universities.  The Committee would like to emphasize that over the years the Institute has 
emerged as a premier tertiary care medical and academic institution dedicated to the 

care of neurological, neurosurgical a nd psychiatric disorders and manpower 
development in super specialty branches.  Havi ng the status of Deemed University, it has 
gained international recognition in patient-care and education. It would, therefore, be in 
the fitness of things to have very eminent persons/ experts in the very specialized medical 
sciences.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends  that clause 5 (1) (i) may be modified 
as follows: 
“Seven persons of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist representing the 
Indian Science Congress Association and  one each from biological, behaviourial 
and physical sciences of repute from any universities to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.”                                                         
(Para 29)            
 
 The Committee finds some merit in the above suggestion and recommends the 
Ministry to modify the sub-clause as indicated below:  
 
 “Four representatives of medical faculties of Indian Universities of whom one shall 
be from NIMHANS to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as may 
be prescribed”.             (Para 32) 
           
 
Clause 13:  Functions of Institute  
 
 
 The Committee appreciates the above sugge stion and desires the Ministry to 
modify the sub-clause accordingly.                                              (Para 38) 
 
 
 The Committee hopes that the Ministry/Insti tute would keep it promise given to 
the Committee that none of the existing employees would be adversely affected as a result 
of the proposed legislation. The rules gove rning service conditions of the employees 
should be framed within three months from th e date of enactment and laid on the Table 
of both the Houses for their s crutiny.  All such rules should be framed in such a way so 
that service conditions of the existing employe es remain unaltered so far as it is possible 
and under no circumstances the existing employees should be placed under any 
disadvantageous position under the new rules.            
                                              (Para 44) 

 The Committee further recommends that no ne of the employees should face any 
sort of retrenchment or other similar measures  on the pretext of la cking proper training, 
expertise and professional and technical sk ills.  They should be provided with all 
opportunities of imparting proper training, expertise, technical and professional skills 
required for development of the Institut e.  The Committee hopes that any funds 
constraints would not come in the way of de veloping and growing the Institute into a 
model centre of excellence a nd fulfilling the goals as enum erated in the statement of 
Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill.  The Committee, therefo re, recommends the 
Ministry to allocate adequate funds to the In stitute to enable it to grow into a model 
centre of excellence and to acquire additi onal manpower and other infrastructure to 
fulfill its objectives.                    (Para 45)                 
 The Committee hopes that with the new auto nomous status as proposed in the Bill, 
the Institute will grow and develop into centre of excellence in the field of Mental Health 
and Neuro-Science and a premier Institute of National importance.   
               (Para 46) 
 
 The Committee adopts the remaining Clau ses of the Bill, including enacting 
formula and the title without any amendment.            (Para 47) 
                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI 
 
SIXTH MEETING 
  
 The Committee met at 2.30 p.m. on Wednesday, the 5
th January, 2011 in Committee 
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 

RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak    -    Chairman 
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
5. Shri Balbir Punj 
6. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
7. Shri Rasheed Masood 
8. Shrimati B. Jayashree 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 9. Shri Ashok Argal 
10. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh  
11. Shri S.R. Jeyadurai 
12. Dr. (Shrimati) Kruparani Killi 
13. Shri N. Kristappa 
14. Dr. Tarun Mandal 
15. Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
16.       Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
17. Shri R.K.Singh Patel 
18. Shri M.K. Raghavan 
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha 
20. Shrimati Meena Singh 
                     
 
WITNESSES     
       I.      Representatives from  Department of Health and Family Welfare  
 
 
 1. Shri K Chandramouli           Secretary  
      2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava           Director General, Health Services (DGHS) 
 3. Shri Keshav Desiraju           Addl. Secretary 
 4. Shri L. C. Goyal            Addl. Secretary 
      5. Shri Surinder Singh           Drug Controller General of India 
 6. Ms Shalini Prasad                       Joint Secretary       
 
       II.        Representative from National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, 
Bangalore. 
  Dr. P. Satish Chandra              Director (NIMHANS)             
                                                                                                                                                                             
     SECRETARIAT 
 
Shrimati Vandana Garg   Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta     Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta        Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh    Assistant Director 
Shri Satis Mesra    Committee Officer 
 
2. Due to delay in arrival of the Chairman  of the Committee owi ng to delayed flight, 
Shrimati Brinda Karat, Member of the Committee, presided over the meeting of the Committee 

in the first half. At the outset, she welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of 
the agenda of the meeting.   
3. Thereafter, the Committee heard the Secretar y and other officers of the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare along with the Dir ector, NIMHANS on various  provisions of the 
proposed National Institute of Mental Health  and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore, Bill, 2010. The 
Secretary briefly dwelt on the grounds warranti ng conferment of autonomy upon the Institute, 
inter-alia stating that the Bill would give flexib ility in the matters of curricula, administration, 
recruitment etc. to the Instit ute, besides ensuring allocation  of more funds. The Director, 
NIMHANS then made a power-point presentatio n, inter-alia briefing th e Committee about the 
functioning of the Institute as well as the circum stances warranting declaration of the Institute 
as an Institute of national importance on the pa ttern of AIIMS, PGI, Chandigarh & JIPMER, 
Puducherry through the introduction of the proposed Bill.  
4. Members raised several queries like the constraints being faced by the Institute in its 
development and evolution as a pioneer Institute as per its pot ential; the use of the words 
“body corporate” in the Bill; collaborative re search programmes; continuance of existing 
facilities to the employees after its beco ming an Institution of national importance; 
consultations with the State Government of Karnataka and other stakeholders, and  the funding 
pattern, etc.  Most of the queries raised during the meeting were replied to by the Secretary and 
other officers of the Department. As regards th e appropriateness of the use of the words “body 
corporate” in the Bill, the Secretary assured th e Committee to have a le gal opinion and apprise 
it  in this regard.  
5. Thereafter the witnesses withdrew. 
6 The Chairman joined the meeting and pres ided over the proceedings of the Committee 
in the second half of the meeting.  
7. *                           *                           * 
8. *                           *                          *  
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 10. The Committee then adjourned at 5.50 p.m.  
_____________________________________ 
***pertains to other matters 
 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3.30 p.m.  on Tuesday, the 1 st March, 2011 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak    -    Chairman 
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi 
3. Shrimati Viplove Thakur 
4. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho 
5. Shrimati Brinda Karat 
6. Shrimati B. Jayashree 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
7.       Shrimati Sarika Devendra Baghel Singh  
8.       Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
9.       Dr. Tarun Mandal 
10.       Shri Datta Meghe 
11.       Dr. Jyoti Mirdha 
12.       Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel 
13.       Shri R.K.Singh Patel 
14.       Shrimati Meena Singh 
15.       Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
16.       Shri Ratan Singh  
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shrimati Vandana Garg   Additional Secretary 
Shri R. B. Gupta    Director 
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta        Joint Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh     Assistant Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised 
them of the agenda of the meeting.  Thereafte r, the Committee took up for consideration its 
draft 53 rd Report on the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Bangalore 
Bill, 2010 and after a brief discussion adopted the same.  
3. *  *  * 
4. *  *  * 
5. *  *  * 
6. *  *  * 
7. *  *  * 
8. *  *  * 
  9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 p.m.  
____________________________________ 
***pertains to other matters 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 