PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 33
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION 
AND RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION
AND RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—4
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 5—6
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 7—11
6. A NNEXURES :
Annexure–I (Copy of the Bill) .................................................................................. 15—19
Annexure–II (List of Witnesses) ............................................................................... 20

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2008-09)
$1. Shri Amar Singh – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Prof. P. J. Kurien
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
5. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
6. Shrimati Maya Singh
7. Shri Digvijay Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
*10. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
12. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
13. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
14. Shri Vinod Kumar
15. Shri Rajendra Kumar
16. Shri R.L. Jalappa
17. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
18. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
19. Shri Rasheed Masood
20. Dr. Chinta Mohan
21. Shri Nihal Chand
22. Shri D.B. Patil
23. Shrimati K. Rani
24. Shri Pannian Ravindran
25. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
26. Dr. R. Senthil
27. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Uday Singh
30. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
#31. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
($ Ceased to be Chairman and Member w.e.f. 26th November, 2008; re-nominated as Chairman and Member w.e.f.
5th December, 2008).
(* Nominated w.e.f. 12th August, 2008).
(# Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2008).

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director

(iii)
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated the 24th October, 2008.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No 45504, dated the 10th November, 2008.
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, after having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
present this Thirty-third Report of the Committee on “The Post-Graduate Institute of Medical
Education and Research, Chandigrah, (Amendment) Bill, 2008”.*
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Council of State, relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh (Amendment) Bill, 2008 (Annexure-I), as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
24th October, 2008 and pending therein, to the Committee on the 7th November, 2008 for
examination and report.
3. The Committee, in its meeting held on the14th November, 2008, interacted with the officers
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the
Director of Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh and
sought clarifications on the various issues arising out of the Bill.
4. The Committee, thereafter, considered and adopted the draft Report on the Bill in its
meeting held on the 17th December, 2008.
5. The Committee has relied upon the following documents/information in finalizing its Report:
(i) Background Note on the Bill, and
(ii) Presentation and clarification by the Additional Secretary and others of the Department
of Health and Family Welfare and Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.
AMAR SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 17 , 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Agrahayana  26, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.

1
REPORT
1. The Post-Graduate  Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (Amendment)
Bill, 2008 (hereinafter referred to as the Bill), was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 24th
October, 2008 and referred to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare on the 7th November, 2008 for examination and report thereon.
2. The objective of the Bill is to provide that dental and nursing degrees and diplomas awarded
by the PGIMER, Chandigarh are recognized as dental and nursing qualifications and deemed to be
included in the schedules of the Dentist Act, 1948 and the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947
respectively. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill reproduced below explains
the reasons warranting the need for the Bill:—
“The Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh was
established as an autonomous body by an Act of Parliament (Act 51 of 1966). The Institute
has been awarding medical degrees and diplomas which are recognized medical
qualifications. Section 13 of the said Act provides that the Post-Graduate Institute of
Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh may esteblish and maintain Dental college as
well as nursing college. However, Sections 23 and 24 of the Act presently recognize only
the medical degrees and diplomas granted by the Institute as medical qualifications for the
purposes of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the dental and nursing degrees and
diplomas are not so recognized. Therefore, there is a need to amend to Post-Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Act, 1966 so that the dental and
nursing qualifications are also recognized for the purposes of the Dentists Act, 1948 and
the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, respectively.”
3. The Amendments proposed are:—
For Section 23 of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh Act, 1966, the following section shall be substituted:—
Grant of medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas etc., by the Institute.
“23 Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Institute  shall have power to grant medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas and
other academic distinctions and titles under this Act.”
For Section 24 of the Act. The following section shall be substituted:—
Recognition of medical, dental and nursing qualifications granted by the Institute.
“24 Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical Council Act 1956, the
Dentist Act, 1948 and the Indian Nursing Council Act. 1947, the medical, dental or nursing
degrees or diplomas, as the case may be, granted by the Institute under this Act shall be
recognized:—
(a) medical qualifications for the purpose of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and
shall be deemed to be included in the First Schedule to that Act.
(b) dental qualifications for the purpose of the Dentists Act, 1948 and shall be deemed to
be included in the Schedule to that Act. And
1

2
(c) nursing qualifications for the purpose of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 and
shall be deemed to be included in the Schedule to that Act.”
4. Appearing before the Committee on the 14th November, 2008, the representatives of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare and the Director, PGIMER elaborated on the background
and circumstances that led to the introduction of this Bill. They stated that under sections 23 and
24 of the PGIMER Act, the institute is empowered to grant medical degrees, diplomas and other
academic distinctions and titles and notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956 (IMC Act), the medical degrees and diplomas granted by institute under this Act
are recognized medical qualifications for the purposes of that Act and are deemed to be included
in the first Schedule of the IMC Act Further, Section 13 of the PGIMER Act provides that the
Institute may establish and maintain dental college as well as nursing college. Accordingly, though
the Institute is empowered to establish and maintain dental college and nursing college, only medical
degrees and diplomas granted by the Institute are automatically recognized. As a result, the
candidates trained at the Institute for dental and nursing courses have to register themselves with
the punjab University and they are required to appear in the examination conducted by the said
University. In addition to this, they are also governed by various regulations of the Dental and
Nursing Councils. Stating that other Institutes like All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)
and the JIPMER. Puducherry have similar provisions, they strongly advocated that PGIMER should
also have the power to grant dental and nursing degrees/diplomas and other academic distinctions
and for this Sections 23 and 24 of the Act, are required to be amended so that the Dental and
Nursing degrees or diplomas awarded by the Institute are recognized as Dental and Nursing
qualifications and deemed to be included in the Schedules of the Dentists Act. 1948 and the
Nursing Council Act. 1947, respectively.
5. The Director, PGIMER in a written submission to the Committee has supported the
proposed amendment, stating that similarly anomaly in AIIMS was removed vide an amendment in
the All India Institute of Medical Sciences Act. 1956 in the year 2002, which provided for
recognition of the Dental and Nursing qualifications and grant of degree and diplomas under the
said Act. The Government has also taken care of this aspect while enacting the Jawaharlal Institute
of Postgraduate Medical Education & Research (JIPMER), Puducherry Act, 2008 which was
passed by the Parliament recently. The proposed amendment would remove the existing anomaly
in the PGIMER, Chandigarh Act, 1966 and bring the Institute at par with the other similar institutes
of national importance.
6. The Committee finds merit in the argument that at present there is duality of
control inasmuch as the students of the dental and nursing courses trained at the PGIMER,
Chandigarh are not only required to appear in the examinations conducted by the punjab
University, but are also subject to regulations of the statutory bodies like the Dental and
Nursing Councils, Such a situation is uncalled for not only in view forth status of the
Institute being of national importance like AIIMS and JIPMER, Puducherry but also due to
the inherent powers of establishing the dental and nursing colleges envisaged under Section
13 of the PGIMER, Chandigarh Act, 1966. The Committee observes that the proposed
amendments under Section 23 and 24 would empower the Institute by enabling it to grant
the dental and nursing degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under
the PGIMER Act, 1966 along with the medical degrees. The Committee, therefore, welcomes
the proposed amendments.
7. During the course of interaction, the Committee sought to know from the representatives
of the Department and the Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh, the reasons for waiting for so many
years in bringing such an amendment in the Act. In response thereto, the Committee was informed
that the proposed amendment has been initiated on the pattern of AIIMS, which did it in 2002. To

3
a specific query, as to why the Department did not come up with present amendment along with
the AIIMS amendment Bill about six years back, the autonomous character of the Institutes was
cited as the reason for not taking suo moto  action in such matters.
8. The Committee expresses it disappointment and is not convinced by the ‘autonomy
factor’ reasoning of the Department. The Department can not shy away from its
responsibility as a coordinating agency. It shows not only lack of planning and foresight on
the part of the Department but also lack of coordination between it and the autonomous
Institutes of the country. The Committee strongly feels that the Department has to play a
more proactive role in such matters.
9. The Committee notes that the PGIMER, Chandigarh was set up as a centre of excellence
of national importance to develop patterns of teaching in undergraduate and post-graduate medical
education in all its branches. With its excellent academic set up and teaching hospital with about
1500 beds, the Institute has been more than successful in achieving its objectives of having high
standards of medical education, bringing together in one place educational facilities of highest order
and attaining self-sufficiency in post-graduate medical education to meet country’s need for
specialists and medical teachers. The Committee is, however, surprised to note that the Institute
is not running under-graduate medical course. On a specific query in this regard, the Committee
was informed by the Director, PGIMER that this was due to the fact that the Institute was
envisaged to be a Post-Graduate Institute and its profile as such has been maintained all these
years. The Committee was also given to understand that need for running MBBS course did not
arise due to a Dental and Medical college already functioning in Chandigarh. When it was pointed
out that AIIMS is already running MBBS course, the Department’s representatives added that the
basic function of institutes like AIIMS, PGIMER, Chandigarh and JIPMER, Puducherry was to
ensure twin objectives of providing faculty for medical colleges around the country for which there
was acute shortage and providing high quality tertiary healthcare. Stress has, therefore, been for
the post-graduate education only.
10. The Committee is not inclined to agree with the justification given by the
Department and the Director, PGIMER regarding not having MBBS course at PGIMER,
Chandigarh. The Committee does not find any logic in the argument that running MBBS
course would in any way have a bearing on the profile of the Institute, especially in view
of the fact that the undergraduate courses in paramedical sciences are already being run
by the Institute. This  reasoning of the Committee further gets reinforced by the fact that
AIIMS, the most reputed Institute in the country, is already providing undergraduate
medical  course without compromising with its postgraduate and referral status.
11. The Committee does not find any merit in the contention of the representatives of
the Department during the course of deposition before it that AIIMS being a hi-tech
hospital of a very high level, majority of undergraduate students get the opportunity to
learn only on the highly sophisticated modern equipment and are therefore not very well-
equipped to practice in the country and prefer to go abroad. The Committee strongly feels
that having both undergraduate and postgraduate courses leads to enhanced standards of
the undergraduate courses. Further, in a developing country like ours where there is
resource crunch, the available resources can not be left unutilized citing the reasons like
availability of other college nearby. India is a vast country and due to its demography and
uneven economy of various States, it is not possible to have college uniformly scattered.
The Committee also takes cognizance of the reported move of the Government for having
Public-Private-Partnership in the field of medical education whereby citing the resource
crunch, private players are being invited to use the Government Hospitals as the training
grounds. In sharp contrast, available resources with premier Institute like the PGIMER,

4
Chandigarh are being allowed to remain under-utilized. The Committee understands that
with very little investment, quite a few medical graduates can be groomed by the Institute.
Further, technically, there is no problem for the Institute in this regard, as the Act already
permits the Institute to award medical degrees or diplomas etc. Therefore, the Committee
strongly recommends the Department to take necessary steps to start MBBS course in the
PGIMER, Chandigarh at the earliest so that precious tax-payers money, in the from of
existing infrastructure facilities, is optimally utilized.

5
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
The Committee finds merit in the argument that at present there is duality of
control inasmuch as the students of the dental and nursing courses trained at the PGIMER,
Chandigarh are not only required to appear in the examinations conducted by the Punjab
University, but are also subject to regulations of the statutory bodies like the Dental and
Nursing Councils. Such a situation is uncalled for not only in view of the status of the
Institute being of national importance like AIIMS and JIPMER, Puducherry but also due to
the inherent powers of establishing the dental and nursing colleges envisaged under Section
13 of the PGIMER, Chandigarh Act, 1996. The Committee observes that the proposed
amendments under Sections 23 and 24 would empower the Institute by enabling it to grant
the dental and nursing degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under
the PGIMER Act, 1966 along with the medical degrees. The Committee, therefore, welcomes
the proposed amendments. (Para 6)
The Committee expresses its disappointment and is not convinced by the ‘autonomy
factor’ reasoning of the Department. The Department can not shy away from its
responsibility as a coordinating agency. It shows not only lack of planning and foresight on
the part of the Department but also lack of coordination between it and the autonomous
Institutes of the country. The Committee strongly feels that the Department has to play a
more proactive role in such matters. (Para 8)
The Committee is not inclined to agree with the justification given by the
Department and the Director, PGIMER regarding not having MBBS course at PGIMER,
Chandigarh. The Committee does not find any logic in the argument that running MBBS
course would in any way have a bearing on the profile of the Institute, especially in view
of the fact that the undergraduate courses in paramedical sciences are already being run
by the Institute. This reasoning of the Committee further gets reinforced by the fact that
AIIMS, the most reputed Institute in the country, is already providing undergraduate
medical course without compromising with its postgraduate and referral status. (Para 10)
The Committee does not find any merit in the contention of the representatives of
the Department during the course of deposition before it that AIIMS being a hi-tech
hospital of a very high level, majority of undergraduate students get the opportunity to
learn only on the highly sophisticated modern equipment and are therefore not very well-
equipped to practice in the country and prefer to go abroad. The Committee strongly feels
that having both under-graduate and post-graduaate courses leads to enhanced standards of
the undergraduate courses. Further, in a developing country like ours where there is
resource crunch, the available resources can not be left unutilized citing the reasons like
availability of other colleges nearby. India is a vast country and due to its demography and
uneven economy of various States, it is not possible to have colleges uniformly scattered.
The Committee also takes cognizance of the reported move of the Government for having
Public-Private-Partnership in the field of medical education whereby citing the resource
crunch, private players are being invited to use the Government Hospitals as the training
grounds. In sharp contrast, available resources with a premier Institute like the PGIMER,
5

6
Chandigarh are being allowed to remain under-utilized. The Committee understands that
with very little investment, quite a few medical graduates can be groomed by the Institute.
Further, technically, there is no problem for the Institute in this regard, as the Act already
permits the Institute to award medical degrees or diplomas etc. Therefore, the Committee
strongly recommends the Department to take necessary steps to start MBBS course in the
PGIMER, Chandigarh at the earliest so that pr ecious tax-payers money, in the form of
existing infrastructures facilities, is optimally utilized. (Para 11)

7
MINUTES

9
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 14th November, 2008 in Committee Room
‘C’,  Ground Floor, Parliament House Annex, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Prof P. J. Kurien
4. Shrimati Maya Singh
5. Shri Digvijay Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Dr. Chinta Mohan
10. Shrimati K. Rani
11. Shri Pannian Ravindran
12. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.
 B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
1. Shri G. Balachandran, Addl. Secretary
2. Ms. Shalini Prasad, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Santosh Kumar, Director
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
1. Dr. K. K. Talwar, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman Welcomed Members of the Committee and apprised them of
the agenda of the day. *   *   *
*** Relate to other matters.

10
3. The Committee then heard views of the Additional Secretary alongwith other officers of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the Director, PGIMER, Chandigarh on the Post-Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (Amendment) Bill, 2008.
Members raised some queries which were replied to.
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

11
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 17th December, 2008 in Committee
Room No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
6. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
7. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawali
8. Shri R.L. Jalappa
9. Dr. Chinta Mohan
10. Dr. R. Senthil
11. Shri Uday Singh
12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. The Committee then
considered the draft report on the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research,
Chandigarh (Amendment) Bill, 2008. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report.
3. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday , the 18th December, 2008. The Committee
authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Smt. Viplove Thakur to present the
Report in Rajya Sabha, and, Dr. Chinta Mohan, and in his absence Dr. Karan Singh Yadav to lay
the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.30 
P.M. to meet again on the 6th January, 2009.
11
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
ON 24 TH O CTOBER , 2008
Bill No. LIV of 2008
THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION
AND RESEARCH, CHANDIGARH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2008
A
BILL
further to amend the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education
and Research, Chandigarh, Act, 1966
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:-
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Post-Graduate Institute of
Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (Amendment) Act, 2008.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), for section 23, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
‘‘23. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, the Institute shall have power to grant
medical, dental or nursing degrees, diplomas and other academic
distinctions and titles under this Act.’’
15
Short title
and commence-
ment.
5
51 of 1966.
Substitution of
new section for
section 23.
Grant of
medical, dental
or nursing
degrees,
diplomas, etc.,
by the Institute.

16
3. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
‘‘24. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian
Medical Council Act, 1956, the Dentists Act, 1948 and the
Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, the medical dental or
nursing degrees or diplomas,  as the case may be, granted by
the Institute under this Act shall be recognized—
(a) medical qualification for the purpose of the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and shall be deemed
to be included in the First Schedule to that Act;
(b) dental qualification for the purpose of the
Dentists Act, 1948 and shall be deemed to be include in
the Schedule to that Act; and
(c) nursing qualifications for the purpose of the
Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 and shall be deemed
to be included in the Schedule to that Act’’.
102 of 1956.
16 of 1948.
48 of 1947.
Substitution of
new section
for section 24.
Recognition of
medical, dental
and nursing
qualifications
granted by the
Institute.

17
17
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh was established as an autonomous body by an Act of Parliament (Act
51 of 1966). The Institute has been awarding medical degrees and diplomas
which are recognised medical qualifications. Section 13 of the said Act provides
that the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh
may establish and maintain dental college as well as a nursing college. However,
Section 23 and 24 of the Act presently recognize only the medical degrees and
diplomas granted by the Institute as medical qualification for the purpose of the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and the dental and nursing degrees and
diplomas are not so recognized. Therefore, there is a need to amend the Post-
Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, Act 1966 so
that the dental and nursing qualifications are also recognised for the purposes of
the Dentists Act, 1948 and the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, respectively.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; ANBUMANI RAMADOSS
The 17th October, 2008.

18
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE P OST-GRADUATE I NSTITUTE OF M EDICAL
EDUCATION AND R ESEARCH, C HANDIGARH, A CT, 1966
NO. 51 OF 1966
** * * *
23. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the Institute shall have power to grant medical
degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions and titles under this
Act.
24. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956, the medical degrees and diplomas granted by the
Institute under this Act shall be recognised medical qualifications for
the pursposes of that Act and shall be deemed to be included in the
First Schedule to that Act.
** * * *
102 of 1956.
Grant of
medical
degrees,
diplomas, etc.,
by Institute.
Recognition of
medical
qualifications
granted by
Institute.

19
19
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh, Act, 1966
(Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

20
ANNEXURE-II
LIST OF WITNESSES
REPRESENTATIVES  FROM THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
1. Shri. G. Balachandran, Addl. Secretary
2. Ms. Shalini Prasad, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Santosh Kumar, Director
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THE POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND
RESEARCH (PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
1. Dr. K.K. Talwar, Director

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.