9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
 
NINTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2005-2006 (DEMAND NO. 48) OF
THE DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28TH APRIL, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 27TH APRIL, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (SAKA)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T S
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.PREFACE
3.REPORT
*4.OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE     
*5.MINUTES                                                                                                                                                             
To be appended at the Printing stage
   ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 (2005-2006)
 
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
 MEMBERS
             RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur          
3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Dr. A.K. Patel
5. Shrimati Maya Singh
 *6.   Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri R. Sarath Kumar
8. Shri Lalming Liana
 **9.    Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
 $10.    Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani
11.   Vacant
 
MEMBERS

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
          LOK SABHA
 
12.  Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
13.  Shri M.H. Ambareesh
14.  Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
15.  Dr. M. Baburao
16.  Dr. R.C. Dome
17.  Smt. Maneka Gandhi
18.  Smt. Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali
19.  Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
20.  Dr. Chinta Mohan
21.  Shri Rasheed Masood
22.  Ms. Archana Nayak
23.  Shri D.B. Patil
24.  Shri Nakul Das Rai
25.  Shri Rajendra Kumar
26.  Smt. K. Rani
27.  Md. Shahabuddin
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29.  Shri Uday Singh
30.  Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
31.  Shri Kailash Nath Yadav
32.  Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
            
            Shri N.C. Joshi,       Additional Secretary
Smt. Vandana Garg,  Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guharoy ,   Director
Shri  Momraj Singh,  Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,          Committee Officer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
$ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 14
th December, 2004
*Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2004
** Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2004      
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PREFACE
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health &Family Welfare,
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.48) of the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for the year 2005-2006.
2.         The Committee considered the various documents and relevant papers received from the Department of
AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also heard the Secretary and other Officials of that Department on
th

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
the said Demands for Grants in its meeting held on 29  April, 2005.
3.         The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on           25th April 2005.
 
NEW DELHI;
April 25, 2005
Vaisakha  5, 1927 (Saka)
AMAR SINGH
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AYUSH
I.         INTRODUCTION
1.1       The Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy which was set up by the Government of India
as an independent department in March, 1995, under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was renamed as
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November, 2003.   The
main objective of the Department is to provide focused attention for the proper development and propagation of
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Homoeopathy, Yoga and Naturopathy and to fully utilize the potentials of these systems.
1.2       Thrust areas of the Department are: -
i)
                    Improvement and up-gradation of standards of education in AYUSH;
ii)                   Quality Control and Standardization of drugs;
iii)                 Ensuring sustained availability of raw materials, i.e. medicinal plants, metals, minerals and materials of
animal origin etc;
iv)                 Research & Development on the efficacy of the systems;
v)                  Participation of AYUSH in the National Health Care Delivery System & National Health & Family Welfare
Programme;
vi)                 Information, Education and Communication.
 
1.3       Over the years, there has been a steady growth in infrastructure of AYUSH.   At present, number of practitioners
of AYUSH in the country is 6,95,024.   There are 549 teaching institutions which include 454 Undergraduate colleges
and 95 Post-Graduate colleges.   Number of drug manufacturing units both in Govt. and private sector in the country is
9257.    There are 3100 Hospitals and 20811 dispensaries in the Govt. sector out of which maximum number of
hospitals and dispensaries provide Ayurvedic system of treatment.  Total number of Ayurveda Hospitals in the country
are 2253 and number of dispensaries in the                  country is 13925.
 
1.4       The Secretary, during the course of her presentation before the Committee, stated that the Department received
actual visibility during the Tenth Plan with the introduction of a number of Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored
Schemes aimed at development of educational institutions, research and quality control, hospitals and dispensaries etc. 
Achievements made during the year 2004-05 included establishment of ISMH wings in 23 district hospitals, 8 speciality
clinics/polyclinics, supply of essential drugs to 8152 AYUSH dispensaries in rural and backward areas, improvement of
educational infrastructure in respect of 120 educational institutions of AYUSH in the country. The Committee was also
informed that the only public sector undertaking of the Department i.e. the Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical
Corporation Limited (IMPCL), Mohan, Uttaranchal enhanced its turnover from about Rs. 3.35 crores in 2002-03 to Rs.
6.00 crores in 2004-05.   The Secretary pointed out that as a result of various activities undertaken during the year,
entire plan allocation of Rs. 200.00 crores for the year 2004-05 was utilised.
 

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
II.        BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
2.1       The Plan Allocation of the Department for the year 2005-06 is Rs. 350.00 crore including Rs. 5.00 crore for the
Department of Urban Development for the completion of building for Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicine
(PLIM) and Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeial Laboratory (HPL).   Non-Plan allocation of the Department for 2005-06 is
Rs. 60.98 crore.  Whereas Plan allocation for 2005-06 has been substantially enhanced when compared with RE 2004-
05 allocation of   Rs. 200 crores, non-Plan allocation for 2005-06 does not reflect any increase. 
 
2.2       The Committee was informed that during the first two years of Tenth Plan, allocation of Rs. 150 crores in each
year remained underutilized due to various reasons.  The two main reasons were delay in approval of some centrally
sponsored schemes and lack of awareness among the implementing agencies about the schemes.  The Plan allocation of
the Department during the year 2004-05 was Rs.173.00 crore (excluding Rs. 8.00 crore for the Department of Urban
Development). Considering the performance of the Department and increased requirements of funds to implement
various Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  BE allocation was raised to Rs. 200.00 crore at RE Stage.  
Expenditure reported upto 28
th March, 2005 is Rs. 195.26 crore.  
 
2.3       The Committee was given to understand that an enhanced provision has been made  for 2005-06, in view of
genuine requirements of the Department under the various on-going programmes and its capacity  to utilize the
proposed provisions.   
The Department was confident of spending the increased budget provisions in 2005-06 as the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes under implementation are fully subscribed.  The Department was rather facing paucity of budget provisions in
implementing even feasible proposals under some of the schemes.
 
2.4       The Committee notes that against an allocation of Rs. 364.43 crore during the Ninth Plan, funds amounting to
only Rs. 293.72 crore could be utilised.   An enhanced allocation of Rs. 775 crore has been made for the Tenth Plan. 
The Committee notes that although utilisation position of allocated funds in the first year of the Tenth Plan i.e. 2002-03
was not satisfactory,  during the  second year,  the Department could utilise the entire allocation provided at the RE
stage.   For 2004-05, provision of Rs. 173 crore was enhanced to Rs. 200 crore.   The Department justified this enhanced
allocation by utilizing Rs. 195.26 crore by 28
th March, 2005. 
 
2.5       The Committee notes with satisfaction that with the increase in allocation, capacity of the Department to utilise
the same is also increasing.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that trend of utilisation is not evenly
spread in all the quarters of the financial year of 2004-05.   Against plan allocation of Rs. 200.00 crore in 2004-05, the
Department could utilise Rs. 121.33 crore  by the end of third quarter, i.e. 31st December, 2005.  By 7th March, 2005   it
increased to Rs. 179.49 crore and by the 28 th March, 05, utilisation figures were Rs. 195.26 crore.   This clearly shows
that out of total allocation of Rs. 200.00 crore in 2004-05, an expenditure of RS. 74.00 crore was made in the last

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
quarter of the year.  The Committee is of the view that the pace of utilisation should be as per the prescribed financial
norms.   Expenditure on the high side in the last quarter of the financial year cannot be considered good for the health of
budget planning.  
 
2.6       The Committee is not fully convinced by the Department’s contention that there was full utilisation of the
allocated funds during   2004-05.   The Committee is constrained to observe that there are many schemes, both in central
sector and centrally sponsored whereunder funds remained underutilized.   Performance of some major schemes is self
explanatory –
                                                                (Rs. in lakhs)
                                                                               Allocation                Utilization
-           Central Pharmacy Council for AYUSH-           20.00                       1.00
-           CCRYN, New Delhi                                        -           222.00                154.00
-
                     Innovative Scheme for Development of             -           50.00                     00.00
Medicinal plants                                               
-           Patent Cell                                                        -           400.00                 355.00
-           Expansion of CGHS Dispensaries                     -           130.00                    00.00
-           PLIM, Ghaziabad                                                           55.00                      4.77
-
                     Renovation and Strengthening of AYUSH    -    250.00               78.00
facility in AYUSH teaching Colleges.
In contrast, there are schemes where allocated funds  overtook the plan funds.  A few examples are as follows –
Scheme 2003-04  BE 2004-05   AE
CCRH, New Delhi 604.00 719.00
Medicinal plants 2305.00 2655.38
Hospitals and Dispensaries 2002.00 3026.63
State drug Testing Labs 300.00 898.06
 
2.7       The Committee, accordingly, requests that the Department should make concerted efforts for optimum and
judicious utilisation of allocated funds in individual schemes/programmes to the extent possible.
 
III STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS
3.1       Central Council of Indian Medicine and Central Council of Homoeopathy are two Statutory Bodies constituted
under the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 and Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 respectively.  The
main objective of these two statutory bodies is to regulate the medical     education in Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy.
 
3.2       Initial allocation for Ninth Plan for the two Councils was Rs. 2.46 crores,  which by the end of the plan period
was brought down to Rs. 1.47 crores.  The Committee observes that whereas CCIM, New Delhi could utilise the
reduced allocation for the Ninth Plan, in the case of CCH, New Delhi, expenditure was restricted to only Rs. 2 lakhs
during the entire Ninth Plan and even this amount was spent during 1998-99.  The Committee observes that situation
remained the same during the Tenth Plan also.   During the       first two years, i.e 2002-03 and 2003-04 only a token
amount of Rs. 1 lakh was kept for CCH, New Delhi which remained  unspent.  During 2004-05 BE allocation of Rs. 1

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
lakh was increased to Rs. 10 lakhs.   This money was to be used for conducting workshops and meetings which failed to
materialize.  
 
3.3       In contrast, in the case of CCIM, there has been optimum utilisation of  allocated funds varying from Rs. 10 to
12 lakhs during this period.   The Committee also notes that CCH, New Delhi has been   utilizing the non-plan funds
fully which are on the same scale as provided to CCIM, New Delhi.   The Committee fails to understand the rationale
for variation in the provision of plan funds to both the Councils which have been set up with similar objectives. 
 
3.4       The Committee would like to be enlightened in this regard.  Committee’s attention has also been drawn by
provision of Rs. 20 lakhs in 2003-04 for conducting elections of CCH which remained unutilized due to the fact that
elections could not be conducted.  Provision was there for this purpose in 2002-03 also.  These elections seem to have
been finally conducted during the year 2004-05 as the provision meant for this purpose has been utilised.  The
Committee would like to know as to whether both these  statutory bodies are duly constituted with full membership.
 
3 .5      Maintenance of Central Registers of Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy and revision thereof is another vital
objective which has to be carried out by the Councils on regular basis.   The Committee, however, finds that in the case
of CCIM, during 2004-05, Central Register of Delhi and Tamil Nadu was updated upto March, 2001 and  in the case of
Orissa and Rajasthan upto March, 2002.   The Committee fails to understand the factors responsible for the Central
Register of Indian Medicine  not being updated.   The Committee would like to be apprised about the position in respect
of other States.  The Committee would also like to have an idea about the status of the Central Register being
maintained by the Central Council of Homoeopathy.
 
3.6       The Committee has been given to understand that as on 1.1.2002, there are 6,91,470 AYUSH doctors which
include both Institutionally qualified and non-institutionally qualified doctors in the country, out of which maximum
number of AYUSH doctors i.e.  1,61,010 doctors are in Bihar.  The number of AYUSH doctors must have increased 
manifold in the last three years.  Prescribing standards of professional conduct, etiquette and code of  ethics to be
observed by the AYUSH doctors is another important mandate of the two Councils.   The Committee has been
observing that at present   there is no check on the AYUSH doctors practising which include both qualified doctors and
quacks.  The Committee is of the view that there needs to be an effective monitoring mechanism for regulating the
AYUSH doctors practising across the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate action is
required to be taken either by the two councils or any other body which is empowered to regulate in such matters.
 
IV.       CENTRAL PHARMACY COUNCIL FOR AYUSH
4.1       The Committee has been commenting on no action being taken in the setting up of Central Pharmacy Council
for AYUSH for the last many years. Committee has observed that during 2002-03 token allocations was made for two
pharmacy councils   i.e. Indian Homeopathy Pharmacy Council and ISM Pharmacy Council.  However, in the next year 

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
it was decided to have one Pharmacy Council and accordingly Rs. 19 lakh  were provided therefor.  The money
allocated remained unspent as the Bill was yet to be finalized.   The Committee is constrained to observe that during
2004-05 also, position remained the same.  The Committee finds that during 2005-06 Rs. 1 crore has been provided for
the proposed Council.  The Department has informed that  the Bill has been prepared and the comments of the
Ministries of Finance, HRD and Health & Family Welfare  obtained.   The draft Bill is almost ready and will be
introduced in Parliament shortly.  The Committee reiterates that there should be no further delay for introducing the Bill
in Parliament. 
 
V. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
Advanced Ayurvedic Centre  for Mental Health in NIMHANS
5.1       An Advanced Ayurvedic Centre for Mental Health was proposed to be set up in NIMHANS, Bangalore. 
Accordingly Rs. 1.45 crore were provided in Ninth Plan.  The Committee observes that although Rs. 97 lakhs were
spent during the Ninth Plan period, nothing seems to have materialized in the operationalisation of the centre.  The
Committee has to make such a comment only because of trend of expenditure in the three years of the Tenth Plan.  Rs.
26 lakhs were provided in 2002-03 but the allocated funds remained unutilized.    There was no provision during 2003-
04.  However, in 2004-05 Rs. 1 lakh has been provided for this Centre.  The Committee strongly feels that any
scheme/plan proposed to be implemented should only be taken up after due consideration of its feasibility and other
allied aspects.  Advanced Ayurvedic Centre for Mental Health in NIMHANS, Bangalore seems to have been forsaken
by the Department.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the actual status of this Centre.   
 
VI.       RESEARCH COUNCILS (INTRA & EXTRA ) MURAL RESEARCH
6.1       The Central Council  for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS) , an autonomous organization set up in
1978 has the mandate to initiate, aid, guide, develop and co-ordinate scientific research in different aspects of Ayurveda
and Siddha.  The Committee notes that the Council has made optimum and judicious allocated funds during the Ninth
Plan.  Tenth Plan allocation of Rs. 45 crores for the Council is on a higher side when compared with Ninth Plan
allocation of Rs. 35.62 crore. Like Ninth plan, during the first three years of Tenth Plan also, the Council has managed
to utilize allocated fund fully.  However, the Committee finds that during 2004-05 the Physical Targets set for different
kinds of research as indicated below remained partially fulfilled: -
Programmes Target achieved 2004-2005
Target Achievement
1. Clinical Research (No. of patients studied) 3000 1289
2. Health Care Research Programme
(a)
    Villages covered
(b)    Population covered
(c)    Patients attended
 
10
10,000
5000
 
6
6020
2546
3. Drug Standardization
(i)                  Single drugs
(ii)                Compound formulation
 
20
20
 
17
9

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
 
6.2       The Committee observes that during 2004-05 physical targets could not be achieved fully inspite of there being
full utilisation of funds.  Plan allocation for 2005-06 stands at Rs. 12.50 crore which is higher than Rs. 8 crore provided
in 2004-05.  The Committee would like to emphasize that all required steps should be taken for achieving the physical
targets for which plan funds are meant for.  The Committee observed that during the last two years of Ninth Plan also
physical targets could not be achieved fully.  The Committee apprehends that during the Tenth Plan also, so far, the
position may be the same.  If that be so, then there is a need for making quarterly assessment about the achievement of
physical targets.   
VII.     CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF UNANI MEDICINE, NEW DELHI
7.1       The Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine, a registered society set up in 1978 has a network of 24
centres functioning in different parts of the country for developing and coordinating scientific research on different
aspects of Unani Medicine.  The trend of utilisation of funds during the first three years of Tenth Plan indicates that
additional funds are being provided at R.E stage for carrying out the Construction Work of Regional Research Institute
of Unani Medicine, Srinagar.  The Committee observes that during 2004-05, Plan allocation enhanced from Rs. 9.50
crore to Rs. 13.50 crore at the R. E stage.  This additional provision was also meant for construction of 2
nd phase of the
building of RRUM Srinagar.  The Committee has been given to understand that these funds were to be provided to the
construction wing of the Kashmir University which is constructing the building.  The Committee finds that 2004-05 also
an enhanced provision of Rs. 11.50 crore has been proposed. The Committee would like to be apprised about the
specific purpose for which this additional allocation is meant for.  The Committee would also like to point out that the
construction of building for RRUM has been continuing for about 8-10 years.  The Committee would like to be
enlightened about the original estimate and the actual expenditure on this construction project.
 
VIII. CENTRAL COUNCIL OF RESEARCH IN HOMEOPATHY
8.1       The Council is an autonomous body set up in 1978 with the objective of formulation of patterns of research on
scientific lines in Homeopathy etc. The Council functions through the Network of 2 CRIs, 1 HDRI, 7 RRIs and 23
Research Units spread all over the country.  Against Ninth Plan allocation of Rs. 16.94 crore, an enhanced provision of
Rs. 22 crore has been made for the Council.  The Committee, however, finds that during the first three years of Tenth
Plan Rs. 14 crore have been provided for.  The actual expenditure is Rs. 16.27 crore by making additional allocation at
RE stage.  The provision for 2005-06 is Rs. 11 crore.  This means that entire allocation during Tenth Plan has been
accounted for.  The Committee has been given to understand that during 2004-05 due to setting up of Regional Research
Institute at Guwahati and Noida additional funds had to be provided at RE stage.  The Committee would like to have an
idea of quantum of funds spent on construction activities during the first three years of Tenth Plan.  The Committee
would also like to know about the status of all the research Institutes functioning under CCRA. 
 
IX.  EXTRA MURAL PROJECTS THROUGH RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS (Pvt./Semi-
Govt./Government/Universities/NGOs.) etc.
 

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
9.1       The Tenth Plan allocation for Extra Mural projects is Rs. 10 crores. Similar provision was also made in the Ninth
Plan. However, funds amounting to only Rs. 4.15 crore could be utilised.  During the Tenth Plan Rs. 3.19 crore have
been utilised during the first three years.  The Committee notes that for 2005-06, Rs. 15 crore have been provided
whereas, the entire allocation is only Rs. 10 crore.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the reason for this
trend of allocation.  9.2            The Committee observes that research projects are being implemented by different
agencies.  The Committee would like to have a status note on the contributions made  in this sector.  One of the
important mandated activities under this Head is to assist research projects and interventions which validate efficacy
claims relating to AYUSH.  An idea about the achievements made in this regard may be given. 
 
X.        SURVEY ON “USAGE & ACCEPTABILITY OF AYUSH
10.1     During the Ninth Plan, there was a provision of Rs. 81 lakhs for conducting a survey on Usage and Acceptability
of AYUSH against which expenditure incurred was   Rs. 46 lakhs.  Tenth Plan provision for this purpose is Rs. 1 crore. 
The Committee finds that during the first year no progress could be made due to delay in finalization of survey agency. 
During the next year i.e. 2003-04, allocated funds of Rs. 12 lakhs had to be reduced to Rs. 6 Lakhs at RE stage due to
delay in the finalization of the survey instruments. The Committee finds that the Plan allocation of Rs. 5.70 Lakhs for
2004-05 also remained under utilised. 
10.2     As per the Annual Report 2004-05 of the Department, a survey was conducted with the help of ICMR, with the
main objective to collect information on availability   of facilities in the hospitals and dispensaries under AYUSH and
the extent of utilization of these services in treatment of the diseases by the population alongwith the various problems
being faced by the AYUSH systems/AYUSH practitioners in practising these systems.  The report of the survey has
been finalized and submitted to the Department.
10.3     As per the report, for 35 districts as a whole, ISM&H was preferred by one-third of the surveyed house holds, in
cases of normal ailments and by about 18% in cases of serious ailments and 14% of the sick persons as a whole, availed
ISM&H systems for treatment of their illness. 
10.4     The Committee observes that undue delay has taken place in conducting the survey on usage and acceptability of
AYUSH.  The Committee is perturbed to note that the although funds were available, considerable time was taken in
deciding the survey agency and other allied matters.  It has taken the entire Ninth Plan and more than half of Tenth Plan
for conducting of survey which is very vital for propogating AYUSH.  The findings of the survey confirms the
apprehensions of the Committee about the lack of publicity and resultant lack of demand for AYUSH in the general
public in the country.  The Committee would appreciate if there is no delay in taking follow up action on the findings of
the survey and the Department should initiate the remedial measures at the earliest.
 
10.5     The Committee has been informed that another survey has been assigned to ICMR to collect information on the
level of acceptability and non-acceptability of AYUSH from the patients attending the CGHS dispensaries. The survey
also proposes to cover the patients from the teaching hospitals attached to AYUSH Colleges located in the 15 cities

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
where AYUSH CGHS dispensaries are located to study the comparative acceptance pattern.  The Committee
appreciates the initiative and hopes that the survey would be completed at the earliest and its findings would be made
use of. 
 
XI.       ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA, NEW DELHI
11.1     The Committee has been monitoring the progress being made in the projects for construction of All India
Institute of Ayurveda, New Delhi. Its started from the third year of Ninth Plan i.e. 2000-01 with the token allocation
during this plan period.  The first two years of the Tenth Plan were taken in deciding about the Government share,
whether to establish it as a joint venture with a private party or not and also obtaining the approval of the Ministry of
Finance.  As the approval of the Ministry could be obtained only in October 2003, project could not start.  The
Committee observes that during 2004-05, required land has been allotted to the Department by the DDA.  The
Committee is, however, constrained to note that procedural formalities remain to be completed. EFC proposal has
to be placed before the Cabinet. The anticipated cost of the expenditure is Rs. 325 crores.  The allocation for 2005 – 06
is Rs. 35 crore.  As informed by the Department, a provision of Rs. 160 crores has to be made during the remaining
period of Tenth Plan.  The Committee would like to emphasize that the actual construction of the project should
be done as per a time bound action Plan which should be strictly adhered to.  All precaution should be taken for
not allowing the present estimate to exceed the present cost. 
 
XII. EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS
12.1     This is a new scheme started in 2003-04 for providing benefits of AYUSH system to CGHS beneficiaries.  In its
last report, the Committee had expressed its concern in the delay in the implementation of this scheme.  The Committee
observes that situation remained unchanged during 2004-05.  It has been informed that dispensaries opened in the year
2003-04 have started functioning and seven more dispensaries have been sanctioned during 2004-05.  The Committee
is, however, surprised to note that physical targets set during both the years i.e. 2003-04 remained unfulfilled.  Not even
one dispensary sanctioned in 2003-04 has become functional.   The Committee does not have any hope for the seven
dispensaries sanctioned  in 2004-05.   This is  born out by     the fact that allocated funds for the scheme remained
unutilized during 2003-04 and 2004-05.   The Committee is of the view that there is a little chance of AYUSH
dispensaries sanctioned becoming functional.   The Department has itself conceded that there are large number of
vacancies in AYUSH dispensaries. The Committee is not convinced by the contention of the Department that the
process of new recruitment is to be taken up by the UPSC and revival of old posts is complicated and time
consuming.The Committee is of the view that when the existing CGHS dispensaries are not fully functional for
lack of AYUSH manpower, fate of AYUSH dispensaries proposed to be opened can be well imagined.
 
XIII.    NORTH-EASTERN REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA AND HOMOEOPATHY
13.1     The Tenth Plan envisages establishment of a North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy.   The
Committee was informed that the Department has prepared  a proposal in consultation with the NE States to establish a

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
North Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homeopathy at Pasighat,  East Siang District of Arunachal Pradesh.  The  State
Govt. of Arunachal Pradesh has allotted 40 acres of land, free of cost, for this purpose.   It is proposed to provide under-
graduate courses in Ayurveda and Homoeopathy to the inhabitants of NE States and Sikkim.
 
13.2     The Committee welcomes the proposal for establishment of NE Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy in
Arunachal Pradesh.  The Committee feels that this was an initiative long overdue in view of richness of bio-diversity of
NE Region having a potential for use in the production of AYUSH drugs and also inadequate presence of AYUSH
institutions and trained personnel in the region.  The Committee, however, is surprised to note that only a token
provision of Rs. 5 lakhs has been made for this purpose in Tenth Plan.   Three years of Tenth Plan are over and only
action taken by the Department is keeping a provision of Rs. 1 lakh every year in the budget.  The Committee has been
given to understand that the enhanced allocation of Rs. 63.84 crores in 2005-06 as lump sum provision for NE States
would be utilised for this proposed Institute.  The Committee notes that the present estimate for creating the
infrastructure including the patient care facility will be about Rs. 50 crore.  The Committee would like to caution the
Department that the proposed project should not remain a new initiative during the Tenth Plan.  Action should
start without any further delay.   The Committee apprehends that like in other projects, this project may
continue at the proposal stage for considerable time with resultant increase in actual cost of the project.   With
free land made available by the State Govt. and funds also available under the lump sum provision, action for
clearance of all procedural formalities is required to be taken by the Department.
XIV. NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD
14.1     The National Medicinal Plants Board was established in 2000 with the primary objective of establishing an
agency that would be responsible for Co-ordination of all matters relating to medicinal Plants.  The Committee was
informed that the Board during 2004-05 has approved 845 projects of Contractual Farming and 156 projects of
promotional schemes amounting to Rs. 10.95 crores and  Rs. 7.62 crores respectively.  Under Contractual Farming
Scheme 36,339 acres of land has been brought under cultivation. So far 32 State Medicinal Plants Boards have been set
up in 27 States 5 UTs.  The Committee notes that in view of various activities being undertaken by the Board, there has
been optimum utilization of allocated funds. 
14.2     In its last Report, the Committee had commented about the need for strengthening the Board with appropriate
infrastructure and logistic support.  The Committee is, however, constrained to point out there has been little progress in
this direction.  The National Medicinal Plant Board set up in 2000, still continues to suffer from lack of proper
infrastructure, which is essential for implementing its high objectives.  The Committee finds that the Department of
Expenditure has agreed for creation/outsourcing of only 6 posts including CEO the Board.  The proposal for creation of
31 other posts alongwith the proposal for  grant of status of registered society to the Board is also under consideration. 
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the tardy progress being made in providing the required staff
essential for its efficient functions.  The Committee fails to appreciate the proposal of the Department of

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
Expenditure of outsourcing of staff for the Board.  The Committee is of the view that there should be creation of
all required posts.  The Department should make concerted efforts for getting the EFC and Cabinet approval for
creation of required posts at the earliest.
 
XV. STRENGTHENING OF PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORIES
15.1     Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeial Laboratory were
established in Ghaziabad in 1970s with the objective of laying down the standards for drugs of AYUSH and also for
their testing/analysis. 
15.2     The Committee has been observing that both the labs lack required infrastructure including staff.  The
Committee observes that during the Tenth Plan Period, funds are being allocated every year to be reduced drastically at
the RE stage, specially in the case of PLIM.  The only reason cited being non-creation of posts. The status  of these labs
remains unchanged  for the last so many years.  Year 2004-05 was no exception.  Rs. 55 lakhs were provided for PLIM,
to be reduced to Rs. 9 lakhs at the RE stage  and the actual expenditure upto 7
th March,2005 was only Rs.4.77 lakhs.
Reason given is non-creation of posts. For strengthening of these two labs, plan allocation proposed for 2005-06 is Rs.
150.00 lakhs. The Committee, however, strongly feels that higher allocation of funds does not have any meaning
in the case of these labs. Lack of infrastructure is adversely affecting the achievement level of various physical
targets set by the two labs.
 
15.3     The Committee notes that out of 36 sanctioned posts in PLIM and 32 in HPL, only 2 and 3 posts are lying vacant
respectively. However, this strength must be based on the initial year of establishment of these two labs i.e in the 1970s. 
Since then, after more than 30 years, the  requirement of posts must have increased manifold. The Department itself has
mentioned that additional 53 posts are required in PLIM and 31 in HPL. As per the latest information given by the
Department, for the first phase of strengthening the requirement of labs, 16 and 19 posts were projected for PLIM and
HPL respectively. The matter is under the consideration of the Department of Expenditure.
 
15.4     The Committee is anguished to note that another plan period would be over and these two labs will
continue to suffer from lack of required staff. The Committee finds that PLIM continues to function without a
Director. Nothing can be more unsatisfactory. In view of a very large variety of AYUSH drugs in the open
market, these labs have to be fully operational. The Committee reiterates that the Department should vigorously
purpose the matter with the Ministry of Finance and other authorities.            
 
15.5     The Committee was given to understand that buildings for HPL and PLIM are expected to be ready by February,
2005. However, as per the latest information, the buildings of HPL and PLIM will be ready by June, 2005 and July,
2005 respectively. The Committee hopes that there would be no further delay due to formal clearance by Fire
Department and other allied agencies.       
 
XVI.    DRUGS QUALITY CONTROL
16.1     Total allocation for drugs quality control in the Ninth Plan is Rs. 45.40 crores.  Major funding under this head is
being made for State Drug Testing Labs and Pharmacies and also for Strengthening of Enforcement Mechanism for
Quality Control which is being utilised also.   However, there are 6 small schemes as indicated below for which

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
although allocation of funds is being made since the beginning of Tenth Plan, it seems that they are yet to be launched –
i)                    Use of Modern Technology and Biotechnology.
ii)                   Scheme of Acquisition  of ISO Quality Control Certification for ISMH Industry.
iii)                 Scheme for Introduction for ASU Mark and Quality certification.
iv)                 Regulation of Health Food supplements.
v)                  Support to ISMH Industry for Creation of Labs/Quality Control Facilities.
vi)                 Assistance to Units Obtaining GMP Certification.
 
16.2        The Committee finds that no allocation has been made for these schemes in 2005-06.   On being asked about
the reasons for  this, the Department informed that  there were practical problems in implementing the Scheme of Use of
Modern Technology and Biotechnology through the State Govts.  Accordingly, this component has been transferred to
another central sector scheme of Extra Mural Research.   It was decided to drop the Scheme of Acquisition  of ISO
Quality Control Certification for ISMH Industry during the mid term appraisal  as it was not found feasible to
implement the same.  As far as Scheme for Introduction for ASU Mark and Quality certification is concerned, this
scheme was also decided to be dropped in view of modification of the Drugs and Cosmetics  Rules providing for
mandatory compliance with Good Manufacturing Practices and the legal provisions with regard to ASU drugs.   Scheme
of  Regulation of Health Food supplements was transferred to the Department of Health as it comes under that
Department only.  The last two schemes at v) and vi) have been merged under the modified scheme of Drugs Quality
Control to be implemented in the year 2005-06. 
 
16.3  The Committee  is constrained to note that all the above schemes were proposed to be launched without
going into the  feasibility aspect.  As a result, after three years  two of the schemes had to be dropped.  One was
transferred  to another scheme and two were merged with the main scheme of drug quality control.  It took 3
years to realize that the subject of regulation of health food supplements belongs to the Department of Health  as
per the Allocation of Business Rules.   Therefore, the Scheme of Health Food Supplements was transferred to the
Department of Health.   
 
16.4     The Committee has been observing that  a large number of fake herbal products and Ayurvedic products and
medicines claiming  cure for a number of diseases are available in the open market.   On a specific query about the
quality control of AYUSH drugs, the Committee has been informed that  the state drug controllers are the implementing
authorities of the provisions of Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules thereunder.  The Department has been periodically
advising the state authorities to implement the provisions of the Act and ensure quality of the drugs.    The Department
has also taken a number of steps which include central assistance for strengthening of 21 drug testing labs of AYUSH
system, for GMP compliance, for appointment of drug controllers/drug inspectors. 
16.5     The Committee notes that only three states have responded about the availability of spurious drugs in their states
during the last three years.    In Andhra Pradesh, samples of 25 ayurveda drugs and 29 samples of homoeopathy
medicines were analyzed.  Gujarat Govt.  has initiated action against one person for selling spurious Ayurvedic product. 
9 samples of fake homeopathic medicines were analyzed in Delhi.   The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction with
the scant feedback about spurious AYUSH drugs for such a big country and that too for a period of three years. 
The Committee would emphasize that the Department should pursue with all the departments so that
preventive/deterrent action can be initiated, wherever required. 
 
16.6     The Committee understands that a Drug Control Cell   (ISM) is working in the Department which besides other

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
matters is also involved in the control of misbranded/adulterated and spurious manufacturing of AYUSH drugs.  The
Committee would like to be apprised about the work done by the Cell in this regard during the last two years.    The
Committee would also like to recommend that if need be, this Cell may be strengthened and function as a  nodal
agency in the vital area of curbing of manufacture and sale of spurious AYUSH drugs.
 
16.7     Committee’s attention has been drawn by some recent media coverage about a report published in the Journal of
American Medical  Association.  As per the report, a group of scientists of Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA
picked up 70 Ayurvedic/Herbal Medicinal products manufactured by 27 companies, 26 being Indian companies.  The
presence of metals in these products was more than  permissible in food items in USA.  The Committee has been
informed that the  Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha has already undertaken a study to see the safety
profile of  Ayurvedic drugs.   Besides that, the Department has also approved a project to study the presence of various
metals in normal habitat in raw drugs and classical Ayurvedic formulations. The Committee appreciates the initiative
taken by the Council and the Department.   The Committee, however, feels that the Department should also
inform the scientists of Harvard Medical School about the rationale for the presence of metals in Ayurvedic
drugs and their safety aspect.  
XVII.   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
17.1    There are 221 Ayurveda Colleges and 180 Homoeopathy Colleges that have the approval of State Govts. and  are
by and large affiliated to the universities.   A state-wise breakup of these colleges indicates that the maximum number of
ayurveda colleges is concentrated in two states of Karnataka and Maharashtra.  Similarly in case of homoeopathy
colleges Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh have the highest number of colleges.   On being asked about the reasons for
this situation, the department clarified that this was largely due to the higher degree of private initiatives in these states. 
The Central Govt. has been taking all preventive measures to check the mushroom growth of sub-standard medical
institutions of ayurveda and homeopathy.   The Department has also informed that no college can be opened without a
NOC from the state govt. and consent of affiliation from the concerned university.  The Committee is not fully inclined
to accept the clarification given by the Department.  The Department itself has indicated that all these colleges are ‘by
and large’ affiliated to universities. 
 
17.2     The Committee also notes that number of govt. colleges are very less when compared with the private colleges.  
Out of 221 ayurveda colleges, only 54 are in the govt. sector.   Similarly, out of 180 homoeopathy colleges 149 are
private colleges.  This is the position in case of unani and siddha colleges.   The Committee has been informed that the
Central Council of Indian Medicine and the Central Council of Homeopathy made inspections of a number of colleges
during 2002-03 and 2003-04.    The Committee has been given to understand that the colleges found lacking facilities
for teaching and practical training were not allowed admission.   The inspection reports have been communicated to
such colleges for rectification of deficiencies.  The Committee would like to be enlightened about the follow up
action taken in this regard.
 
XVIII. MISCELLANEOUS
18.1     Mainstreaming AYUSH institutions and Practitioners in National Health Care Delivery Systems is one of the

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
thirst areas of the Tenth Plan.  The Committee notes that a proposal in this regard has been sent for consideration under
the new initiative of National Rural Health Mission and National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health.  The
proposal envisages involvement of AYUSH doctors and Medicines in primary health care network.  The proposal is at
present under consideration of different forums.  State Govt. have also been asked to do the needful in terms of posting
of ISMH physicians in PHCs. The Committee welcomes this initiative.  The Committee is of the view that the
Department should pursue this proposal with all concerned authorities. 
 
18.2     The Committee has been informed that a capsule containing the basic concepts and fundamentals of AYUSH for
incorporation in MBBS curricula has been sent to MCI by the Department.  Similarly Nursing Council of India has also
been approached for inclusion of 120 hour yearly programme in the nursing degree course.  The Committee notes that
the proposal regarding MBBS curricula has not been found acceptable by the MCI.  According to MCI, inclusion of the
basic principles and concepts of ISM&H in the MBBS course may only lead to acquiring inadequate knowledge of these
systems by MBBS students.  The matter has however been referred back to MCI for reconsideration.  Response of NCI
is awaited with regard to inclusion of a 120-hour course programme of AYUSH.  The Committee feels that a decision
in this matter should be taken after considering the views of all stakeholders.
 
18.3     The Committee notes that the Department in collaboration with CSIR and ICMR is to work together for
scientific validation of some of the existing Ayurveda medicines. 
 
18.4     Thirteen priority areas have been identified on which drugs are to be developed in a time bound manner.  These
priority areas include some of the chronic problems like diabetes, Vision disorders, Cardiac disorders and Bronchial
allergy etc. The Committee welcomes this ambitious partnership programme and hopes that research work to be
undertaken under this project will yield fruitful results for all concerned.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
II.         BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
            The Committee notes that against an allocation of Rs. 364.43 crore during the Ninth Plan, funds amounting to
only Rs. 293.72 crore could be utilised.   An enhanced allocation of Rs. 775 crore has been made for the Tenth Plan. 
The Committee notes that although utilisation position of allocated funds in the first year of the Tenth Plan i.e. 2002-03
was not satisfactory, during the second year, the Department could utilise the entire allocation provided at the RE
stage.   For 2004-05, provision of Rs. 173 crore was enhanced to Rs. 200 crore.   The Department justified this enhanced
allocation by utilizing Rs. 195.26 crore by 28
th March, 2005.  (Para 2.4)
 
            The Committee notes with satisfaction that with the increase in allocation, capacity of the Department to utilise
the same is also increasing.  The Committee would, however, like to point out that trend of utilisation is not evenly
spread in all the quarters of the financial year of 2004-05.   Against plan allocation of Rs. 200.00 crore in 2004-05, the
Department could utilise Rs. 121.33 crore  by the end of third quarter, i.e. 31
st December, 2005.  By 7th March, 2005   it
increased to Rs. 179.49 crore and by the 28 th March, 05, utilisation figures were Rs. 195.26 crore.   This clearly shows
that out of total allocation of Rs. 200.00 crore in 2004-05, an expenditure of RS. 74.00 crore was made in the last
quarter of the year.  The Committee is of the view that the pace of utilisation should be as per the prescribed financial
norms.   Expenditure on the high side in the last quarter of the financial year cannot be considered good for the health of
budget planning. (Para 2.5) 
 
2.7       The Committee, accordingly, requests that the Department should make concerted efforts for optimum and

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
judicious utilisation of allocated funds in individual schemes/programmes to the extent possible. (Para 2.7) 
 
III STATUTORY INSTITUTIONS
 
             The Committee would like to be enlightened in this regard.  Committee’s attention has also been drawn by
provision of Rs. 20 lakhs in 2003-04 for conducting elections of CCH which remained unutilized due to the fact that
elections could not be conducted.  Provision was there for this purpose in 2002-03 also.  These elections seem to have
been finally conducted during the year 2004-05 as the provision meant for this purpose has been utilised.  The
Committee would like to know as to whether both these statutory bodies are duly constituted with full membership.
(Para 3.4) 
 
   The Committee, however, finds that in the case of CCIM, during 2004-05, Central Register of Delhi and Tamil Nadu
was updated upto March, 2001 and in the case of Orissa and Rajasthan upto March, 2002.   The Committee fails to
understand the factors responsible for the Central Register of Indian Medicine not being updated.   The Committee
would like to be apprised about the position in respect of other States.  The Committee would also like to have an idea
about the status of the Central Register being maintained by the Central Council of Homoeopathy. (Para 3.5) 
 
        The Committee is of the view that there needs to be an effective monitoring mechanism for regulating the AYUSH
doctors practising across the country.The Committee, therefore, recommends that immediate action is required to be
taken either by the two councils or any other body which is empowered to regulate in such matters. (Para 3.6) 
 
IV.       CENTRAL PHARMACY COUNCIL FOR AYUSH
The Committee is constrained to observe that during 2004-05 also, position remained the same.  The Committee
finds that during 2005-06 Rs. 1 crore has been provided for the proposed Council.  The Department has informed that
the Bill has been prepared and the comments of the Ministries of Finance, HRD and Health & Family Welfare
obtained.   The draft Bill is almost ready and will be introduced in Parliament shortly.  The Committee reiterates that
there should be no further delay for introducing the Bill in Parliament.    (Para 4.1) 
 
V. HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
Advanced Ayurvedic Centre  for Mental Health in NIMHANS
The Committee observes that although Rs. 97 lakhs were spent during the Ninth Plan period, nothing seems to
have materialized in the operationalisation of the centre.  The Committee has to make such a comment only because of
trend of expenditure in the three years of the Tenth Plan.  Rs. 26 lakhs were provided in 2002-03 but the allocated funds
remained unutilized.    There was no provision during 2003-04.  However, in 2004-05 Rs. 1 lakh has been provided for
this Centre.  The Committee strongly feels that any scheme/plan proposed to be implemented should only be taken up
after due consideration of its feasibility and other allied aspects.  Advanced Ayurvedic Centre for Mental Health in
NIMHANS, Bangalore seems to have been forsaken by the Department.  The Committee would like to be apprised
about the actual status of this Centre.   (Para 5.1)  
 
VI.       RESEARCH COUNCILS (INTRA & EXTRA ) MURAL RESEARCH
            The Committee observes that during 2004-05 physical targets could not be achieved fully inspite of there being
full utilisation of funds.  Plan allocation for 2005-06 stands at Rs. 12.50 crore which is higher than Rs. 8 crore provided
in 2004-05.  The Committee would like to emphasize that all required steps should be taken for achieving the physical
targets for which plan funds are meant for.  The Committee observed that during the last two years of Ninth Plan also
physical targets could not be achieved fully.  The Committee apprehends that during the Tenth Plan also, so far, the
position may be the same.  If that be so, then there is a need for making quarterly assessment about the achievement of
physical targets.  (Para 6.2)  
 
VII.     CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF UNANI MEDICINE, NEW DELHI
The Committee would like to be apprised about the specific purpose for which this additional allocation is meant
for.  The Committee would also like to point out that the construction of building for RRUM has been continuing for

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
about 8-10 years.  The Committee would like to be enlightened about the original estimate and the actual expenditure on
this construction project. (Para 7.1) 
 
VIII. CENTRAL COUNCIL OF RESEARCH IN HOMEOPATHY
The Committee would like to have an idea of quantum of funds spent on construction activities during the first
three years of Tenth Plan.  The Committee would also like to know about the status of all the research Institutes
functioning under CCRA.  (Para  8.1)
 
IX.  EXTRA MURAL PROJECTS THROUGH RESEARCH INSTITUTIONS (Pvt./Semi-
Govt./Government/Universities/NGOs.) etc.
 
            The Committee observes that research projects are being implemented by different agencies.  The
Committee would like to have a status note on the contributions made  in this sector.  One of the important
mandated activities under this Head is to assist research projects and interventions which validate efficacy claims
relating to AYUSH.  An idea about the achievements made in this regard may be given.  (Para 9.2) 
 
X.        SURVEY ON “USAGE & ACCEPTABILITY OF AYUSH
            The Committee observes that undue delay has taken place in conducting the survey on usage and
acceptability of AYUSH.  The Committee is perturbed to note that the although funds were available,
considerable time was taken in deciding the survey agency and other allied matters.  It has taken the entire Ninth
Plan and more than half of Tenth Plan for conducting of survey which is very vital for propogating AYUSH.  The
findings of the survey confirms the apprehensions of the Committee about the lack of publicity and resultant lack
of demand for AYUSH in the general public in the country.  The Committee would appreciate if there is no delay
in taking follow up action on the findings of the survey and the Department should initiate the remedial measures
at the earliest. (Para 10.4) 
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative and hopes that the survey would be completed at the earliest and
its findings would be made use of.  (Para 10.5) 
 
XI.       ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA, NEW DELHI
The Committee is, however, constrained to note that procedural formalities remain to be completed. The
Committee would like to emphasize that the actual construction of the project should be done as per a time
bound action Plan which should be strictly adhered to.  All precaution should be taken for not allowing the
present estimate to exceed the present cost.  (Para 11.1)
 
XII. EXPANSION OF AYUSH DISPENSARIES IN CGHS
The Committee is not convinced by the contention of the Department that the process of new recruitment
is to be taken up by the UPSC and revival of old posts is complicated and time consuming.The Committee is of
the view that when the existing CGHS dispensaries are not fully functional for lack of AYUSH manpower, fate of
AYUSH dispensaries proposed to be opened can be well imagined.  (Para 12.1) 
 
XIII.    NORTH-EASTERN REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA AND HOMOEOPATHY
The Committee would like to caution the Department that the proposed project should not remain a new
initiative during the Tenth Plan.  Action should start without any further delay.   The Committee apprehends
that like in other projects, this project may continue at the proposal stage for considerable time with resultant
increase in actual cost of the project.   With free land made available by the State Govt. and funds also available
under the lump sum provision, action for clearance of all procedural formalities is required to be taken by the
Department. (Para 13.2) 
 
XIV. NATIONAL MEDICINAL PLANTS BOARD

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
  The Committee expresses its serious concern over the tardy progress being made in providing the
required staff essential for its efficient functions.  The Committee fails to appreciate the proposal of the
Department of Expenditure of outsourcing of staff for the Board.  The Committee is of the view that there should
be creation of all required posts.  The Department should make concerted efforts for getting the EFC and
Cabinet approval for creation of required posts at the earliest. (Para 14.1) 
 
XV. STRENGTHENING OF PHARMACOPOEIAL LABORATORIES
The Committee, however, strongly feels that higher allocation of funds does not have any meaning in the
case of these labs. Lack of infrastructure is adversely affecting the achievement level of various physical targets
set by the two labs. (Para 15.2) 
 
15.4     The Committee is anguished to note that another plan period would be over and these two labs will
continue to suffer from lack of required staff. The Committee finds that PLIM continues to function without a
Director. Nothing can be more unsatisfactory. In view of a very large variety of AYUSH drugs in the open
market, these labs have to be fully operational. The Committee reiterates that the Department should vigorously
purpose the matter with the Ministry of Finance and other authorities. (Para 15.4)     
 
The Committee hopes that there would be no further delay due to formal clearance by Fire Department
and other allied agencies.     (Para 15.5)     
 
XVI.    DRUGS QUALITY CONTROL
 
The Committee is constrained to note that all the above schemes were proposed to be launched without going
into the feasibility aspect.  As a result, after three years two of the schemes had to be dropped.  One was transferred to
another scheme and two were merged with the main scheme of drug quality control.  It took 3 years to realize that the
subject of regulation of health food supplements belongs to the Department of Health as per the Allocation of Business
Rules.   Therefore, the Scheme of Health Food Supplements was transferred to the Department of Health. (Para 16.3)  
 
            The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction with the scant feedback about spurious AYUSH drugs for such a big
country and that too for a period of three years.  The Committee would emphasize that the Department should pursue
with all the departments so that preventive/deterrent action can be initiated, wherever required.  (Para 16.4 & 16.5)
 
The Committee would also like to recommend that if need be, this Cell may be strengthened and function as a 
nodal agency in the vital area of curbing of manufacture and sale of spurious AYUSH drugs. (Para 16.6)
 
The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Council and the Department.   The Committee, however, feels that
the Department should also inform the scientists of Harvard Medical School about the rationale for the presence of
metals in Ayurvedic drugs and their safety aspect.   (Para 16.7)
 
XVII.   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
The Committee would like to be enlightened about the follow up action taken in this regard. (Para 17.1 & 17.2)
 
XVIII. MISCELLANEOUS
The Committee is of the view that the Department should pursue this proposal with all concerned authorities. 
(Para 18.1)
 
The Committee feels that a decision in this matter should be taken after considering the views of all
stakeholders. (Para 18.2)
 
The Committee welcomes this ambitious partnership programme and hopes that research work to be undertaken
under this project will yield fruitful results for all concerned. (Para 18.4)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 29th March, 2005 in Room 139, First Floor, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
           
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1.   Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
2.   Smt. Sukhbuns Kaur
3.
      Smt.  Maya Singh
4. Shri Lalming Liana
 
LOK SABHA
 
5. Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
6. Dr. M. Baburao
7. Dr. R.C. Dome
8. Smt. Maneka Gandhi
9. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah
10. Dr. Chinta Mohan
11. Shri Rajendra Kumar
12. Smt. K. Rani
13. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg,  Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director
Shri Mom Raj Singh,  Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,         Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY WELFARE
 
1.         Shri P.K. Hota                                      Secretary
2.         Shri Sanjiv Misrha                                 Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
3.         Shri S.S. Brar                                        Joint Secretary
3.         Shri B.P. Sharma                                 Joint Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
 
1.         Smt. Uma Pillai                                      Secretary
2.         Shri Sanjiv Misra                      Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
3.         Shri Tara Dutt                           Joint Secretary      
2.         At the outset Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Family Welfare

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
and requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation on the Demands for Grants 2005-2006 of the Department. The
Secretary informed the Committee about the achievements of the Department, the activities undertaken during the year
2004-05 and the activities proposed to be undertaken during 2005-06. The Members sought clarifications on the
activities and achievements of the Ministry and deliberated on the budgetary allocation under different heads of the
Department.  The Secretary replied to the queries raised by the Members.  The witnesses then withdrew at 12.20 p.m.
2A.      The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of AYUSH and requested the
Secretary to make a brief presentation on the Demand-for-Grants 2005-06 of the Department.  The Secretary made a
presentation of the activities undertaken during the last year and achievements of the Department.  The Joint Secretary
of this Department made a power-point presentation and briefly explained the budgetary allocations under the different
heads of the Department for the year 2005-06.  The Members sought clarifications on the activities and achievements of
the Ministry and deliberated on the budgetary allocation on different heads of the Department.  The Joint Secretary
replied to the queries raised by the Members.
3.         The Committee also decided to meet on 25 th April,05 to consider and adopt the Reports on Demands-for-grants
(2005-06) relating to the Departments of Health, Family Welfare & AUSH.
3A.      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 2:00 p.m.
NEW DELHI
29th March, 2005       
MOM RAJ SINGH
UNDER SECRETARY
 
                 MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 25th April, 2005 in Room No. 63 First Floor, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 
1. Shri Amar Singh                       ¾        Chairman
2. Dr. A.K. Patel
3. Smt. Maya Singh
4.      Shri Lalming Liana
 
LOK SABHA
 
5. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu
6. Smt. B. Sushila Devi Laxman
7. Dr. M. Baburao
8. Dr. R.C. Dome
9. Smt. Maneka Gandhi
10. Dr. Chinta Mohan
11. Ms. Archana Nayak

9th Report of Committee on Health & Family Welfare
file:///D/health_family/9th%20Report.htm[29-06-2016 14:41:58]
12. Shri Rajendra Kumar
13. Smt. V. Radhika Selvi
14. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Smt Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S.C. Dixit,        Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the 7
th, 8th and 9 th   draft Reports on the Demands-for-Grants for
2005-2006 of Departments of Health, Family Welfare and AYUSH respectively, and adopted the same after some
modifications.
3.         The Committee decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok
Sabha on Wednesday, the 27
th April, 2005.  The Committee authorized to Smt. Maya Singh and in her absence Shri
Lalming Liana to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Smt.  Maneka Gandhi and in her absence Dr. Chinta
Mohan for laying the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
 
4.         The Chairman then informed the Committee that two Bills i.e. Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment)
Bill, 2005 and the Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Bill 2005, have been referred to the Committee for
examination and report thereon within three months.  The Committee decided to meet at 4.00 p.m. on 12
th May, 2005 to
hear the Secretary of the Department of AYUSH for initial briefing on the said bills.
 
5.         The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.15 p.m.
 
NEW DELHI
25
th March, 2005       
MOM RAJ SINGH
UNDER SECRETARY
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 