Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
REPORT NO.
64
SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2013)  
Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendation/Observations Contained in the
Fifty-Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13
(Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th March, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 19th March, 2013)
Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendation/Observations Contained in the
Fifty-Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13
(Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
REPORT NO. 
64


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
SIXTY-FOURTH REPORT
Action taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations Contained in the
Fifty-Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13
(Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
(Laid on the table of Lok Sabha on  19 th March, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)-(viii)
Part – A (Health Sector)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—50
Chapter I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 2—21
Chapter II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .................. 22—32
Chapter III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 33—49
Chapter IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 50
Part – B (NRHM)
REPORT ................................................................................................................................... 51—84
Chapter I – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have been accepted by the Committee .......................... 52—68
Chapter II – Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ................ 69—74
Chapter III – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee ................. 75—83
Chapter IV – Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited ................................................... 84
5. O BSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS A T A G LANCE
(PART A AND P ART B C OMBINED) ........................................................................................ 85—90
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 91—94
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 95 —131
Part-A (Health Sector) ......................................................................................................... 97—129
Part-B (NRHM) .................................................................................................................... 130—131

(i)(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brajesh Pathak — Chairman
2. Dr. Vijaylaxmi Sadho
*3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Shri Rasheed Masood
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
6. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri H. K. Dua
10. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
@11. Shri Ashok Argal
12. Shri Kirti Azad
13. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
14. Shrimati Sarika Devendra Singh Baghel
15. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
16. Shrimati Priya Dutt
17. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
18. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
19. Dr. Monazir Hassan
20. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
21. Dr. Tarun Mandal
22. Shri Mahabal Mishra
23. Shri Zafar Ali Naqvi
24. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
25. Shri Harin Pathak
26. Shri Ramkishun
27. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
30. Shri P.T. Thomas
#31. Shri Chowdhury Mohan Jatua
* Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  28 th October, 2012.
@ Ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.  9 th January, 2013.
# Nominated as a Member to the Committee w.e.f.  14 th December, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, hereby
present this Sixty-fourth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Committee’s 54
th Report on Demands for Grants
2012-13 (Demand No. 46) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare for the year 2012-13.
2. The Fifty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26
th
and 25 th April, 2012 respectively. Replies of the Government on the recommendations contained in the
Report, received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare were considered by the
Committee at its meeting held on the 13 th March, 2013.
3. The Committee considered the Draft Report and adopted the same in its meeting held on the
13th March, 2013.
 BRAJESH PATHAK
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
13th March , 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Phalguna 13, 1934 ( Saka) Committee on Health and Family Welfare

(iv)
LIST OF ACRONYMS
(Health Sector)
A E – Actual Expenditure
A TN – Action Taken Note
AS&FA – Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
AS&DG – Add itional Secretary and Director General
BCGVL – BCG Vaccine Laboratory
B E – Budget Estimate
CCA – Chief Controller of Accounts
CoS – Committee of Secretaries
CMO – Chief Medical Officer
CRBN Med – Chemical, Radiological, Biological, Nuclear Medicine
CCEA – Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CRP – Comprehensive Redevelopment Plan
cGMP – Current Practice Good Manufacturing
CGHS – Central Government Health Scheme
CHS – Central Health Service
CRI – Central Research Institute
CPWD – Central Public Works Department
CSSD – Central Sterile Supply Department
COTPA – Control of Tobacco Products Act
CNCI – Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute
CDTC – Central Drug Testing Laboratory
CDSCO – Central Drugs Standard Control Organization
DMHP – District Mental Health Programme
DPT – Diptheria, Pertussis, Typhoid
DFG – Demand for Grants
EAC – Expert Appraisal Committee
EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
FCTC – Framework Convention on Tobacco Control

(v)
FSSAI – Food Safety S tandards Authority of India
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
HSCC (I) Ltd. – Hospital Service Consultancy Corporation (India) Ltd.
IVF – In Vitro Fertilization
IFD – Integrated Finance Division
INC – Indian Nursing College
IPC – Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission
JIPMER – Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education & Research
L&DO – Land and Development Office
LHMC – Lady Hardinge Medical College
MoU – Memoranda of Understanding
NMHP – National Mental Health Programme
NPHCE – National Programme for Healthcare of the Elderly
NCHRH – National Commission for Human Resources for Health
NDC – National Development Council
NIC – National Informatics Centre
NCD – Non-Communicable Disease
NTCP – National Tobacco Control Programme
NTRA – National Tobacco Regulatory Authority
NIMHANS – National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences
NPCDSC – National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes,
Cardiovasular Disease and Stroke
NCR – National Capital Region
NUHM – National Urban Health Mission
NEIGRIHMS – North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health
NOC – No Objection Certificate
NMCN – National Medical College Network
OM – Office Memorandum
PHCUS – Preventive Health Check-up Scheme
PMSSY – Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Surakhsha Yojana
PII – Pasteur Institute of India
PGIMER – Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research
RE – Revised Estimate

RFP – Request for proposal
RAK College – Rajkumari Amritkaur College
RAN – Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi
RIPANS – Regional Institute of Paramedical Sciences
SFC – Standing Finance Committee
SJH – Safdurjang Hospital
TT – Tetanus Toxoid
TCIL – T elecommunication Consultants India Ltd
UC – Utilization Certificate
UPSC – Union Public Service Commission
UT – Union Territory
UIP – Universal Immunization Programme
UTI-TSL – Unit Trust of India-Technology Services Limited
VMMC – V ardhaman Mahavir Medical College
(vi)

(NRHM Sector)
ASHAs – Accredited Social Health Activists
ANM – Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
ANC – Ante Natal Care
BCC – Behaviour Change Communication
CAG – Comptroller and Auditor General
CCA – Chief Controller of Accounts
CRMs – Common Review Missions
CHCs – Community Health Centres
DOTS – Directly Observed Short Treatment Course
FMR – Financial Management Report
FRUs – First Referral Units
GDP – Gross Domestic Product
GoI – Government of India
H R – Human Resource
HBNC – Home Based Newborn Care
IEAG – India Expert Advisory Group
IRS – Indoor Residual Spraying
ICMR – Indian Council of Medical Research
IEC – Information, Education, Communication
IMR – Infant Mortality Rate
IDD – Iodine Deficiency Disorder
IUCD – Intra Uterine Contraceptive Device
IDSP – Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme
JRMs – Joint Review Missions
JSY – Janani Suraksha Yojana
JSSK – Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram
LSAS – Life Saving Anaesthetic Skills
MMU – Mobile Medical Unit
MMR – Maternal Mortality Ratio
MPW – Multi Purpose Worker
MDRTB – Multi Drug Resistant Tuberculosis
MTS – Malaria Technical Supervisors
MCTS – Mother & Child Tracking System
MoHFW – Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
(vii)

MoWCD – Ministry of Women and Child Development
MSG – Mission Steering Group
MCP – Mother Child Protection
NRHM – National Rural Health Mission
NBSUs – New Born Stabilization Units
NGO – Non Governmental Organisation
NPCC – National Programme Coordination Committee
NSSK – Navjat Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram
NBCCs – New Born Baby Corners
NIDs – National Immunization Days
NPCB – National Programme for Control of Blindness
PPIUCD – Post Partum Intra Uterine Contraceptive Device
PHCs – Primary Healthcare Centres
PIP – Programme Implementation Plan
PKDL – Post Kala Azar Dermal Leishmaniasis
PNC – Post Natal Care
RHS – Rural Health Survey
RCH – Reproductive Child Health
RKS – Rogi Kalyan Samitis
SRS – Sample Registration Survey
SFP – Statement of Fund Position
SNCUs – Special New Born Care Units
SNIDs – Sub National Immunization Days
SCs – Sub-centers
SSG – Sodium Stibo Gluconate
TMC – Trials of new Molecule
TFR – Total Fertility Rate
ToR – Terms of Reference
ToT – Training of Trainers
UIP – Universal Immunization Programme
UCs – Utilization Certificates
UT – Union Territory
VHNDs – V illage Health Nutrition Days
VHSCs – V illage Health Sanitation Committees
VBD – Vector Borne Disease
VBDCP – Vector Borne Disease Control Programme
(viii)

1
REPORT
Part-A
(Health Sector)
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Fifty-Fourth Report on Demands for Grants of the Department
of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2012-13.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 1.1, 1.2, 1.12, 1.13, 1.18, 1.19, 1.21, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6,
2.7, 2.10, 2.12, 2.20, 2.21, 2.23, 3.5, 3.10, 3.12, 5.4, 5.8, 8.2, 9.8, 9.13, 9.15, 10.4,
11.2, 11.3, 11.4, 12.3, 13.6, 13.8, 13.11, 13.16, 14.11, 14.16, 14.7, 15.7, 15.11,
17.5, 17.6, 17.10,18.2, 18.4, 19.6, 19.7, 20.5, 23.3, 25.2 Total–49 (Chapter I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 1.23, 2.3, 2.8, 2.9, 2.11, 2.19, 3.7, 3.13,
6.4, 7.3, 7.4, 9.16, 13.13, 14.9, 14.14, 15.10, 21.3, 21.4, 24.4, Total–19
(Chapter II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 1.6, 1.9, 1.10, 1.14, 2.14, 2.15, 3.11, 3.14, 4.2,
4.3, 5.6, 8.5, 9.9, 9.11, 12.6, 12.7, 14.3, 14.12, 15.5, 15.9, 16.3, 16.5, 16.7, 17.3,
17.9, 22.3, 25.4 Total–27 (Chapter III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: 14.11 Total–1 (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
I. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS
Recommendations/Observations
1.1 The Department has informed that the expenditure status of the allocated funds under Plan
heads for the Eleventh Plan was as follows:
(Rs. in crore )
Year B E RE Actual Expdt.
2007-08 2985.00 2331.39 2183.83
2008-09 3650.00 3650.00 3008.40
2009-10 4450.00 3825.25 3261.90
2010-11 5560.00 5139.55 4666.04
2011-12 5720.00 4450.00 4101.41
Total – XI Plan 22365.00 19396.19 17221.58
(Para 1.1)
1.2 From a scrutiny of the above Table, the Committee is constrained to observe that there was
substantial and persistent under-utilization of the budgeted funds during the Eleventh Plan. That the
savings occurred under the Plan head underlines the fact that the development activities have been
curtailed. Though the Committee is supportive of the Department’s demand for higher allocation of
funds, it deprecates the Department for failing to optimally utilize its Plan Allocations over the last
five years. The Committee observes that the underutilization of budgeted funds is indicative of slack
monitoring on the part of the Department as well as formulation of the Budget Estimates in a
ritualistic manner without application of proper financial yardsticks. The Committee, accordingly,
impresses upon the Department to pay focused attention to streamlining its monitoring mechanism
and ensure optimal and more efficient deployment and utilization of its financial resources for
smooth execution of its Plan programmes. (Para 1.2)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Recommendations/Observations
1.3 As per the information furnished by the Department the allocation made vis-a-vis actual
expenditure incurred in respect of some of the major Institutions/projects/initiatives of Department
for the last three financial years is as follows: Annexure-I (Para 1.12)
2

3
1.4 From a perusal of the utilization trend of the allocation as given in the Table above, the
Committee infers that the Department has failed to meet broad committed objectives of the Eleventh
Five Year plan. The Committee feels that the Department needs to introspect the reasons for
underutilization of funds practically in all of its major initiatives targeted to be achieved during the
Eleventh Plan period and take appropriate corrective actions accordingly. In addition to dedicated
approach, advance action plans may also be drawn for completion of all the projects in hand within
the targeted timelines. (Para 1.13)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Recommendations/Observations
1.5 The Committee recalls the following recommendations it has made in its 39th Report:–
“The Committee takes note of the fact that the Department has taken measures like for
non-recurring grants, no fresh releases are being authorized unless audited Utilization
Certificate for grant released in the year prior to the last year ( i.e. with a ‘grace period’
of one year) has been received, subject to the condition that the sanction for the earlier
grant does not permit a longer period of utilization. Further, the provisions of the General
Financial Rules, which require that in case of recurring grants, funds for same purpose
beyond 75% of the next year’s provision will not be released unless audited Utilization
Certificate for the grants released in the previous year is received, are being strictly
implemented. Impact of such measures does not seem to be very effective as number of
pending UCs continues to remain very high. Not only this, such a trend also indicates that
schemes are not being implemented as envisaged.”
“The Committee notes that as a further effort to maximize liquidation of UCs, a
communication has been sent by the Secretary (Health) to the Principal Health Secretaries
of all the States. If need be, this exercise needs to be pursued further with higher
authorities.” (Para 1.18)
1.6 The Committee is deeply disturbed that no heed has been paid to the Committee’s above
observations/recommendations, and a large number of UCs are still pending under both the
Centrally Sponsored and Central Sector Schemes. The additional measure taken by the Department
by sending a communication from the Secretary (Health) to the Principal Health Secretaries of all
the States has also been proved to be futile. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the
Department needs to have a serious introspection of the reasons for pendency of such a large
number of Utilization Certificates and come out with clear and innovative action plans for
liquidation thereof. (Para 1.19)
Action Taken
The Office of CCA has been periodically monitoring the pendency of UCs at the level of
different State Governments, and putting up the status to higher authorities in the Ministry. D.O.
letter has been issued to all the Health Secretaries with details of UCs pending in the States. Many
States like Punjab, Tripura, Goa, Jharkhand, Haryana have already responded with details of the
UCs. A drive to reconcile the pending UCs with Divisions shall be undertaken during this quarter.
A monitoring system has also been introduced on the website of CCA namely
www.ccahealth@gov.in to monitor the status of UCs.

4
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee is constrained to note that to a pointed query to the Department in this
regard, the Department has either merely stated that the ATN has been submitted to the Audit or
the ATN is under preparation. The Committee rather desires that details of the Action Taken by the
Department on the Audit paras should have been made available to the Committee. The Committee
also takes note of the fact that action on audit paras dating as far back to years 2008, 2009 are
still under preparation stage. The Committee calls for a speedy action on the observations as
contained in audit paras. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard. (Para 1.21)
Action Taken
The details of ATN on audit paras are at Annexure-II.
As regards speedy action on the submission of ATN on audit paras, following monitoring
system has been put in place to review the status of pending Action Taken Notes:
1. The Standing Audit Committee has been set up under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(Health) with AS&FA, CCA and concerned Joint Secretary as members to review the
pending ATN regularly.
2. ATN Adalats/Workshops with the representatives of audit are held to review the
pending Action Taken Notes/Disputes.
3. Status of pending Action Taken Notes is also reviewed in the Senior Officers’ Meeting
periodically.
4. The Committee of Secretaries is also reviewing the status of pending Action Taken
Notes.
As a result of above reviews, pendency of Action Taken Notes on audit paras has been
greatly reduced from 72 paras as on 01.04.2009.
II. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
1.8 Despite continuous under utilization of funds during the Eleventh Five Year Plan, there is
enhanced allocation in Plan funds from Rs. 78.00 crore in 2011-12 to Rs. 82.81 crore for 2012-13.
The Committee is given to understand that these enhanced funds are meant for meeting the
expenditure on account of salary and wages, purchase of medicines and all other administrative
expenses incurred by some CGHS cities for which budget is allocated under plan Head only  i.e.
Chandigarh, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, Guwahati, Shillong, Dehradun, Jabalpur, Ranchi and
Thiruvananthapuram. Further, construction of own CGHS building where plots are already allotted
and opening of already sanctioned dispensaries in Delhi and NCR are also proposed during 2012-13.
The Committee observes that the Department has to undertake lot of ground work in CGHS and
is of the view that for this purpose the targets need to be set, resources to be placed at the
disposal in time and implementing agencies need to be made accountable for accomplishing the set
targets from the very outset. (Para 2.4)
Action Taken
The observation of the Hon’ble Committee to ensure maximum utilisation of funds is
accepted for compliance in the future.

5
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Committee notes that the earmarked funds for 2012-13 under the scheme are not in
tune with the projected demand of the Department. From the figures made available to the
Committee it is evident that Rs.600.00 crore have been allocated against projected demand of
Rs.759.08 crore under non Plan Head and Rs.82.81 crore against the projection of Rs.92.17 crore
under Plan head. The Committee is given to understand that this deficit in allocation may adversely
affect procurement of medicines. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should try its best to convince the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance, for enhancement
of allocation at RE stage for procurement of medicines. (Para 2.5)
Action Taken
Every effort is made to secure maximum fund for procurement of medicines. The Hon’ble
Committee’s suggestion is noted for compliance at the RE stage for enhancement of allocation
under the Plan head.
Recommendation/Observation
1.10 On a query regarding the settlement of reimbursement claims of CGHS beneficiaries, the
Committee has been apprised of a number of steps taken by the Department to expedite the process
and as a result thereof the pendency has been brought out significantly to 3075 bills all over the
country. The Committee lauds the efforts made by the Department to bring about a significant
reduction in pendency of reimbursement claims and hopes that the Department would strive to
bring this figure further down with its sincere efforts. The Committee likes the Department to issue
a circular intimating the simplified procedures and for dispelling any misgivings among the
beneficiaries. (Para 2.6)
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee has appreciated the efforts made by CGHS for addressing the
issues of Medical Reimbursement Claims (MRC). CGHS will keep on making the requisite efforts
to bring about further improvements in the MRC disposal and also to make the process hassle free
and fast for the beneficiaries. The circular issued in this regard has been placed on the CGHS
website – www.cghs.nic.in.
Recommendation/Observation
1.11 The Department has stated that in order to mitigate the problems faced by the CGHS
beneficiaries in getting their bills reimbursed, there is no need of verification of bills by the treating
doctor and submission of essentiality certificate. Also, specific guidelines for examination of
requests for full reimbursement of claims have also been issued. In addition to this, the
beneficiaries now have the option of submitting the original bills under any health insurance scheme
that they may be subscribing and claim the balance amount from CGHS/Department that shall be
as per CGHS rates and regulations. The Committee observes a lot of ambiguity in process of
reimbursement of bills and the facts that are brought to the notice of the Committee are at
variance. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to issue a fresh circular in this
regard addressing all the misgivings currently prevailing among beneficiaries. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is accepted. CGHS will endeavour to make
the system more effective and hassle free for the beneficiaries.

6
Recommendation/Observation
1.12 The Committee is happy to note that 4,332 beneficiaries have opted for the Preventive
Health Check Up Scheme (PHCU) till 19th March, 2012 since its introduction. 30 beneficiaries per
day are registered in advance-online and undergo a list of identified investigations. Keeping in view
the success of the scheme, the Committee feels that these facilities should be made available at all
the Wellness Centers across the country so that more and more CGHS beneficiaries can avail these
facilities. Secondly, the Committee also suggests to the Department to have a monitoring
mechanism to gauge the performance of Preventive Health Checkup Scheme at regular basis so as
to maintain the quality standards of diagnostics and treatment procedures. While appreciating
Department’s efforts to spread awareness about this scheme, the Committee would like to suggest
that Department should publicize it through audio-video aids; newspapers in regional languages, etc.
in order to expand the scheme to a wide range. Also the Department should make efforts to ensure
that CGHS beneficiaries should understand the importance of Preventive Health Checkup Scheme
and opt for it. (Para 2.10)
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s suggestions are noted. The Preventive Health Check-up scheme
has already been implemented in 8 Wellness Centres in Delhi. It is working well and adequate
publicity is being given to this scheme among the beneficiaries. The initiative has been widely
appreciated. CGHS is contemplating introduction of this scheme in some other places also in a
phased manner.
The scheme is being given wide publicity through posters at the Wellness centre level. The
OM issued in this respect has been placed on CGHS website for public viewing and it has also
been circulated to all Ministries/Departments/Offices of Government of India with request to give
it wide publicity among the beneficiaries. A circular has also been issued in this regard requesting
the CGHS doctors and officials at Wellness centre level to give the scheme wide publicity and
inform and educate the beneficiaries about the importance of preventive health checkup and
motivate them to undergo the preventive health checkup to ensure timely detection and cure of any
disease conditions.
Recommendation/Observation
1.13 In context of Health Insurance Scheme, the Committee is given to understand that as per
the directions of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS), a proposal for inclusion of the Health
Insurance Scheme in the Twelfth Five Year Plan has been sent for consideration of the Steering
Committee of the Planning Commission. This Scheme will require a Plan outlay of approx
Rs.2,600.00 crore over the plan period of five years. After obtaining a go ahead from the Planning
Commission, the proposal would be placed before the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and
finally before the Cabinet for its approval of the Health Insurance Scheme. Request For Proposal
(RFP) for the Scheme will be issued after getting all the requisite approvals. The Committee was
informed that the proposed scheme is mainly for non-CGHS areas and is not a substitute of CGHS.
The Committee appreciates that the above scheme is primarily for non-CGHS areas and is of the
firm view that if at all it is implemented, it should be over and above CGHS facility instead of
replacing it. (Para 2.12)
Action Taken
The proposed Health Insurance Scheme will not be a substitute for CGHS. It is being
contemplated with special focus on non-CGHS areas where the pensioners are not getting adequate
healthcare cover.

7
Recommendation/Observation
1.14 The Committee was informed that around 485 hospitals and 138 Diagnostic centres are
empanelled under the scheme. As far as rates are concerned, the Committee was informed that only
L1 rates are notified & all those hospitals who agree for the notified rates get CGHS approval. The
Committee is constrained to note that the reluctance of the private hospitals and diagnostic centres
for empanelment is because of the low rates quoted by the CGHS for the specialized treatment and
diagnostic procedures due to which the CGHS beneficiaries are deprived of highly specialized
medical care and diagnostic facilities. The Committee hopes that the Department would rationalize
the new package rates as committed in the meeting. (Para 2.20)
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 One must not forget that the main objective of CGHS is to provide quality healthcare at
economical rates to the targeted beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the
rates should be rationalized so that the beneficiaries should be able to avail high quality diagnostics,
laboratories, specialized medical and surgical treatment in various private super specialty hospitals.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends framing of a policy for revision of rates after every two
years to realistically fix the rates of treatment as stated in 39th Report of the Committee on
Demand for Grants 2010-11 and would like to be updated about the action taken by the Department
in this regard. (Para 2.21)
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted for compliance .
Recommendation/Observation
1.16 The Committee is happy to note that the computerization of various facilities of CGHS has
brought about transparency and accountability in administration of CGHS and has proved
instrumental in identifying the malpractices & negligence in drug procurement procedure. The
Committee is of the opinion that the punishment in these cases should act as strict deterrence for
all functionaries of CGHS. The surprise visits by the concerned authorities to check the records
and verify the details of demand, supply and consumption pattern of drugs in CGHS Wellness
Centers can be also considered for regulating the functioning at CGHS. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should devise some checks and balances to ensure that incidence
of fraud and corruption reported recently in media should not recur in future. (Para 2.23)
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted. However, a detailed Circular indicating the
steps to be taken at the level of CMO-in charge of CGHS Wellness Centres to stop pilferage of
medicines has been issued to tighten the system.
III. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
1.17 The Committee observes that in the financial year 2011-12 against an allocation of

8
Rs.163.88 crore at RE stage, the Department had incurred a provisional expenditure of Rs.169.72
crore, which is more than the outlay at RE stage. However, against the projected outlay of
Rs.364.05 crore for 2012-13, the Department has been allocated only Rs.261.05 crore for the
hospital. The Committee is of the opinion that in view the various expansion activities proposed
to be undertaken by the Hospital during the Twelfth Plan, there is a need for increased allocation
for the Hospital. The Committee, therefore, recommends that if need be, the Department may
approach the Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure to increase allocation at RE
stage 2012-13 and also seek enhanced funds for subsequent financial years of the Twelfth Plan as
per the requirements. (Para 3.5)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted and requirement of increase
in the funds would be projected to the authority concerned depending upon the need at RE Stage.
Recommendation/Observation
1.18 The Committee is happy to note that Department has acted positively to the Committee’s
earlier recommendation and had taken steps to not only to fill up the vacant posts of Resident
doctors but also after review of manpower vis-à-vis sanctioned strength had created more posts
in different cadres. The Committee is of the opinion that the Department should take measures for
reviewing the manpower strength year wise at a regular basis to ensure that the process of filling-
up of the vacancies is initiated well in advance so that the duration of vacancy to any post is
minimized to the lowest level and the ever increasing patient load in the hospitals is aptly tackled.
(Para 3.10)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. It is submitted that this
is a continuous process and such review will be done when the proposal for expansion of various
Departments is taken up. The need to increase the posts in various categories would be complied
at the time of finalization of the expansion of the Hospital in case of construction of Super
Specialty Block, ICU etc. as mentioned above.
Recommendation/Observation
1.19 The Committee is dismayed to note that the original re-development plan approved during
Eleventh Plan consisting of dismantling the existing hospital in III phase and rebuilding the hospital
in 9 towers in time period of 6 years has been shelved. This has not come as a surprise to the
Committee considering the pace with which things were moving in respect of re-development plan
of the hospital in previous years. Now, the Twelfth Five Year Plan has proposed to build a Super
Specialty Hospital with 650 beds including 200 beds nursing home, CBRN Medical management
centre and 400 bed emergency wards for which Rs. 257.55 crore have been allocated. Also, the
Committee is given to understand that the expansion of VMMC building to accommodate 27%
increase in OBC quota seats; Lecture Theatre, Auditorium and increase in Hostel accommodation
is in progress. Keeping in mind the achievement of the redevelopment plan of SJH during Eleventh
plan, the Committee recommends that the Department needs to have a serious introspection of the
reasons for shelving the re-development Plan of SJH during Eleventh Plan. Further, the Department
should take realistic measures and make all conceivable efforts so that the whole new re-
development project gets completed within the given time period. For this to happen, from the very
outset, targets need to be set, resources to be put to use judiciously and implementing agencies
to be made accountable to accomplish the set targets. (Para 3.12)

9
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. The preliminary
proposal with Project Report for the construction of Super Specialty Block (SSB) and (ii) Critical
Care Medical Emergency and Casualty Block and (iii) CRBN Medical Management System have
been prepared. A draft EFC Memo is under consideration for seeking approval of competent
authority. A Project Management Committee would be constituted to monitor the progress of the
project once EFC/CCEA approves the proposal. However, the time taken in obtaining various Local
and Statutory clearances is an impediment as these authorities take their own time to clear such
proposals.
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
1.20 The Committee is not happy with the slow pace of construction work and recommends that
the Department needs to make serious introspection of the reasons for delay in execution of various
projects envisaged during 2011-12 and take all measures to see that the same reasons do not crop
up again and hinder the progress of various projects/programmes envisaged in current financial
year. A realistic assessment of targets and dedicated timelines for their achievements would be a
right step in this direction. (Para 5.4)
Action Taken
The comments of the Committee have been noted for compliance. New Emergency Care
Building is scheduled to be completed by Sep.-Oct., 2012 and construction of Dharamshala is
expected to be completed by end of this year.
Recommendation/Observation
1.21 The Committee is disappointed on the continuance of a large number of vacancies in
different categories of post. Although new posts have been created in the category Senior Residents
(SR) and Group ‘C’ Nursing, the process of filling up of these posts has not been started yet. The
Committee is unable to comprehend as to why there have been always a substantial number of
vacancies at any given point in time. At least, in case of Resident Doctors (RD), the Department
can pro-actively step in to place the next batch of RDs well in advance. Since the hospital is
catering to the health needs of ever increasing patients, the Committee can easily visualize the
amount of burden on the existing manpower. In such scenario, it is really a matter of concern that
such a large number of vacancies is allowed to persist. The Committee, therefore, keeping in mind
the OPD, IPD attendance of the Dr. RML Hospital, would like to suggest that Department should
consider necessary steps to expedite the process of filling up of newly created posts of senior
residents and nursing category which are integral part of health care services to ensure smooth
functioning of the Hospital on priority basis. (Para 5.8)
Action Taken
As regards filling up of newly created post of Senior Residents and Junior Residents,
Selection process has been completed and offer of appointment to the selected candidates has been
issued. As regards filling of the posts of Nursing Category, the hospital has initiated the process
to fill up the newly created post of Staff Nurse.

10
VIII. LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE
Recommendation/Observation
1.22 The Committee observes consistent under-utilization of funds during last 3 years of Eleventh
Five Year Plan. As regards to the activities undertaken by the Hospital, the Committee notes that
modular Eye and ENT operation theatres were renovated; new central AC plant for auditorium and
central library has been installed and the construction of new hospital and residential buildings/
facilities have started at a great pace after getting approval from competent authorities. In light of
the activities undertaken by the Hospital; the Committee understands that underutilization of funds
reflect that the Hospital has failed to accomplish the targeted activities during the Eleventh Plan.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Hospital should draw out definite action plan for
realization of its targets and monitor construction of new hospital and other related buildings
scrupulously . (Para 8.2)
Action Taken
The underutilization of the funds in the last three years of the Eleventh Plan was due to
the delay in starting the construction activity as there was delay in receiving the NOCs from
various statutory/local bodies. An action plan for realization of its targets has already been chalked
out which is 20 months for construction of the hospital buildings and 15 months for construction
of residential buildings. So far as monitoring of the construction activities is concerned, Ministry
has already appointed HSSC (I) Ltd. for supervising and monitoring the activities pertaining to the
construction and the execution of the works.
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
Recommendation/Observation
1.23 The Committee notes the fact that in spite of lot of developmental work being undertaken,
most of projects have gone beyond the targeted time-line. The Committee has been informed that
the delay in execution of various infrastructure development projects is attributed to delay in
approval of Master Plan of AIIMS which is pending due to clearance from various agencies like
MCD, NDMC, CPWD etc. The Committee feels that time overruns are certain to result in cost
overruns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should chalk out a time
bound Action Plan for the projects which are yet to be executed and also for the projects
underway. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the current status of various
approvals and also the extent of cost overruns likely to be caused due to the delay in completion
of projects. The Committee would like to be apprised about the targeted timelines for all the
underway projects planned in AIIMS. (Para 9.8)
Action Taken
The desired information is at Annexure-III .
Recommendation/Observation
1.24 The Committee was also informed that under Moily Committee, 160 faculty posts have been
created in addition to 34 new posts duly approved by the Academic Committee, Standing Finance
Committee and Governing Body on 29th February, 2012. The Committee was further informed that
these 194 vacancies would be advertised after finalization of roster. The Committee was also
apprised that backlog reserved vacancies for the posts of Assistant Professor have also been

11
advertised in March, 2012. The Committee observes that with a large number of posts lying vacant
at Faculty level it would be practically difficult for the Institute to maintain the high standards of
patient care and teaching for which it has been known for decades. The efforts made by
Department to fill up the backlog vacancies came as sign of relief to the Committee. While
appreciating the Department’s efforts, the Committee would, however, recommend to the
Department to make all out efforts to fill up all the vacant posts existing in faculty, non-faculty
and other categories in a time bound manner. (Para 9.13)
Action Taken
The reservation position of 194 posts of faculty has been finalized and the same have been
plotted in the roster. In addition, 117 posts of faculty are resultant due to retirement, resignation
etc. and reservation position for 72 posts has also been finalized. Reservation status of remaining
45 posts is yet to be finalized. As regards filling of all these vacant posts of faculty, the same
would be filled in a phased manner.
Recommendation/Observation
1.25 The Committee was further informed that there is a huge mismatch in doctors-patients ratio
in OPD; even if the vacant posts are filled up in the near future the mismatch would remain there.
The Committee cannot remain a mute spectator to the appalling circumstances prevailing in such
a reputed Institute like AIIMS which is a role model for all medical institutes across the country
and implore upon the Department to take proactive steps not only to fill up the vacant posts on
a war-footing but also to initiate a blueprint to ensure a decent doctor-patient ratio, which would
help the Institute to achieve the overall aim of the Institute to provide tertiary care and path
breaking research. The Committee feels that the above objectives can only be possible when there
is adequate number of doctors who could besides delivering quality healthcare to the patients also
devote quality time for research activities. Hence, a realistic assessment of available manpower
vis-à-vis sanctioned strength of the Institute is urgently required. (Para 9.15)
Action Taken
As is evident from the position stated in the preceding paragraphs, the Institute has taken
active measures to fill up vacant faculty positions and to create new positions as well.
X. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEURO SCIENCES (NIMHANS),
BENGALURU
Recommendation/Observation
1.26 The Plan allocation of Rs.109.00 crore was made against the projected demand of
Rs.225.61 crore for the first year of the Twelfth Five Year Plan. The reasons cited for seeking
enhanced allocation targets for the year 2012-13 were to make the Institute move towards
achieving the proposals laid down for the year 2012-13 especially to meet expenditure on salary
for newly created posts as well as meeting the cost of equipments and infrastructure needed for
implementing the new initiatives. The Committee finds although the Plan allocation is lesser than
what was projected by the Institute, it should be utilized effectively by prioritizing the activities/
expenditure without having significant impact on the performance of the Institute. Prioritization
would enable phasing out lesser priority areas to the subsequent years of the plan period. However,
if the Department finds itself hamstrung midway, the Committee recommends to the Department
to approach the Planning Commission and the Department of Expenditure seeking for more funds
at RE stage as per its requirements. (Para 10.4)

12
Action Taken
The Department accepts the recommendations of the Committee and assures that all
activities proposed during the year shall be carried out as proposed and should it require additional
funds, will approach the Planning Commission and the Department of Expenditure for more funds
at RE stage.
XI. THE POST-GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH
Recommendation/Observation
1.27 Though the funds earmarked for individual financial years of the Eleventh Plan period were
optimally utilized, the Committee notes that there was substantial reduction in Plan funds allocation
from Rs.140.00 crore at BE stage to Rs.92.00 crore at RE stage during the year 2011-12 which
as informed, was due to delay in process for starting various capital works which were pending
for approval of Union Territory administration. From the perusal of status of different projects
envisaged during the Eleventh Plan period, the Committee notes that in many areas no or negligible
achievements have been made as against the targets set. The Committee observes that this state
of affairs clearly reflect that Institute has not drawn out its action plans for achieving the goals
set in right perspective and targets could not be achieved despite availability of adequate funds. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the Department to make a checklist of all approvals
required before the execution of works and approach the concerned agencies for getting the same.
The Institute should draw definite action plans and timelines for completion of all the projected
works to avoid cost overruns. (Para 11.2)
Action Taken
It is submitted that earlier the drawings were not approved by UT Administration,
Chandigarh for the building. When the Institute approached the UT Administration for permission
for cutting trees coming in the layout of building plans, the Chandigarh Administration insisted that
building plans be got approved and thereafter tree cutting can be pursued. Chief Architect, UT
Administration, Chandigarh, insisted that a comprehensive Master Plan be got prepared and
submitted. The Master Plan has been submitted to UT authorities to obtain their approval in May,
2012. Certain observations raised by them are being attended to. Further, the Ministry of
Environment also insisted that environment clearance be obtained for the new plan projects. The
environment clearance is at final stage of issue by the Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC). Both the
issues are expected to be sorted out by 30th September, 2012 and thereafter execution of works
will be carried out as per the timelines set.
Recommendation/Observation
1.28 For the financial year of 2012-13, the Institute has demanded Rs.229.00 crore against
which it has been allocated Rs.161.00 crore, keeping in view the present position of on-going
works as well as the proposed augmentation of various Departments. The Committee was informed
that the reduced allocation is likely to impact the major projects which were pending for approval
of UT Administration. The Committee is of the opinion that lack of funds should not hamper the
progress of the projects and recommends that this could be achieved by proper monitoring and
judicious utilization of the available funds. The Department should if required take up with
the Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure for revision of funds at RE stage.
(Para 11.3)

13
Action Taken
In view of the position explained at Para 11.2, every effort is being made to expedite the
progress of projects and to fully utilize the allocation of funds for the financial year 2012-13.
Recommendation/Observation
1.29 The Committee has been informed that out of the sanctioned strength of 7785 posts in
different categories, 1414 posts are lying vacant. Out of 78 vacant posts in Faculty category, 48
posts of backlog vacancies of faculty (06 posts of Professors and 42 posts of Assistant
Professors) have been advertised and remaining 30 posts of faculty will be advertised in due
course. 80 vacancies in Resident category are due to be filled up in June session. The Committee
takes note of the measures taken by the Hospital to fill up the vacancies in different categories.
The Committee would appreciate if these posts get filled up as scheduled. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
The institute made effort to fill up the vacant posts in respect of various categories. 48
posts of backlog vacancies reserved for SC/ST/OBC have been advertised. Apart from above
backlog vacancies, there are about 57 posts of faculty (Professor 17, Associate Professor 2,
Assistant Professor 38) lying vacant due to retirement and left out from the last selection which
are being advertised shortly and will be filled up in due course.
As far as the posts of Residents are concerned, the Institute had advertised 146 posts of
Sr. Residents/Jr. Residents, Demonstrator, Sr. Medical Officer and Tutor (Medical) in the leading
newspapers on 16.5.2012, 26.5.2012 and 8.6.2012 respectively. 109 posts of Residents have
already been filled up and the remaining posts will be filled up in next session i.e. in December, 2012.
XII. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG
Recommendation/Observation
1.30 The Committee is happy to note that the Department has chalked out a defined development
plan of the Institute but has not set any timelines/deadlines for the proposed initiatives. Since all
the projects are under planning stage, the Committee would like the Institute to frame a time bound
Action plan for execution of all projects emphasizing on judicious utilization of resources at the
outset. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to monitor execution of all the
proposed new initiatives from the outset so that these are accomplished as targeted. (Para 12.3)
Action Taken
The Institute has projected the three projects of (i) Establishment of Under Graduate College
at an estimated cost of Rs.198.55 crore; (ii) Expansion of Nursing College from 50 to 100 B.Sc.
Nursing Student at an estimated cost of Rs.51.28 crore; (ii) Establishment of Regional Cancer
Centre at an estimated cost of Rs.123.31 crore to be funded in the annual plan 2012-13. They have
earmarked an amount of Rs.80.00 crore for capital projects including the above three project in
the Annual plan 2012-13. The projects were considered in the Ministry in the form of EFC/SFC
cases in consultation with appraising agencies of Project Appraisal and Management Division of
Planning Commission, Plan Finance-II Division of Department of Expenditure. The observations
made by these agencies are under correspondence with the Institute and M/s HSCC for
clarification.

14
In order to freeze the issue, the matter has been further considered and it has been decided
that keeping in view the available financial resources and the urgent requirement of infrastructure,
to begin with the projects of Establishment of UG College and Expansion of Nursing College should
be taken up and the Institute should finalize the formalities of engaging M/s HSCC as their Project
Management Consultant so that the projects can take off at the earliest. It is expected that both
these projects would be considered and recommended by EFC/SFC by end of December, 2012.
XIII. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
Recommendation/Observation
1.31 The Committee observes that although the ground work under the all packages more or less
has been started, the completion has spilled over to 2012-13. It is self revealing situation to
comprehend the correlation between pendency of work under the scheme and under-utilization of
funds. The Committee is perturbed to note the slow pace of implementation of Pradhan Mantri
Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) scheme, one of the key initiatives of the Department launched
with the objective of correcting regional imbalances in the affordable tertiary healthcare services as
well as to augment facilities for quality medical education in the country. Almost all the projects
proposed under the programme are running beyond schedule. The Committee observes that the
delay in operationalization of this ambitious project would certainly lead to the cost overruns. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to streamline monitoring of the progress of
the project and strive to meet the new targets set under PMSSY . (Para 13.6)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.32 The Committee recommends that the Department needs to have a serious introspection of
the reasons which led not only to delay in completion of targeted projects but also resulted in
underutilization of funds and cost overruns as the Department had to seek approval for the revised
estimates for the project. The Committee expects that the Department would meet its deadline to
start AIIMS like Institutes functional from this academic session 2012-13 i.e. August, 2012.
(Para 13.8)
Action Taken
It has already been decided to start the academic session in the new six AIIMS in
September, 2012 with 50 MBBS students in each of the new AIIMS.
Recommendation/Observation
1.33 The Committee impresses upon the Department to learn from the hurdles being faced in the
rolling out of Phase I of the project and make a serious effort to plug all the possible loopholes
to ensure timely completion of the targeted projects. (Para 13.11)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.

15
Recommendation/Observation
1.34 The Committee appreciates the Department for taking timely suitable action to meet the
faculty and equipments/needs of the six AIIMS like Institutes. The Committee hopes that all the
exercises would be completed well within the dedicated timelines and all the Institutes would be
made functional from the current Academic session 2012-13. (Para 13.16)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
XIV. DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES
Recommendation/Observation
1.35 The Committee is happy that the Department has acted on its advice, but it feels that a lot
is yet to be achieved in this regard as the number of faculty trained till date is miniscule as
compared to the grants in aid given to the States. The Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the
Department to take its recommendations in right perspective and act on it with vigour and urgency
it calls for. (Para 14.6)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Recommendation/Observation
1.36 The Plan funds allocated for the programme for 2012-13 are Rs.22.50 crore against the
projected outlay of Rs.55.00 crore. Given the fact that the provisional expenditure exceeded the
allocated funds during 2011-12, the Committee is surprised to find a huge gap of Rs.32.50 crore
between the projected and budgeted funds for 2012-13. The Committee was also apprised of many
on-going programmes and new schemes proposed under development of nursing services. Further,
upgradation of RAK College of Nursing into Centre of Excellence is also under process. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that additional funds be allocated at RE Stage so that lack of
funds does not hamper the developmental activities undertaken by the Department. (Para 14.7)
Action Taken
Noted. The Ministry of Finance shall be approached to allocate additional funds at RE stage.
XV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
1.37 The Committee is shocked to see the mismatch between requirement of manpower under
NMHP and the personnel actually available. The Department has also stated that there is shortage
of the qualified mental health manpower in the country. The Committee is unable to accept the
Department’s statement when so many efforts are being invested in strengthening and upgradation
of the institutions, training of personnel and research activities. Further, the Committee also notes
that the last National Survey of Mental Health Resources was carried out a decade back in 2002,
which clearly indicates casual attitude on part of Department in this matter. The Committee would
like to be apprised of whether the Department is taking any steps to conduct the next National
Mental Health Survey and parameters on the basis of which such surveys are carried out by the
Department. (Para 15.7)

16
Action Taken
It is admitted that there is an acute shortage of qualified professionals in the field of Mental
Health in the country which is also a major constraint in meeting the mental health needs and
providing optimal mental health services to the people. Due to shortage of manpower in mental
health, the implementation of the District Mental Health Programme in the country suffered
adversely in previous plan periods. To address the acute shortage of manpower in the field of
mental health, the Department started the Manpower Development Schemes under the National
Mental Health Programme. The scheme envisaged establishment of 11 Centres of Excellence in
Mental Health across the country and strengthening/establishment of 120 PG Departments in Mental
Health Specialties (30 each in Psychiatry, Clinical Psychology, Psychiatric Social Work and
Psychiatric Nursing).
Once fully operational, the Institutes funded under Manpower Development Schemes would
produce 1756 qualified professionals in the field of Mental Health every year as per details at
Annexure-IV .
The Department is also aware that in spite of implementing the Manpower Development
Schemes in the country, there is a great mismatch between requirement of manpower under NMHP
and the personnel actually available. In this regard, it is stated that once all the Centres of
Excellence and PG Departments become fully operational, only then 1756 qualified professionals
would be produced each year and consequently it will take time to bridge the gap between
availability and requirement of mental health professionals in the country. Also, steps would be
taken to further enhance the output capacity of the institutes in the future which will further
enhance the rate at which the gap would be bridged. The Ministry is planning to conduct a nation-
wide survey in the current year to assess the current situation of mental health resources in the
country.
Recommendation/Observation
1.38 Majority of districts in the country have not still been covered under DMHP, which was
initiated way back in 1996. Almost 16 years have passed but the scenario seems to be at standstill.
With about 500 districts still remaining outside the reach of this vital aspect of the programme, the
Committee can only hope that the matter regarding extension of District Mental Health Programme
to all the districts of India would be taken up earnestly during the Twelfth Five Year Plan and the
failure of the Department to extend the District MHP in the Tenth and Eleventh Plan would not
be repeated. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make all out
efforts to accomplish all the set targets within the set time line. The Committee would like to be
apprised of breakthrough made in the programme. (Para 15.11)
Action Taken
The Department has already submitted the 12th Plan Proposal to the Planning Commission
for implementation of the National Mental Health Programme in the 12th FYP which includes
extension of District Mental Health Programme to all 640 Districts of the country over a period
of 5 years in a phased manner. Subsequent to the approval of the Planning Commission, the
approval of EFC and CCEA would be taken for the extension of the programme to the uncovered
parts of the country.
XVII. V ACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
Recommendation/Observation
1.39 The Committee has been constantly monitoring the progress of upgradation of these three

17
vaccines producing PSUs and is equally perturbed with the dependence on private players on
account of closure of these units. Hence, the Committee is delighted that production of vaccines
has again started in these units. The Committee, however, hopes that soon the no. of doses of DPT
and TT Vaccines produced at CRI, Kasauli, meet the national demand. Similar aspirations are there
for BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor. The Committee, accordingly, would like to be updated on
the measures that would be taken to increase the production of vaccines in these units to meet
the national requirements simultaneously working upon fulfilling of cGMP norms. (Para 17.5)
Action Taken
The vaccine manufacturing capacity of DPT group of vaccines is expected to go up to 235
million doses annually after upgradation of vaccine manufacturing public sector units as per cGMP
standards as compared to the earlier capacity of 160.5 million doses annually.
Recommendation/Observation
1.40 On the issue of efforts being made by the Department to regulate the cost of vaccines, the
Committee was informed that vaccines are being procured at competitive prices through tender
systems. Further, the suspension of manufacturing licenses of the three vaccine manufacturing
units namely the Central Research Institute at Kasauli, the Pasteur Institute of India at Coonoor and
BCG Vaccine Laboratory at Chennai has been revoked. The process for their upgradation for
compliance with the Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) as provided under Schedule M of Drugs
and Cosmetic Rules, 1945 is underway and would be completed soon which would further help
in regulating the cost of vaccines. The Committee is not convinced with the evasive reply given
by the Department. The efforts or step taken by the Department to regulate the cost of vaccine
finds no mention in the reply furnished by it. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the
Department to furnish realistic efforts being made by it to regulate the costs of vaccines.
(Para 17.6)
Action Taken
All vaccines are being procured at competitive price through tender systems. The
upgradation of public sector vaccine manufacturing units with enhanced capacities of production
would result in substantially meeting the requirement of vaccines for Universal Immunization
Programme (UIP) thereby resulting in regulation of costs of vaccines.
Recommendation/Observations
1.41 The Department has further informed that for the financial year of 2012-13, Plan allocations
has been substantially increased to Rs.1806.70 lakh as compared to Rs.550.15 lakh in 2011-12. The
Committee is constrained to note that it has sought to know as to how the enhanced Plan allocation
to the tune of Rs.35.00 crore for 2012-13 is proposed to be utilized. The Department’s reply is casual
and evasive since it has stated that the proposed increase in BE 2012-13 to the tune of Rs.1806.70
lakh as compared to RE 2011-12 i.e. (Rs.739.88 lakh) is due to increased targets of vaccine
production specially DPT group of vaccines; for rain water harvesting project proposed to be
executed by Irrigation and Public Health Department of Himachal Pradesh; and Upgradation of existing
facilities like Animal House, Yellow Fever, Anti Sera, etc. The Committee is unable to comprehend as
to why the Department has chosen to give restricted reply and directs the Department to give
complete and coherent reply to the information sought by the Committee. (Para 17.10)
Action Taken
The proposed enhancement is due to the fact that the newly upgraded cGMP compliant

18
DPT vaccine manufacturing facility at CRI, Kasauli is expected to be operational shortly and hence
would require material and supply as per the enhanced capacity. Further, upgradation of other
vaccine manufacturing facilities and machineries and equipments associated with it are also
proposed during the year.
XVIII. HEALTH SECTOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND MANAGEMENT INCLUDING
EMERGENCY MEDICAL RELIEF
Recommendation/Observation
1.42 As regards the utilization status of allocated Plan funds and physical targets set and
achieved during 2011-12 under Programme, the Plan allocation at RE stage was reduced to Rs.2.00
crore from Rs.80.50 crore at BE stage. Further, the actual expenditure was even lesser to the tune
of Rs.0.02 crore. The reasons behind the reduction of funds at RE stage were due to a few
sporadic outbreaks in Avian & Pandemic Influenza which could be managed by drugs, personal
protective equipments etc. available in the stock. No fresh procurement was anticipated and no
large scale visual or print media publicity required. Also, in context to the Health Sector Disaster
Preparedness, as the specifications finalization took time, it was anticipated that the allocated budget
under this head would not be utilized. In addition to this, there has been no major disaster requiring
health sector intervention during the year 2011-12. However, the Committee is not convinced with
the reasons cited for not procuring one mobile Hospital due to the delay in refraining specification
by Technical Sub-Committee which truly reflect no-preparedness on the part of the Department.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department should even in the absence of any major
disaster, acquire all necessary equipments and create the required infrastructure in order to get it
fully equipped to face any disaster instead of waiting for the disaster to happen and then move
forward for getting prepared to face the same. Almost cent percent under utilisation of allocated
funds indicates lack of seriousness and lacklustre approach on the part of the Department for any
eventuality. (Para 18.2)
Action Taken
The proposed 100 bed Mobile Hospital is state of art, all weather, selfcontained mobile
hospital designed to provide secondary/tertiary level medical, surgical and critical care at or near
disaster site. It can be airlifted or mobilized through rail or road. It is a full-fledged hospital with
support systems including diagnostic and imaging facilities, kitchen, sanitation, water treatment
plant etc. Laying down specifications for over hundreds of equipments, instruments and
customizing it to Indian conditions, took time. Now that the specifications have been finalized, the
procurement would be expedited to follow the guidance given by the Committee. However, this
would require engaging specialized agencies with expertise in international bidding, having know
how of such systems, evaluation and pre-dispatch inspection, installation and commissioning.
Mobile hospital is a component of a broader plan for disaster preparedness in health sector.
All pre-project activities have been completed and the implementation is under process.
Recommendation/Observation
1.43 The Committee welcomes and appreciates the aforesaid initiatives proposed to be taken by
the Department during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee infers that these measures would certainly
help in building a taskforce to strengthen the facilities to be utilized at the time of emergency during
disaster subject to the condition that these are implemented in letter and spirit. The proposals of
capacity development for medical intervention in various types of disasters and developing
Emergency Medical Services if rightly designed result in saving human life. The Committee would

19
recommend to the Department to take all necessary steps for initiation of these projects without
any procedural delays and to keep a close watch on the progress of new initiatives from the outset
so that these are accomplished as targeted. The Committee would like to be informed of the
progress made with respect to the new initiatives on quarterly basis. (Para 18.4)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee are noted for future guidance.
XIX. ASSISTANCE FOR CAPACITY BUILDING
Recommendations/Observations
1.44 The Committee is constrained to note that during 2012-13, 46 out of 160 Government
hospitals are yet to be identified to provide financial assistance for capacity building. This clearly
indicates lackasdical attitude of the Department which ultimately results in delay in achieving the
set targets. The Committee, accordingly, persuades the Department to play a proactive role in
implementation of the scheme so the capacity building target in all 68 Government Hospitals
including 46 new hospitals could be achieved well in time. (Para 19.6)
1.45 Regarding the monitoring mechanism under this scheme the Committee was informed that
the implementation and progress of the Scheme is closely monitored by visit of the State-wise
designated nodal Officer including the Regional Directors of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
The Committee is happy that the Department has put in place a mechanism for monitoring the
scheme. The Committee impresses upon the Department that corrective measures, wherever
required, be taken to check any element of delay. (Para 19.7)
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s observations have been noted for compliance.
XX. RASHTRIYA AROGYA NIDHI (RAN)
Recommendation/Observation
1.46 From time to time review is undertaken and the related information has been provided in
the website of this Ministry. All the States/UTs/Hospitals/Institutes are also requested from time to
time to take action regarding awareness of RAN scheme by displaying the posters/pamphlets, etc.
in their respective hospital/institute campus. The Committee is happy to note full utilization of funds
during 2010-11 and 2011-12. The Committee would like to be apprised as to whether any record
of number of beneficiaries utilizing funds under RAN has been kept. The Committee is of the
opinion that since this service is meant for poor people, the publicity of this scheme should be
done in a wider scale in vernacular languages so that the really needy and deserving poor people
may avail benefits of the scheme. (Para 20.5)
Action Taken
The record of number of beneficiary patients regarding utilizing funds under RAN is also
being maintained. Moreover, the Ministry has also written to all the States/UTs and Central
Government Hospitals/Institutes regarding publicity of the scheme by putting banners/pamphlets in
the hospital campuses to generate awareness among the needy and poor patients. A booklet is also
published containing all type of information for both the scheme viz. (i) Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi

20
(RAN) and (ii) Health Minister’s Discretionary Grant (HDMG) and all detailed information has also
been uploaded on the ministry website www.mohfw.nic.in.
XXIII. THE NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR HEALTHCARE OF THE ELDERLY (NPHCE)
Recommendation/Observation
1.47 The Committee also notes that Rs.150.00 crore only has been allocated for BE 2012-13
against the projected outlay of Rs.200.00 crore. The Committee further notes that due to
considerably increased life expectancy the number of elderly people particularly, women has been
increasing day by day out of total population of the country and a majority of these elderly people
would be women; particularly widows. This trend of increasing population of elders will continue
and the Department will have to make all necessary arrangement for providing proper and adequate
healthcare facilities to these people. The Committee is happy to note the activities undertaken under
NPHCE and plans for the year 2012-13. The Committee feels that the inadequacy of funds available
for elderly population of the country might create hurdles in implementation of planned activities.
The Committee, therefore, is of the firm opinion that the paucity of funds should not block the
progress of the proposed projects and Department should seek more funds, if required, for the
timely completion of the projected endeavours at RE stage. (Para 23.3)
Action Taken
The comments of the Committee have been noted and additional funds will be sought at the
RE stage.
XXV. HUMAN RESOURCES FOR HEALTH
Recommendation/Observation
1.48 The utilization status of Plan funds allocated in 2011-12 shows reduction of Rs.100.00 crore
at RE stage and even lesser actual expenditure by the year end. The reasons cited for this under-
utilization of funds were non-receipt of proposals and MOUs from the State of UP, change in some
districts proposed by the States. In view of consistently huge shortage of manpower in heath
sector, the Committee is not convinced with the progress of programme carried under development
of human resources for health. It seems that Department’s approach is ‘Nursing- centric’ as can
be seen from the Department’s strategies, as furnished to the Committee, about the proposed
utilization of funds earmarked for 2012-13. The Committee is well aware of the looming shortage
of manpower in Nursing category, but finds it strange that majority of expenditure is being
allocated for Nursing profession when the availability of medical/paramedical professionals is also
not satisfactory. Accordingly, the Committee, recommends that Department should strike a balance
while allocating the scarce financial resources of the country. (Para 25.2)
Action Taken
There is no Central Council or Regulatory Authority to recognize institutes imparting
paramedical education. However, to augment supply of skilled paramedics and to promote quality
through standardization of paramedical education/courses, this Ministry has operationalized a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely “Establishment of National Institute of Paramedical Sciences
and Eight Regional Institutes of Paramedical Sciences as well as developing RIPANS, Aizawl as the
9th RIPS and supporting the State Government Medical Colleges for conducting paramedical
courses through one time grant” with a total outlay of Rs.1156.43 crore to be shared in the ratio
85:15 between Centre and State Government. The scheme has two components –

21
(i) Establishment of One National Institute of Paramedical Sciences (NIPS) at Najafgarh,
Delhi, and eight Regional Institutes of Paramedical Sciences (RIPS) at Patna, Bhopal,
Hyderabad, Bhubaneswar, Coimbatore, Lucknow, Chandigarh and Aurangabad
(Maharashtra) at a total cost of Rs.804.43 crore.
(ii) To support State Government Medical Colleges conducting paramedical courses
through one time grant at a total cost of Rs.352 crore.

22
22
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
I. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee notes that the Eleventh Plan has concluded; however, the Twelfth Plan
outlay of the Department is yet to be approved. The Committee feels that the delay in approval
of the Twelfth Plan outlay is sure to impinge on the process of EFC/CCEA approvals which entails
further delay in finalization and implementation of the Schemes/Programmes of the Department for
the Twelfth Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Government to hasten the approval
of Twelfth Plan outlay and related proposals so that the Department is not hamstrung by lack of
necessary approvals and the consequent delay in finalization and implementation of various
schemes/programmes in the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee desires to be apprised of the
reasons for delay in approval of the Twelfth Plan outlay of the Department. (Para 1.23)
Action Taken
The Steering Committee on Health, constituted by Planning Commission for the Twelfth
Five Year Plan, has submitted its report to the Planning Commission. The views of the Steering
Committee are considered by the Planning Commission while formulating the Twelfth Five Year
Plan which then has to be approved by National Development Council (NDC). The Planning
Commission is in process of finalizing the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
II. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
2.2 The Committee is disappointed to note the continuous trend of underutilization of Plan
Funds during the last five years i.e. Eleventh Plan, more so when the Department has sought
enhanced funds at RE stage during 2008-09, 2010-11 and 2011-12. The actual expenditure figures
also indicate that the Department could not even utilize the funds allocated at BE stage except
during 2009-10. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should devise
strategies to utilize the allocated funds optimally before proposing the revised estimate so that the
funds are not unnecessarily blocked and remain unspent. (Para 2.3)
Action Taken
The Plan funds are utilised for meeting the expenditure on account of salary and wages,
purchase of medicines and all other administrative expenses incurred by some CGHS cities for
which budget is allocated under plan head only. These cities are Chandigarh, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar,
Guwahati, Shillong, Dehradun, Jabalpur, Ranchi and Thiruvananthapuram. Further, the expenditure
on construction of new CGHS buildings and renovation and modernisation of existing ones etc. are
also met from the capital works head under Plan head. CGHS has been making best efforts to

23
utilise the plan funds allocated to it under this head. The main reason for under-utilisation of the
Plan funds is the long process of finalisation of contracts and execution of work by the CPWD
which has to follow the laid down procedures for engaging contractors and execution of work.
Although CGHS releases almost entire funds timely but due to process delays, the contracts
awarded through CPWD are not finalised timely leading to time overrun in many cases. AS and DG,
CGHS has been holding regular meetings with the concerned CGHS officials and CPWD officials
to expedite the implementation of projects in order to ensure full utilisation of plan funds. Progress
has been noticed during the last few months in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee has been informed that the system of UTI-TSL as Bill Clearing Agency is
functioning satisfactorily and bills amounting to Rs.346.00 crore have so far been processed by it.
The Committee notes the initiatives taken by the Department to simplify the bill reimbursement
process under which the empanelled hospitals and diagnostic centers are required to submit their
bills after discharge of the patient which will pay them the applicable amount as per the package
rates for the treatment within 10 days. However, on the basis of feedback received from various
witnesses, the Committee is dismayed on the poor outcome of the above mentioned scheme. The
Committee is of the view that assessment of the scheme should be done to gauge its performance
as also to take corrective steps for its smooth functioning. (Para 2.8)
Action Taken
CGHS has hired the services of UTI-ITSL to expedite the process of payments of bills of
the empanelled private hospitals and diagnostic centres. It has been ensured that the payments are
made provisionally within 10 days of receipt of the bills from the hospitals and diagnostic centres.
The system is working well and there has not been any major complaint in this regard from the
hospitals and diagnostic centres. Details of the claims settled by UTI-ITSL since the inception of
this system in the last two years are as under:
Year No. of bills processed Amount disbursed
2010-11 (June’10 onwards) 1,04,612 Rs.85 crore
2011-12 4,07,767 Rs.328 crore
A Monitoring and Review Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of AS and
DG to monitor and review the position of payments of hospital bills through UTI-ITSL. The
Committee meets regularly to assess the performance of the arrangement and also to address the
systemic and structural issues.
Recommendation/Observation
2.4 Despite Department’s declaration that financial powers for settlement of reimbursement
claims and hospital bills, ADs/JDs of CGHS and Director CGHS, Financial powers of Additional
Secretary and Director General (CGHS) to approve reimbursement cases have been enhanced, the
Committee notices the hardships the beneficiaries have to face in getting their bills reimbursed. The
Committee would like to suggest that the Department should continuously monitor the claim
reimbursement mechanism and also ensure the claim adalats meant for settling pending claims are
regularly held. The Committee understands that third Thursday of every month is designated as
claims settlement day for interaction with the beneficiaries to sort out pending reimbursement
claims. The Committee impresses that the Department may try to settle more and more pending
claims on this day. (Para 2.9)

24
Action Taken
Continuous efforts are being made to improve the functioning of CGHS including timely
disposal of Medical Reimbursement Claims of beneficiaries. Review meetings are being taken at the
highest level to monitor and improve the position. The situation has improved remarkably over the
last few months. CGHS will continue its efforts in this direction to make it more effective and
hassle free.
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 Regarding computerization, the Committee has been informed that the process of
computerization of CGHS has been completed in all dispensaries in collaboration with the National
Informatics Centre (NIC). Now computerization of AYUSH Wellness Centers/Units/Medical Store in
Delhi and NCR is in progress. The Committee appreciates the Department’s effort to enable the
provision of online connectivity of all CGHS Wellness Centers in the country which will enable
CGHS beneficiaries to avail the healthcare services from any Wellness Centers across the country.
The Committee observes that this is one of the revolutionary benefits accrued as a result of
computerization and the Department deserves Committee’s appreciation in this regard. (Para 2.11)
Action Taken
Appreciation of the Hon’ble Committee on the initiative taken by CGHS to make the CGHS
cards acceptable all over the country is noted.
Recommendation/Observation
2.6 Despite the Department’s claim that the contractual appointments of retired doctors is being
made to fill up the vacancies, Committee is constrained to observe on the basis of the feedback
received from various stakeholders that there is still a huge gap between the doctors in position
and the sanctioned strength. If all the vacancies had been filled up by contractual appointment as
claimed by the Department, the vacancies would have ceased to exist. The Committee, therefore,
observes that the Department should reassess the strategies adopted to fill up the vacancies and
come up with realistic measures so that the shortage of doctors and paramedical staff in CGHS
dispensaries can be overcome. (Para 2.19)
Action Taken
The Hon’ble Committee’s concerns are appreciated. It is a fact that the country is facing
a shortage of qualified medical and paramedical professionals. CGHS cannot remain immune to this.
CGHS inducts doctors through UPSC. UPSC takes time in selection of doctors and their
placements. A number of doctors do not join the Central Health Service even after final selection
and appointment. Some of them join and subsequently leave the job for pursuing higher studies.
CGHS made an effort to hire retired doctors to bridge this crucial gap but that too is not proving
sufficient as retired doctors are not coming forward in adequate numbers to join CGHS on contract
basis. The CGHS has now thrown open its requirement even to other doctors who have retired
from Government service other than CGHS. The Ministry is also working on a strategy to augment
the general supply of qualified and trained medical and para medical professionals in the country.
III. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee is very much concerned with the persisting vacant position in different

25
categories of posts at the Hospital and VMMC. As per the information provided by the Department,
the Committee finds that there is no noticeable change in the situation since 2010. As on
31.12.2010, out of total sanctioned strength of 4101 posts in different categories, as many as 582
posts were vacant and as on 31.12.2011, out of total sanctioned strength of 4056 posts, 487 are
vacant in different categories. What is more worrisome is the shortfall in Group B: medical posts
have not changed since 2010.As many as 28 medical personnel are still required to be in place out
of total strength of 56. The status of vacant posts presents a sorry state of affairs. The Committee
is not aware about the status of filling up of Group A posts initiated by the Department. But from
its past experience, the Committee can only conclude that it would be a long drawn affair. Looking
at the ever-increasing attendance of patients in the Hospital which was 23, 22,152 in the year 2011,
the Committee concludes that to cater to the healthcare needs of such a high load of patients, the
actual requirement of the medical, paramedical and Group D staff at the Hospital is higher than the
sanctioned strength. The Committee is of the opinion that vacancies, irrespective of its category,
directly or indirectly have an adverse impact on the quality and quantity of services being rendered
by the Hospital in addition to the overstressing of the existing manpower. It seems that the
Department has not given due attention to the status of vacancy positions in different cadres at
SJH. The Committee, therefore, would like to impress upon the Department to review the
manpower requirements of the Hospital considering the patient load and put all the efforts together
to not only fill up the existing vacancies at the earliest, but also put up its case for increase in
staff strength. (Para 3.7)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted and the need to increase
of the posts in various categories may be taken care of at the time of finalization of the
expansion of the Hospital in case of construction of Super Specialty Block, ICU etc. as
mentioned above.
Recommendation/Observation
2.8 The Committee is given to understand that all requirements for starting of New Renal
Transplantation (RT) Unit have been met except recruitment of DM Nephrologist, without which
the said unit cannot be started. The Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for the delay in
recruitment of DM Nephrologist. Nonetheless, the Committee is surprised that no action has been
taken in this regard so far and is dismayed that having invested so many funds in renovation of
space, procuring equipments and training of staff for Renal Transplantation Unit, the project is yet
to see the light of the day. The Committee feels that Department has failed to prioritize their
activities before acting upon the projects. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that inspite
of all good work done by the Department, the delay in filling up the post of DM Nephrology has
superseded its effort in kick- starting the RT unit. (Para 3.13)
Action Taken
There are two sanctioned posts of Nephrologist at Safdarjung Hospital in the Teaching Sub-
cadre of CHS. The requisition for filling up of these posts could not be placed with the UPSC due
to pending clarifications on DNB Qualifications as required by the Commission. The matter is
already under active consideration of the Ministry. However, the Safdarjung Hospital has been
authorized to fill up these posts on contractual basis for a period of one year or till the posting
of the regular incumbent through UPSC, whichever is earlier. The Safdarjung Hospital has already
initiated action for filling up of these posts as authorized.

26
VI . CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PSYCHIATRY (CIP), RANCHI
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 The Department has been allocated Rs.45.74 crore under Plan Head in BE 2012-13. The
enhanced Plan allocation for 2012-13 is proposed to be utilized for procurement of equipments,
construction of OPD, family ward, Neuroscience Block etc. along with completion of 210 bedded
hostel and resident flats. The Committee is hopeful that the funds earmarked for the projects would
be utilized judiciously and optimally so that the envisaged projects are accomplished as per the
timelines set in this regard . (Para 6.4)
Action Taken
The construction of 210-bedded hostel and 15 married resident flats are already under
construction and are likely to be completed by the end of financial year 2012-13. For the
construction of OPD, Family Ward, Neurology Block, casualty Block, OT Block, Diagnostic
Centre, Pharmacy Block, CSSD Block and Corridors, an architectural consultant has already
been appointed by the CPWD, Ranchi. A preliminary estimate in this regard will be submitted
shortly for according administrative approval and expenditure sanction, so that the construction
work may be undertaken within this financial year. A pre-bid meeting has already been taken
place on 20.1.2012 for the purchase of MRI. The major equipment such as Gas
Chromatography with MS, PCR, DNA sequencer, 256 channels EEG/ERP systems will also be
added. Thus the allocated funds of Rs.45.74 crore under the Plan B.E.2012-13 are expected
to be fully utilized.
VII. KALAWATI SARAN CHILDREN’S HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI .
Recommendation/Observation
2.10 On the issue of hospital staff in place as per the sanctioned strength in various categories,
the following information has been furnished:
Sl. No. Group Sanctioned Post Filled Post Vacancy
01 A 44 30 14
02 B 150 137 13
03 C 589 426 163
04 D 170 157 13
T
OTAL 953 750 203
(Para 7.3)
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 From the plain reading of the above information, it can be found that a large number of
posts are lying vacant in all the service categories (Group A, B, C & D). The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Department should take urgent steps to fill up the vacancies at the earliest so as
to fulfil the objective of providing better quality of patient care to all patients. (Para 7.4)

27
Action Taken
Sl. No. Group V acant Remarks
1 A 14 Recruitment process for these posts is under progress.
2 B 12 (A) An interview for the 60 posts of staff nurse has been
taken by the interview Board and the result to appoint
3 C 164 them will be declared very soon.
(B) For the post of Social Worker, Physiotherapist,
Occupational Therapist and Pipe and Line Operator,
Scrutiny process is underway for interview of each post.
(C) A request has been sent to UPSC for seeking approval
to fill the post of junior Biochemist.
(D) A request has been sent to Staff Selection Commission
for providing the names of the candidate for appointing to
the post of Lower Division Clerk.
(E) A compassionate Appointment Committee has been
formed to appoint suitable and needy candidate as per the
notified Recruitment Rules of the Group C vacant posts.
(F) Notification of RRs for the posts which were created
under JICA Project is under process.
4 D 13 These Posts cannot be filled because of ban to fill Gr. D
posts.
203
2.12 On a suggestion to the Department for evolving a mechanism to utilize the services of
students passing out from the Institute, the Committee was informed that the number of students
passing out from the Institute far exceed the job opportunities available at AIIMS. The Institute
would not be in a position to offer a job to every student passing out from the Institute. Hence,
no bond of serving in the Institute is obtained from the students. The Committee is not convinced
with the reply furnished by the Department. The Committee has merely opined that probability of
utilizing the services of the students passing out from AIIMS may be explored in view of the huge
vacancy position at AIIMS. However, it is surprising to note that an Institute like AIIMS has
expressed its inability to retain students passing out of the Institute after graduation. The
Committee, therefore, expresses its displeasure that its earlier recommendations made in 27th and
39th Reports have not been given adequate weight and lack of seriousness required on the part of
the Institute to implement the recommendation made by a Parliamentary Committee. The Committee
implores upon the Department to explore the possibility of implementing its suggestion without any
further delay. (Para 9.16)
Action Taken
As already intimated, the Institute being a PG teaching Institution has very few job
opportunities for MBBS doctor. In fact, by an order of the Supreme Court, the Institute has been
restrained from earmarking a quota in PG seats for MBBS pass outs from the Institute. For medical
professionals job opportunities arise at the level of Senior residency and these are filled up through
all open competitive exam. However, in the case of Nursing students passing out from AIIMS

28
Nursing College, they are all offered one year’s contractual appointment immediately on their
passing out. However, for regular appointment, they too have to compete in a selection exam.
Whether a similar arrangement could be made for MD/MS students for purpose of Sr. residency
needs greater examination.
XIII. PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY)
Recommendation/Observation
2.13 From the perusal of the Details of Targets set and achieved, the Committee notes that
percentage of work completed in respect of upgradation of State Government Medical colleges, is
well below the targeted deadline. The Committee only hopes that the Department ensures to meet
the new deadlines set in this regard. (Para 13.13)
Action Taken
The details are at Annexure-V.
Recommendation/Observation
2.14 The Committee is not happy with the slow pace of upgradation of RAK College on account
of one reason or the other. The Committee feels that the Department should have acted in an
earnest manner to get all the approvals in right time. The Committee had desired to be apprised
of the timelines originally set for the project and the new proposed timelines but the Department
has chosen to remain silent and non-committal in this regard. The Committee would like to be
updated about the status of this project regularly. (Para 14.9)
Action Taken
The project has achieved a momentum by way of getting clearance from the statutory body,
and SFC based on the revised cost estimates is under process.
Recommendation/Observation
2.15 The Committee is happy to note that this issue has been given due weightage by the
Department as the steps taken by INC regarding maintenance of live registers of Nurses seems to
be encouraging. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should made adequate
efforts to materialize the proposed initiatives during the Twelfth Plan and see that these are not
bogged down by bureaucratic delays. The Committee would like to be updated on the progress
made in this regard. (Para 14.14)
Action Taken
INC has informed that a committee has been constituted to provide the specifications of the
hardware. It is proposed to have a server at Indian Nursing Council where data will be punched
from the client, i.e., State Nursing Council to ensure the primary data availability and reports can
be generated at Indian Nursing Council itself. However, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka Nursing
Councils have developed their own software where data is available as per their State Act, i.e.,
generation of certificates, availability of nurses, their RN and RM number etc.
INC is in the process of developing software wherein their data is not disturbed and add
on variables can be incorporated to get the requisite information.

29
XV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
2.16 The District Mental Health Programme (DMHP) was initiated under NMHP in 1996 to
provide community based mental health services in the country in tune with National Health Policy
2002 and to integrate with general health services. The Committee observes that there has been no
change in the Department’s stance in regard to expansion of DMHP to all the districts across the
country and the figure has remained static at 123 districts. It has been informed that future
expansion of DMHP to all districts of the country has been restricted due to non-availability of
trained manpower and fund constraints and this matter will be taken up during Twelfth Plan subject
to the approval of the competent authorities. The Committee expresses its displeasure to note that
although the Department has proposed to expand DMHP in all the districts across the country, final
approval is yet to be given by bureaucratic authorities. With this state of affairs, the Committee
can visualize as to what would be the ultimate results. The Committee, therefore, directs the
Department to take urgent and remedial measures to rectify the existing deficiencies and, if need
be, approach the Planning Commission as and when it proposes to expand the Mental Health
Programme. (Para 15.10)
Action Taken
The proposal for implementation of DMHP in 123 old districts and 200 new districts during
the Eleventh Five Year Plan was submitted to the EFC for its approval. However, the EFC
recommended that the number of districts shall be restricted to 123 and further expansion of
DMHP to rest of the districts shall be taken up during the Twelfth Five Year Plan once the existing
DMHPs are consolidated with newer components proposed in the current plan and more skilled
manpower is available in the country as a result of proactive measures by the NMHP to increase
the PG training capacity in mental health related specialties.
XXI. NA TIONAL TOBACCO CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
2.17 The Committee notes with regret that the allocations made at BE stage was reduced
drastically at RE stage during the entire Eleventh Plan period except the year 2008-09. The
Committee fails to comprehend the reasons for same. However, the Department could optimally
utilize nearly complete reduced allocations made at RE stage. The Committee also feels that a lot
more needs to be done to eliminate the scourge of Tobacco related diseases and Department
should make all out efforts to utilize entire allocations made at BE stage for the year 2012-13.
(Para 21.3)
Action Taken
The allocations made at BE stage have been reduced at RE stage mainly on account of the
fact that the tobacco product testing laboratories could not be set up during the Eleventh Plan due
to various issues such as approval for manpower, procurement of machinery, trainings for staff
and accreditation from NABL for tobacco testing etc. These issues have now been sorted out and
it is expected that the tobacco testing labs will be set up in 2012-13.
Further, some of the States did not furnish the Utilization Certificates and Statements of
Expenditure, due to which further release of the Grants-in-Aid could not be made to them every
year.

30
The Ministry agrees with the view of the Committee that more needs to be done to
eliminate the scourge of tobacco related disease. The Ministry has plans to upscale the programme
in the Twelfth Plan with coverage of all States and districts in phases. The Ministry is also looking
at improvement of the programme components, and its integration to the national programmes on
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) so as to have better outcomes and
synergy, since tobacco is the biggest risk factor for NCDs. The Ministry is also taking up various
other activities in this regard such as issue of guidelines, taking up the implementation of ban on
Gutka with the States, notification of new pictorial health warnings on smoking forms of tobacco,
setting up a national tobacco quitline with a toll free number, changes in the reporting format and
introduction of web-based reporting and feedback system to improve monitoring, visits to States
and districts to follow up implementation of NTCP and compliance with COTPA 2003 at the State/
district level, capacity building through regional workshops and trainings, advocacy workshops with
policy makers and law enforcers etc. at the State level, conducting national review workshop,
strengthening of anti-tobacco helpline through introduction of a webbased reporting system for
registration of complaints against violations of antitobacco law and their dissemination to the state
and district focal points, sustained media and outdoor campaigns with a strategic media plan,
Interministerial consultations for implementation of WHO FCTC guidelines (under Articles 17 and 18)
and the draft treaty on illicit trade in tobacco products (under Article 15).
Recommendation/Observation
2.18 The Committee had commented in its previous reports on the issue of the setting up of
National Tobacco Regulatory Authority and Tobacco Testing Labs. As per the information supplied
by the Department, the former is still at discussion stage while there has been some progress made
regarding the latter. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts made by the Department on the
issue of setting up of Tobacco Testing Laboratories, expresses its displeasure at the laggard
approach taken by Department on the matter of setting up of National Tobacco Regulatory
Authority (NTRA). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should prepare a
blueprint by the time the said authority would be set up and keep the Committee regularly updated
of the progress made in this regard. (Para 21.4)
Action Taken
Currently three models for setting up NTRA are under discussion:
MODEL-I: The NTRA may be established through a notification under the provisions of
Section 25 read with Section 31(1) of Cigarette and Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act
(COTPA), 2003. However, NTRA formed through this process will be non-statutory.
MODEL-II: The NTRA may be established through an Act of Parliament by amending the
COTPA, wherein provisions of State level authorities; quasijudicial action; penalty provisions,
speedy trials by Special Courts etc. may be incorporated.
MODEL-III: A hybrid model wherein the NTRA may be notified through Rules issued
under COTPA, and steps may be initiated for establishing a statutory body through amendment to
COTPA 2003.
It is felt that instead of creating a new body, the existing infrastructure of the Food Safety
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) could be used for the purpose, which can perform the
functions envisioned under NTRA. The rationale for this stand was that creation of a separate
infrastructure for NTRA would be a time taking process, and hence the most feasible option would
be to create NTRA as a sub-ordinate structure/office under FSSAI. However FSSAI has conveyed

31
its reservations saying that not all tobacco products listed in the Schedule to COTPA 2003 can be
classified as food products as per definitions under the Food Safety Standards Act 2006, and hence
NTRA cannot qualify to be a part of FSSAI. The matter is under further discussion with FSSAI
and within the Ministry to take a final view in the matter
XXIV. DISTRICT HOSPITALS
Recommendation/Observation
2.19 The Committee, on the basis of physical targets achieved till date, is not convinced with
the steps taken for monitoring utilization of allocated funds by various colleges. It seems as if the
monitoring is being done on the basis of exchange of words only. The Committee, therefore, would
like the Department to take some stringent measures to put a mechanism in place for checks and
balances to ensure proper communication and coordination among the concerned authorities at
Centre, State and college levels. Further, in view of the fact conceded by the Department that the
formalities to be completed by college authorities would be time consuming, the Committee opines
that measure to expedite the process of getting approvals from the authorities at various levels to
accomplish the objectives of the scheme as envisaged should also be looked into. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the measures taken by the Department for encouraging utilization
of allocations by the two colleges in the North Eastern Region who had received funds under this
scheme. The mechanism put in place for active monitoring of progress made by the colleges
receiving funds under the scheme may also be communicated to the Committee. (Para 24.4)
Action Taken
The Central Government has taken following steps to monitor the expenditure made by the
beneficiary medical colleges under the scheme for strengthening and upgradation of State
Government medical colleges:
(i) Instructions being issued from time to time to the medical colleges for sending the
monthly progress report along with the details of work done and other necessary
documents;
(ii) Requested the State Government authorities to monitor the progress made by the
medical colleges.
(iii) Periodic meeting with the representatives of State Governments and medical colleges.
(iv) On the spot evaluation made by the Central Government teams.
For the purpose of monitoring and the smooth implementation of the schemes, the Central
Government has directed the medical colleges to submit the monthly progress report, bank account
statement reconciled with the expenditure, utilization certificate, audit report, list of equipments and
its installation certificate so that a watch can be kept on the expenditure made by the medical
colleges. The State Governments have also been requested to monitor the progress and expenditure
as well so that the funds should be utilized as per the recommendations of technical evaluation
committee recommendations and for the purpose for which it has been sanctioned. Further,
periodic meetings at the level of Joint Secretary and Secretary (H) were also held in the past with
the State Government officials and Dean/Principal of the medical colleges to review the progress and
to ensure that funds be utilized by the medical colleges at the earliest so that 2nd installment can
be released to medical colleges in time. Besides, the teams from Central Government also visited
some medical colleges of the States of Rajasthan, Orissa, Assam, Gujarat and Goa to see the actual
physical progress made by the medical colleges out of the Central Government funds and requested

32
the college authorities to expedite the work so that the aim of increasing seats under the scheme
can be achieved.
Under the present scheme, a total of Rs.501.00 crore has been released to 72 medical
colleges during 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12. Out of these 72 medical colleges, 40 medical
colleges have received state matching share which amounts to Rs.106.719 crore (approximately).
There are 33 medical colleges which are in the process of utilizing the funds and are sending
monthly progress report to the Ministry. As per the information provided by these medical colleges,
an expenditure of Rs.116.99 crore (approx.) has been made so far. Out of these 33 medical
colleges, there are 20 medical colleges which can be considered for released of 2nd installment only
after receiving the relevant document like utilization certificate in format, bank account statement,
and installation certificate etc. Remaining medical colleges have not utilized the full amount; such
medical colleges have been requested to make expenditure of the balance amount at the earliest so
that the colleges can be considered for release the 2nd instalment. Further there are 26 medical
colleges of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, J&K and Jharkhand which were granted
1st installment in 2011 only have not spent the funds but have taken steps to make expenditure
of the central assistance.
As regards north eastern States, it is stated that the Central Government funded 03 medical
colleges of Assam and 01 medical college of Tripura State. As per the State Government of Assam,
various steps have been taken by the medical colleges to incur the expenditure and payment has
been made for procurement of equipments. The State Government has also issued instructions to
the college authorities to expedite the developmental works and to submit utilization certificates and
physical progress report etc. The Central Government has also requested the State Government and
medical colleges to utilize the funds received from the Central and State Governments and send all
necessary documents so that the colleges can be considered for release of 2nd installment.
Regarding Agartala Government Medical College, Agartala, Tripura, it is stated that as per
the Government of Tripura, out of the 1st installment of Rs.7.29 crore as released by the Central
Government under the above scheme, a sum of Rs.7.23 crore has been utilized by the college. In
this regards, the college has been requested to submit utilization certificate in format, bank account
statement and physical progress report so that the 2nd installment can be released to the college.
From the above it is stated that the medical colleges are utilizing the funds and the progress
made by some medical colleges are eligible for 2nd installment. The Central Government has taken
all necessary steps for implementing the scheme and utilization of the funds by the State
Government medical colleges.

33
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
I. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee observes that a shortfall in allocation of funds to the tune of Rs.10507.53
crore vis-à-vis the proposed outlay for 2012-13 that too at a time when the Government has
committed itself to raising its expenditure on health from roughly 1% of the GDP to 2.5% of the
GDP by the end of Twelfth Plan is baffling, to say the least. The public expenditure on health in
the country is one of the lowest in the world and total plan expenditure would need to rise
substantially and consistently before the target expenditure level of 2.5% of GDP is achieved. The
Committee, therefore, desires to know the reasons behind the substantially reduced allocation for
2012-13. The Committee also desires to know the rate at which the total Plan expenditure would
need to grow annually, in order to meet the expenditure level of 2.5% of GDP by the end of the
Twelfth Plan and what would be the share of the Centre and the States therein. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should make all out efforts to convince the Planning
Commission and the Department of Expenditure for enhancing the annual Plan allocation for the
remaining four years of the Twelfth Plan and also at RE 2012-13 in such a way that the target
of meeting expenditure level of 2.5% of GDP could be achieved. (Para 1.6)
Action Taken
3.2 The approach paper to Twelfth Five Year Plan envisages an increase in total public health
expenditure to 2.5% of GDP by the end of Twelfth Plan. The outlay of both Centre and States
on health would need to be enhanced progressively to achieve the target of 2.5% of GDP. The
States account for approximately two-thirds of the total expenditure. Frontloading of financing of
activities envisaged for Twelfth Plan would be needed for meeting the timelines for the achievement
of target. Department is engaging with Planning Commission to approve the outlay as proposed by
this Department for the Twelfth Five Year Plan and enhance the annual plan allocation for the
remaining four years of the Twelfth Plan. The Committee’s recommendations that Department
should make all out efforts to convince Department of Expenditure for enhancing allocation at RE
2012-13 has been noted for compliance.
Further recommendation
3.3 The Department had been asked to address two pointed queries regarding the
reasons for reduced allocation for 2012-13 and the required rate of increase in Total Plan
allocation to meet the expenditure level of 2.5 per cent of GDP. However, the Committee
is constrained to note that the Department reply is evasive in as much as it fails to shed
light on these queries. The Committee would like the Department to exercise greater care
and precautions while framing its reply in future and also furnish the requisite
information.
33

34
Recommendation/Observation
3.4 From the information made available, the Committee gathers that some of the major
programmes/heads which are likely to be affected due to substantially less allocation of funds
include PMSSY , Financial Assistance for Strengthening and Upgradation of Medical Colleges,
Establishment of New Medical Colleges in underserved States, Strengthening of tertiary care
institutions like AIIMS, JIPMER, PGIMER, NIMHANS, Safdarjung Hospital and VMMC, RML
Hospital, NPCDSC, Capacity Building for establishing Trauma Care Facilities in Government
Hospitals on National Highways and the proposed National Urban Health Mission. The Committee
is of the firm opinion that the above trend of allocation of funds would adversely impact the public
health sector’s ability to cater to the healthcare needs of the people at large. The Committee is also
aware that the absorption capacity of the States has witnessed improvement and their spending
capacity is expected to pick up during the Twelfth Plan. Besides, presently more than 9 crore
people of the country have been categorized as urban poor, mostly residing in urban slums. The
level of availability of health care facilities to these poor people is worse than that available to the
rural poor. Their health indicators are also worse than those of the rural poor. The Committee,
accordingly, opines that non-rolling of National Urban Health Mission on account of no provision
of funds would further impact the health indicators of poor people residing in urban slums.
(Para 1.9)
Action Taken
The views expressed by the Committee have been noted. Launching of National Urban
Health Mission (NUHM) is one of the priorities in Twelfth Plan for dealing with health issue of
urban poor. An allocation of Rs.23452 crore has been proposed for NUHM in the Twelfth Plan.
Availability of the required resources is the pre-requisite for starting the NUHM.
Recommendation/Observation
3.5 Taking all the above factors into consideration, the Committee recommends that the
Department should once again assess its fund requirements realistically and thereafter move the
Planning Commission for augmentation of financial resources for health sector for 2012-13 at RE
stage. The Committee would like to be apprised of the follow-up action taken in this regard.
(Para 1.10)
Action Taken
3.7 The Department will strive to ensure better utilization of allotted funds and this will pave
way for pursuing increased fund allocation with Department of Expenditure, for the Department,
at the RE stage.
Further Recommendation
3.8 While making the above recommendation, the Committee had expected the
Department to draw a roadmap with detailed explanation for better utilisation of the funds
allocated under this head. Merely informing that the Department will strive to ensure better
utilisation of allocated funds is no substitute for action in concrete terms. The Committee,
therefore, would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
3.9 The Committee’s attention has been drawn to faulty planning of the National Programme for
Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDCS). The

35
Committee was informed that NPCDCS was launched in 2010 in 100 districts across 21 States.
Under Cancer component of NPCDCS, various activities like early diagnosis of cancer,
chemotherapy facilities etc. were envisaged. However, non-availability of adequate manpower, non-
signing of MOUs with State Governments, non-opening of Bank Accounts in States etc. led to
reduction of BE of Rs.200.00 crore for 2011-12 to Rs.112.00 crore at RE stage and the actual
expenditure was pegged even less at Rs.99.79 crore, which clearly reflects that the Department did
not complete preparatory activities on time. From the information furnished the Committee gathers
that Non Communicable Diseases (NCDs) are emerging as a leading cause of death in the country
accounting for 42% of all deaths and that NCDs cause significant morbidity and mortality in
population with considerable loss in potentially productive years of life. The Committee would,
therefore, expect the Department to urgently initiate appropriate corrective measures to arrest
shortfall in utilization of the budgeted amount for NPCDCS in future. (Para 1.14)
Action Taken
3.10 In this connection, it is stated that Government of India had launched a comprehensive
National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and
Stroke (NPCDCS) in 2010 and the Programme envisages implementation in 100 districts across 21
States (30 districts selected for 2010-11 and 70 districts selected for 2011-12) during 2010-2012.
The programme also envisaged strengthening of Government Medical College Hospitals including
erstwhile Regional Cancer Centers across the country as Tertiary Cancer Centre (TCC) for providing
comprehensive Cancer care services. These institutions are eligible for financial assistance unto
Rs.6.00 crore (Rs.4.80 crore from Central Government and Rs.1.20 crore from State Government.)
Out of the 21 States, this Ministry released Rs.7.09 crore during 2010-11 to Health
Societies of 19 States (except UP and Jharkhand as they had not furnished Bank Details) with the
condition that the States have to furnish the MoU urgently to this Ministry and the States should
credit their share of 20% in respect of District Cancer Care Facility sub-scheme of NPCDCS.
However, due to late receipt of the MoU from the State Governments and due to non-
furnishing of SOE/UC by the State Health Societies in respect of previous grant-in-aid released
during 2010-11, this Ministry could not release the anticipated Grant-in-aid to State Health Societies
during 2011-2012. The main reason cited by the State Health Societies is non-availability of
requisite manpower and training of Health personnel. The State of UP has not signed the MoU and
not furnished the bank details as yet. The MoU/ Bank Details were received from the State Govt.
of Jharkhand at the fag end of financial year 2011-12. As such, the anticipated Grant-in-aid could
not be released for the selected districts of these two States.
Further, we had not received anticipated proposals (complete in all respects) for Financial
Assistance under the Tertiary Cancer Centre (TCC) Scheme of NPCDCS. Besides this, the shortfall
of expenditure by around Rs.10 crore w.r.t. RE is due to furnishing of incomplete proposals without
the approval of Governing Body by CNCI. Therefore, the BE (Plan) Allocation of Rs.200 crore was
reduced to Rs.112 crore at the RE and the utilized amount was Rs.99.79 crore.
Further recommendation
3.11 While making the above recommendation, the Committee had expected the
Government to take measures to overcome the under-utilisation of funds earmarked for
NPCDCS. The Committee notes that though the Department had acquainted it with the
reason for shortfall, it has not indicated the measures taken/contemplated to be taken to deal
with the under utilisation of funds. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Department
should take concrete steps and measures to arrest the trend of under-utilisation of funds and
the Committee intimated of the corrective measures taken in this regard.

36
II. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
Recommendations/Observations
3.12 The Committee has been informed that the double shifts have been introduced from August
2011 in CGHS Wellness centers at Noida, Gurgaon and Faridabad but the response received has
not been encouraging. The Committee feels that the purpose behind starting the double shifts in
CGHS Wellness centers was that the beneficiaries need not have to take leave from their offices
to see the doctor in the morning shift and further, patients’ load will also get distributed. Moreover,
the Committee is of the view that double shift system needs an extended run along with wide
publicity through local and print media. The viability of using same staff on rotation basis can also
be looked into. In addition to this, the Department should be flexible and open to understand the
reasons for low turnout and implement corrective action plan based on its assessment. The
Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the Department to see the viability of implementing double
shift system in other Wellness centers also particularly those located at prominent places and
catering to a considerably large number of beneficiaries. (Para 2.14)
3.13 The Committee has been informed that Central Government has sanctioned 8 new Wellness
Centers to be opened in Delhi to cater to the demands of CGHS beneficiaries. Also, efforts are on
to start the other dispensaries in rented locations at the earliest. Three dispensaries are being opened
in Gurgaon, Faridabad and Greater Noida by relocation of approved dispensaries. In addition, CoS
has also given an in-principle approval for opening 3 more dispensaries at Vasant Vihar, Patparganj
and M.B. Road Sector-7 where CGHS has plots of land available with it for construction of its
own buildings. The matter has been taken up with the Department of Expenditure for sanction of
these dispensaries including creation of posts. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the
Department to expand the coverage of CGHS by increasing the number of Wellness Centers. The
Committee is of the opinion that setting up of Wellness centers at given location should be put on
fast track with emphasis on time bound completion of the projects. Further, the Department should
not limit the scope of CGHS healthcare facilities to Delhi/NCR but across the length and breadth
of the country alongwith assessment of workload vis-à-vis capacity of Wellness Centers and taking
necessary remedial measures accordingly. (Para 2.15)
Action Taken
3.14 The Hon’ble Committee’s observations are noted.
Further Recommendation
3.15 The Committee had made very specific recommendation in the above paras. However,
instead of coming out with detailed and reasoned response, the Department had tried to
skirt the core issues highlighted by the Committee by giving an ambiguous reply. The
Committee reiterates the recommendation made earlier.
III. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
3.16 As regards the Nursing category, the Committee has noticed that vacant posts in Nursing
cadre has reduced from 125 in the year 2010 to 82 by the end of 2011. Although the vacancies
have reduced, the Committee’s concern is the availability of good accommodation for the nursing
staff which was cited as the main factor responsible for the fall in number of nursing staff. As
it was previously reported, the capacity of existing staff quarters at Srinivaspuri is inadequate for

37
which the project to construct staff quarters for nursing at Dwarka had been planned. The
Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation made in its DFG Report
(2010-11) that the provision of the required accommodation facilities for nursing staff should be
taken on priority basis and if feasible, it should be considered under the Re-Development Plan of
the Hospital. In addition to this, the Committee is also of the opinion that the provision of transport
facility from the hospital to staff quarter at Dwarka should be provided considering the distance
of the hospital from Dwarka and the night duties of the nursing staff. The Committee should be
updated in this regard. (Para 3.11)
Action Taken
3.17 The nursing cadre enjoys better prospects of getting allotment under Safdarjung Hospital
Pool Quarters. However, the construction of Nursing Quarters at Dwarka land is still awaiting
administrative approval, economic sanctions from the Ministry. On the receipt of this the
construction activity can begun. Considering the distance, the issue of transport facilities for the
nursing staff allotted accommodation in Dwarka Land Project shall be taken up once the
construction is under way.
Further Recommendation
3.18 The Committee is dismayed at the manner in which the Department has considered
the Committee’s recommendation on providing accommodation facilities for nursing staff.
The Committee is perturbed by the response of the Department that administrative
approval and economic sanctions for the construction of nursing quarters at Dwarka land are
still awaited. Such delay is unacceptable to the Committee. The Committee is of the view
that the nursing staff is the strongest support of the doctors in the delivery of health care
services and bureaucratic delays should not be allowed to impact the healthcare services
being provided at Hospitals. The Committee, therefore, recommends with all the power at
its command that a decision in the matter be arrived at within a period of one month.
Recommendation/Observation
3.19 In context of setting up of IVF Unit, the Committee is given to understand that equipments
for IVF procedures are under process of procurement and due to lack of competition or single
tender response, re-tendering has been done in majority of items. Also, the Committee is given to
note that there is space constraint which is hampering the start of IVF facilities. The Committee
expresses its displeasure at unjustifiable delay in setting up of IVF Unit in SJH arising out of
conflicting statements provided by the Department in this regard. The Committee feels that the
development work has been carried out at snail’s pace and has failed miserably. The Committee
would like to draw the attention towards Department’s statement as mentioned in 39th Report on
DFG 2010-11 wherein it has been stated that second floor of old Cardiology Wing had been
selected as site for setting up of IVF Unit and inspection was also carried out in August, 2009
along with the go-ahead for carrying out necessary renovation work. Now, the Committee has been
informed that space constraint is hampering operationalization of IVF Unit. This clearly shows lack
of accountability on part of Department and improper planning and mismanagement of resources.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department should channelize its efforts in doing
realistic assessment to remove all the bottlenecks in setting up of IVF Unit and chalk out a time
bound action plan with regard to funds allocated for the purpose. (Para 3.14)
Action Taken
3.20 Setting up of IVF unit has been proposed to be housed in hospital in the space to be

38
made available after shifting of some of the existing Departments to proposed Super Specialty
Block.
Further Recommendation
3.21 The Committee expresses extreme disappointment over the persisting slow progress
with regard to setting up of IVF unit in SJH. Despite Committee’s repeated
recommendations made in this regard, the Department has not been able to take concrete
steps towards setting up of IVF unit since 2010. The Committee observes that though the
Department has indicated that the space for IVF unit will be made available in the Hospital,
there is no timeframe within which the activity is targeted to be squeezed is indicated. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that setting up of IVF unit be taken on priority basis
and accomplished within a specific time-frame.
IV. V ARDHMAN MAHA VEER MEDICAL COLLEGE, NEW DELHI
Recommendation/Observation
3.22 The Committee also noted that two projects namely construction of Lecture Theatre for the
capacity of 150 MBBS Students, and construction of theatre with capacity of 1,000 MBBS students
are underway. The Committee would like to know the timeline set for the completion of these
projects. (Para 4.2)
Action Taken
3.23 The MOU with CPWD is being signed by the Ministry in consultation with IFD after which
the work relating to the project would speed up.
Recommendation/Observation
3.24 On the query regarding the current capacity of the Institute, the Department has furnished
that at present, the intake capacity is 150 seats of UG Students; 168 posts including teaching
faculty, Registrar etc. has been created and the process of filling these posts is underway. It has
also been informed that on completion of construction of lecture theatres, filling up of manpower,
the VMMC will become functional in full strength . The Committee just hopes that the college could
adhere to the timelines set in this regard. (Para 4.3)
Action Taken
3.25 The filling of 168 posts including teaching faculty, registrar etc. is under process.
Further Recommendation
3.26 It is evident from the reply that no time-lines have been set for completion of the
projects under reference. The Committee observes that keeping the projects open-ended is
a sure recipe for time overruns and cost-escalation.  The Committee would, therefore, exhort
the Department to set time-frame for execution of the projects so that there is little scope
for cost-escalation.
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
Recommendation/Observation
3.27 The Committee was earlier informed that the Hospital proposes to construct New Casualty

39
Building, a multi-storey super specialty block after likely possession of land in the ‘G’ point near
Trauma Care Center. Now, as informed, the land at ‘G point’ has been physically handed over to
the hospital on 22.11.2010 by L&DO. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan
for the construction of New Casualty Building, the physical and financial targets set therefor and
the resources to be deployed w.r.t. the new projects. The Committee feels that the Department
should strive to adhere to the time-lines set for completion of various projects. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
3.28 As regards Construction of Super Specialty block at G-point, a Technical Committee for
finalization of Project Report was constituted by the Ministry and the Committed has finalized the
modified project Report submitted by HSCC on 18.05.2012. The draft EFC Memo is under
consideration.
Further Recommendation
3.29 The Committee observes that fixing a time-frame for completion of the projects is
extremely important from the point of view of efficient utilization of scarce resources. The
Committee would, therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation regarding fixing a time-
frame and striving to adhere the same.
Recommendation/Observation
3.30 The Committee impresses upon the Department to take up the matter with the UPSC for
expediting recruitment of regular staff to fill up a large number of vacancies existing in the
Hospital. The Committee would like to be apprised about the preparatory steps taken so far to fill
up the additional sanctioned 810 posts, which would be filled-up on availability of additional
facilities under CRP. (Para 8.5)
Action Taken
3.31 Out of 804 sanctioned posts created in Feb., 2009, the action related to filling up the post
has been initiated in respect of following categories:
Assistant Professor – 138
Senior Resident – 96
Junior Resident – 161
Total – 395
The incumbency position in respect of faculty staff is as follows:–
Sanctioned Post – 297
Regular Faculty – 189
Contractual Faculty – 26
Vacancy – 83
Pending regular appointment to 138 posts of Assistant Professors, the faculty posts have
been filled on contractual basis as an interim measure.
At present to fill the 83 vacant posts of faculty on contract basis, pending appointment on
regular basis by UPSC, walk-in interview has been conducted at institute level and the panel
selected for this purpose is being finalised.

40
Recently, four vacancies have occurred on account of Resignation/Transfer.
Filling up the 4 posts also through contractual means is under finalization. Therefore, the
remaining 409 posts belonging to the different categories ( Annexure-VI ) it is submitted that a
decision has been taken to fill the vacancy on the availability of additional facilities under
Comprehensive Re-development Plan (CRP). The Phase-I of CRP has commenced in February-
March, 2012 and the infrastructure as envisaged under Phase-I is expected to come up in Aug.,
2013. Meanwhile, availability of additional facilities was a pre-condition for filling up of the posts
and as that could not be filled till January 2012 for want of additional facilities, the posts were
deemed to be lapsed and the proposal to revive these posts is under consideration.
Further Recommendation
3.32 The Committee while noting the Department’s reply, feels that there seems to be a
sorry state of affairs in the recruitment for various posts due to non-completion of
additional facilities under Comprehensive Re-development Plan – Phase I. The current
situation is that neither the re-development plan has been completed and nor the vacancies
are filled. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should initiate steps
to fill up the 409 posts on the premise that the process may take upto six months by which
time the additional facilities under phase I (August, 2013) would be in place as committed
by the Department in its reply.
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
Recommendation/Observation
3.33 The Committee had sought to know whether the Department had made any assessment of
the patient load in the Burns Unit at the Safdarjung Hospital with a view to take decision regarding
setting up of a Burns Unit at AIIMS. From the reply furnished by the Department the Committee
notes that no assessment of the patient load in the Burns Unit at Safdarjung Hospital has been made
and instead the Committee has been informed that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had
launched a pilot project for creating burn injury facilities in salient districts in the country and
accordingly, the need for a parallel burns unit at AIIMS has not been felt. The Committee is not
convinced that opening of Burns injury facilities in salient districts in the country would in any case
reduce the requirement of an additional burns unit at AIIMS since Safdarjung Burns Ward is already
burdened with patients. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should
reassess the requirement of Burns Unit at AIIMS. (Para 9.9)
Action Taken
3.34 As of now, there is no proposal for starting of Burns Unit at AIIMS.
Further Recommendation
The Committee is extremely dismayed at the tenor of the reply of the Department.
Instead of apprising the Committee of the cogent reasons for non-setting up of a Burns
Units at AIIMS, the Department has been offering various alibis for the same. If the
ground reality indeed did not warrant setting up of a Burns Unit at AIIMS, why was the
Unit conceived in the first place. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to
submit detailed explanation in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
3.36 The Committee is extremely disappointed with the vacancy position in different categories

41
of posts in AIIMS. Out of total sanctioned strength of 10639, 1468 posts are lying vacant in
various categories. The Committee is perturbed to note that 303 posts of Assistant Professors are
lying vacant in such a premier institute and feels that this would bound to adversely affect the
quality of healthcare services rendered by the premier Institute of the country. Besides, this would
also adversely impact the quality of medical education being imparted at AIIMS. (Para 9.11)
Action Taken
3.37 It is submitted that out of 303 posts of Assistant Professors lying vacant as on
16.3.2012, 76 posts have been filled in. However, remaining 227 posts are being advertised in
phased manner.
The breakup of 227 posts of Assistant Professor lying vacant is as under:-
1. The posts created under Moily Committee on 29.02.2012 144
2. The Post created by the Institute on 29.02.2012 34
3. The Candidates have yet to join after recent selection made in the year 2012 07
4. The posts could not be filled up due to non-finding of suitable candidates/not 04
accepting the offer by the candidates in the recent selection made in the year
2012
5. The posts of Dental Cadre kept in abeyance by the Academic Committee. 09
6. Resultant vacancies due to resignation/retirement etc. after the advertisement of 09
115 posts published in the year 2011
7. Recruitment rules not finalized 19
8. Kept in abeyance on the request of Chief, CDER 01
G
RAND T OTAL 227
As regards total sanctioned strength, it is stated that at present total sanctioned strength of
posts is 11623. Out of which 2409 posts in various groups and categories are lying vacant, though
177 posts (including Faculty) have been filled in, during the past 3 months 1045 posts have also
been newly created out of which 859 posts are of Nurses. Due to large turn over on account of
retirement, resignation, etc., 119 posts (including Faculty) have also fallen vacant in the said
quarter. However, recruitment is a continuous process and all efforts are being made to fill the
posts. Against most of the vacancies Recruitment process are in progress.
Further Recommendation
3.38 The Committee is pained to note that despite its repeated recommendation to
liquidate the vacancies, not much headway has been made towards wiping out the vacancies
which is evident from a substantial number of 2409 vacancies. The Committee is
constrained to observe that though it has been claimed that all efforts are being made to
fill the vacancies, the facts project an altogether different picture. The Committee is aware
that the efforts made in the past to fill the vacancies have not borne fruit due to ambiguous
recruitment policy. The Committee would, therefore, expect the Department to pay focussed
attention to the recruitment of qualified personnel and impresses upon the Department to
launch Special Recruitment Drives so that the perennial shortage of qualified personnel is
addressed.

42
XII. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG
Recommendations/Observations
3.39 In addition to this, the Committee was given to understand that faculty is given pay scale
at par with pay scales of faculty in AIIMS, Delhi along with furnished accommodation upto a limit
of 1,00,000/- with Special Duty Allowances. Also, 2 MBBS seats have also been reserved for their
wards. Further, Assessment Promotion Scheme (APS) on the liens of AIIMS has also been
approved for faculty of the Institute. With due regards for the measures taken by Institute for
filling up the vacancies in faculty posts, the Committee is hopeful that 93 vacant posts of faculty
will be filled soon to cater to the healthcare needs of patients from deprived region of North-East.
(Para 12.6)
3.40 The Committee notes that no further efforts have been made to fill up Group ‘B’ and ‘C’
Technical Posts which is evident from huge number of posts numbering 131 (Group B) and 190
(Group C) out of sanctioned strength of 608 and 352 lying vacant respectively. The Committee is
unable to comprehend as to how the Institute is working effectively with such a large number of
vacancies. The Committee opines that the manpower and infrastructure are two foremost
requirements for smooth functioning of any Institute. The Committee, accordingly, recommends to
the Department to put relentless efforts to attract technical manpower by special incentives and
special recruitment drives to facilitate early filling up of the vacancies. The Committee would like
to be updated on the issue. (Para 12.7)
Action Taken
3.41 The recruitment rules of Group A, B & C have been modified and approved. The Institute
has been asked to make special recruitment drive and draft an action plan for filling up the vacant
posts. With a new Director who is likely to join soon, the position is expected to improve
immensely. Ministry will be monitoring this on a regular basis.
Further Recommendation
Only Recruitment Rules have been modified. But it appears the recruitment drive
has not been commenced. The Committee reiterates its recommendation to take up special
recruitment drive.
XIV. DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES
Recommendation/Observation
3.43 From the perusal of the physical targets set vis-à-vis achievements made, it can be seen
that in one area the Department has crossed the physical targets set but in other areas, the
Department has missed the targets by almost 50%. The Committee would like to suggest that a
better planning model should be put in place enabling the Department to achieve all targets, instead
of over-achieving one facet of the plan, and missing on other fronts. The Committee would like
to be apprised the reasons for reduction in allocation from Rs. 34.00 crore (BE) to Rs. 25.00 crore
at RE stage. Whether the reduction in allocation indicates that the targets originally conceived were
either shelved or could not be executed? (Para 14.3)
Action Taken
3.44 The reason for crossing the target in one area and less achievement in other areas is

43
because there were more proposals received for strengthening of institutions under the
scheme.
Further, the reduction in allocation from Rs.34 crore to Rs.25 crore is due to the inability
to consider proposals for training of Nurses and upgradation of School of Nursing into College of
Nursing for want of audited statement of expenditure, agency details for release and undertaking
etc. from the concerned State Government.
Further Recommendation
3.45 The Committee does not agree with the reasons given by the Department for under-
utilization of funds. The Committee is of the opinion that reasons cited for under
achievement like unavailability of audited statements of expenditure, agency details for
release and undertakings etc. from the concerned State Government could have been sorted
out, had the Department pursued the matter with the State Governments vigorously. The
Committee accordingly recommends to the Department to take a more proactive approach
in this matter.
Recommendation/Observation
3.46 The Committee reiterates its earlier stand on the matter of availability of accommodation for
nurses. The Committee is now worried in the light of the fact that nothing significant has happened
till now and it seems not enough attention has been paid to its recommendation as contained in
its 39th Report on DFG (2010-11). The Department in its Action Taken Note on Committee’s 39th
Report has informed that the demand and availability of residential accommodation for nurses is
being assessed in consultation with the concerned hospitals. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the outcome of the said exercise, and also the follow-up action taken thereon. The
Committee is of the opinion that if the Department does not pay proper attention to seriousness
of the matter it would fail to get desired and significant results in the Twelfth Five Year Plan also.
(Para 14.12)
Action Taken
3.47 There are four Central Government hospitals in Delhi viz. Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML
Hospital, LHMC and Kalawati Hospital. For accommodation, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
has constructed 413 Units at Sriniwaspuri and the Directorate of Estate has also allowed
accommodation for Nurses in general pool. With all these the satisfaction level of Nursing personal
has considerably increased.
Further Recommendation
3.48 The Department has not indicated about the assessment of demand and availability
of residential accommodation for nurses that was to be done by the Department. The
Committee desires that this may be done at the earliest.
XV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
3.49 It is evident that the Department has not achieved the set targets during 2011-12. The
Committee is of the view that unless the targets are met with the required pace, these backlogs
are bound to happen and the spillover of components of programme to the next year is unavoidable.
The Committee recommends that the Department needs to take proactive approach and try to bring

44
all the States on board for effective implementation of the programme besides having regular
interactions with them. It is high time that the problem areas hampering implementation of the
programme are identified and suitable and timely action is taken accordingly. (Para 15.5)
Action Taken
3.50 The Department is making all efforts to achieve the targets set for each year at the required
pace. No doubt, the programme did not achieve the desired results in the past years, however
during the past three years, continued efforts are being made to enhance the pace of
implementation of the programme across the country which is also evident by the expenditure made
in the Grant-in-aid component during this period. It is expected that the targets set for the current
year would be achieved.
A series of five regional meetings were held in the year 2011 with the State Government
officials to discuss the implementation of the programme in the country and to sensitize them about
the implementation of the District Mental Health Programme on revised pattern. This year also, a
series of meetings with the officials of the State Government are being planned to discuss the
issues raised by the Committee and to identify the problem areas hampering the implementation of
the programme and suitable actions to be taken to fill in the gaps in programme implementation.
Further Recommendation
3.51 The Department only indicated about the meetings planned. Apparently no meeting
was held till the receipt of ATN. The Committee observes that at this rate, the targets
cannot be achieved. There needs more pro-active approach on the part of the Department.
Recommendation/Observation
3.52 The Committee notes that till date only 123 seats have been created under the scheme
which is very small considering the actual requirement. The unsatisfactory level of performance of
the overall programme and gaps in physical targets and achievements and above all the giant gap
in in-position strength vis-à-vis the actual requirement of manpower further strengthens the point
that the Department should take up the matter on priority basis and identify the loopholes in the
action plan in the implementation of the schemes under the programme and should take necessary
steps to expedite all the developmental projects in the field of Mental Health. (Para 15.9)
Action Taken
3.53 Under the Manpower Development Schemes, funds have been released to the Institutes for
Capital Works, Technical and Non-Technical Equipments, Library, Faculty etc. The Institutes can
start the courses once the necessary infrastructure is in place and faculty positions have been
approved by the State Governments which is also based on the approval of concerned regulatory
bodies like Medical Council of India, Rehabilitation Council of India, Nursing Council of India, etc.
The Department is making constant efforts to ensure that the Institutes have the necessary
infrastructure and faculty positions in place to start their academic sessions on time and at the
earliest. Also, meetings are held with the heads of the Institutes funded under the Manpower
Development schemes in Delhi and at the Institutes to identify loopholes and difficulties faced in
the implementation of the scheme and also to suggest the best possible course of action for filling
in the loopholes and ensuring smooth progress of the scheme.
Further Recommendation
3.54 The Committee observes that though the Department claims to have held meetings to

45
identify the loopholes in the implementation of the Scheme, it has not indicated the outcome
of such meetings. The Institutes need to take necessary steps to achieve the targets.
XVI. CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION (CDSCO)
Recommendation/Observation
3.55 The Committee has been informed that under the Revenue section of CDSCO, an
expenditure of Rs.12.00 crore is expected to be on the salaries of the CDSCO Headquarters and
various Zonal and Sub-Zonal Offices as well as the 5 existing Central Drugs Testing Laboratories
(CDTL) including provision for the expected increase in the staff strength of CDSCO during the
year as 100 more Drug Inspectors are likely to join; an expenditure of Rs.6.00 crore is expected
to be on Professional Expenses, including payment to 234 contractual staff and an expenditure of
Rs.8.00 crore is expected on Office Expenses, which will include strengthening and up-gradation
of CDSCO offices and CDTLs, setting up of e-governance system etc. In addition to this, rest of
the allocation under the Revenue section of CDSCO will be on various petty items of running
expenses of CDSCO/CDTLs, travel expenses, etc. Further, under the Capital section of CDSCO,
funds are planned to be utilized to purchase sophisticated equipments for the CDTLs and other
existing labs which are deficient in critical equipments. Out of the allocations made for the Indian
Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC), about Rs.2.00 crore is expected on payment of wages,
including 20 additional Pharmacopoeial Associates and 25 Technical Data Associates which the
Commission is to induct this year on contractual basis; about Rs.1.00 crore is expected to be on
office expenses; and expenditure of around Rs.10.00 crore is expected to be incurred on
construction of new lab building and purchase of equipments. The allocation of Rs.10.00 lakh is
for National Pharmacovigilance Programme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status
of the recruitment of 100 Drug Inspectors as envisaged. (Para 16.3)
Action Taken
3.56 The Mi nistry has been regularly requesting the UPSC for expediting the selection process
for appointment of 100 Drug Inspectors. The Written Tests for the posts were held in March, 2011
and further interviews are to yet be held.
Further Recommendation
The Committee observes that the Drug Inspector plays a vital role in ensuring that
pharmaceutical products are of legal standards and grading. It is in this context that the
filling up of 100 vacant posts of Drug Inspector assume added significance. Even though
written test was held in 2011, the interviews were not held till ATN was sent by the
Department. The Committee would like to urge that the Department, pursue the matter of
recruitment of Drug Inspectors with UPSC so that they are in place at the earliest.
Recommendation/Observation
3.58 The Committee feels that the Department should strive to act more vigorously in the area
of sample checking to prevent the menace of availability of spurious and sub-standard drugs in the
market. (Para 16.5)
Action Taken
3.59 There are presently 5 functional Central Drug Testing Laboratories. One more lab has been
set up which is yet to become fully functional. There are 29 drug testing labs spread over 23

46
States. Leaving aside the emerging fields of cosmetics and medical devices, in the area of drugs
alone, these laboratories have tremendous work pressure in view of the fact that the Indian Pharma
Industry is one of the largest producers of drugs in the world. In comparison, the capability of
these labs for testing of samples of drugs is sub-optimal. This Ministry has been trying to equip
the central labs with sophisticated modern equipments and additional manpower especially for the
last four years. Significantly, a new budget line has been opened for strengthening the drugs
regulatory systems at the State level, with central assistance.
Further Recommendation
3.60 The Committee views with concern the status of labs for testing of drug samples and is
surprised to know the sub-optimal capability of these labs in view of the menace of availability
of spurious and substandard drugs in the market. Moreover, the Committee is also disappointed
to know about the efforts put in by the Department providing sophisticated equipments and
additional manpower in these labs for the last four years yet the capability of the labs for
testing of samples of drugs is sub-optimal. Opening of new budget line for strengthening the
drug regulatory systems at the State level, with Central assistance may be effectively used to
address the bottlenecks which restrain the forward movement in this regard.
Recommendation/Observation
3.61 The Committee lauds the efforts made by the Department for promoting availability of
generic medicines in the country which is a giant leap for ensuring affordable healthcare for every
citizen of the country. But the Committee also observes that still much is to be done and achieved
in this direction. The Committee impresses upon the Department to make dedicated efforts for
opening of more Jan Aushadi Stores as envisaged. The Committee would like to be apprised about
the status of its proposed initiative for supply of generic medicines for all in public health facilities
in the country during the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would also like to be informed as to
whether the Department is making any effort to ensure prescription of generic only drugs by the
doctors. (Para 16.7)
Action Taken
Updated status on the opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores, as on 10.5.2012, as has been
obtained from the Department of Pharmaceuticals in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers is
at Annexure-VII. During the Twelfth Five Year Plan, a new initiative, namely, “Free medicines for
all through Public Health Facilities” has been proposed under NRHM for both indoor and outdoor
patients who seek care in the Public Health Facilities. A fund of Rs.100 crores has been provided
under this initiative of Free Medicines during the 2012-13 budget. A draft implementation plan is
being finalised and will be discussed with the States.
Health Ministry has from time-to-time issued directions to doctors in the Central
Government-run hospitals to prescribe only generic drugs. Repeated circulars/instructions have been
issued to all Government Hospitals and CGHS dispensaries to prescribe generic medicines to the
maximum extent possible. At the hospitals level also, circulars by Medical Superintendents of
hospitals in Delhi have been issued from time to time encouraging / motivating doctors to prescribe
generic drugs.
Further Recommendation
The Committee notes from the submission made in Annexure-VI that the Central
Pharma PSUs has a critical role to play in the promotion of quality generic drugs. The

47
Committee is also convinced that the supply of low cost quality medicines cannot be sustained
without the participation of the Central Pharma PSUs. The Committee is, however, aware that
the revival of Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals company which had been declared sick in
1992 by Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) is still hanging fire. Besides,
the production and sales turnover of Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Limited and
Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals are more or less static in value terms since 2007-08.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
should urgently take up the matter of revival/modernisation of all Central Pharma with the
nodal Department ( i.e. Department of Pharmaceuticals) so that the objective of access to
quality generic medicines could be realised within the shortest possible time. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the progress made towards finalisation of the new initiative,
namely “Free medicines for all through Public Health Facilities”.
XVII. V ACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
Recommendation/Observation
3.64 The Committee is concerned about the huge dependency of the country on Private Sector
to meet its requirement of vaccines under the Universal Immunization Programme and hopes that
the revival of these three PSUs is ensured in targeted timelines, since a lot of time has already
elapsed since their closure. As informed, the upgradation of BCGVL, Guindy, and PII, Coonoor is
likely to be completed by the middle of 2014 and end of 2014 respectively. Suspension of vaccine
manufacturing licenses of these units was revoked in 2010, since then period of more than 2 years
has already elapsed and the Department could only get approval of the upgradation plans of these
two units. The Committee expresses its serious concern on the slow pace of upgradation process
of these units and recommends that it is high time the Department should buckle up its shoes to
complete upgradation projects in letter and spirit so that requirement of vaccines could be met
indigenously. The Committee would like to be apprised periodically about the progress made at
BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor in achieving cGMP compliance. (Para 17.3)
Action Taken
3.65 The upgradation process of CRI, Kasauli was initiated in December, 2009 and is likely to
be completed shortly. The Project Report for upgradation of BCGVL, Guindy and PII, Coonoor
required extensive survey, detailed planning and consultation with experts as completely new
facilities are being created in these projects. The progress regarding upgradation of vaccine
manufacturing units is being submitted to the Rajya Sabha Secretariat quarterly for being placed
before the Parliamentary Standing Committee. The last such report giving position as on 31.3.2012
was sent on 23.4.2012
Further Recommendation
3.66 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the slow pace of the revival of the
three vaccine units and feels that the Department is not pursuing the matter vigorously
which has very serious implications on the vaccine prices and the resultant impact on
Universal Immunisation Programme. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department to
shed its casual attitude and ensure that the work regarding upgradation of these vaccine
manufacturing units be completed at the earliest.
Recommendation/Observation
3.67 The Committee fails to understand as to how the funds of the Department remain under-

48
utilized even after undertaking so many activities in CRI, Kasauli. The underutilization of funds
reflect mismatch between the targets set and achieved. The Committee feels that in order to step
up production of vaccines at the Institute to meet the national requirements optimum utilization of
funds is required; which can only be achieved by chalking out foolproof action plans and dedicated
timelines for all the activities envisaged in the Institute. The Committee hopes that the Institutes
would make good use of the enhanced allocations. (Para 17.9)
Action Taken
3.68 The upgraded vaccine manufacturing facility at the Institute is expected to function shortly
in full capacity and utilization of funds is expected to become systematic and planned. However,
suitable instructions have also been communicated to the Institute.
Further Recommendation
3.69 The Committee observes that the Department has not addressed its concern
regarding under-utilisation of funds allocated for CRI, Kasauli in a satisfactory manner. In
a resource constrained country like India, optimal and judicious utilisation of allocated
funds is of paramount importance. The Committee would expect the Department to apprise
it of the roadmap for better financial performance under this head.
XXII. TELEMEDICINE
Recommendation/Observation
3.70 The Committee appreciates this new initiative of the Department aiming at extending the
outreach of health services to a vast population but is apprehensive that the casual approach of the
Department has resulted in surrendering of Rs. 19.00 crore out of Rs. 20.00 crore allocated for
E-health during 2011-12. The Committee is skeptical of the success of the programme since the
programme is yet in planning stage and large milestones have to be travelled till some visible impact
is seen of the programme. The Committee, accordingly, impresses upon the Department to draw
up clear action plans and dedicated timelines for implementation of the programme. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress of the programme on quarterly basis. (Para 22.3)
Action Taken
3.71 T owards implementation of the National Medical College Network (NMCN) Scheme approved
by SFC in December, 2010/January, 201 1, the expert group decided that Telecommunications
Consultants India Ltd. (TCIL), a PSU under Department of Telecommunications which is already
implementing agency for several projects with Tele-education as major component may be assigned
for implementation of the scheme for which a proposal was sent by TCIL for Rs.60.31 crores. The
proposal was sent to Department of Telecommunications and Department of Electronics &
Information Technology for comments from technical angle as well as reasonability of the rates
quoted by TCIL for high end equipments (both hardware and software) proposed to be procured and
installed. On the basis of the comments, the matter is under examination. Once the agency is selected
clear time lines would be drawn for implementation of the programme.
Further Recommendation
3.72 The Committee notes that the Scheme was approved by SFC in December, 2010/
January, 2011. Two years have elapsed since then, but the matter is still under examination.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to quickly finalise the issues
involved and implement the project at the earliest.

49
XXV. HUMAN RESOURCE FOR HEALTH
Recommendation/Observation
3.73 The Committee appreciates the steps, the Department proposes to take during the Twelfth
Five Year Plan for building Human Resources. However, the Committee is at loss to understand as
to how the Department would be able to achieve the huge and ambitious targets set, by 2020. The
Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the detailed and comprehensive action plan the
Department proposes to adopt from the year 2012 to 2020. The Committee is also apprehensive
of how the Department would be able to retain the additional doctors so as to improve the doctor:
population ratio to 1: 1000 from current 1: 2000 by 2020 when there is no mechanism to prevent
migration of doctors to foreign pastures after completing their studies in home country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that in addition to preparation of detailed & comprehensive plan
to increase human resources for health, the Department should also devise a mechanism for
retaining such doctors who have been trained at subsidized and valuable financial resources of the
country. (Para 25.4)
Action Taken
3.74 In order to increase the availability of doctors, the following steps were suggested by
Working Group for the Twelfth Five Year Plan:
(i) setting up 30 medical colleges in under-served States with fund sharing between centre
and states in the ratio of 3:1 with targeted training capacity of 4500 students per year.
(ii) A new scheme for financial assistance to around 135 State Government Medical
Colleges and Central Government Health Institutions with main objectives of increasing
undergraduate and postgraduate seats, providing super-specialty health care.
In so far as retention of doctors in the country is concerned, the Department has already
introduced National Commission for Human Resources for Health (NCHRH) in the Rajya Sabha
which has referred the same to the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health
and Family Welfare for examination. The proposed NCHRH envisages provisions regarding duty to
serve in India with a view to encourage service in the country.
Further Recommendation
3.75 The Committee had presented its 60th Report on the NCHRH Bill, 2011 to both the
Houses of Parliament in the Winter Session of the Parliament (December, 2011). While the
Committee expects that the Government has taken into account the recommendations,
nevertheless for the sake of clarity it recommends that while redrafting the said Bill special
emphasis on restoring the autonomy of the existing Councils; setting up of other Councils;
inclusion of AYUSH; adequate participation of State Governments, etc. be made.

50
50
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee was apprised that Indian Nursing Council has taken a number of measures
to meet the shortage of nurses which include relaxation of norms and conditions applicable in
nursing education both for students and teachers as well as Institutions. The Committee expected
that these initiatives clubbed with improvement in the pay scales of nurses subsequent to the sixth
pay commission’s recommendations and creation of more dwelling units for nurses would have
mitigated the problem of shortage of nurses. The Committee, however, feels that still much is to
be achieved in this regard. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that concerted efforts need
to be made by the Department to fill up the vacancies at the earliest. (Para 14.11)
Action Taken
4.2 Noted for further compliance.

51
REPORT
Part-B
(NRHM)
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in its Fifty-Fourth Report on Demands for Grants of the Department
of Health and Family Welfare for the year 2012-13.
2. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of the
recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
been accepted by the Committee: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13,
4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.10, 5.2, 5.4, 5.5, 5.14, 5.18, 6.3, 6.6, 6.7, 8.4, 9.2, 9.3, 11.2,
11.3, 11.4, 12.1, 12.2, Total–31 (Chapter I)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 3.1, 3.2, 4.6, 4.8, 4.9, 5.6, 5.7, 5.21,
7.3, 10.2, 10.3, 10.4. Total–12 (Chapter II)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee: 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 3.3, 3.4, 5.3, 5.22, 5.23, 6.9,
6.10, 7.4, 8.2, 9.4, Total–13 (Chapter III)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited: 8.3 Total -1 (Chapter-IV)
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages.
51

52
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
II. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 Approved outlay for NRHM for the Eleventh plan was Rs.90558.00 crore. The Committee
however, learnt that substantial plan allocation could not be released during the Plan period. Out
of the total approved outlay of Rs.90558.00 crore for NRHM, total allocation made during the
Eleventh Plan period amounted to Rs.70,030.00 crore with a balance of Rs.20528.00 crore
remaining and not being allocated during the Plan period. The following table gives an idea of the
approved outlay vis-à-vis their utilization:-
(Rs. in crore )
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Approved Expenditure Approved Expenditure Approved Expenditure
outlay outlay outlay
13930.00 13305.76 15440.00 14696.71 17840.00 16490.14
The Committee is constrained to observe that shortfall has been reported every year in the
utilization of the allocated funds. Utilization has failed to keep pace with the allocation as indicated
above. The Committee feels that such worrisome trends in the utilization of funds allocated does
not augur well for a flagship scheme like NRHM which was designed to complement State efforts
on the health front. The Committee observes that such a huge and persistent under-utilization of
the budgeted funds is certain to have a bearing on the achievements of National Health Goals and
calls for streamlining the existing monitoring of expenditure. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Ministry needs to take some innovative yet practical measures to streamline
the monitoring mechanism of utilization of funds and ensure that the utilization of funds allocated
is carried out in an optimal and judicious manner in the Twelfth Plan (2012-17) so that the Goal
of the Mission, i.e., to provide effective and quality primary healthcare to the rural population
throughout the country with special focus on 18 States with weak health indicators and weak
infrastructure could be fulfilled. (Para 2.1)
Action Taken
Noted.
Measures undertaken so far to streamline monitoring and fund utilisation:
• Monitoring through FMR and SFP: Utilisation of budgeted funds is monitored on
Quarterly basis through the Financial Management Report (FMR) and Statement of Fund
Position submitted by the States/UTs. A detailed activity-wise analysis of the utilisation
against the approved PIP is being done by the Ministry on regular basis.
• Statutory Audits: Statutory Audits of accounts annually conducted in all States (all
programmes, all Districts and 40% of the blocks) by chartered accountants’ firms
52

53
selected through a process of open tender. The Statutory Audit Reports submitted by
the State are analysed in detail along with Auditor’s opinion and deficiencies
communicated to the State for compliance on statutory basis.
• Concurrent Audit: Concurrent audit mechanism has been implemented in most of the
States on monthly basis.
• CAG’s Audit: On the Ministry’s request, CAG has agreed to undertake annual audits
of the implementation of NRHM in all States from 2012-13 and onwards.
• Periodic review by Financial Management Group (FMG) through field visits to States.
• Financial management being examined by Joint Review Missions (JRMs ) and
Common Review Missions (CRMs).
Financial Management Initiatives : New measures introduced to strengthen the financial
management are as follows:
• Model Accounting Handbooks for sub-District level finance/accounts personnel at Sub
Centres, CHCs/PHCs, Village Health and Sanitation Committees, Rogi Kalyan Samitis and
Block Accountants rolled out for guidance of States
• Detailed Operational Guidelines on Financial Management disseminated
• E-training modules on finance and accounts under NRHM introduced to build financial
management capacities of finance personnel
• E-Banking – E-transfers of funds under NRHM undertaken up to District level in all
States. E-Banking Management Information System is being developed
Guidelines and Advisories on Utilization of Rogi Kalyan Samitis (RKS), Village Health and
Sanitation Committees (VHSCs) and State Contribution funds issued.
Recommendation/Observation
1.2 The Committee has been informed that against the projected demand for Rs. 28439.65 crore
for NRHM, the Planning Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 20542.00 crore for 2012-13.
The lower approved outlay as compared to proposed outlay is likely to affect the implementation
of a number of ongoing schemes under NRHM like Mission Flexible Pool, RCH Flexible Pool,
National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme, Revised National TB Programme and Routine
Immunization. The Committee notes out that under all such programmes which are going to be
adversely affected due to non-allocation of required funds, funds allocated so far have remained
underutilized during 2011-12, as indicated below:–
(Rs in crore )
2011-12
Schemes Allocation Expenditure
(upto February, 2012)
Vector borne Disease Control Programme 520.00 383.23
National T.B. Control Programme 400.00 264.62
RCH Flexible Pool 9890.00 7703.97
Mission Flexible Pool 4300.00 3623.77
Routine Immunization 541.00 289.21
(Para 2.2)

54
1.3 The Committee views with serious concern the trend of allocation of funds and utilization
thereof in the year 2011-12 in some other crucial programmes such as National Programme for
Control of Blindness (B.E.-Rs.261 crore, A.E- Rs.221.37 crore), Iodine Deficiency Disorder Control
Programme (B.E.-Rs.47.00 crore, A.E- Rs.23.04 crore) and National T.B Control Programme (B.E.-
Rs.400.00 crore, A.E- Rs.264.62 crore) are some of the other programmes under which financial
performance level during the Eleventh Plan so far has also been far from satisfactory. The
Committee has been repeatedly cautioning the Department year after year to take remedial measures
to ensure optimum utilization of funds but the situation has not improved. The Committee,
therefore, recommends even at the cost of repetition that the Department should take appropriate
measures to ensure proper utilization of funds allocated under the above heads and obviate large
variations in approved allocation and actual expenditure. The Committee desires to be apprised of
the steps taken in this direction and the success achieved in ensuring optimal utilization of the
budgeted funds. (Para 2.3)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance. The measures taken for optimum utilisation of allocated funds have
already been enumerated in reply to Para 2.1 above.
Recommendation/Observation
1.4 The Committee, at the same time, observes that the above programmes are too vital to be
allowed to be plagued with under-funding which can have very serious implications for the access
to quality healthcare for those who are residing in rural areas. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the fund-crunch should not be allowed to come in the way of effective
implementation of the above programmes and quantum of funding be enhanced for them.
(Para 2.4)
Action Taken
In the Twelfth Plan proposals forwarded to Planning Commission, the Department of Health
& Family Welfare had proposed an enhanced outlay both for NRHM and the Health sector.
Frontloading of financing of activities envisaged for Twelfth Plan would be needed for meeting the
timelines for the achievement of targets.
Recommendation/Observations
1.5 The problem of pending Utilization Certificate (UCs) under various programmes/
components of NRHM has been engaging the attention of the Committee since long. The
Committee finds that the year 2011-12 was also no different. The Committee was informed that
as on 29th February, 2012, there were 3861 UCs amounting to Rs.5171.06 crore outstanding in
respect of releases made upto 2009-10. This pendency must have increased manifold by the end
of March, 2012. (Para 2.8)
1.6 The Committee observes that 3861 number of pending UCs amounting to Rs.5171.06 (as
on 29.02.2012) crore is too large to be comfortable with. The Committee had earlier recommended
that the monitoring of pending UCs needed to be strengthened further. However, pending UCs do
not show any improvement. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
should co-ordinate with the State Governments to appoint a senior officer in the various Health
Departments of the respective State Governments to ensure timely submission of utilization
certificates immediately on utilization of funds allocated, which would go a long way in ensuring
fiscal prudence. (Para 2.9)

55
Action Taken
The Office of CCA has been periodically monitoring the pendency of UCs at the level of
different State Governments, and putting up the status to higher authorities in the Ministry. D.O.
letter has been issued to all the Health Secretaries with details of UCs pending in the States. Many
States like Punjab, Tripura, Goa, Jharkhand, Haryana have already responded with details of
the UCs. A drive to reconcile the pending UCs with Divisions shall be undertaken during this
quarter. A monitoring system has also been introduced on the website of CCA namely
www.ccahealth@gov.in to monitor the status of UCs.
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 On the issue of pending UC’s, the Department has furnished State wise details of UCs
pending under RCH and Mission Flexible Pool. As per details furnished, it has been found that both
under RCH and Mission Flexible Pool, though the number of UCs pending has shown a
considerable improvement, the amount that is pending is too high to be comfortable with. The
Committee would like the Department to resolve the issue of pending utilization certificates in both
the programmes as their pendency has a direct impact on the release of funds to be made to the
States. (Para 2.10)
Action Taken
Noted. It is worthwhile to mention that considerable improvement has taken place in case of
pending UCs due to constant monitoring by the NRHM-Finance division. This issue is regularly being
taken up with the States. Also during the National Programme Coordination Committee Meetings held
for the approval of State PIPs, the matter related to pending UCs was discussed in detail. The status
of pool-wise pending UCs upto 2010-11 under major Pools has been mentioned in the form of Record
of Proceedings so that the same can be expedited for smooth release of funds.
Recommendation/Observation
1.8 The Department further stated that the 5th Common Review Mission conducted from
8th-15th Nov., 2011 highlighted problems faced in the implementation of various components under
NRHM, which include certain gaps in infrastructure including lack of residential accommodation in
ensuring 24x7 service availability, shortage of human resources including specialists, doctors and
staff nurses, high out-of-pocket expenses on drugs, diagnostics and transportation costs across the
States, increase in the utilization of untied funds but need for increasing their effectiveness and
involvement in addressing social determinants of health etc. The Committee feels that these
problems could have been addressed appropriately by now. At least in the second phase of the
scheme, Government should concentrate on all these problems so that the Mission can be
implemented with meaningful results. (Para 2.11)
Action Taken
Necessary steps are being taken to address the issues raised by the Hon’ble Committee. For
instance, to deal with the shortage of human resources including specialists, doctors and staff
nurses, short term multi-skilling training of MBBS doctors in life saving anaesthetist skills (LSAS)
and emergency obstetric care (EmOC) for obstetric skills including C-Section has been initiated and
being undertaken by States to overcome shortage of anaesthetists and obstetricians particularly at
sub-District level.
Besides this, a 3 weeks training has been initiated for the staff nurses, LHVs and ANMs
for training them as SBAs. Regarding high out of pocket expenses on drugs, diagnostics and

56
transportation costs across the States, Government of India has launched Janani Shishu Suraksha
Karyakaram (JSSK) on 1st June, 2011under the overall umbrella of National Rural Health Mission
(NRHM) which entitles all pregnant women delivering in public health institutions to absolutely free
and no expense delivery including Caesarean section. The initiative stipulates free drugs,
diagnostics, blood and diet, besides free transport from home to institution, between facilities in
case of a referral and drop back home. Similar entitlements have been put up in place for all sick
newborns accessing public health institutions for treatment till 30 days after birth. The initiative has
been launched to eliminate out of pocket expenses being incurred by the beneficiaries
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Department has further informed that the Twelfth Plan proposal of the Deptt. Has been
forwarded to the Planning Commission. The Twelfth Plan outlay proposed by Deptt. of Health and
Family Welfare is Rs.404490.96 crore, comprising Rs.219702.45 crore for NRHM and
Rs.184788.24 crore for Health. The outlay proposed by this Deptt. for 2012-13 was Rs.45532.18
crore. The outlay approved by the Planning Commission for 2012-13 is Rs.27127 crore for Deptt.
of Health and FW comprising of Rs.6585 crores under Health and Rs.20542 crores under NRHM.
The outlay for 2012-13 approved by Planning Commission is only 59.58 per cent of the proposed
outlay for 2012-13. Accordingly, the activities envisaged under the schemes would need to be
adjusted within the contours of the approved outlay. It is hoped that the shortfall in 2012-13 outlay
would be made good during 2013-14 and the outlay proposed by the Deptt. for the Twelfth Plan
would be approved. Therefore, no plan holiday has been considered. Insofar as Zero Based
Budgeting is concerned, it may be Stated that the allocation made by the Planning Commission for
an Annual Plan is significantly less than the requirement projected. Accordingly, that allocation is
distributed judiciously amongst the respective Schemes based on need, priorities assigned, etc. It
may also be added that for continuation of all the ongoing Schemes from Eleventh Plan to Twelfth
Plan, there is a requirement of their appraisal and approval and this will be done at the appropriate
stage. (Para 2.12)
1.10 The Committee is not pleased with the stand taken by the Ministry that for continuation of
all ongoing schemes from Eleventh Plan to Twelfth Plan, their appraisal and approval will be done
at the appropriate stage. The Committee feels that the Department should set up realistic and time
bound schedules for appraisal and approval of these schemes from Eleventh to Twelfth plan so as
to ensure smooth functioning of the schemes set to be launched in the Twelfth Plan. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the deadlines be fixed for appraisal and approval so as to
ensure that the Twelfth Plan Schemes do not suffer from teething problems. (Para 2.13)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
IV. MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
1.11 The Committee has been informed that under the Mission Flexible Pool (MFP) an allocation
of Rs. 4970.50 crore was made in 2011-12 which was reduced to 4300.50 crore at the RE stage
due to the cut imposed by Ministry of Finance on account of slow pace of expenditure of the
Department. Explaining the reasons for slow pace of expenditure and the resultant reduction of
allocation at RE Stage, the Department has stated that the spending on construction and
infrastructure under MFP is characterized by long-gestation periods and delays leading to slowing
of the pace of expenditure. The Committee is constrained to note that the underutilization of the

57
budgeted funds has been mainly on account of delay in completing construction and infrastructure
development which is indicative of slackness in monitoring of the projects, which in turn also
indicates that periodic and regular follow-up action with the State Governments was not taken in
this regard. Emphasizing the fact that such delays will lead to cost-overrun, the Committee
recommends to the Department to take appropriate remedial measures for addressing the issues
contributing to delays and cost-overruns. (Para 4.2)
Action Taken
Noted for compliance.
Recommendation/observation
1.12 Committee has been further informed that an outlay of Rs.5152.00 crore has been approved
for Mission Flexible Plan for the year 2012-13, which according to the Department has increased
only to the tune of 19.8% (Rs.852 crores) as compared to the RE of 2011-12. This increase in
allocation will be used to meet the increasing requirements of funds for human resources and
operational costs on account of inflation. Further, the increased allocation will be used to fill the
gaps of infrastructure and to roll the new scheme of Weekly Iron Folic Acid supplementation for
adolescent boys and girls in order to tackle the problem of nutritional anaemia in the country.
(Para 4.3)
1.13 The Committee sincerely hopes that the Department would be able to fully utilize the fund
allocations approved for 2012-13. However, keeping in view its track record of reduction in funds
at RE Stage on account of ‘slow pace of expenditure’, the Committee would like the Department
to be more vigilant while utilizing the budgeted amount and keep realistic targets in sight to ensure
that the shortfall in the utilization of budget allocation does not become a regular feature year after
year. (Para 4.4)
Action Taken
Noted for future compliance.
Upgradation of PHCs/CHCs
Recommendation/Observation
1.14 Upgradation of CHCs and PHCs which are to be upgraded to First Referral Units is another
major component under Mission Flexible Pool. The Committee notes that in the years 2009-10 and
2010-11, some States viz. Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Manipur, Mizoram, Goa, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and
Puducherry were not able to make operational even one FRU. The Committee expresses its anguish
over such a sorry state of affairs. Though the intentions to provide critical healthcare to all under
the aegis of NRHM is laudable, but what is needed is a proactive approach to convert intentions into
actions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in light of the fact that the first phase of NRHM
has concluded, the Department should take a rational assessment of the factors responsible for
drawbacks in making FRUs operational in many States as detailed above and take remedial measures
accordingly to ensure more positive outlook in the second phase of NRHM (2012-17). (Para 4.5)
Action Taken
Noted for future compliance.

58
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 Under NRHM, one Mobile Medical Unit (MMU), was to be provided in each District to
serve under-served/ unserved areas with the aim of taking healthcare to the door-step of the needy
people. As per the latest details made available to the Committee there are 442 Districts where
facility for MMUs under NRHM is available. The number of MMUs operating in these Districts is
1952. The Committee has also been given to understand that many States have made their own
arrangement for MMUs through NGOs or registered societies. State-wise disaggregated data in this
regard is not maintained by the Ministry. Further, it was informed that a proposal for providing
more MMUs to inaccessible Districts was discussed in the meeting of Empowered Programme
Committee of NRHM held on 8th February, 2012 and it was recommended for placing the same
before the Mission Steering Group of NRHM for consideration and approval. The Committee is
dismayed by the slow progress in procurement and provision of MMUs in the country and urges
upon the Department to take immediate steps especially in High Focus States to ensure deployment
of MMUs without further delay and also ensure proper monitoring of the same at regular intervals
in States where they have already been deployed, so as to ensure accessibility of health care
facilities to the masses in unserved and under-served areas. (Para 4.10)
Action Taken
The number of Districts where MMU is functional and total MMUs functional in the
country is monitored State-wise and the figures of the same are collected from State/UT
Governments and published in book namely NRHM State-wise progress.
As informed in the previous reply that a proposal for providing more MMUs to inaccessible
Districts was discussed in the meeting of EPC and the same was to be placed before MSG. The
MSG in its meeting held on 16.04.12 has already considered proposal on MMUs and approved the
following:
1. Providing more than one MMU per District based on the need with a cap of 5 MMUs
per District.
2. Increase the recurring expenditure cost of NE States, Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal
Pradesh for diagnostic van from Rs.23.71 lakhs to 28.00 lakhs. For other States the
recurring cost be revised from Rs.19.87 lakhs to Rs.24.00 lakhs.
V. RCH FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
1.16 The targets set under the National Rural Health Mission for Maternal Mortality Ratio
(MMR), Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) and Total Fertility Rate (TFR) were 100 per 100,000 live
births, 30 per 1000 live births and 2.1 respectively by 2012. As per the latest Sample Registration
System (SRS) report 2007-09 of the Registrar General of India (RGI-SRS), Maternal Mortality
Ratio (MMR) showed a decline from 254 per 100,000 live births in the period 2004-06 to 212
per 100,000 live births in the period 2007-09, Infant Mortality Rate declined from 58 per 1000 live
births in the year 2005 to 47 per 1000 live births in 2010 and Total Fertility Rate declined from
3.0 in 2003 to 2.6 in 2009. By these figures the Committee feels that the targets set to be achieved
by 2012 would not have been achieved till now. The Committee notes that none of the targets set
by the Eleventh Plan for reduction in MMR, IMR and TFR has been met during the Eleventh Plan
period. The Committee feels that the strategies adopted to achieve the goals of reduction in MMR,
IMR and TFR need to be evaluated afresh so that with suitable modifications, they would correct
the imbalance and help meet the targets set for MMR, IMR and TFR in the coming years.
(Para 5.2)

59
Action Taken
Under the National Rural Health Mission, the following steps are being taken to ensure the
reduction in Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR), Infant Mortality Ratio (IMR) and Total Fertility Rate
(TFR) and improve the health status of children across all the States of the country:
Strategies Adopted for achieving target set for MMR
• For accelerating the pace of reduction in MMR, GoI has identified delivery points
throughout the country based on a minimum benchmark and in the PIP for the year
2012-13 funds are being given to the States for strengthening these delivery points for
improving service delivery.
• States have also been asked to monitor the performance of identified delivery points to
improve its working.
• Name Based web enabled tracking of pregnant women and children under the Mother
& Child Tracking System (MCTS) has been started to ensure and monitor full services
to them.
• A Joint MCP Card of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) and Ministry of
Women and Child Development (MoWCD) has been launched to provide a tool for
monitoring services for MCH including ANC, INC & PNC and Nutrition interventions
being implemented by both Ministries.
• The Government of India has taken a policy decision to review every maternal death
both at the health facilities and in the community. The purpose of the review is to
identify causes of maternal deaths and the gaps in service delivery for taking corrective
action and not for taking punitive action against service providers.
• Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram (JSSK): A new initiative namely JSSK has been
launched, which entitles all pregnant women delivering in public health institutions to
absolutely free and no expense delivery including Caesarean section. The initiative
stipulates free drugs, diagnostics, blood and diet, besides free transport from home to
institution, in-between facilities in case of a referral and drop back home.
Strategies Adopted for achieving target set for IMR
• Promotion of Institutional Delivery through Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY): Promoting
Institutional delivery by skilled birth attendant is a key to reducing both maternal and
neo-natal mortality.
• Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram (JSSK): A new initiative namely Janani Shishu
Suraksha Karyakaram has been launched, which entitles all sick newborns being
delivered in public health institutions to absolutely free and no expense for treatment till
30 days after birth. The initiative stipulates free drugs, diagnostics, blood and diet,
besides free transport from home to institution, in-between facilities in case of a referral
and drop back home.
• Sick Newborn such as Special New Born Care Units (SNCUs), New Born Stabilization
Units (NBSUs) and New Born Baby Corners (NBCCs) at different levels are being set
up at different levels to reduce Child Mortality.
• Home based newborn care (HBNC) through ASHAs has been initiated to improve new
born practices at the community level and early detection and referral of sick new born

60
babies through series of home visits. In case of institutional deliveries six visits on days
3, 7, 14, 21, 28 & 42nd days and one additional visit within 24 hours of delivery in
case of home deliveries. Additional visits will be made for babies who are pre-term, low
birth weight or ill. ASHA is being paid Rs. 250 for conducting home visits for the care
of the newborn.
• Mother and Child Tracking System: A name based Mother and Child Tracking System
has been put in place which is web based to ensure registration and tracking of all
pregnant women and new born babies so that provision of regular and complete services
to them can be ensured.
• Capacity building of health care providers: Various trainings are being conducted under
NRHM to train doctors, nurses and ANM for early diagnosis and case management of
common ailments of children and care of mother during pregnancy and delivery. These
trainings are on IMNCI, NSSK, SBA, LSAS, EMOC, BMOC etc.
• Management of Malnutrition: 657 Nutritional Rehabilitation Centres have been established
for management of severe acute malnutrition cases.
• Appropriate infant and young child feeding practices are being promoted in convergence
with Ministry of Woman and Child Development. Village Health and Nutrition Days
(VHNDs) are organized for imparting nutritional counselling to mothers and to improve
child care practices.
• Universal Immunization Programme: Vaccination protects children against many life
threatening diseases such as Tuberculosis, Diphtheria, Pertussis, Polio, Tetanus,
Hepatitis B and Measles. Infants are thus immunized against seven vaccine preventable
diseases every year. The Government of India supports the vaccine programme by
supply of vaccines and syringes, Cold chain equipments and provision of operational
costs.
Strategies Adopted for achieving target set for TFR
• Emphasising more on spacing methods like IUCD.
• Promoting Post-partum Family Planning services especially PPIUCD.
• Increasing the basket of choices.
• Leveraging huge workforce of ASHAs for delivering contraceptives at doorstep as well
as counselling couples for ensuring delay in first child birth and having spacing between
first and second child.
• Ensuring availability of fixed Day family planning services at all facilities.
• Ensuring quality care in Family Planning services by establishing Quality Assurance
Committees at State and District levels.
• Accreditation of more private/NGO facilities for family planning services under PPP.
Increasing male participation and promoting Non-scalpel vasectomy.
1.17 On the issue of justification for increase in allocation to Rs.4345.51 crore in BE 2012-13
from Rs.3785.00 crore in RE 2011-12, the Department has informed that State Programme
Implementation Plans (SPIPs), are based on the District Action Plans in accordance with
requirement of the State. During the year 2011-12, a new initiative viz., the Janani Shishu Suraksha
Karyakram (JSSK) was launched. Besides this, the funds on account of procurement of some items

61
such as RCH Drugs and Sanitary napkins, etc. will have to be released under this head and also
escalation and the incremental increase in expenditure will have to be factored in, thereby
contributing to enhancement in BE proposal of F.Y . 2012-13. (Para 5.4)
1.18 The Committee notes that while allocation for RE 2011-12 was Rs. 3785.00 crore, actual
releases were to the tune of Rs. 3457.29 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs. 2814.90 crore
which shows a shortfall in the utilization. States like Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have failed to optimally utilize their funds. The Committee
would like to stress that though it is sympathetic to the Department’s demand for higher allocation
of funds and ready to give due relief in terms of its inherent powers, it would simultaneously like
the Department to improve its financial administration. The Committee is of the opinion that the
stiff targets set for achieving IMR, MMR and TFR would fall by way side, if the budgeted amount
is persistently under-utilised. The Committee, therefore, implores upon the Department to tighten
its seat belts and ensure that the Department takes urgent and effective steps in order to ensure
that the targets set do not remain a pipe dream. (Para 5.5)
Action Taken
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for further compliance.
PULSE POLIO PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
1.19 The Committee appreciates that the Department has been able to eradicate polio in the
country with one or two exceptions. However, the Committees feels that the Department should
not feel complacent on the success and ensure that the scourge of polio is not allowed to rear its
head again. (Para 5.14)
Action Taken
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is fully geared up and alert and is not showing any
slackness due to the success achieved in polio programme. The India Expert Advisory Group
(IEAG) consists of International and National experts who review the polio programme, its
epidemiological situation etc. periodically. The last meeting of the IEAG was held on 15th and 16th
March 2012. It recommended 2 National Immunization Days (NIDs) and 3-4 Sub National
Immunization Days (SNIDs) for the year 2012-13. Two NIDs and two SNIDs have already been
held in 2012 as on 18th May 2012. Beside this emergency preparedness, the response teams have
also been placed in the States and Districts to respond to any threat of wild polio virus. There are
also intensified efforts for strengthening routine immunization in the country. The year 2012-13 has
been declared a year of Intensification of RI.
JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA
Recommendations/Observation
1.20 The Committee is given to understand that in several cases, the ASHAs do not actually
provide the required help and assistance and instead only add the numbers. In several cases, the
mothers reach the hospital only after the delivery though they are shown to have been given
institutional delivery. Such attitude of the ASHAs should be strictly dealt with. A strict monitoring
of the activities of the ASHAs should be kept. The Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram is also a
good programme and all efforts need to be made to make it a success. (Para 5.18)

62
Action Taken
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for further compliance.
VI. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASE CONTROL PROGRAMME (NVBDCP)
Recommendation/Observation
1.21 The Department had informed that against a Plan Allocation of Rs.430 crore for 2011-12,
the expenditure was Rs. 412.66 crore till 23.03.12. Further, the target of bringing the number of
cases to less than 1 per 10,000 populations could not be achieved by 2010 as envisaged by
National Health Policy (2002), for elimination of Kala Azar. However, the target is set to be
achieved by 2015. The Department has been allocated at outlay of Rs. 447.00 crore for the year
2012-13. The Committee is at pains to understand that a period of 10 years was not enough to
eliminate Kala Azar and the target date has been further set back by three years. The Committee
feels that the initiatives taken earlier for Kala-Azar elimination did not have the desired impact. The
Committee would, therefore, like to be enlightened about the short-comings identified in the Kala
Azar elimination programme and how the Department plans to re-orient its policies for achieving
the desired results in terms of elimination of Kala-Azar. The Committee also desires that an
evaluation of the implementation of the programme may be undertaken. (Para 6.3)
Action Taken
• Against plan allocation of Rs.430 crore (excluding NE) for 2011-12, the expenditure is
Rs.433.19 crore (excluding NE) till 31.03.12.
• During 2012-13, the plan allocation of Rs.455.73 crore (excluding NE) has been made.
• The target of Kala-Azar elimination (number of cases less than 1 per 10,000 population
at block level) could not be achieved by 2010. However, target data is revised to 2015.
The constraints and shortcomings identified in the Kala-Azar Elimination Programme for
such a delay and revising the target date are as under:
• Till 2008, diagnosis of kala-azar was being done by bone marrow aspiration or
splenic puncture which was possible at District hospital. This used to delay
institution of treatment and allowing transmission to continue.
• Injectable Sodium Stibo Gluconate (SSG) was the drug of choice for treatment of
kala-Azar cases till 2008 and needed hospitalization for institution of treatment.
Moreover, long duration of treatment (one month) lead to non-compliance and non-
responsiveness to SSG.
• Social mobilization for the control of kala-Azar including for indoor residual spray
had been limited and inadequate attention has been paid to behaviour change
communication.
• Because of administrative delays often funds were not received at the District/PHC
level due to non-release of funds. Non-submission of SOE & UCs by the States
hampered release of funds by the Government of India.
• The suggestion of the Committee to undertake an evaluation of the implementation
of the programme has been acted upon by the Department and a meeting of central
panel of experts has been held to finalize the methodology for the same.
Department proposes following initiatives to be undertaken during Twelfth Five year Plan
Period:

63
Surveillance and Case Management
• Strengthening of early case detection and complete treatment:
• Upscaling the use of rapid diagnostic test kits at the PHC level.
• Treatment with new oral drug Miltefosine which has been expanded to all the Kala-Azar
endemic Districts as first line treatment on Directly Observed Treatment (DOT) pattern
as a supervised treatment with patient coding system for tracking.
• ASHAs would be trained and fully involved to ensure complete treatment compliance
with incentive of Rs. 200/- per case.
• Incentive to the patient towards compensation for loss of wages for 28-30 days @ Rs.
50/- per day during the period of treatment.
• Active case detection by increasing the frequency of door to door visit by observing
Kala-Azar fortnight twice in a year and also through camp approach and also to
intensify the searches for PKDL cases.
• Monitoring of diagnosis and treatment will be accelerated by frequent visits by
programme personnel as well as by proposed coordinators.
• Additional human resource, their capacity building and intensive IEC/BCC.
Vector Management
• Indoor residual spraying (IRS) for interruption of transmission will be taken up in all
the 52 endemic Districts of the country to ensure good quality spray and coverage
above 80 %.
• Monitoring of the process and impact of indoor residual spraying would be stepped out
through independent studies on the effect of spraying on vector populations and
susceptibility studies.
• Environment sanitation will be given considerable importance in a BCC campaign to
eliminate the breeding sites of the vector species.
Initiatives are underway for the provision of alternative housing sites to the poor and
marginalized population in the Kala-Azar villages, who are the most common victims of disease,
under the Indira Vikas Yojana.
MALARIA
Recommendation/Observation
1.22 With regard to availability of manpower to monitor the Malaria endemic States, the
Department informed that the status of key functionaries for National Vector Borne Disease Control
Programme is as under:
(i) District Malaria Officer: 520 are in position against 581 sanctioned.
(ii) Multi Purpose Worker Male: 52774 are in place against 76074 sanctioned posts,
though the requirement is 147069 to have one at each sub-centre.
(iii) Lab. Technicians: 15094 are in position against 17858 sanctioned though total
required number is 28,208.

64
In North East States:
(i) Out of 84 sanctioned posts of DMOs, 64 are filled up.
(ii) Out of 8859 sanctioned MPWs (M), 8457 are filled up.
Out of 1253 LTs, 1202 are filled up. (Para 6.6)
1.23 The Committee feels that there is still a considerable gap between what has been achieved
and what needs to be achieved. The Committee is of the opinion that the Department has not been
able to fill even the vacant sanctioned posts. The Department may also consider sanctioning the
required number of posts. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Department to closely
monitor on a more proactive basis to fill the sanctioned manpower on an urgent basis and prepare
a blue print to identify and create the required manpower on a war footing and if need be more
funds and expertise may be provided to ensure that the huge backlog of cases could be eliminated.
(Para 6.7)
Action Taken
• Considering the gap in the achievement, the Programme has given the special thrust to
the important component for supporting from the Central Government during Twelfth
Five Year Plan.
• The Programme is persistently flagging the issue with the States for filling the key posts
like District Malaria Officer in each District, Entomologist in the Entomological zone,
MPW (male) at Sub-centres and Lab. Technician in all microscopic centers.
• To bridge the gap in human resource, Central Government has taken following steps:
(a) The Central Government has provided 9655 contractual male MPWs to 17 States
for deploying in the high malaria endemic Districts during Eleventh five year plan.
Same support has been also extended for one more year i.e. till 31st March, 2013.
(b) For effective implementation of the programme in 16 high malaria endemic
States, 90 State level consultants have been allocated under externally aided
component.
(c) For effective supervision in the identified 210 high malaria endemic Districts, one
VBD Consultant for each of these Districts has been supported through externally
aided projects. Similarly, to strengthen monitoring and supervision at sub-District
level –1002 malaria technical supervisors (MTS) have been provided in these
Districts under externally aided component.
(d) For enhancing malaria case detection and treatment facilities at community level,
the Government of India has provided support for ASHA incentives in 257
Districts of 24 States. A total of 3.3 lakh ASHAs have been trained on Rapid
Diagnostic Test, blood slide preparation and administration of anti-malarial to the
cases.
(e) The States have been reiterated and regularly monitored for filling all the key
positions through following steps:
• Emphasis on filling of vacancies during PIP meetings
• Holding ownership meetings with State and District health authorities
Conducting regional reviews with special focus to HR issues.

65
VIII. NA TIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
1.24 As per information available to the Committee, the following States have shown the highest
number of cases where leprosy has been detected during the last three years i.e. 2008 to 2011
namely Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The Committee
is constrained to note that India still accounts for more than 50% of the new leprosy cases
worldwide. The efforts made so far have still not yielded the desired results. The Committee
would, therefore, strongly recommend to the Department to monitor the measures taken so far to
eliminate this disease. (Para 8.4)
Action Taken
Elimination of leprosy i.e. less than one case per 10,000 population was achieved at National
level in Dec., 2005. The prevalence of leprosy has been decreasing in India over the years. From
a level of 42 cases per 100,000 population in 2001-02, it has come down to 7 cases per 100,000
population in 2010-11. However, considering very long incubation period of the disease which could
be from few weeks to 20 years, India will continue to have new leprosy cases for many more
years to come.
Government of India continues to accord high priority to elimination of leprosy within the
overall framework of National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). Leprosy diagnosis and treatment
services have been integrated into general health care system, and village level functionaries like
ASHAs and Anganwadi Workers are involved in bringing leprosy suspects to the health care system
for their detection and proper treatment. The Government of India is advocating a District specific
approach for elimination of leprosy during the Twelfth plan period (2012-17). The special measures
for achieving elimination at District level include improved and early cases detection and case
management through intensified activities like active case finding, IEC/BCC in the community,
capacity building of medical, para-medical, community workers and improved monitoring and
supervision.
IX. NATIONAL TRACHOMA AND BLINDNESS CONTROL  PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
1.25 On the reason behind reduction of allocation at RE 2011-12 stage and increase in same to
Rs. 261 crore in BE 2012-13 and whether the same is as per projected requirements, the
Department has informed that the unspent balances as on 31st March of the previous year were
taken into consideration while releasing funds to the States. The States had reported an unspent
balance of Rs.155.52 crore as on 31st March, 2011. Hence, only the balance amount of the
allocated funds could be released to the States. As such, upto September, 2011, only an amount
of Rs.123.20 crore was released. Hence, RE 2011-12 was proportionally reduced to Rs.252 crore.
However, the Ministry has managed to release an amount of Rs.204.52 crore to the States based
on balances with States and Districts. The projected expenditure during 2012-13 under NPCB is
Rs.350 crore (including NE Region). An amount of Rs.221.37 crore has so far been utilized during
2011-12 (provisional). Pending approval of Twelfth Five Year Plan, NPCB will continue as per the
existing pattern of assistance, approved during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The emphasis will be
on comprehensive eye care, quality service delivery, strengthening of eye care infrastructure,
support for human resources and training and capacity building. It has also been proposed to set
up a Multipurpose District Mobile Ophthalmic Units @ Rs.30 lakh each during the Twelfth Five
Year Plan. (Para 9.2)

66
1.26 The Committee is not satisfied with the issue of substantial unspent balances remaining with
States in the previous year viz. Rs. 155.52 cores as on 31st March, 2012. On the one hand the
Department seeks certain projected amount, on the other it is unable to monitor whether the States
are able to spend the amount within the time frame. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the
Department to monitor effective and timely utilization of funds to justify seeking of enhanced
allocations in the Budget. (Para 9.3)
Action Taken
The unspent balance with the State during 2010-11 was Rs.159.65 crore and the budget
allocation for 2011-12 was Rs.290.00 crore out of which Rs.222.00 crore was utilized. Under the
National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB) a provision of Rs.290.00 crore has been
made in the Annual Plan 2012-13. Comments of the Committee about the unspent balance available
with the States have been noted. States/UTs are being requested to ensure timely utilization of the
Grant-in-aid under NPCB. Proper monitoring of the programme will be done to improve the
spending under NPCB through review meetings at the national and regional levels.
XI. INTEGRATED DISEASE SURVEILLANCE PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
1.27 On the reasons for reduction of allocation at RE 2011-12 stage from B.E. Stage 2011-12
and the utilization status, the Department has informed that vacant contractual positions are the
key reason for under utilization of funds. Rs 42-57.00 crore would be needed for this component
every year if all contractual positions under IDSP are filled up. Hence to account for this, the
allocation for National Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) was reduced to
Rs.45.00 crore at RE 2011-12 stage (RE Rs.39.50 crore excluding NE States) from Rs.63.00
crore at BE stage (BE Rs.55.00 crore excluding NE States). Further, during 2011-12, a total of
Rs.25.67 crore expenditure has been incurred (provisional). Also, less recruitment of technical
staff affected capacity of State/District surveillance units to analyze and use surveillance data for
local decision and outbreak responses. Further, all the ongoing initiatives/activities under this
programme except strengthening of District public health labs are presently running as per
schedule. Non-recruitment of Microbiologists for District Public Health Labs has affected the
strengthening of labs. During the T welfth Five Year Plan (2012-17) all the activities presently
being undertaken under IDSP are proposed to be continued as a Central Sector Scheme with
domestic budget. (Para 11.2)
1.28 The Committee observes that on the one hand the Department seeks funds justifying it
by stating that funds are needed for contractual posts to be filled up every year, while on the
other a substantial amount of it is saved by way of underutilization, thereby weakening the basic
idea of the programme. Without quality and reliable data, the entire Surveillance Programme
would lose its relevance. The Department should, therefore, convey better sense in using its
wherewithal for augmenting its physical parameters with the finances allocated to it in the future.
(Para 11.3)
Action Taken
• To expedite the process of recruitment of contractual manpower, the recruitment has
been decentralized to State health societies.
• Terms of Reference (TOR) for Epidemiologists for State/District levels were revised/
relaxed and conveyed to States on 5th May, 2011.

67
• States are repeatedly requested to expedite the recruitment of contractual manpower
under IDSP. Secretary (HFW) has reminded the States in March 2012 through letters
to State Health Secretaries to expedite the recruitment of contractual technical positions
under IDSP.
Recommendation/Observation
1.29 W ith regard to Training to staff to be recruited in 2012-13, the Department has informed
that Training Institutes have been identified and Training Material and curriculum is ready. Though
the progress being made on the training front is appreciable, but the Committee feels that the States
have been slow with the additional lists of persons required to be trained. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should sound the States not only to provide the list of
additional persons to be trained on a priority basis but also to provide feedback on the number of
persons required to be recruited under this programme in the Twelfth Plan. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
This recommendation of the Committee is valuable for the programme. The States have
been advised to prepare annual training plan including training of existing staff and training to be
provided to the staff to be newly recruited for vacant positions or due to attrition. This training
plan will be reviewed quarterly. Steps have been taken in this direction and letter has been sent
from Secretary (HFW) to State Health Secretaries in March 2012 highlighting the need to expedite
the recruitment of contractual technical staff and their training.
XII. NEW SCHEMES DURING THE TWELFTH PLAN
Recommendation/Observation
1.30 As per information provided by the Department, the following new schemes are proposed
to be undertaken by the Department during the Twelfth Plan under the NRHM, as per the MOU
signed between the Department and the Planning Commission:–
• New Initiatives under CSS
• NRHM
o Strengthening of District Hospitals for providing advanced secondary care
o Providing free genetic medicines in all public health institutions in the country
• Strengthening Government Medical colleges and Central Government Health Institutions
• Establishing New Medical colleges
• Setting up of State institutions of paramedical sciences in States and Setting up of
college of paramedical education
• Setting up of college of pharmacy in Government Medical Colleges
• Strengthening of State drug regulatory system
• Strengthening of State food regulatory system
• Innovation based schemes (Para 12.1)
1.31 The Committee while being appreciative of the new Schemes proposed to be launched under
this flagship programme feels that the absorptive capacity of various State Governments to absorb

68
the funds under the Mission in the XIth plan leaves much to be desired and the Department needs
to seriously analyse the reasons, for, in the majority of Schemes there was a massive
underutilisation of funds disbursed to the States. The Committee, therefore, feels that before
introducing so many schemes in the XIIth Plan there is a need for the Department to seriously
engage the States to shore up their infrastructure so that they are able to benefit in real terms and
the funds percolate to them during the XIIth Plan. (Para 12.2)
Action taken
Noted for compliance.

69
69
CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
III. INFRASTRUCTURE STRENTHENING
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 NRHM aims at strengthening of Primary Health Infrastructure and improving effective
service delivery across the country. Sub-centers (SCs), Primary Healthcare Centres (PHCs) and
Community Health Centres (CHCs) are the three cornerstones on which rural infrastructure is built.
The Committee was informed that as per Rural Health Statistics, 2010, the number of Sub-Centres,
PHCs and CHCs required, sanctioned and functional is as under:–
Health facility Required Sanctioned Shortfall
SC 1,58,792 1,47,069 19,590
PHC 26,022 23,673 4,252
CHC 6,491 4535 2115
Further, for strengthening of infrastructure in existing SCs/PHCs and CHCs and for new
equipments, provision has been made under NRHM to provide financial assistance upto 33% of the
annual plan in high focus States and 25% for Non-high focus States. Further, since 2005, 18151
Sub-Centres, 1582 PHCs, 451 CHCs and 61 DHs have been taken up for new construction and
13299 SCs, 3438 PHCs, 1660 CHCs and 486 DHs have been taken up for Renovation/upgradation
under NRHM upto 31st December, 2011. The Committee, however, cannot feel complacent with
the situation. Out of the total shortfall in the SCs, CHCs and PHCs, Bihar with a shortfall of 5263
Sub-Centres, 626 PHCs and 552 CHCs and Uttar Pradesh with a shortfall of 5823 SCs, 698 PHCs
and 582 CHCs continue to be an eyesore and may lead to fallback of targets set in the NRHM to
provide Universal Health Coverage for all. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the
Department to undertake special efforts in these States to ensure that the shortfall in setting up of
SCs, PHCs and CHCs are taken on a warfooting with dead lines fixed for completion of the same
and penalties for non-completion of the deadlines set. (Para 3.1)
Action Taken
Public Health being a State subject the matter is being taken up with the Health Secretary
Government of UP and Health Secretary, Gov ernment of Bihar for the fixing the targets/deadlines and
under taking special efforts for addressing the shortfall in primary health care facilities in their State.
Recommendation/Observation
2.2 The Committee also notes with disdain that in the 129 District Hospitals sanctioned for
renovation and upgradation in Uttar Pradesh, not even one has been completed as on 31st December,
2011. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to look into the reasons for the

70
same and also depute a senior officer of the Department to personally take up the task of completion
of the renovation/upgradation of these District hospitals with the State authorities within a designated
time-line. The Committee should also be kept posted of the developments taking place in this regard
on a regular basis. Furthermore, the Committee would also like to be kept apprised of the progress
made towards the completion of all SCs, PHCs, CHCs and District Hospitals in all States on a six
monthly basis so as to ensure continuity in completion of such infrastructure which is the most
important aspect of provision of uniform healthcare for all under the aegis of NRHM. (Para 3.2)
Action Taken
Public Health being a State subject, the responsibility of completion of projects timely as
well as for deputing officer for this purpose rests with respective State/UT Governments which in
the instant case is Government of UP and this issue has also been addressed in the above referred letter.
IV. MISSION FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 As per information made available by the Department, the Rogi Kalyan Samitis (RKS)/Hospital
Management Committees are constituted by all States/UTs at facility level including Sub Centres,
PHCs and CHCs and District Hospitals. As on date 30,420 Rogi Kalyan Samitis have been set up in
all States across the country. In order to ensure flexibility, funds are disbursed to States in one lump
sum grant pool wise ( e.g. Reproductive and Child Health Programme Flexible Pool) as per allocations
approved. The Committee observes that out of Rs. 147.18 crore allocated for High Focus States in
2011-12 an expenditure of only Rs. 47.61 crore has been made. Similar has been the case in respect
of Non-High Focus States and small States/UTs, the only exception being NE States where sizeable
expenditure of the allocated outlay has been made. The Committee feels that this is yet another case
of slack monitoring of the utilization of funds especially in high focus States, thereby creating gaps
in critical health infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to
strengthen its monitoring network so as to keep a tab on the timely utilization of funds disbursed
especially in the High Focus States. The Committee would like to know the details of the targets set
vis-à-vis the achievements made under the Rogi Kalyan Samitis in the XI plan. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the targets set for the XII Plan especially with relation to the High Focus
States as the situation there has not been very encouraging. (Para 4.6)
Action Taken
Nearly all PHCs and CHCs and District Hospitals have constituted Rogi Kalyan Samitis/
Hospital Management Society across the country. There are no targets set separately at National
level regarding the constitution of RKS at facilities above sub-centres. The funds to these societies
are released based on the targeted facilities projected by the State Government in their State
Programme Implementation Plan which is apprised and approved by GoI based on the
recommendations of National Programme Coordination Committee. However, guidelines and
advisory letters have been issued to States from time to time for the effective utilisation of RKS
funds. Further, in pursuance of the observations made by the Committee, advisory letters to all
High Focus States are being issued to strengthen the functioning of Rogi Kalyan Samitis.
Recommendation/Observation
2.4 Capacity building of ASHA is critical in enhancing her effectiveness as a link between the
community and the health facility. The initial orientation training is for a period of 23 days spread
in 5 rounds over a period of 12 months and followed by periodic re-training for about 2 days once
every alternate month, apart from the on-the-job training she would be getting. Training modules

71
for this purpose have been developed based on a thematic approach and States have also
constituted District and block training teams for this purpose. The Committee has been informed
that upto 31st December 2011, out of 8.61 lakh ASHAs selected, 6.2 lakhs have been trained in
5th module and 7.82 lakh have been given drug kits. ASHA training for Module 5 has been
completed in all eight NE States. ASHA training for Module 5 in the States of Jharkhand, Odisha,
Chhattisgarh, J & K and Punjab are either underway or integrated with 6th and 7th modules in
other States. Training in module 6 and 7 covers a range of competencies in maternal, newborn and
sick child care. ASHA is expected to be trained in all the competencies in Module 6 and 7
conducted in four rounds over 1 year period. Most States have initiated the roll out of the training
in module 6 and 7, although the rate of progress varies substantially across the States. However
as per information provided to the Committee, in some States/Union Territories namely Jammu and
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttar-Pradesh, Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Punjab, Tamil Nadu,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Delhi and Lakshadweep, training for the 6th and 7th Module is yet
to take off. The Committee would like to know the reasons as to why the training for ASHAs with
respect to the 6th and 7th module is yet to take off. The Committee impresses upon the
Department to direct these State Governments/UTs to speed up the process of training of ASHAs
in the 6th and 7th module. (Para 4.8)
Action Taken
ASHA Training in 6th & 7th module has been initiated in most of the States and financial
assistance has been provided to States as projected in their annual plans. The State-wise details
indicating the number of ASHAs trained in 6th & 7th module is given at Annexure-VIII . A letter
stipulating the need for speeding up the process of training of ASHAs in the 6th and 7th module
is being issued to all States
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 Further, as per information provided, it has been found that in States like Himachal Pradesh,
no training has been initiated for the selected ASHAs, while in some States like Goa, Daman and
Diu and Puducherry, no selection of ASHA has been initiated. The Committee is of the view that
the Department should take steps to ensure that these States start selection/training of ASHAs
immediately so as to ensure uniformity in the selection and training modules vis-à-vis other States
without further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the State wise updated status
of progress made in this regard. (Para 4.9)
Action Taken
Matter of Record.
In Himachal Pradesh and Daman & Diu, role of ASHAs is performed by Link workers and
budget provision is made in the State PIP for providing performance based incentives. However,
advisory letters are being issued to these States. In case of Goa, the State has not proposed funds
for selection and training of ASHAs.
V. ROUTINE IMMUNIZATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.6 With regard to the reasons for increase in allocation to Rs.777.00 crore during 2012-13 as
compared to previous years, the Department has informed that the allocation of Rs.777.00 crore
under Routine Immunization during 2012-13 are proposed to be utilized for activities as per details
mentioned below:

72
Sl. Activities Amount
No. (Rs. in crore)
1. Procurement of Routine Vaccines 263.00
2. Pentavalent Vaccine (GAVI Supply, notional cost adjustment) 164.19
3. Needles and Syringes 116.00
4. Cold Chain equipment 230.66
5. Grant in aid for Research/New Vaccine 3.15
T
OTAL: 777.00
The increased allocation is primarily on account of (i) notional cost adjustment of
pentavalent vaccine (ii) cold chain equipment and (iii) increased provision for needles and syringes.
Further, a sum of Rs.303.51 crore was utilized under procurement of vaccines and needles and
syringes during 2011-12. As no cold chain items were procured in 2011-12, no cost adjustment
was carried out under this Head. (Para 5.6)
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 Cold chain equipment is a sin-qua-non for success of Universal Immunization Programme
(UIP). However, figures in some States raise an alarm bell. In Bihar out of 1648 PHCs/CHCs,1164
do not have any cold chain equipments and States/UTs like Dadra and Nagar (D&N) Haveli, Daman
& Diu, Delhi and Puducherry have no cold chain equipment. The Committee regrets that a densely
populated State like Bihar does not have cold chain equipment in majority of its PHCs/CHCs and
States/UTs like D&N Haveli, Daman & Diu, Delhi and Puducherry have yet to open their account.
The Committee feels that the Department should seriously direct these States to take immediate
steps to ensure setting up of cold chain equipment without further delay so as to ensure
implementation of UIP in both letter and spirit and if need be more funds and expertise may be
provided by the Department to such laggard States. (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
In view of the observation of the Committee, a letter was sent to the said States/UTs and
based on the information received from the States/UTs, the Cold Chain point status is mentioned
as below:
The State of Bihar has PHC/APHC model in practice in place of CHC/PHC. The total no.
of PHCs are 533 and APHCs are 1330. As per GoI guidelines the PHC is the last storage point
for vaccines and accordingly there are 533 cold chain points at the PHC level and 44 in urban
areas.
The State/UTs like Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, Delhi and Puducherry are having
cold chain points as per the details given below:
Sl. No. Name of the State/UT No. of cold chain point
1 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 9
2 Daman & Diu 2
3 Delhi 600
4 Puducherry 13

73
JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA
Recommendation/Observation
2.8 The Committee appreciates the joint efforts taken by the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare and Ministry of Women and Child Development to develop a mother and child protection
plan. The Committee hopes that as informed by the Ministry all States and UTs would have
completed the issue of such cards and recommends more funds should be allocated for such a
scheme if need be as it would strengthen both maternal and child care protection for which funds
and infrastructure should not be a constraint. (Para 5.21)
Action Taken
During the appraisal of the State Project Implementation Plan (PIP), every State is being
requested to keep adequate funds for printing and dissemination of MCP cards. Similarly, States
have also been asked to keep enough funds for any infrastructural requirements of delivery points.
VII. NA TIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 With regard to MDR-TB patients the Department has informed that DOTS strategy has
significantly improved case detection and cure rates beyond 72% and 87% respectively. 28
accredited labs have been set up across the country to diagnose Multi Drug Resistant T.B (MDR-
TB) and 15 are under process which shall be completed by March,2013. 6944 patients have been
provided treatment for MDR-TB upto 2011. Further, the Phase-II trials of the new molecule (TMC-
2007) for treating patients with MDR-TB are underway. It is a multi-country study and in India
two centers namely, National Institute of Research in Tuberculosis, Chennai and All India Institute
of Medical Sciences are participating. The analysis is underway and the study results are expected
shortly. The Committee would like to know by when the analysis would be completed and its study
results published since a lot of time has already elapsed since the clinical trials commenced.
(Para 7.3)
Action Taken
1. Johnson & Johnson’s (USA) research subsidiary, TIBOTEC, is managing the clinical
development of TMC 2007.
2. The Phase I trial was completed in South Africa and results published in 2008.
3. Phase II (part A) was done in South Africa and published in 2009. The study results
showed it reduced the time to sputum conversion to negative and TMC eliminated TB
bacteria more quickly and was shown to be safe and well tolerated in the patients.
4. The second stage of the Phase II (part B) was initiated in late 2009 as a multi-national
trial involving patients in South Africa, Peru, Latvia, India, Brazil, Thailand, the
Philippines and Russia. The stage is still on-going and for which the results are likely
to become available by end 2012 or early 2013.
After successful Phase II trials, the drug will enter Phase-III clinical trials (minimum 5
years) before it is available for routine patient care.

74
X. NATIONAL IODINE DEFICIENCY DISORDERS CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
2.10 The outlay for the programme for the year 2011-12 was Rs.50.00 crore which was reduced
to Rs.39.00 crore at RE. Some of the proposed activities i.e. supply of Salt Testing Kits to
all States/UTs and honorarium to ASHAs did not take place. The fund utilization during the year
2011-12 under the programme was Rs.23.04 crore. The allocation under the programme for the
year 2012-13 is Rs.50.00 crore. The activities i.e. supply of Salt Testing Kits to 303 endemic
Districts of States/UTs and payment of honorarium to ASHAs on testing 50 salt samples per month
will be conducted during the fiscal year 2012-13. These have been approved by EPC and will be
placed before next MSG meeting. (Para 10.2)
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 The Committee is dismayed with the utilization of funds allocated for the programme. The
Department did not utilize a substantial amount of funds allocated which is against the principles
of fiscal prudence. Moreover, in the face of 303 Districts out of 365 surveyed being endemic does
not augur well on the physical achievements front as well. The Committee expresses its displeasure
at the State of the things and emphasizes the need to overcome the bottlenecks in the proper
implementation of the said programme (Para 10.3)
Action Taken
The Mission Steering Group (MSG) has already approved the payment of performance
based incentive to ASHA @ Rs.25/- per month per ASHA for testing at least 50 salt samples per
month in 303 endemic Districts covering all States/UTs except Lakshadweep. This will help in
creating demand for consumption of adequately iodated salt in the country. Further, the
procurement of salt testing kits and incentive payment will definitely help in achieving the financial
target of the programme.
Recommendation/Observation
2.12 The Committee also expresses its concern over the fact that out of 365 Districts surveyed
in the country, 303 were found to be endemic. If a survey is carried out in all the Districts of
the country it would not come as a surprise if the results throw a more alarming situation in hand.
The Committee recommends that a focused intervention in all the States/UTs need to be taken
without undue delay in face of the spectre of Goiter looming over the country (Para 10.4)
Action Taken
In order to complete the survey of the remaining Districts of States/UTs we have already
made Rs.64.00 lakh allocation to States/UTs for conducting District IDD survey in 128 Districts
during 2012-13. Further, the States/UTs will be requested to take up the District IDD survey work
involving medical and paramedical staffs of the District and Medical College faculty if located in
the concerned District. The central IDD team will make a special training programme for the
States/UTs so that the Training of Trainers (TOT) will help in conducting District IDD survey.
Efforts will be made to complete District IDD survey in time bound manner. The sanctioned posts
of establishment of IDD Cell and IDD Monitoring Lab should be filled up as reflected under Record
of Proceedings (ROP’s) of concerned States/UTs under National Programme Coordination
Committee (NPCC) of NRHM.

75
CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
BUDGETARY PROVISIONS
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that the Department intends to carry forward the
NRHM programme into the Twelfth Plan (2012-17). The Committee has been given to understand
that a Cabinet note on continuation of NRHM under the Twelfth Plan has been sent to the Cabinet
Secretariat for approval. The Committee hopes that in the second phase the programme would
bring more fruitful results. The Committee would, however, recommend that in the meanwhile the
Department should undertake a review of NRHM and take concrete and concerted efforts to plug
the gaps and bottlenecks in the implementation of the programme that existed in the first phase,
so that the result in the second phase would be far better than the performance in the first phase.
(Para 2.5)
Action Taken
3.2 Government has approved continuation of NRHM for 5 years from 1.4.2012 to 31.3.2017
(i.e. coterminous with the Twelfth Five year Plan) with expenditure to be shared between Centres
and the States in the ratio of 75:25 in place of 85:15 ratio in the Eleventh Plan. For North-Eastern
and Special Category States viz. Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, the
expenditure ratio will be 90:10. As far as recommendations of the Committee to undertake a review
of NRHM and to take concrete and concerted efforts to plug the gaps and bottlenecks in the
implementation of the programme that existed in the first phase, Ministry has taken note of the
above recommendations of the Committee for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.3 The Committee notes that the gap between the expected targets and the
achievements are too wide to be comfortable within the first phase of NRHM (2005-2012).
In response to the Committee recommendation to the Department to undertake a review
of NRHM and to take concrete and concerted efforts to plug the gaps and bottlenecks in
the implementation of programme that existed in the first phase, the Ministry has stated
generically that the Ministry has taken note of the above recommendations of the
Committee for compliance, without spelling out the mechanisms envisaged to be employed
to identify the inadequacies and iron them out. The Committee again impresses upon the
Ministry to undertake a thorough review before the second phase (2012-13) is implemented
on the ground and take corrective measures accordingly.
Recommendation/observation
3.4 On the issue of adequacy of plan allocation for different components under NRHM for
2012-13 and the Schemes/Programmes which would be affected as a result thereof, the
Department has informed that the plan allocation for different components of NRHM for 2012-13
75

76
is not as per projected requirements. Against a projected requirement of Rs.28439.65 crore,
allocation is only Rs.20542 crore. As a result schemes such as strengthening of District hospitals,
supply of free generic medicines in public health facilities and provision of 2nd health worker in
Sub-Centres would be affected. (Para 2.6)
3.5 The Committee feels that insufficient allocation of funds would needlessly affect schemes
as mentioned above as these schemes are the bedrock for effective and efficient delivery of
healthcare services to the rural population under the NRHM. The Committee, therefore,
recommends favourably that the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission should relook at the
cutting down of plan allocations so drastically so as to ensure that these life line schemes of
ensuring success of NRHM programmes remain on track. The Committee observes that
enhancement of allocation under the on-going schemes of NRHM is also important from the point
of view of raising public spending on health from the current 1% (roughly) of the GDP to 2.5%
of GDP by the end of the Twelfth Plan. The Committee would like the Department to bring the
above observation to the notice of the concerned authorities of Planning Commission and also
acquaint it with their response in the matter. The Committee also recommends that the Department
should strive towards deploying the available resources more efficiently so that the allocated funds
are spent fully to justify higher allocation. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken
3.6 The observations of the Committee have been brought to the notice of the Planning
Commission. Their response is as follows –
“So far as the issue of Plan allocations for the Health Sector in the Twelfth Plan is
concerned, Planning Commission is making efforts to ensure that adequate gross budgetary
support in terms of increased allocation to the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare as well
as for health determinants such as nutrition, drinking water etc. is provided in the Twelfth
Plan. While doing so, the absorptive capacity of the State Health Systems and also the
broad goal envisioned of increasing the total health spending of the country (both centre
and State) to a level of 2.5% GDP by the end of the Twelfth Plan is being kept in view.
The GBS allocation for the Twelfth Plan is currently under discussion”.
The recommendations of the Committee that the Department should strive towards
deploying the available resources more effectively so that the allocated funds are spent fully to
justify higher allocation have been noted for compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.7 The Committee notes the observations of the Planning Commission on the
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee feels that the observation of the
Planning Commission on the absorptive capacity of the State Health Systems require
attention of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee feels that
increasing the public spending on health from 1% to 2.5% of GDP by the end of Twelfth
Plan is a sin-qua-non for the success of the NRHM flagship scheme. However, the same
cannot be achieved without strengthening the absorptive capacity of State health systems.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should play a vital role in augmenting the absorption
capacity of State Health Systems. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the
Department to seriously set its sights on strengthening of the State health systems in order
to ensure that the funds released for health systems are capable of being absorbed properly
by the State Health Systems.

77
III. INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING
HEALTH CARE UNITS
Recommendation/observation
3.8 The Department has informed that as per Rural Health Survey (RHS) 2009 there is 7.3%
overall shortfall in the posts of ANMs, 16.2% in the post of doctors at PHCs and 68% shortfall
of specialists at CHCs.
To address the problem highlighted in RHS 2009, the following steps have been taken by
the Department:–
(a) States have been encouraged to appoint health functionaries on contractual basis under
NRHM. Under NRHM 8722 Doctors, 14529 Paramedics, 2914 Specialists, 10995
AYUSH Doctors, 33413 Staff Nurses, 69662 ANMs and 3894 AYUSH Paramedics were
appointed by States on contract basis since 2005.
(b) Norms for establishment of Medical Colleges have been simplified and streamlined to
increase their admission capacity.
(c) Number of PG seats has been increased by rationalizing the teacher student ratio to
increase availability of Specialists.
(d) Monetary and non-monetary incentives are provided to staff working in difficult and
hard to reach areas.
(e) States have undertaken reforms in Recruitment, Transfer and Promotion policies and
articulated policies on these issues. Some States have taken out recruitment from the
purview of the State Public Service Commission to expedite recruitment.
(f) Regulatory measures: States have introduced compulsory rural postings, bond for
medical students for working in rural areas.
(g) For strengthening of infrastructure in SCs/PHCs/ CHCs provision has been made under
NRHM to provide financial assistance upto 33% of the annual plan in High Focus
States and upto 25% for Non high Focus States.
Since 2005, 1815 Sub-Centres, 1582 PHCs, 457 CHCs and 61 DHs have been taken up for
new construction and 13299 SCs, 3438 PHCs, 1660 CHCs and 486 DHs for Renovation/
Upgradation under NRHM upto 31st December, 2011. (Para 3.3)
3.9 The Committee on the basis of the above Statistics given by the Department finds that
inspite of Committee’s recommendation and its concern shown on contractual appointments, there
has been no change in the Department’s policy and it still subsists to fill vacancies on contractual
basis inspite of the fact that five years have elapsed since the NRHM was launched. Similarly on
the issue of specialists appointment at CHCs, the emphasis is still on contractual appointment. The
Committee is constrained to observe that such stop-gap arrangement in the appointments by way
of contract would lead to ripple effect on the quality of services being offered under NRHM. This
deficiency impacts not only the limited financial resources but also have a bearing on the quality
of services being offered. The Committee hopes that during the Twelfth Plan, the Department
would address this issue. The Committee also notes that though the Department has detailed the
measures taken to address the problems highlighted in RHS-2009, it has failed to shed light on the
effectiveness of the measures so taken. The Committee desires to be apprised of the efficacy of
the steps taken to wipe out the deficiencies as pointed out in RHS-2009. (Para 3.4)

78
Action Taken
3.10 The vacancies are filled up by respective State/UT Governments. Therefore, the matter is
being taken up with all State/UT Governments.
Further, it is stated that as per RHS in India, 2011, 207868 Health Worker [F]/ANM at SCs
& PHCs, 52215 Health Worker [M] at SCs, 26329 Doctors at PHCs, 6935 Specialists at CHCs,
11798 GDMOs at CHC, 2221 Radiographers at CHCs, 24671 Pharmacists at PHCs and CHCs,
16208 Lab. Tech. at PHCs and CHCs and 65344 Nursing Staff at PHCs and CHCs are in position
across the country in rural areas.
Besides, as on 31st December, 2011, a Statement showing the staff appointed under NRHM
on contractual basis across the country is as follows:–
Sl. No Designation No. of Personnel engaged on Contractual basis
1 Specialists 2914
2 GDMOs 8722
3 AYUSH Doctors 10995
4 Staff Nurses 33413
5 ANM 96992
6 Para Medics 14529
7 AYUSH Para Medics 3894
Further Recommendation
3.11 While making the above recommendations, the Committee had expected the
Department to indicate its reaction to desirability or otherwise of contractual appointments
and their impact on offering quality healthcare services and formulate appropriate policy
response accordingly. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the Department
has sought to wash its hands off the matter by merely stating that the vacancies are filled
up by State/UT Governments and the matter is being taken up with them. Since the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the principal financier of NRHM, it is its
obligation to see that the quality of healthcare services is not compromised in any way and
help the States devise appropriate strategies for the purpose.
3.12 The Committee notes from a perusal of the statement (as on 31st December, 2011),
of staff appointed under NRHM on contractual basis across the country that the number of
contractual staff are still substantial as they may not be amenable to punctuality, discipline,
and control. The Committee would also like to be enlightened on the total number of in-
position posts vis-a-vis  sanctioned strength as per RHS 2011 and the measures taken/
contemplated to be taken to overcome the deficiencies as pointed out in RHS 2011.
V. RCH FLEXIBLE POOL
Recommendation/Observation
3.13 To accelerate the pace of reduction of Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) in the country, the
following steps are being undertaken by the Government of India under the National Rural Health
Mission (NRHM), launched in the year 2005, across the country with a special focus on 18 States
with weak public health indicators and infrastructure:

79
• Promotion of institutional deliveries through Janani Suraksha Yojana.
• Capacity building of health care providers in basic and comprehensive obstetric care.
• Operationalisation of Sub-Centres, Primary Health Centres, Community Health Centres
and District Hospitals for providing 24x7 basic and comprehensive obstetric care
services.
• Name Based Tracking of Pregnant Women to ensure antenatal, intranatal and postnatal
care.
• Mother and Child Protection Card in collaboration with the Ministry of Women and
Child Development to monitor service delivery for mothers and children.
• Antenatal, Intranatal and Postnatal care including Iron and Folic Acid supplementation to
pregnant & lactating women for prevention and treatment of anemia.
• Engagement of more than 800,000 Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs) to
generate demand and facilitate accessing of health care services by the community.
• Village Health and Nutrition Days in rural areas as an outreach activity, for provision of
maternal and child health services.
• Health and nutrition education to promote dietary diversification, inclusion of iron and
folate rich food as well as food items that promote iron absorption.
• A new initiative namely Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (JSSK) has been launched
on 1st June, 2011, which entitles all pregnant women delivering in public health
institutions to absolutely free and no expense delivery including Caesarean section. The
initiative stipulates free drugs, diagnostics, blood and diet, besides free transport from
home to institution, between facilities in case of a referral and drop back home. Similar
entitlements have been put in place for all sick newborns accessing public health
institutions for treatment till 30 days after birth.
• To provide essential and basic Newborn Care and Resuscitation, Navjaat Shishu
Suraksha Karyakram (NSSK) has been launched to address care at birth issues i.e.
Prevention of Hypothermia, Prevention of Infection, Early initiation of Breast feeding
and Basic Newborn Resuscitation. Newborn care and resuscitation is an important
starting-point for any neonatal program and is required to ensure the best possible start
in life. The objective of this initiative is to have at-least one person trained in Basic
newborn care and resuscitation at every delivery.
• This training is being imparted to Medical officers, Staff nurses and ANMs at CHC/
FRUs, 24x7 PHCs and Sub-centers where deliveries are taking place.
• The training is for 2 days and is expected to reduce neonatal mortality significantly in
the country.
• As on date more than 66,900 health personnel have been trained in NSSK across the
country.
The Committee welcomes the above measures contemplated by the Department for
accelerating reduction in MMR, IMR and TFR. The Committee would, however, like the
Department to put in a place a rigorous monitoring mechanism of evaluation of the effectiveness
of the measures so taken. (Para 5.3)

80
Action Taken
3.14 Noted for future compliance.
Further Recommendation
3.15 The Committee had directed the Department to put in place a rigorous monitoring
mechanism of evaluation of the effectiveness of the measures so taken. However, the reply
of the Department is silent on this aspect. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation made in its 54th Report to provide details of monitoring mechanism of
evaluation of the effectiveness of the measures so taken in this regard
JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA
Recommendations/Observations
3.16 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare further informed that it had commissioned an
evaluation of the Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) by an expert group led by the Executive Director,
NHSRC. The Committee has submitted its findings which are available in the form of a report. The
report entitled “Programme Evaluation of the Janani Suraksha Yojana” is available at the website:
www.nhsrcindia.org. The following are the major findings/recommendations of the evaluation:
1. The JSY has undoubtedly increased the number of institutional deliveries and has
enabled poor women to access public health facilities.
2. JSY funds are reaching most of the beneficiaries who deliver in institutions.
3. Services of FRUs (First Referral Units) are largely available in almost all Districts in the
public sector.
4. Exclusionary criteria for home and institutional deliveries which limit the JSY entitlement
for the most vulnerable women should be removed.
5. There is a need to ensure that no user fees and provider fees are charged for pregnancy
and newborn care and this should be well advertised.
Facilities should have a quality management system in place. Quality processes would
include minimum standards of inputs like infrastructure, human resources, electricity, water,
number of toilets, equipment and drugs and laboratory services. It would also include protocols of
clinical care and review and administrative processes.  (Para 5.22)
Action Taken
3.17 Matter of Record.
Recommendations/Observations
3.18 The Committee recommends that the gaps in implementation of the JSY Scheme highlighted
by the said report may be removed at the earliest. The Committee desires to be kept apprised of
the follow-up action taken on the findings of the Expert Group. (Para 5.23)
Action Taken
3.18 Noted for compliance

81
Further Recommendation
3.20 The Committee is aware that the Expert Group submitted its Report on the
evaluation of the Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY). A considerable period of time has elapsed
since then. By now the Ministry must have initiated followup action on the
recommendations contained in the said Report. The Committee is therefore unhappy to
note that the Department instead of acquainting the Committee with the follow-up action
taken on the findings of the Expert Group has sought to give an evasive reply. The
Committee recommends that a concrete and specific action plan be prepared for removing
the gaps.
VI. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASES CONTROL PROGRAMME (NVBDCP)
Recommendations/Observations
3.21 T otal 8247 cases and 1169 deaths due to Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (AES) including
Japanese Encephalitis (JE) have been reported in 2011 as compared with 2871 cases and 663
deaths in 2006. Though the cases have increased, the case fatality rate (CFR) has been reduced
from 23% in 2006 to 14.1% in 2011. Total 54 Sentinel Sites in all the endemic States have been
made functional to enhance surveillance. Immunisation coverage of children of 88.97% has been
reported in 2010-11. Allocation of Rs. 3.11 crore during 2011-12 has been increased to Rs. 15.60
crore in 2012-13 for prevention & control of JE. JE vaccination by using SA-14-14-2 covering the
children of 1-15 years of age were covered in endemic States. The coverage was noted to be the
66.61% of the targeted children during 2009. Under the remedial steps taken to overcome the
shortfall of targets a special campaign was carried out in 7 Districts of Uttar Pradesh and 2
Districts of Assam (Dibrugarh and Sibsagar) along with 19 Districts of other endemic States and
88.97% coverage was achieved. To follow up, the leftover children along with new cohorts are
covered under Routine Immunisation (RI). (Para 6.9)
3.22 The Committee is not happy with the physical achievements under the programme. Though
the fatal cases have reduced, yet the Committee cannot be in oblivious to the fact that the number
of cases have increased. The Committee feels that though the fund allocation has been increased
five fold from Rs.3.11 crore during 2011-12 to Rs.15.60 crore in 2012-13, a lot needs to be done
in terms of physical achievements on the ground. The Committee feels that there is a need on the
part of the Department to improve its physical achievements by recruitment of more manpower
especially in JE endemic States. (Para 6.10)
Action Taken
3.23 Four meetings of Group of Ministers under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble HFM were held
on 21.11.2011, 24.11.2011, 09.12.2011 and 02.02.2012 to discuss the convergence with other
Ministeries for effective prevention and control of AES/JE. Hon’ble Ministers of Health & FW,
Urban Development; Rural Development; Social Justice & Empowerment and Women & Child
Development participated. The recommendation of the GoM is under submission for approval.
Further Recommendation
3.24 The Committee notes that a considerable period of time has elapsed since the
recommendation of the Group of Ministers was sent for approval. The Committee,
therefore, feels that the Ministry needs to be more proactive to push its case for approval
as delays in approvals lead to delay in implementation.

82
VII. NA TIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
3.25 The Committee observes that the fact that India accounts for a fifth of the global TB
burden is indicative of the magnitude of the problem and reminds of the challenges ahead. Though
DOTS (Directly Observed Short Treatment Course) has been found to be highly efficacious, the
Committee believes that the TB patients being treated in the private sector which is largely
unregulated, go unmonitored and there is no regulatory mechanism in place to ensure that the well-
established and validated treatment regimen is followed there. The Committee would, therefore, like
the Department to pay attention to this aspect while formulating its strategies for the Twelfth Plan.
The Committee also desires to be apprised if any assessment has been made regarding cases of
default in treatment of TB. (Para 7.4)
Action Taken
3.26 The point regarding TB patients being treated in the private sector which is largely
unregulated, go unmonitored and there is no regulatory mechanism in place to ensure that the well-
established and validated treatment regimen is followed there and that this aspect be paid attention
to by the RNTCP while formulating its strategies for the Twelfth Plan is noted. Further,
Government has recently issued a notification for mandating all private institutions to report any
TB cases to the district authorities.
3.27 Regarding default in treatment of TB there is an inbuilt routine surveillance mechanism to
assess the default among the TB patients under the Revised National Tuberculosis Control
Programme. Studies have also been conducted under the programme to assess the factors
associated with default. These are then closely monitored through the mechanism of supervision &
monitoring. The default rate under the programme has declined from 6.9% in 2006 to 5.5% in 2011
amongst the New Smear Positive TB patients.
Further Recommendation
3.28 The Committee notes that the default rate under the programme has declined from
6.9% in 2006 to 5.5% in 2011. The Committee expresses displeasure with the mere decline
of only 1.4% in the 5 year period mentioned above. The Committee feels that T.B being
a highly contagious disease, reduction of just 1.4% over a period of 5 years is not sufficient.
The Committee feels that the Department ought to take more stringent steps to increase
the tempo of curative as well as preventive aspects under the programme; otherwise all
measures taken so far would fall by wayside.
IX. NATIONAL TRACHOMA AND BLINDNESS CONTROL PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
3.29 As per informa tion received from the Eye Bank Association of India, Hyderabad, there are
around 666 Eye Banks existing in States/UTs in the country. As per available information, around
249 Eye Banks are functional to carry eye banking activities. It was targetted to develop/
strengthen a network of 30 Eye Banks in the country during the Eleventh Five Year Plan by
providing one time financial assistance upto Rs.15 lakh per unit through respective State Health
Societies. The Committee hopes that the Department would have been able to achieve the targets
set during the Eleventh Plan as one of the major causes of Blindness is the lack of proper eye
banks for eye donation or collection resulting in low levels of eye transplants leading to blindness
of the affected persons. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of eye banks

83
being set up in the country, which would help it keep track of the physical achievements on this
front. (Para 9.4)
Action Taken
3.30 Funds have been released to the States/UTs for setting up 57 Eye Banks during the years
2009-10 to 2011-12, against the target of 30 Eye Banks during the Eleventh FYP.
Further Recommendation
3.31 While making the above recommendation, the Committee had expected to be
provided with the details of progress made towards setting up of the Eye banks. However,
the Committee is dismayed to note that the Department has merely stated that funds have
been released to States/Union Territories for setting up of 57 Eye Banks. The Department
should have made efforts to collect the updated status of physical performance of the
project and apprised the Committee accordingly. The Committee, therefore, deprecates the
Department for its casual approach and exhorts it to use greater care while formulating its
reply in future.

84
84
CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
VIII. NA TIONAL LEPROSY ERADICATION PROGRAMME
Recommendations/Observations
4.1 The Department has further informed that the number of new cases reported by India
shows a declining trend since 2003-04. The proportion of new cases accounted for by India is
gradually reducing. During the year 2002-03, India accounted for 76.3% of the total Global cases
and during year 2010-11 India accounted for 55.49% of the total number of new cases. There is
no active search programme presently under way in the country; however, National Sample Survey
to assess the Leprosy disease burden has been undertaken through National JALMA Institute,
ICMR. The Survey has been completed in all the States/UTs. The report of the survey will be
available by April 2012. The Committee would like the Department to furnish the latest status
update on survey conducted by National Sample Survey to assess the leprosy disease burden in
the country . (Para 8.3)
ActionTaken
The report of the survey is still awaited for which the National Institute of JALMA & OMD
Agra, an ICMR Institute is being persuaded to submit the report expeditiously.

85
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
I. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
The Department had been asked to address two pointed queries regarding the reasons
for reduced allocation for 2012-13 and the required rate of increase in Total Plan allocation
to meet the expenditure level of 2.5 per cent of GDP. However, the Committee is
constrained to note that the Department reply is evasive in as much as it fails to shed light
on these queries. The Committee would like the Department to exercise greater care and
precautions while framing its reply in future and also furnish the requisite information.
(Para 1.6)
While making the above recommendation, the Committee had expected the
Department to draw a roadmap with detailed explanation for better utilisation of the funds
allocated under this head. Merely informing that the Department will strive to ensure better
utilisation of allocated funds is no substitute for action in concrete terms. The Committee,
therefore, would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.
(Para 1.9 & 1.10)
While making the above recommendation, the Committee had expected the
Government to take measures to overcome the under-utilisation of funds earmarked for
NPCDCS. The Committee notes that though the Department had acquainted it with the
reason for shortfall, it has not indicated the measures taken/contemplated to be taken to
deal with the under utilisation of funds. The Committee, therefore, desires that the
Department should take concrete steps and measures to arrest the trend of under-
utilisation of funds and the Committee intimated of the corrective measures taken in this
regard. (Para 1.14)
II. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME
The Committee had made very specific recommendation in the above paras. However,
instead of coming out with detailed and reasoned response, the Department had tried to
skirt the core issues highlighted by the Committee by giving an ambiguous reply. The
Committee reiterates the recommendation made earlier. (Para 2.14 & 2.15)
III. SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL, NEW DELHI
The Committee is dismayed at the manner in which the Department has considered
the Committee’s recommendation on providing accommodation facilities for nursing staff.
The Committee is perturbed by the response of the Department that administrative
approval & economic sanctions for the construction of nursing quarters at Dwarka land are
still awaited. Such delay is unacceptable to the Committee. The Committee is of the view
that the nursing staff is the strongest support of the doctors in the delivery of health care
services and bureaucratic delays should not be allowed to impact the healthcare services
being provided at Hospitals. The Committee, therefore, recommends with all the power at
its command that a decision in the matter be arrived at within a period of one month.
(Para 3.11)
85

86
The Committee expresses extreme disappointment over the persisting slow
progress with regard to setting up of IVF unit in SJH. Despite Committee’s repeated
recommendations made in this regard, the Department has not been able to take concrete
steps towards setting up of IVF unit since 2010. The Committee observes that though the
Department has indicated that the space for IVF unit will be made available in the Hospital,
there is no time-frame within which the activity is targeted to be squeezed is indicated. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that setting up of IVF unit be taken on priority basis
and accomplished within a specific time-frame. (Para 3.14)
IV. V ARDHMAN MAHA VEER MEDICAL COLLEGE, NEW DELHI
It is evident from the reply that no time-lines have been set for completion of the
projects under reference. The Committee observes that keeping the projects open-ended is
a sure recipe for time overruns and cost-escalation. The Committee would, therefore, exhort
the Department to set time-frame for execution of the projects so that there is little scope
for cost-escalation. (Para 4.2 & 4.3)
V. DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL
The Committee observes that fixing a time-frame for completion of the projects is
extremely important from the point of view of efficient utilization of scarce resources. The
Committee would, therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation regarding fixing a time-
frame and striving to adhere the same. (Para 5.6)
VIII. LADY HARDINGE MEDICAL COLLEGE
The Committee while noting the Department’s reply, feels that there seems to be a
sorry state of affairs in the recruitment for various posts due to non-completion of
additional facilities under Comprehensive Re-development Plan – Phase I. The current
situation is that neither the re-development plan has been completed and nor the vacancies
are filled. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should initiate steps
to fill up the 409 posts on the premise that the process may take upto six months by which
time the additional facilities under phase I (August, 2013) would be in place as committed
by the Department in its reply. (Para 8.5)
IX. ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
The Committee is extremely dismayed at the tenor of the reply of the Department.
Instead of apprising the Committee of the cogent reasons for non-setting up of a Burns
Units at AIIMS, the Department has been offering various alibis for the same. If the
ground reality indeed did not warrant setting up of a Burns Unit at AIIMS, why was the
Unit conceived in the first place. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to
submit detailed explanation in this regard. (Para 9.9)
The Committee is pained to note that despite its repeated recommendation to
liquidate the vacancies, not much headway has been made towards wiping out the vacancies
which is evident from a substantial number of 2409 vacancies. The Committee is
constrained to observe that though it has been claimed that all efforts are being made to
fill the vacancies, the facts project an altogether different picture. The Committee is aware
that the efforts made in the past to fill the vacancies have not borne fruit due to ambiguous
recruitment policy. The Committee would, therefore, expect the Department to pay focussed

87
attention to the recruitment of qualified personnel and impresses upon the Department to
launch Special Recruitment Drives so that the perennial shortage of qualified personnel is
addressed. (Para 9.11)
XII. NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH AND
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG
Only Recruitment Rules have been modified. But it appears the recruitment drive
has not been commenced. The Committee reiterates its recommendation to take up special
recruitment drive. (Para 12.6 & 12.7)
XIV. DEVELOPMENT OF NURSING SERVICES
The Committee does not agree with the reasons given by the Department for under-
utilization of funds. The Committee is of the opinion that reasons cited for under
achievement like unavailability of audited statements of expenditure, agency details for
release and undertakings etc. from the concerned State Government could have been sorted
out, had the Department pursued the matter with the State Governments vigorously. The
Committee accordingly recommends to the Department to take a more proactive approach
in this matter. (Para 14.3)
The Department has not indicated about the assessment of demand and availability
of residential accommodation for nurses that was to be done by the Department. The
Committee desires that this may be done at the earliest. (Para 14.12)
XV. NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH PROGRAMME
The Department only indicated about the meetings planned. Apparently no meeting
was held till the receipt of ATN. The Committee observes that at this rate, the targets
cannot be achieved. There needs more pro-active approach on the part of the Department.
(Para 15.5)
The Committee observes that though the Department claims to have held meetings
to identify the loopholes in the implementation of the Scheme, it has not indicated the
outcome of such meetings. The Institutes need to take necessary steps to achieve the
targets. (Para 15.9)
XVI. CENTRAL DRUGS STANDARD CONTROL ORGANISATION (CDSCO)
The Committee observes that the Drug Inspector plays a vital role in ensuring that
pharmaceutical products are of legal standards and grading. It is in this context that the
filling up of 100 vacant posts of Drug Inspector assume added significance. Even though
written test was held in 2011, the interviews were not held till ATN was sent by the
Department. The Committee would like to urge that the Department, pursue the matter of
recruitment of Drug Inspectors with UPSC so that they are in place at the earliest.
(Para 16.3)
The Committee views with concern the status of labs for testing of drug samples and
is surprised to know the sub-optimal capability of these labs in view of the menace of
availability of spurious and substandard drugs in the market. Moreover, the Committee is
also disappointed to know about the efforts put in by the Department providing sophisticated
equipments and additional manpower in these labs for the last four years yet the capability
of the labs for testing of samples of drugs is sub-optimal. Opening of new budget line for

88
strengthening the drug regulatory systems at the State level, with Central assistance may
be effectively used to address the bottlenecks which restrain the forward movement in this
regard. (Para 16.5)
The Committee notes from the submission made in Annexure-VI that the Central
Pharma PSUs has a critical role to play in the promotion of quality generic drugs. The
Committee is also convinced that the supply of low cost quality medicines cannot be
sustained without the participation of the Central Pharma PSUs. The Committee is,
however, aware that the revival of Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals company which had
been declared sick in 1992 by Board of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) and
is still hanging fire. Besides, the production and sales turnover of Karnataka Antibiotics and
Pharmaceuticals Limited and Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals are more or less static
in value terms since 2007-08. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare should urgently take up the matter of revival/ modernisation of
all Central Pharma with the nodal Department ( i.e. Department of Pharmaceuticals) so that
the objective of access to quality generic medicines could be realised within the shortest
possible time. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made towards
finalisation of the new initiative, namely “Free medicines for all through Public Health
Facilities”. (Para 16.7)
XVII. V ACCINE MANUFACTURING UNITS
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the slow pace of the revival of the
three vaccine units and feels that the Department is not pursuing the matter vigorously
which has very serious implications on the vaccine prices and the resultant impact on
Universal Immunisation Programme. The Committee, therefore, exhorts the Department to
shed its casual attitude and ensure that the work regarding upgradation of these vaccine
manufacturing units be completed at the earliest. (Para 17.3)
The Committee observes that the Department has not addressed its concern
regarding under-utilisation of funds allocated for CRI, Kasauli in a satisfactory manner. In
a resource constrained country like India, optimal and judicious utilisation of allocated
funds is of paramount importance. The Committee would expect the Department to apprise
it of the roadmap for better financial performance under this head. (Para 17.9)
XXII. TELEMEDICINE
The Committee notes that the Scheme was approved by SFC in December, 2010/
January, 2011. Two years have elapsed since then, but the matter is still under examination.
The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to quickly finalise the issues
involved and implement the project at the earliest. (Para 22.3)
XXV. HUMAN RESOURCE FOR HEALTH
The Committee had presented its 60th Report on the NCHRH Bill, 2011 to both the
Houses of Parliament in the Winter Session of the Parliament (December, 2011). While
the Committee expects that the Government has taken into account the
recommendations, nevertheless for the sake of clarity it recommends that while
redrafting the said Bill special emphasis on restoring the autonomy of the existing
Councils; setting up of other Councils; inclusion of AYUSH; adequate participation of
State Governments, etc. be made. (Para 25.4)

89
PART-B
NRHM
I. BUDGETARY PROVISIONS
The Committee notes that the gap between the expected targets and the
achievements are too wide to be comfortable within the first phase of NRHM (2005-2012).
In response to the Committee recommendation to the Department to undertake a review
of NRHM and to take concrete and concerted efforts to plug the gaps and bottlenecks in
the implementation of programme that existed in the first phase, the Ministry has stated
generically that the Ministry has taken note of the above recommendations of the
Committee for compliance, without spelling out the mechanisms envisaged to be employed
to identify the inadequacies and iron them out. The Committee again impresses upon the
Ministry to undertake a thorough review before the second phase (2012-13) is implemented
on the ground and take corrective measures accordingly. (Para 2.5)
The Committee notes the observations of the Planning Commission on the
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee feels that the observation of the
Planning Commission on the absorptive capacity of the State Health Systems require
attention of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee feels that
increasing the public spending on health from 1% to 2.5% of GDP by the end of 12th Plan
is a sin-qua-non  for the success of the NRHM flagship scheme. However, the same cannot
be achieved without strengthening the absorptive capacity of State Health Systems. Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare should playa vital role in augmenting the absorption capacity
of State Health Systems. The Committee, therefore, impresses upon the Department to
seriously set its sights on strengthening of the State Health Systems in order to ensure that
the funds released for health systems are capable of being absorbed properly by the State
Health Systems. (Para 2.6 & 2.7)
III. INFRASTRUCTURE STRENGTHENING
HEALTH CARE UNITS
While making the above recommendations, the Committee had expected the
Department to indicate its reaction to desirability or otherwise of contractual appointments
and their impact on offering quality healthcare services and formulate appropriate policy
response accordingly. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the Department
has sought to wash its hands off the matter by merely stating that the vacancies are filled
up by State/UT Governments and the matter is being taken up with them. Since the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the principal financier of NRHM, it is its
obligation to see that the quality of healthcare services is not compromised in any way and
help the States devise appropriate strategies for the purpose.
The Committee notes from a perusal of the statement (as on 31st December, 2011)
of staff appointed under NRHM on contractual basis across the country that the number of
contractual staff are still substantial as they may not be amenable to punctuality, discipline,
and control. The Committee would also like to be enlightened on the total number of in-
position posts vis-a-vis  sanctioned strength as per RHS 2011 and the measures taken/
contemplated to be taken to overcome the deficiencies as pointed out in RHS 2011.
(Para 3.3 & 3.4)

90
V. RCH FLEXIBLE POOL
The Committee had directed the Department to put in place a rigorous monitoring
mechanism of evaluation of the effectiveness of the measures so taken. However, the reply
of the Department is silent on this aspect. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation made in its 54th Report to provide details of monitoring mechanism of
evaluation of the effectiveness of the measures so taken in this regard. (Para 5.3)
JANANI SURAKSHA YOJANA
The Committee is aware that the Expert Group submitted its Report on the
evaluation of the Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY). A considerable period of time has elapsed
since then. By now the Ministry must have initiated follow-up action on the
recommendations contained in the said Report. The Committee is therefore unhappy to note
that the Department instead of acquainting the Committee with the follow-up action taken
on the findings of the Expert Group has sought to give an evasive reply. The Committee
recommends that a concrete and specific action plan be prepared for removing the gaps.
(Para 5.22 & 5.23)
VI. NATIONAL VECTOR BORNE DISEASES CONTROL PROGRAMME (NVBDCP)
The Committee notes that a considerable period of time has elapsed since the
recommendation of the Group of Ministers was sent for approval. The Committee,
therefore, feels that the Ministry needs to be more proactive to push its case for approval
as delays in approvals lead to delay in implementation. (Para 6.9 & 6.10)
VII. NA TIONAL T.B. CONTROL PROGRAMME
The Committee notes that the default rate under the programme has declined from
6.9% in 2006 to 5.5% in 2011. The Committee expresses displeasure with the mere decline
of only 1.4% in the 5 year period mentioned above. The Committee feels that T.B being
a highly contagious disease, reduction of just 1.4% over a period of 5 years is not sufficient.
The Committee feels that the Department ought to take more stringent steps to increase
the tempo of curative as well as preventive aspects under the programme; otherwise all
measures taken so far would fall by wayside. (Para 7.4)
IX. NATIONAL TRACHOMA AND BLINDNESS CONTROL PROGRAMME
While making the above recommendation, the Committee had expected to be
provided with the details of progress made towards setting up of the Eye banks. However,
the Committee is dismayed to note that the Department has merely stated that funds have
been released to States/Union Territories for setting up of 57 Eye Banks. The Department
should have made efforts to collect the updated status of physical performance of the
project and apprised the Committee accordingly. The Committee, therefore, deprecates the
Department for its casual approach and exhorts it to use greater care while formulating its
reply in future. (Para 9.4)

91
MINUTES

VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
(2012-13)
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 13 th March, 2013 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal — In the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
3. Shri H.K. Dua
4. Shrimati B. Jayashree
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Kirti Azad
6. Shri Mohd. Azharuddin
7. Shri Kuvarjibhai M. Bavalia
8. Shrimati Priya Dutt
9. Dr. Sucharu Ranjan Haldar
10. Mohd. Asrarul Haque
11. Dr. Tarun Mandal
12. Shrimati Jayshreeben Patel
13. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
14. Shri P.T. Thomas
SECRETARIAT
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Joint Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Deputy Director
I. Opening Remarks
2. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal, in the Chair, at the outset, welcomed Members and informed them that
due to certain urgent work, the Chairman would not be able to attend the meeting and requested
him to chair the meeting. The Committee, thereafter, elected Dr. Jaiswal to preside the meeting.
The Chairman then apprised Members about the agenda of the meeting viz. to consider and adopt
drafth (i) 64
th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on Recommendations/
Observations contained in the 54 th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of
the Department of Health and Family Welfare and (ii) * * *.
93
*** Relate to other matters.

94
II. Consideration and adoption of draft 64 th and * Reports
3. The Committee considered and draft 64 th and * of the Committee and after some discussion,
adopted the Reports with minor amendments. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports
may be presented to the Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Tuesday, the 19
th
March, 2013. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence, Shri H.K. Dua and
Dr. Prabhakar Kore to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha, and Shri Kirti Azad, and in his absence,
Shri Mohd. Azharuddin to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
III. ***
4 . ***
5. The Committee then adjourned at 10.40 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

95
ANNEXURES

96

97
PART-A (Health Sector)
ANNEXURE-I OF REPORT (PARA NO. 1.12)
Sl. Scheme 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE
1 CGHS 51.00 66.64 58.02 68.65 80.81 57.21 84.00 86.23 55.34
2 CTP, Ranchi 15.00 21.64 20.88 27.25 26.60 13.94 40.90 38.97 16.18
3 Cancer Research 95.00 35.00 28.25 180.00 55.00 31.97 200.00 1 12.00 76.80
4 LHMC & S.K. 60.00 70.50 43.64 79.00 72.00 50.90 80.00 68.00 50.52
Hospital
5 PMSSY 1447.92 683.58 474.48 750.00 747.00 653.84 1616.57 918.91 714.31
6 Tobacco Control 30.00 17.00 16.40 45.00 30.00 29.28 50.00 32.00 11.31
Programme
7 Development of 18.00 2.00 17.55 21.00 26.00 25.47 40.00 27.00 10.25
Nursing Services
8 Total/Medical Edu., 2279.52 1659.03 1338.39 1982.51 1967.55 1749.94 3135.92 2257.18 1780.18
Training and
Research

98
ANNEXURE-II TO PARA 1.21
Updated status of Action Taken on deficiencies as pointed out in the audit paras for the last five years
Sl.
No.
1
1
2
Report
No.
2
CA 1
of 2008
CA 14
of 2008-
09
Para
No.
3
8.1
5.2
Subject of Para
4
Unfruitful expenditure on construction of sub-
standard Laboratories (CRL)
Even after lapse of nine years of award of work,
Ministry failed to ensure renovation/upgradation of
laboratories of CRI Kasauli to meet the requirement
of current Good Manufacturing Practices for safe
production and testing of vaccines. The facilities
created at the cost of Rs.11.86 crore could not be
put to use due to sub-standard construction, thus
rendering the entire expenditure unfruitful.
Failure to recover Rs.l1.90 crore from BSNI and
Postal Department on account of medical services
rendered by CGHS, Allahabad.
Action Taken/Status of the para
5
After the audit findings, Ministry engaged M/S HLL as expert
agency. Detailed Project Report has been prepared including
time schedule for implementation and costing of the project.
The project is being executed with a cost of Rs.49.83 crores
w.e.f. December, 2009 and is in final stage of completion. The
commercial production is expected from October-November,
2012.
Audit vetted the ATN on 12.12.2011 with their observations as
follows:–
1. Ministry may inform the PAC about the outcome of the
show cause notices issued against the officers of CRI,
HSCC and former DCG(l).
2. Ministry may inform PAC about the compensation for the
loss by HSCC.
3. Ministry may inform the PAC steps taken or proposed to
be taken to avoid such lapses in future.
The Action is being taken to submit the Final Action Taken
with the replies on further audit comments as mentioned
above.
ATN sent to audit on 6th March, 2012.
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare does not agree

99
3 PA 30
of
2008-
09
National Institute of Biological (NIB)
Even after 16 years of its inception and expenditure
of Rs.256 crore, which was 95 per cent of the total
project cost, the National Institute of Biologicals
(NIB) could not fulfill its role of ensuring availability
of safe and good quality biological products for
consumption in India. NIB could not achieve its
intended objectives of systematic examination of the
quality of biologicals, development of national
reference standards and human resource development
in the field of biologicals. As a result, inspite of the
establishment of a vast infrastructure, several batches
of biological products continued to be released
without independent quality assurance testing. In the
case of imports, the country was compelled to rely
essentially on claims of safety, potency and efficacy
made by foreign manufacturers/drug regulatory
authorities of other countries.
NIB did not deploy Good Laboratory Practices
compliant processes and procedures. Serious
scientific lapses and malpractices were observed
during audit. NIB was certifying blood products
stating compliance with requirements of the
pharmacopoeia wilhout carrying out critical tests
required under the pharmacopoeia. For example, it
had certified many batches of immunoglobulin, a lite-
saving drug, withou carrying out tests to ascertain
whether the biological was actually immunoglobulin;
whether it was safe for use and would not lead to
abnormal toxicity and fever when administertd and
whether it would remain stable under given
temperature conditions.
with the audit in their findings on the grounds that the staff
of the employees of the erstwhile Department of
Telecommunications (now BSNL) and the Department of Post
and Telegraph (Postal Department) is eligible for availing the
CGHS services on payment of requisite contribution. The
CGHS cards were also issued as per the extant instructions
subject to compulsory recovery of staff contribution through
their monthly salary bills. The recoveries made are classified
under the proper head of accounts.
Revised ATN sent to audit on 5th Sept. 2011.
Audit vetted the ATN with the following further
observations:–
1. The Ministry has stated that action was initiated for
creation of balance 195 posts approved in EFC/
CCEA. The time frame fixed for gelling the balance
posts created be mentioned in the ATN.
2. Ministry may inform PAC about the reasons for
keeping the freeze drier idle for more than two
years. The details of the possibilities being explored
for utilizing the Freeze Drier may also be mentioned.
3. Ministry may inform PAC about the steps taken or
proposed to be taken for issue of guidelines/
manuals on standards to be used by manufacturers.
4. Ministry may inform PAC about the training
programme for Indian Manufacturers.
5. Ministry may inform PAC about the mechanism
devised for having close watch on functioning of the
Institute.
Entire
Report

100
Owing to complaints regarding large scale
irregularities in testing and reporting of results, the
Ministry stopped the testing of biologicals by NIB in
July, 2007 and forbade all subordinate offices of the
Drug Controller General of India {DCG(l)} to send
samples to NIB for testing. Despite this some
subordinate DCG(l) offices continued to send
samples to NIB for batch samples received by NIB
after July, 2007 were sent by one particular
subordinate office of DCG(1) and belonged to one
particular manufacturer/company.
One of the main reasons for under-performance of
NIB, in addition to the above-mentioned lapses, was
non-deployment of commensurate human and
physical resources for timely achievement of intended
objectives. This, coupled with undue delays in
decision-making and lack of coordination and proper
planning, led to delays in construction of
infrastructure and inefficient management and
utilization of available resources. Despite the
completion of the main Laboratory Building and
Animal House in February, 2006, only 75 persons
were deployed in NIB as of October, 2008, against
the assess requirement of 363.
The procurement process followed by the institute
did nor ensure sufficient competition and was marred
with irregularities. Equipment was procured without
proper assessment of actual requirements and care to
stagger purchase in tune with anticipated usage,
leading to poor or no utilization of costly equipment.
This resulted in wasteful deployment of funds in
time. About 88.5 per cent of the total fixed
equipment installed in NIB was lying unutilized. The
6. Ministry may inform PAC about the details of the
possibilities being explored for utilization of idle
equipment (Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorter and
DNA sequencer) by other institutions.
Final Action Taken Note alongwith the reply to the above
observations is being submitted to Public Accounts
Committee,
12 3 4 5

101
equipment installed in NIB was lying unutilized. The
warranty periods of most of the fixed equipment
had lapsed even before they were put to use.
Only one meeting of the General Body and three
meetings of the Governing Body were held against
15 such meetings mandated under the Rules and
Regulations of NIB during the five-year period
reviewed by Audit. Deficient control and oversight
over the performance of NIB deprived the Ministry
of opportunities to address NIB's shortcomings and
deficiencies in time.
Recommendations:
• NIB should conduct all the crucial tests in
accordance with the concerned pharmacopoeia
so that the quality of biologicals is ensured
before release in the market.
• Concerted efforts should be made for
development of human resources in the field of
biologicals and immunobiological products
through proper training of scientific and
technical personnel. Besides, efforts should be
made for dissemination of knowledge through
networking and linkages with national and
international institutes.
• The Ministry and NIB should ensure
deployment of sufficient scientific and technical
manpower commensurate with the available
infrastructure in NIB in a time-bound manner.
• NIB should systematize its procurement
procedures and make proper assessment of the
actual requirement of equipment before
procurement. Besides, concerted efforts should
be made to ensure proper utilization of the
procured equipment.

102
• The internal controls within the institute and
oversight by the Ministry should be
strengthened.
• The Ministry should fix responsibility for the
various lapses observed during audit, such as
batch release certification by NIB without
conducting the full complement of tests
prescribed by the pharmacopoeia: sending of
samples by subordinate offices of DCG (1) to
NIB for quality control testing despite
instructions of the Ministry to the contrary and
purchase of a DNA sequencer, an expensive
equipment, without any requirement by the
institute.
Non recovery of cess (AIIMS):
AIIMS did not recover cess of Rs.37.75 lakh from
the bills of contractors as required under the Building
and other construction worker’ welfare cess
Act, 1996 and pay to Delhi Building and other
Construction Workers Welfare Board. Due to non-
payment of Cess, AIIMS was also liable to pay
interest and penalty.
Reimbursement of medical claims to pensioners
under CGHS:
The system of reimbursement of medical claims to
the pensioners suffered from delays in their
settlement by CGHS authorities. Further, the more
serious the disease and the amount involved in the
medical claim, greater were the delays faced by the
pensioner.
12 3 4 5
AIIMS referred the matter to Standing Legal Council and as
per his opinion, the Institute is not entitled to recover the
amount of labour cess retrospectively under any clause of the
agreement as had been entered into for various contracts.
However, the recovery of labour cess from the bills of
contractors is being done regularly w.e.f. 1.2.2009 onwards.
Action Taken Note has been sent to audit on 28.5.2012.
ATN is under preparation.
4
5
23 of
2009-10
3 of
2010-11
(PA)
3.2
Chapter
II

103
Time limit for settlement of medical claims was not
prescribed by the CGHS. For medical claims
exceeding Rs.2 lakh, which were to be settled by
Director (CGHS)/Ministry, one third of the 163
claims sample checked by audit were pending for an
average period of two years and seven months.
Average time taken for the remaining two third
claims was one year and two months. For medical
claims below Rs.2 lakh, which were to be settled by
Additional/Joint Directors of local CGHS covered
cities, average time taken to settle the medical
claims was six months.
Out of 112 applications seeking permission for
treatment for serious illnesses, test checked in audit
32 applications were pending in Director (CGHS)
Office/Ministry for an average period of two years.
Causes for delay in settlement of claims were
indifferent handling of cases by CGHS authorities
resulting in claims and files getting misplaced;
forwarding of claims by local CGHS offices seeking
unnecessary clarifications; lack of effective initial
scrutiny of claims leading to avoidable
correspondence and inadequate monitoring and
accountability.
The effectiveness of the system of extension or
credit facility by recognized private hospitals was
hampered due to lack of awareness among
pensioners about extension of credit facility and
substantial reduction in the number of recognized
private hospitals in recent years.
The system did not afford adequate opportunity to
the CGIIS covered pensioners for registering their

104
12 3 4 5
grievances/complaints as the grievance redress
system was not functioning in five out of eight cities
audited.
The medical reimbursement procedures were not
transparent. Except for Delhi, formal system was not
in place in the audited CGHS covered cities for
communicating the status of reimbursement of
medical claims to be pensioners
Recommendations:
• An activity specific time-frame for processing
and settling the medical claims of pensioners
needs to he stipulated and followed in an
accountable environment.
• Responsibility may be fixed for each case of
negligent handling resulting in harassment to
pensioners
• Staff responsible for collection of medical claims
should be trained to properly scrutinize the
documents submitted long with medical claims at
the time of initial submission of such claims,
This would reduce avoidable correspondence
later at the time of processing the claims.
• There is a need to increase awareness among
pensioners about CGHS rules and facilities
provided by it. A small compilation of useful
information may be given to the pensioners at
the time of issue of CGHS card.
• A transparent electronic system should be put in
place to facilitate reporting of the status of the
disposal of claims to the claimants. Online
availability of the status of disposal of a medical
claim, as prevalent in Delhi, should also be
extended to other CGHS covered cities.

105
6
7
9 of
2010-11
9 of
2010-11
Non-implementation of computerized
Management Information System for Food
Control Organisation
Failure of the Ministry to ensure migration of
complete data from State Food Testing Laboratories
to the computerized system has resulted in non-
achievement of objectives of establishing
communication network between the Food regulatory
agencies and laboratories even after three years of
scheduled date of completion. The equipment worth
Rs.2.79 crore is lying idle at NIC, and in State
laboratories at different stations.
Delayed supply of equipment (NICD))
Failure of the Ministry to ensure timely supply of
ventilators through HSCC which was of emergent
nature resulted in intended objectives remaining
unfulfilled. Advance of Rs. 5.53 crore to HSCC was
released ever before the agreement was entered into
with the supplier and the advance was much in
excess of the value of goods procured. The
unadjusted advance of Rs.I.57 crore is yet to be
recovered from HSCC.
Under the World Bank assisted Capacity Building Project. the
HCL Infosystem Ltd. was awarded the contract for
computerisation which consisted of both the Hardware and
Software components. The contract was for an amount of
Rs.3,44,60,861/-.
ATN sent to audit on 11.06.2012 by directing Food Safety &
Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) for a time bound revival
of the project. FSSAI has informed that they have taken over
the aforesaid servers for utilization, The process of proper
utilization of the aforesaid infrastructure has, thus, already
been initiated by the FSSAI.
The Action Taken Note was submitted to audit after
recovering Rs.l.86 crore and Rs.0.67 crore towards interest
accrued from HSCC (I),
Avian Influenza outbreak was a Public Ilealth Emergency of
International concern and it was substantial implication on
human health having a case fatality of more than 50% and the
capability of developing into a human influenza pandemic.
Being a respiratory disease. there was an increasing demand
of ventilators for managing critical cases, all across the globe
including India.
The delay in supply was mainly due to (i) supplied could not
meet the deadline due to substantial demand in the Market
(ii) procurement procedures like technical and bid evaluation
commitlee meetings documentation demonstration of
equipments inspection ete and (iii) fluctuation in foreign
exchange rate resulting in revising the LC in INR etc. Due to
delay in supplies, HSCC had recovered maximum Liquidity
Damage (LD) @ 10% of contract value amounting to
Rs.39, 56,414 from the supplier.
7.1
7.3

106
12 3 4 5
ATN sent to audit on 12.10.2011 by indicating that GMSDs
are making serious efforts to accelerate the recoveries by
reminding the indenters for payment as a result of which the
outstanding recoverable amount of Rs. 88.34 crore has been
reduced to Rs. 64.30 crore. A revie\v meeting of all GMSDs
was held in June, 2011 wherein all heads of GMSDs were
advised to strictly follow the recoveries of outstanding dues.
Also, MSO is holding regular meetings with GMSDs to
accelerate the recoveries from time to time.
ATN sent to audit on 19.01.2012
Copy of the Action Taken Note submitted to audit is at
Appendix-X (to Annexure-I).
While submitting the Action Taken Note, the Ministry agreed
with the audit and further stated that the payment of interest
on ground rent was mainly due to delay in final transfer of
land to AIIMS. Initially, in the year 1984, it was proposed to
set up Centralized Accidental Trauma Centre by the Central
Government on the said land. Subsequently, on the
recommendation of Lt. Governor of Delhi, the project was
handed over to the Delhi Administration in 1988. In 1992, the
land was again transferred to Central Government and to
AIIMS in turn.
While calculating the interest on belated construction and
ground rent, the L&DO took the date of allotment of land to
Supply of medicines on credit basis by the GMSD to
various client departments resulted in accumulation
of outstanding dues of Rs. 88.34 crore covering the
period 1975 to 2009.
Medical Council of India
63% medical colleges are in 6 states indicates
skewed distribution of medical colleges across the
country.
Permissions for 4 medical colleges were granted
without ensuring fulfillment of prescribed medical
standards.
59 medical colleges were found admitting 326
students in excess of their intake capacity in 126
post graduate courses.
Avoidable payment of interest – AHMS
Audit observed that after 1993, AIIMS did not
pay the ground rent. Consequently, the LDO raised
(12/2001) a demand of Rs. 50.72 lakh for seven
years and the same was paid by AIIMS. Thereafter,
AIIMS again defaulted in making The payment of
ground rent on time. Consequently, the LDO raised
(10/2002) and June 2009 demands for interest also
for belated payment of ground rent.
8
9
10
9 of
2010-11
20 of
2010-11
38 of
2010-11
7.5
Chapter
1
3.1

107
AIIMS as 1985 despite the fact that the same was finally
handed over to AIIMS in 1992. The L&DO was requested to
waive off the penalty imposed on AIIMS. However, that
Department did not agree to the request of the Ministry.
Safdarjung Hospital was allotted 2 Acre of land in Dwarka in
October, 2000 for the purpose of construction of residential
accommodation for Staff Nurses of this Hospital. The land is
in the physical possession of Safdarjung Hospital and for
safety of premises, a boundary wall and security booth has
been constructed. Security has been deployed there and
regular monitoring is being carried out. The Central Design
Bureau submitted a concept design in April, 2002, which was
forwarded to CPWD for framing up an estimate. The estimate
of Rs.16.26 crore submitted by CPWD in April, 2007 was
sent to DGHS for approval.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee has observed that
proposed residential accommodation is too distant and
preferably a suitable property at a nearby location be found.
Recently DDA has acquired approx. 56 Acre land behind
Trauma Centre and LNDO/DDA has been approached to allot
land in lieu of land at Dwarka. In the meantime, Staff quarters
(157 Type-II & 16 Type-IV) specially built for Staff Nurses
at Sriniwaspuri have been made available.
Action Taken Note has been submitted to Audit on 6th
August, 2012.
ATN is under preparation.
Unfruitful Expenditure – Safdarjung Hospital and
VMCC
Inordinate delay and lackadaisical approach of the
Ministry and the Hospital has led to non-
commencement of the work of construction of staff
quarters for the nurses depriving them of the
intended facility. The expenditure of Rs. 1.80 crore
incurred by the Ministry on acquisition of land
alongwith an interest of Rs.2.09 crore has been
rendered unfruitful as the Hospital was looking for an
alternate land nearer to the Hospital for the project.
Avoidable payment – CGHS :  Non-compliance with
the terms of agreement by CGHS, New Delhi
resulted in avoidable payment of V AT of Rs. 9.92
crore during 2006-09.
11
12
16 of
2011-12
16 of
2011-12
8.1
8.2

108
ANNEXURE-III TO PARA 9.8
Status of Ongoing Pr ojects/Planned – Updated 10.07.12
■ Covering of Nallah Phase-II on East Side of Ansari Nagar– Agency-Central Public Works Department
In phase-I, 600 mts. nallah flowing on the east side of Ansari Nagar Campus was being covered. The balance is proposed to be co vered in
Ph-II with provision for surface parking and landscaping. This is required to end the mosquito menace in the Campus and to reso lve the parking
woes of the AIIMS. Approval has been received from MOH for Rs.24.50 crore for the said work. Payment made to CPWD till date-
Rs.20.0 crore.
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals Principle approval of covering of
nallah was obtained from MCD
Estimated cost Rs.24.50 crore
Awarded cost Rs.20.40 crore
Start date June, 2011
Stipulated Completion Date May 2102
Expected Completion Date September 2012 Delay on account of shifting HT line, Delhi Jal board sewer line &
Boundary wall reconstruction. Expected completion cost would be within
10% of the sanctioned amount.
■ Connecting East and West Ansari Nagar campus with Trauma Centre By Means of a Motorable Subway-Agency-DMRC
The west Ansari Nagar Campus of AIIMS is a residential Campus with more than 800 units. Also there exist Dharamshalas for the p atient and
their relatives. At present the crossover from the Main east Campus to the said Campus is not patient friendly. Also at odd hou rs and nights
the clinical faculties have to visit the main hospital for which a motorable subway is proposed to be built. The JPNA Trauma Ce ntre of AIIMS
is approx. 2.0 KM away from the main Campus. The staff and ancillary support from the Main Hospital is a must. At present the r oad
connection is prone to traffic Jams and congestion. Transfer of critically ill/trauma patient from main hospital to Trauma Cent re and vice-versa
is problematic. Thus a proposal for motorable tunnel between the two Campuses was conceived. The connectivity planned is from E ast Ansari
Nagar Campus to Trauma Centre with outlets at West Ansari Nagar Campus and Safdarjung Hospital. The work has been entrusted to DMRC
who have already prepared feasibility reports and Detailed project reports for the same. Project cost is 50.50 crore plus servi ce tax as applicable.
Payment Made to DMRC-Rs.31.0 crore.

109
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals No approvals required
Estimated cost Rs 50.50 crore
Awarded cost Rs. 38.89 crore
Start date November 2011
Stipulated Completion Date November 2012
Expected Completion Date November 2012
■ Construction of Underground parking : Agency-Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
There is a proposal for developing and underground parking at Masjid Moth Campus for approx. 435 cars. Payment made till date-Rs 20.00
crore.
Status of Approvals Approval received from Delhi Fire services, Delhi Urban Arts Commission, Tree Officer,
Airport Authority, and ASI.
Estimated cost Rs.60 crore
Awarded cost Rs.50.95 crore
Start date November, 2011
Stipulated Completion Date October, 2012
Expected Completion Date September, 1012
■ Construction of private wards - Agency-Hospital Consultancy Corporation
There is a proposal for demolishing existing private ward block housing 60 private ward rooms. The new proposed block would be a nine
floor block with double extended basement for parking. The new block shall have l12 room private wards. Also there shall be cre ation of
dedicated office space for the Deptt. of Hospital Administration. There would be a facilitation block for central admission fac ility and other
value added services for the visiting patients. Payment made till date- Nil.

110
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals Approval received from Delhi Fire services,
Tree Officer, Airport Authority.
Estimated cost Rs. 81.41 crore
Awarded cost Rs. 89.34 crore
Start date Award withheld
Stipulated Completion Date
Expected Completion Date Stipulated time is 15 months from the date of start.
■ Master Plan & Site Development Ansari Nagar/Majid Moth
The urban design of the Ansari Nagar and Masjid Moth Campus has been redone. The 26 acres vacant land at Masjid Moth is to be d eveloped
as a patient care facility hub. For the same Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation had been appointed as Consultants in the  year 2009~10.
The submission and approval of the Revised Master Plan as per MPD 2021 is underway. The Redevelopment plan has been finalised a nd is
under submission to NDMC for approval. The scrutiny process of NDMC required  many surveys and incorporations. Finally the Rede velopment
plan with all upto date compliances was submitted to NDMC on 26.04.11. The Plans are yet to be approved. The projects are centr alized in
Masjid Moth Land of AIIMS. The Master Plan of the said area is yet not approved inspite of being under process with NDMC for mo re than
two years. There was an issue of non-receipt of Land use change of 32.08 Acres land Campus. This had been pending for over five  years
period. Final notification towards the said land use change has been issued in June, 2011.
■ Women & Child Block-Agency-Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
The planning of the said planned Centre has been finalized in consultation with the user departments. The plans have been submi tted to NDMC
on 9.02.12. Project cost Rs.145.0 crore. Payment made till date-Rs.13.09 crore.
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals Approval received from Tree Officer, Airport Authority
Estimated cost Rs.145 crore
Awarded cost Yet to be tendered.
Start date
Stipulated Completion Date
Expected Completion Date 30 months (Six months for pre tenddering
procedures and 24 months for execution)

111
■ Construction of New Pre-clinical & Teaching Block (Convergence Block) – Agency-Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
This scheme envisages to create additional space for teaching and research to the non-clinical deaprtments.  Payment made till date-Rs.15.00
crore.
Stage Status
Status of Approvals Approval received from Delhi Fire Services, Delhi Urban Arts Commission, Tree Officer and Airport
Authority
Estimated cost Rs.60 crore
Awarded cost Rs.50.95 crore
Start date November 2011
Stipulated Completion Date April, 2013
Expected Completion Date April, 2013
■ Surgical Block Agency-Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
Project management is being done by Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation. Price bid has been opened and is under evaluatio n Payment
made till date-Rs.4.80 crore.
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals Approval received from Tree Officer, Airport Authority
Estimated cost Rs.59.0 crore
Awarded cost Tender received lowest bidder for Rs.50.18 yet to
be awarded.
Start date
Stipulated Completion Date
Expected Completion Date 20 months from date of start

112
■ Construction of Integrated basement parking at Masjid Moth.
The project has been a part of AIIMS Master Plan firmed up earlier on with a view to making it patient friendly. The future blo cks proposed
are 2 Blocks for Diagnostics and One block of same size as OPD and a services Block to house Substations, kitchen, stores, offi ces, etc.
All the blocks have open courtyard spaces between them. However, all these blocks are fully connected with 3 level basements. T he first level
is largely used for mechanical services of the various blocks. The second and third level basements are for parking. A semi-aut omatic double
stack parking system is proposed for these two levels. It is proposed to integrate the complete land between & below the propos ed block by
constructing a connected basement of area 78847 sq.m. A total of 3400 cars can be parked herein in this integrated basement par king and
services facilities.
This facility would provide direct ease of access to the individual blocks above. It would ensure adequate parking space for st aff that works
here and would complement the public parking already constructed because it would be linked by tunnels to the VG parking. This system helps
in segregation pedestrian and vehicular movement and ensures ease of patient drop off.
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals At DPR Stage
Estimated cost Rs.355.00 crore
Awarded cost Yet to be tendered.
Start date
Stipulated Completion Date
Expected Completion Date 30 months from date of start
■ Vertical Expansion of JPN Trauma Centre
The expansion of the Centre has been visualized utilizing the permissible ground coverage of 30% to 17,592 sq.m (against 14.58%  i.e., 8,550
sq.m) and the increased permissible FAR of 200% to 1,17,278 sq.m (against 50% i.e., 29,600 dq.m). The Master Plan of the complete Centre
is being developed as per the same. However in first step vertical expansion over the already built building/Basement is propos ed, the provision
for which was alaready made in the initial building structure. This would involve addition of area to the extent of 6,856 sq.m.  The proposed
expansion has been considered largely above the existing basement & OT Block. The existing structure would thus undergo a modul ar expansion
mainly in the Front Block and the Wards Block. The floor-wise distribution of the additional facilities, proposed to be created , together with
the tentative area requirements are as under:

113
Proposed Facilities – Floor-wise -
Floor Projected Usage Areas
Ground floor Triage area 1010 sq.m
First floor Faculty Rooms & Teaching 1043 sq.m
Second floor Labs ICU Beds-15 597 + 575 = 1172 sq.m
Third floor Offices ICU beds-15 486 + 575 = 1061 sq.m
Fourth floor Staff Room ICU Beds-15 270 + 575 = 845 sq.m
Fifth floor to 7th floor Private Rooms-12 each 575 sq.m. each
Total area 6856 sq.m Say 7000 sq.mts.
■ Construction of Out reach OPD at Badsha Jhajjar Haryana, AIIMS-II
Government of Haryana offered 300 acres of Panchayat land which was transferred by Haryana Government to MH&FW, for the develop ment
of AIIMS-II on 28th February 2009. The said land is situated at village Badhsa, District Jhajjar. The land was allotted on free  of cost basis.
The OPD proposed for the polyclinic has been conceived to handle approx. 1000 patients per day. The same was conceived as facil ity with
25 consultants room, diagnostic facilities and laboratories. The plans and proposed facilities list has been finalised. Covered  area comes to 4200
sq. mts. Payment made till date is Rs.9.50 crore.
Stage Status
Status of Approvals Temporary structure. However In-Principle approval taken from Haryana Government. Related issues of
waiving off of land use conversion charges are underway.
Estimated cost Rs.9.50 crore
Awarded cost Rs.9.75 crore
Start date March, 2012
Stipulated Completion Date June, 2012
Expected Completion Date September, 2012

114
■ Construction of New OPD Block at Masjid Moth
The infrastructure of AIIMS is being enhanced to provide state-of-the-art facilities by increasing the OPD facilities. The proj ect design
incorporates new services in the form of OPD in various super specialties; the facilities are presented hereunder: Total area p roposed including
G .F. to 8th floor is 57663.02 sq.mtr. and three level basement comprising of area 42964 sq.mtr. Time schedule for construction is 34 months.
Project is at DPR stage.
■ Out of the total of 26 departments 13 would shift here.
■ Adequate waiting area for the public
■ Capacity enhancement of major departments
■ Segregation of public to the Masjid Moth area with an independent access off the ring road.
■ Decongestion of existing Building and then better utilization
■ Capacity to handle a load of 20 lakhs patients per annum vis-a-vis the present load of 10 lakhs per annum.
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals Drawings submitted to NDMC on 10.07.12
Estimated cost Rs. 481.00 crore
Awarded cost Yet to be tendered.
Start date
Stipulated Completion Date
Expected Completion Date 30 months from date of start
■ Construction of Houses Type A/B/C at A.V. Nagar- Agency- Central Public Works Department
There is proposal to construct 352 houses at Ayurvigyan Nagar campus. The said proposal is part of the Master Plan submitted to  MCD which
is yet under process of scrutiny and processing. Due to old pre-existing two temples in the Campus I & DO raised a penalty and outstanding
payment demand for approx. Rs. 1.47 crore. This impostion of penalty was contested by AIIMS. But finally the payment was made i n
September 2011. The MCD has now consented to consider the Master Plan approval in its next scheduled meeting likely to be held next month.
The scheme shall be taken up by MCD once the Master Plan of Ayurvigyan Nagar is approved Project cost Rs. 129.68 crore. Payment made
till date-Nil

115
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals Master Plan approval of MCD awaited where after
the individual plans of the houses shall be submitted
Estimated cost Rs.129.68 crore
Awarded cost Yet to be tendered.
Start date
Stipulated Completion Date
Expected Completion Date Once the Master Plan is approved, the individual
schemes of housing shall be taken up for approval
with NDMC.
■ Construction of Hostels at Masjid Moth Campus- Agency-Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation
The scheme envisages creation of 550 beds for resident doctors. Plans were submitted to NDMC on 13.01.11. Payment made till date-
Rs.11.97 crore.
Sub head I- Main hostel comprising of 550 units
Stage Status
Status of Approvals Approval received from Delhi Fire Services, Delhi Urban Arts Commission, Tree Officer and Airport
Authority.
Estimated cost Rs. 80.57 crore
Awarded cost Rs.72.85 crore
Start date November, 2011
Stipulated Completion Date October, 2012
Expected Completion Date September, 2012

116
Sub head II- Dining Block
Stage Status
Status of Approvals Approval received from Delhi Fire Services, Delhi Urban Arts Commission, Tree Officer and Airport
Authority.
Estimated cost Rs. 13.27 crore
Awarded cost Rs.12.00 crore
Start date April, 2012
Stipulated Completion Date March, 2013
Expected Completion Date March, 2013
Stage Status Remarks
Status of Approvals At DPR Stage
Estimated cost Rs. 35.00 crore
Awarded cost Yet to be tendered.
Start date
Stipulated Completion Date
Expected Completion Date 18 months from date of start.
Conclusion
As per above it is clear that the projects were delayed on account of non-grant of statutory approvals from various civic bodie s. Yet as per
the tenders received and awarded, there seems to be less chances of cost overrun beyond the permissible limits of the sanctione d amount.
Even on date as per the status of approvals of various projects, there is uncertainty of drawing time bound programme for the p lanned/ongoing
works.

117
ANNEXURE-IV TO PARA 15.7
Details of creation of seats of qualified professionals by the Institutes funded under Manpower Development Schemes
in the field of Mental Health every year
Scheme-A Scheme-B Total
Seats to be created through Seats to be created through supporting Annual Production
11 Centres of Excellence 30 PG training departments in each speciality
Psychiatrist 44 60 104
Clinical psychologist 176 240 416
PSW 176 240 416
Psychiatric nurses 220 600 820
T
OTAL 616 1140 1756
Creation of seats is depends on creation of teaching posts at various Institutes based on approval of concerned regulatory bodi es like Medical
Council of India, Rehabilitation Council of India, Nursing Council of India etc.

118
ANNEXURE-V TO PARA 13.13
Details of targets set and achieved including reasons for delay for upgradation of Medical Colleges-Phase I
Name of the Medical Agency Tar gets Progress Reasons for delay Expected
College set made so date of
far completion
12 3 4 5 6
Srinagar Medical
College (Trauma
Centre)
IMS, BHU, V aranasi
(Trauma Centre and
Nursing College)
RIMS, Ranchi (SSB,
Oncology Blocks
SVIMS, Tirupati
(Procurement of
equipment only)
CPWD
CPWD
CPWD
HLL
100%
100%
100%
100%
76%
92%
89%
80%
The procurement of integrated modular OT was originally
envisaged to be procured/installed by CPWD Since they could not
succeed in their attempt to procure and install the item, the work
was entrusted to HLL who have already issued supply order.
Further, certain external development works could not be
undertaken on account of delay in handing over of site of the
Carpet Factory which was made available only in July, 2012.
Construction work at the institute is nearing completion, 60%
work of false ceiling was held up due to delay in procurement
and installation of medical gas pipeline. The work of
procurement/installation of medical gas pipelines was originally
envisaged to be procured by CPWD. Since they could not
succeed in their attempt to procure and install the item, the work
was entrusted to HLL who have already initiated the procurement
process.
Initial delay was due to delay in selection of contractor for civil
work which has taken more time due to re-tendering. Shifting of
overhead electric lines and pole by the State Government also
resulted in delay.
SVIMS, Tirupati wanted to replace some equipment from the
original approved list. This was required to be got approved by
the faculty experts of JIPMER who had earlier finalized the list
of equipments. Subsequently, the specifications for the equipments
Dec., 2012
Dec., 2012
Dec., 2012
Dec., 2012

119
B.J. Medical College,
Ahmedabad
(Procurement of
equipment only)
Grants Medical
College Mumbai
(Procurement of
equipment only)
HLL
HLL
100%
100%
87%
84%
Dec., 2012
Dec., 2012
were also formulated. The process for procurement of the
equipments has been initiated by HLL. Further, procurement of
some equipment could not be made even after tenders were
floated thrice due to inadequate response.
Procurement of some equipment could not be made even after
tenders were floated thrice due to inadequate response.
Procurement of some equipment could not be made even after
tenders were floated thrice due to inadequate response.

120
Details of targets set and achieved including reasons for delay for upgradation of Medical Colleges-Phase II
Agency Name of College/Institute Physical Targets Physical Ta rgets Remarks/Reasons for delay
set during 2011-12 achieved during
2011-12
12 3 4 5
HSCC
HSCC
HLL
HLL
Governemnt Medical
College, Amritsar
(Diagnostic Block)
Government Medical
College, Tanda
(Super Specialty Block)
J.N. Medical College of
Aligarh Muslim University,
Aligarh
(Trauma centre i/c OPD
& Extension of OBG
Block)
Government Medical
College, Madurai
(Super Specialty Block)
Government Medical
College, Nagpur (OT and
Procurement of Equipment)
Award and start
of work
Award and start
of work
Award and start
of work
Award and start
of work
The work mainly
involves procurement
of equipment by
State Government
Work started in
January, 2012
Work started in
November, 2011
Work started in
November, 2011
Work could not be
awarded and started
due to change of
site by State
Government
Rs. 40 crore has
been released to the
State Government
Tender initiated for civil work earlier could not be
succeeded to and the work had to be re-tendered. Civil
work started in January, 2012 and is scheduled to be
completed in June, 2013. Progress of work is 10%.
Civil work started in November, 2011 and is scheduled
to be completed by May, 2013. Progress of work is
10%.
The civil work started in November, 2011 and is
scheduled to be completed in 21 months. Progress of
work is 14%.
HLL Life Care Ltd., Project Consultant has received
tenders for civil work. However, in the meantime
State Government has sought change in location of
site adjacent to existing medical college at Madurai.
Revised plan is yet to be approved by the State
Government.
Upgradation of the institution mainly involves
procurement of equipment only.
Rs. 40 crore has been released to the State
Government.

121
HLL Pandit B.D. Sharma
Postgraduate Institute
of Medical Sciences,
Rohtak
Award and start
of work
Not yet started Earlier delay was due to revision of earlier proposal by
Institute for construction of Institute of Ophthalmology
with new proposal by providing tertiary healthcare
facilities covered under PMSSY scheme.
Tender for the civil work is under finalization and the
work is likely to be awarded in August, 2012.

122
122
ANNEXURE-VI TO PARA 8.5
Details of vacancies of various categories
Sl. No. Post No. of Posts created
1 Medical Physicist 2
2 Technicians/OT/BB Tech. etc. 91
3 Technical Supervisors 4
4 Staff Nurses 211
5 Sister Nurses
6 Assistant Nursing Superintendent 25
7 Deputy Nursing Superintendent 8
8 Administrative Officer 4
9 Office Superintendent 1
10 Accounts Officer 2
11 Store Officer 1
12 Bio-medical Engineer 1
13 LDC 1
14 Sr. Technical Assistant/Mech. Tech. 15
15 Record Keeper/Store Keeper 4
16 Stenographers 10
17 Radigraphers 5
18 Drivers—Ambulance 12
19 Photographer/Reproduction Tech. 18
20 Social Worker 2
21 Plaster room Attendants 2
T
OTAL 409

123
123
ANNEXURE-VII TO PARA 16.7
BRIEF NOTE ON JAN AUSHADHI SCHEME
(QUALITY MEDICINES AT AFFORDABLE PRICES)
The Need - Over the years, India has developed a strong capability in producing generic medicines in
almost all the therapeutic categories. These medicines are being sold mostly as branded medicines,
which pushes up the retail price of these medicines. There is still a large population of poor people
in the country which finds it difficult to afford these medicines. In fact access to quality health care
is a challenge in a developing country like India. According to NSO estimates, upto 79% cost of health
care in rural areas is due to cost of medicines. This problem gets further aggravated as upto 80% of
expenditure on health care is out-of-pocket. With 65% of India’s population not having access to
modern health care (WHO estimates 2000 the entire problem is compounded several times.
Unbranded Generic Medicines Vs. Branded Medicines - Therefore, access to quality medicines at
affordable prices is a key challenge for the Government. In this connection the prices of branded
medicines are generally higher than generic medicines due to various reasons inter-alia including
branded drugs having patent protection and a number of drugs having limited regulation through the
Drug Prices Control Order, 1995 etc. A sample comparison of some of the prices is given below:
Name of salt Dosage Pack Market Generics Difference
Price (Rs.) Price (Rs.)
Antibiotic: Ciprofloxacin 250 mg 10 55.00 1 1.10 5 times higher
Pain Killer: Diclofenac 100 mg 10 36.70 3.50 10 times higher
Common Cold: Cetrizine 10 mg 10 20.00 2.75 7 times higher
Fever: Paracetamol 500 mg 10 10.00 2.45 4 times higher
Pain and Fever: Nimesulide 100 mg 10 25.00 2.70 9 times higher
Cough Syrup 110 ml bottle 33.00 13.30 2.5 times higher
For the above reasons therefore, making available medicines at affordable prices has been taken up by
the newly created Department of Pharmaceuticals.
Jan Aushadhi Campaign -  For fulfillment of this goal, a Campaign in the name of Jan Aushadhi
Campaign has been launched in 2008. The aim of this campaign is to make available quality medicines
at afforadable prices for all, especially the poor and the disadvantaged. Under this campaign, less priced
quality unbranded generic medicines will be made available through Jan Aushadhi Stores which
inherently are less priced but are of same and equivalent quality, efficacy and safety as compared to
branded generic medicines.
The generic medicines are being supplied in the first instance by the Central Pharma PSUs which will
ensure both quality and timely supply. Medicines not available currently with the CPSUs will be sourced
from quality SME units. This will also give support to the Pharma SME sector also as well as promote
public-private partnership and avenues for achievement of corporate social responsibilities geared
towards affordable medicare for the masses. The Jan Aushadhi Campaign has now been formalized as
Generic Drug Scheme with the approval of the Planning Commission.

124
Scheme Details -  Under this Scheme, the State Government has to provide space in Government
Hospital premises for the running of the outlets (JAS) Government hospitals, NGOs, Charitable
Organisations and public societies like Red Cross Society. Rogi Kalyan Samiti typically constituted for
the purpose can be operating agencies for the JAS. The operating agency for JAS is nominated on the
basis of the recommendations of the State Government. Operational expenditure is met from trade
margins admissible for the medicines. The State Government has to ensure prescription of unbranded
generic medicines by the Government doctors. The Jan Aushadhi Programme is accordingly being a
self sustaining business model not dependeation Government subsidies or assistance. It runs on the
principle of “Not for Profits but with Minimal Profits”. In order to incentivise and provide the initial
trigger for above, it is envisaged that the Central Government would provide, if need be, a token
amount of Rs. 50,000/- as infrastructural support and one-time financial support of Rs.2.00 lakhs to
NGO etc. on reimbursement basis, setting up the Jan Aushadhi Outlet.
Jan Aushadhi Stores -  The Jan Aushadhi Campaign of the Central Governemnt is exprected to make
a contribution by way of achieving the socio-economic goal of affordable health are through ensuring
availability of quality drugs at affordable prices for all. At present, 231 medicines are being supplied
in the 121 JAS opened (till 10
th May, 2012) in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttarakhand, Odisha,
Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Union Territories of
Chandigarh and Delhi. A list of Jan Aushadhi Opened is given below:
The scheme is also expected to lead to reduction of state health expenditure on branded medicines,
more patient coverage, popularization of the use of unbranded generic medicines which will bring down
the actual out-of-pocket costs of medicines, for the common man due to wider availability (at present
only 2% of the total medicines supplied in the market are unbranded medicines) and finally better and
more affordable health care driven by the reduction in costs of medicines as the majority coponent of
health care expenses.
People’s Participation -  The assistance sought is for just one time facilitative incentive to the Jan
Aushadhi outlet operating agency which would be an NGO/Charitable body/Cooperative body/health care
driven societies like the Red Cross Society/Rogi Kalyan Samiti, etc. who would do the actual operation
of the outlet on the principle of minimal profits obtained from the minimal margins included in the cost
of the medicine itself. There is no subsidy or recurring assistance envisaged either by the State or the
Central Gvoernment. Additionally it may be appreciated that if there are no dedicated outlets at strategic
locations, it may not be possible to promote the usage of unbranded generic medicines as mere media
campaigns without commensurate ready availability would be a wasted effort Cooperation of the State
Governments is essential for locating the outlets in the district hospital premises. The Generic Drugs
Scheme is an attempt in this direction based on a viable business model not requiring Government
subsidy. The Programme does not envisage grant of any upfront subsidy other than the assistance
indicated above to provide some support from the Government/BPPI to NGOs etc.
Benefits of the Scheme -  The Jan Aushadhi Campaign will help:
(i) Improve access to healthcare in as much as cost of treatment would come down
substatially. This would enable the public Health System to increase the coverage.
(ii) Secure a socio-economically viable mechanism/institutional arrangement for efficacions
sales of Pharma CPSU products, thereby improving their viability.
(iii) Promote and encourage private industry to sell their quality unbranded generic products
through these retail outlets.
(iv) Ensure successful implementation of the Jan Aushadhi campaign would dispel the myth
that quality of medicines is linked to price and demonstrate that quality medicines can be
sold at substantially lower prices.

125
(v) Educate dotors that unbranded generic medicines provide a better option than branded
products since quality of generic medicines can be equally efficacious and safe at much
lower prices.
(vi) Create Consumer awareness and involve private and charitable bodies and NGOs by
making them part of the campaign.
(vii) Reduce promotional cost and profits for the benefit of patients etc.
Constraints -
(i) Availability of space for Jan Aushadhi Stores at Hospital premises.
(ii) Prescription of medicines in generic form by Government Doctors/Private Doctors
(iii) A wareness among general public. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may take suitable
action to help overcome the above constraints.
List of Jan Aushadhi Stores Opened as on 10.5.2012
Sl. No. State District Date of Opeaning
12 3 4
1 Punjab (23) Amritsar 25.11.2008
2 Mohali* 23.02.2009
3 Bhatinda 02.03.2009
4 Ludhiana 17.06.2009/08.09.2011
5 Jallandhar 17.06.2009
6 Patiala* 29.06.2009
7 Moga 30.06.2009
8 Faridkot 30.06.2009
9 Ferozpur 04.09.2009
10 Mansa 12.09.2009
11 Sangrur 01.10.2009
12 Barnala 01.10.2009
13 Fatehgarh Sahib* 28.10.2009
14 Roop Nagar (Ropar)* 03.12.2009
15 Nava Sahar (Sahid Bhagat Singh Nagar) 03.12.2009
16 Hoshiarpur 1 1.12.2009
17 Taran Taran 13.12.2009
18 Muktsar 18.12.2009/re-opened
on 05.09.2011
19 Gurdaspur 29.12.2009

126
12 3 4
20 Kapurthala 31.12.2009
21 Civil Hospital,  Pathankot 09.05.2011
22 Civil Hospital, Abohar 30.11.2011
23 Civil Hospital, Nabha District, Patiala 03.04.2012
24 Delhi (3) Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi 05.02.2009
25 Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, Shahdara 13.11.2009
26 Deen Dayal Upadhayay Hospital, Hari Nagar 11.02.2010
27 Haryana (4) Gurgaon** 20.02.2009
28 Punckkula 23.02.2009
29 Faridabad** 05.08.2009
30 Yamuna Nagar** 29.08.2009
31 Rajasthan (53) @ Kanwatia Hospital, Jaipur 27.02.2009
32 Jaipuriya Hospital, Jaipur 01.06.2009
33 Alwar 05.06.2009
34 Sawai Madhopur 25.08.2009
35 Sriganganagar-I 26.03.2010
36 Sriganganagar-II 26.03.2010
37 Udaipur 28.03.2010
38 Banswara 05.04.2010
39 Jhalawad 15.04.2010
40 Keshorao Patan 20.04.2010
41 Bundi 30.04.2010
42 Bhawani Mandi 01.05.2010
43 Jalore 01.05.2010
44 Khanpur (Jhalawad) 02.05.2010
45 Churu 03.05.2010
46 Jhujhunu 04.05.2010
47 Rajgarh (Alwar) 06.05.2010
48 Byawar 08.05.2010
49 Hanumangarh 14.05.2010
50 Sunel (Jhalawad) 16.05.2010

127
12 3 4
51 Rampura (Kota  1) 25.05.2010
52 MBM Hospital (Kota  2) 25.05.2010
53 Rajsamand 27.05.2010
54 Bhilwara 01.06.2010
55 Pali 02.06.2010
56 Onsiya (Jodhpur) 05.06.2010
57 Dungarpur 06.06.2010
58 Mandore, Jodhpur 06.06.2010
59 Sagwara 06.06.2010
60 Tonk 1 12.06.2010
61 Niwahi (Tonk 2) 12.06.2010
62 Bikaner 21.06.2010
63 Partapgarh 06.07.2010
64 Bijay Nagar 07.07.2010
65 Barmer (Ajmer) 09.07.2010
66 Dausa 10.07.2010
67 Hanumangarh 13.07.2010
68 Bharatpur 20.08.2010
69 Malpura (Tonk) 28.08.2010
70 Ealsoth 01.09.2010
71 Sirohi 14.09.2010
72 Sikar-1 18.10.2010
73 Sikar-2 18.10.2010
74 Bandi Kui 14.11.2010
75 Medical College, Kota 3 01.12.2010
76 Neem Ka Thana 04.12.2010
77 Jaisalmer 15.12.2010
78 Sojat City-1 12.01.2010
79 Sojat City-2 12.01.2010
80 Ajmer 28.02.2011
81 Bhindar 28.02.2011

128
12 3 4
82 Dholpur 15.06.2011
83 Baran 13.07.2011
84 Andhra Pradesh (3) V isakhapatnam Port Trust Hospital 12.12.2009
85 Nixam’s Institute of Medical Sciences, (NIMS) 05.03.2010
Hyderabad**
86 Uppal Industrial Employees Healthcare Centre, Uppal 29.07.2010
87 Odisha (15) Capital Hospital, Bhubaneswar 06.03.2010
88 Red Cross Bhavan, Unit-IX, Bhubaneswar 06.03.2010
89 District HQ Hospital, Khordha 06.03.2010
90 District HQ Hospital, Dhenkaual 25.03.2010
91 District HQ Hospital, Koraput 1 1.06.2010
92 District HQ Hospital, Angul 09.07.2010
93 District HQ Hospital, Nabrangpur 15.08.2010
94 District HQ Hospital, Baragarh 03.10.2010
95 District HQ Hospital, Nayagarh 26.03.2011
96 District HQ Hospital, Berhampur 1 1.04.2011
97 District HQ Hospital, Jajpur 13.04.2011
98 District HQ Hospital, Puri 19.04.2011
99 District HQ Hospital, Naupada 30.04.2011
100 District HQ Hospital, Baripada Mayurbhanj 12.05.2011
101 District HQ Hospital, Balasore 28.04.2012
102 West Bengal (3) M.R. Bangar Hospital, Kolkata 25.08.2010
103 N.R.S. Medical College and Hospital Kolkata 25.08.2010
104 Howrah District Hospital, Howrah 10.08.2011
105 Uttarakhand (2) Dehradun 09.1 1.2009
106 Roorkee 27.11.2009
107 Chandigarh (3) PGIMER, Chandigarh 16.11.2009
108 Government Medical College Hospital, Sector-12 04.08.2010
109 Multi Specialty Hospital, Sector-16 02.02.2011
110 J & K (2) Red Cross Building, Exchange Road, Srinagar 09.05.2011
111 District Hospital, Leh 09.01.2012
112 Himachal Pradesh (9) Indira Gandhi Medical College, Shimla 18.05.2011

129
12 3 4
113 Zonal Hospital, Mandi 18.06.2011
114 Civil Hospital, Una 25.07.2011
115 Zonal Hospital, Tanda 19.08.2011
116 Zonal Hospital,  Dharamshala 30.08.2011
117 Civil Hospital, Solan 09.11.2011
118 Regional Hospital, Chamba 18.11.2011
119 DDU Zonal Hospital, Shimla 07.12.2011
120 Regional Hospital, Hamirpur 01.04.2012
* The reopening of JASs at Mohali, and Patiala in Punjab is underway after these were closed due to the court Order.
Two stores at Fatehgarh Sahib and Roop Nagar are non functional due to administrative reasons.
* * In Haryana, three Jan Aushadhi Stores at Faridabad, Gurgaon and Yamua Nagar and also Jan Aushadhi Stroe at NIMS.
Hyderabad in Andhra Pradesh are non functional due to administrative reasons.
@ In the case of Rajasthan, as per the latest Health Policy of the Government of Rajasthan, free medicines are being
given to all the in-patients as well as out-patients visting the State Government Hospitals for treatment w.e.f. 2nd
October, 2011. Accordingly, the State Government has since converted all the existing 53 JASs in the State, besides
opening new outlets for free distribution centers for medicines. The matter regarding functioning of JASs in the State
has been taken up with the MD, Rajasthan Medical Services Corporation, Government of Rajasthan.

130
PART-B — (NRHM)
ANNEXURE-VIII
Status of ASHA Module 6 and 7 Training
A. HIGH FOCUS STATES
Sl. No. Name of State No. of ASHAs Training – as on 31 Dec., 2011 No. of ASHAs Training – as on 31 Dec., 2012
Round I Round II Round II I Round IV Round I Round II Round  III Round IV
1 Bihar – – – – 2505 – – –
2 Jharkhand – – – – 2908 – – –
3 Odisha 7323 – – – 18624 – – –
4 Madhya Pradesh – – – – 8575 – – –
5 Rajasthan – – – – 3646 – – –
6 Uttar Pradesh* – – – – – – – –
7 Uttarakhand 10313 10064 – – 10313 10064 6807 –
8 Chhattisgarh * * 60092 60092 60092 – 60092 60092 60092 –
B. NORTH EAST STATES
I Assam – – – – – – – –
2 Arunachal Pradesh 3566 – – – 3602 300 – –
3 Manipur 3878 2886 – – 3878 3878 – –
4 Mizoram 987 739 – – 987 739 – –
5 Meghalaya 5136 – – – 5136 4480 – –
6 Nagaland 1576 1571 – – 1576 1571 – –
7 Sikkim 666 666 – – 666 666 – –
8 Tripura 7257 3500 – – 7257 6261 – –

131
C. NON HIGH FOCUS STATES
1 Andhra Pradesh – – – – 12736 – – –
2 Delhi – – – – – – – –
3 Gujarat 14475 – – – 14475 12902 – –
4 Haryana 12007 – – – 12007 – – –
5 Jammu and Kashmir – – – – – – – –
6 Karnataka 9500 9500 – – 9500 9500 – –
7 Kerala – – – – – – – –
8 Maharashtra 6318 460 – – 8221 2884 – –
9 Punjab – – – – – – – –
10 Tamil Nadu – – – – – – – –
11 West Bengal 727 – – – 2920 203 – –
*
39721 ASHAs have been trained in a state specific Comprehensive Child Survival Programme (CCSP) which includes elements of newb orn and child health which are
present in ASHA modules 6 and 7.
** State has adopted its own pattern of training and all 60092 ASHAs have been training in the content being covered in ASHA Tra ning Modules 1 to 4, Module 5 and
Modules 6 and 7. State has developed a set of 13 Modules.
*** ASHAs in Kerala and Tamil Nadu will be trained in issues that are state specilic and not in Modules 6 and 7 since their Mate rnal, newborn and child health indicators
are good.
In UTs, no ASHA training in Modules 6 and 7 is currently being planned.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.