 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026/ Phalguna, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
174 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2026-27 (DEMAND NO. 4) 
OF THE 
 
 MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th March 2026) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th March 2026) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail :rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR
HEALTH AND FAMILY WE
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2026
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE O
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
  
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2026/ Phalguna, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
 
ON 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2026-27 (DEMAND NO. 4)
OF THE 
MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
 
 
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th March 2026
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th March 2026
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
FOURTH REPORT 
27 (DEMAND NO. 4) 
March 2026) 
2026) 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page Nos. 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2.  PREFACE ii 
3.  ACRONYMS iii - vi 
4. REPORT  
 Chapter - I-Introduction 1 - 7 
 Chapter- II - Macro Analysis of Demands for Grants 8 - 21 
 Chapter- III - Micro Analysis of the Demands for 
Grants 
22 - 62 
 Chapter -IV - Issues pertaining to Ayush 63 - 80 
 Chapter - V -WAY FORWARD: Road ahead for Ayush 81 - 96 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A 
GLANCE 
97-146 
  6. MINUTES* 
 
- 
7. * ANNEXURES - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*to be appended at later stage 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITIONOFTHECOMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav -  Chairman  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
4. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
5. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade 
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri Harbhajan Singh 
10. Shri Rameswar Teli 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri MukeshKumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri  Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman  
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri K.S. Somashekhar     Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Rakesh Naithani Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar Director 
4. Shri Vivek Chandra Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Renu Sreekanth Under Secretary 
6. Shri Ravi Yadav      Security Assistant Grade-I 
 

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare, having been authorised by the Committee, present this 174th 
Report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (Demand No.4) of the Ministry of 
Ayush for the year 2026-27. 
 
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees are entrusted with the 
constitutional role of ensuring accountability of executive to the Parliament.  In this regard, 
Rule 270 (a) of Rules & Procedure and Conduct & Business in the Council of States (Rajya 
Sabha) empowered the Department-related Standing Committees to consider the Demands for 
Grants of the related Departments/Ministries with the objective of ensuring financial 
accountability of the executive and report thereon. In exercise of its constitutional mandate, 
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health & Family Welfare 
scrutinized the Demands for Grants for the year 2026-27 (Demand No. 4) of the Ministry of 
Ayush. 
 
3.  The Committee, in its meeting held on 23rd February, 2026, heard the Secretary, 
Ministry of Ayush and other Officers on the Demands for Grants (2026-27) of the Ministry of 
Ayush. 
 
4.  The Committee while making its observations/recommendations has mainly relied 
upon the following documents: - 
 
(i) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Ayush for the year 2026-27; 
(ii) Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 2025-26; 
(iii) Output-Outcome framework (2026-27) for schemes of the Ministry; 
(iv) Background Note on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Ayush for the 
year 2026-27; 
(v) Written replies furnished by the Department to the Questionnaires sent to them 
by the Secretariat; 
(vi) Presentation made by the Secretary, Ministry of Ayush and other 
officersconcerned; 
(vii) Economic Survey 2025-26 and Speech of Hon’ble President of India; 
(viii) Budget Speech of the Finance Minister; 
(ix) Outcome Budget- Expenditure Budget; 
(x) Other study materials / documents / reports relevant and incidental to 
consideration of Demand for Grants (2026-27) pertaining to the Ministry of 
Ayush 
 
5.  The Committee, in its meeting held on 18th March, 2026, considered the draft report 
and adopted the same. 
 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
18th March,  2026 
Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav                                                                                       
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Health and Family Welfare 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AAM Ayushman Arogya Mandir 
ABC Always Better Control 
ABDM Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission 
ABIHR Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health Research 
AE Actual Expenditure 
AHWC Ayush Health and Wellness Centre 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AIIA All India Institute of Ayurveda 
AIIMS All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
AOGUSY Ayush Oushadi Gunvatta Evam Uttapadan Samvardhan Yojana 
API Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India 
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ASU & H Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, and Homeopathy 
ASU&H Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, and Homoeopathy 
ASUDCC Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee 
ASUDTAB Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board 
ATAB Ayurveda Training Accreditation Board 
AUS&SR Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Sowa-Rigpa 
AYUSH Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy 
AYUSHEXCIL Ayush Export Promotion Council 
BE Budget Estimate 
BIMSTEC Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
BMC Biodiversity Management Committee 
BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa 
CARI Central Ayurveda Research Institute 
CCA Chief Controller of Accounts 
CCIM Central Council of Indian Medicine 
CCRAS Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences 
CCRH Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy 
CCRS Central Council for Research in Siddha 
CCRUM Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine 
CCRYN Central Council for Research in Yoga & Naturopathy 
CHC Community Health Centre 
CICA Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia 
CME Continuing Medical Education 
CNA Central Nodal Agency 
CoE Centre of Excellence 
CPSE Central Public Sector Enterprise 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CRIUM Central Research Institute of Unani Medicine 
CSMCARI Captain Srinivasa Murthy Central Ayurveda Research Institute 
CTMS Clinical Trial Management System 
CTRI Clinical Trials Registry- India 
DDDU Drug Development and Discovery Unit 

iv 
 
DFGT Directorate General of Foreign Trade 
DGHS Directorate General of Health Services 
DH District Hospital 
DTL Drug Testing Laboratory 
ECG Electrocardiogram 
EDC Electronic Data Capture 
EMR Extra Mural Research 
ERMS Eklavya Model Residential Schools 
FTA Free Trade Agreement 
G20 Group of Twenty 
GAP Good Agricultural Practice 
GCTM Global Centre for Traditional Medicine 
GCTM WHO Global Centre for Traditional Medicine 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GFCP Good Field Collection Practices 
GIA Grant-in-Aid 
GMP Good Manufacturing Practices 
HS Code Harmonized System Code 
IBSA India, Brazil, and South Africa 
IC International Cooperation 
i-CAINE Ayurveda Innovation & Entrepreneurship Incubation Centre 
ICCR Indian Council for Cultural Relations 
ICD-11 TM2 International Classification of Diseases-11 Traditional Medicine Chapter 2 
ICDS Integrated Child Development Services 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
ICU Intensive Care Unit 
IEC Information, Education, and Communication 
IMPCL Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Limited 
IMR Intramural Research 
IPC Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission 
IPHS Indian Public Health Standards 
IPvC Intermediary Pharmacovigilance Centre 
ISM Indian System of Medicine 
ISM&H Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
IT Information Technology 
ITRA Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda 
JFMC Joint Forest Management Committee 
MoA Ministry of Ayush 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MoTA Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MoWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development 
MPCDA Medicinal Plants Conservation and Development Areas 
MVT Medical Value Travel 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals & Healthcare Providers 

v 
 
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories 
NAM National Ayush Mission 
NARIP National Ayurveda Research Institute For Panchakarma 
NCH National Commission for Homoeopathy 
NCISM National Commission for Indian System of Medicine 
NCT National Capital Territory 
NER North Eastern Region 
NHM National Health Mission 
NHP National Health Policy 
NIA National Institute of Ayurveda 
NICU Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
NIH National Institute of Homoeopathy 
NIPER National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
NMC National Medical Commission 
NMPB National Medicinal Plants Board 
NPvCC National Pharmacovigilance Coordination Centre 
NRDR National Raw Drug Repository 
NRIUMSD National Research Institute of Unani Medicine for Skin Disorders 
NSSO National Sample Survey Office 
OHOS One Herb One Standard 
OPD Outpatient Department 
PCIM&H Pharmacopoeia Commission for Indian Medicine & Homoeopathy 
PCOD Polycystic Ovarian Disease 
PG Postgraduate 
PGT Postgraduate Trainee 
PHC Primary Health Centre 
PHI Public Health Initiative 
PMC Project Management Consultant 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PPvC Peripheral Pharmacovigilance Centre 
QCI Quality Council of India 
R&D Research and Development 
RARI Regional Ayurveda Research Institute 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
RCFC Regional-cum-Facilitation Centre 
RCT Randomized Controlled Trial 
RE Revised Estimate 
RIS Research and Information System for Developing Countries 
RRDR Regional Raw Drug Repository 
RRI(H) Regional Research Institute (Homeopathy) 
RRIUM Regional Research Institute of Unani Medicine 
SAP Special Assistance Programme 
SCO Shanghai Cooperation Organization 
SCO-TM Shanghai Cooperation Organisation-Traditional Medicine 
SCSP Scheduled Caste Sub Plan 
SDG Sustainable Development Goal 
SLA State Licensing Authority 

vi 
 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
TSP Tribal Sub Plan 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UG Undergraduate 
UT Union Territory 
VCSMPP Voluntary Certification Scheme for Medicinal Plant Produce 
WHD World Homeopathy Day 
WHO World Health Organization 
WHO GTMC World Health Organization Global Traditional Medicine Centre 
WHO-GCTM World Health Organization - Global Centre for Traditional Medicine 
WIPO World Intellectual Property Organization 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 The Ministry of Ayush is the nodal Ministry of the Government of India responsible 
for policy formulation, development, education, research, regulation and propagation of 
traditional systems of medicine, namely Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, 
Sowa-Rigpa and Homoeopathy. These systems collectively contribute to a pluralistic and 
integrative healthcare framework within the country. 
 
1.2  The institutional evolution of the Ministry reflects progressive policy recognition of 
traditional medicine in the national healthcare architecture. The journey commenced with the 
establishment of the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) 
in 1995 under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. In 2003, it was re-designated as the 
Department of Ayush to strengthen focus on education and research. In 2011, Sowa-Rigpa 
was formally included within its ambit. Recognising the strategic and public health 
significance of these systems, the Government elevated the Department to a full-fledged 
Ministry in 2014, thereby consolidating its mandate to lead India’s integrated healthcare 
future which today aligns with the national vision of “Viksit Bharat @2047”. 
  
1.3  The mandate of the Ministry encompasses policy formulation, standardisation, 
quality assurance, human resource development, research validation, international 
cooperation, medicinal plant development and integration of Ayush services within public 
health delivery mechanisms. The functioning of the Ministry is aligned with the broader 
national objectives of strengthening preventive healthcare, promoting holistic wellness and 
advancing India’s traditional knowledge systems. 
 
1.4  The Ministry administers six recognised systems of traditional medicine: Ayurveda, 
Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa and Homoeopathy. Each system is based 
on distinct theoretical foundations and therapeutic principles, yet all share an emphasis on 
preventive care, natural therapies, lifestyle regulation, individualised treatment and holistic 
well-being. These systems are integrated within the broader healthcare framework through 
institutional education, research councils, clinical establishments, pharmacopoeial standards 
and regulatory bodies. Their role in primary healthcare, chronic disease management, 
wellness promotion and public health outreach has significantly broadened through initiatives 
like National Ayush Mission (NAM) and Ayushman Bharat emphasising preventive and 
holistic care at grass root level.    
 
1.5 Thematic Domains of the Ministry 
 
1.5.1 The Ministry of Ayush has delineated seven broad thematic domains to structure and 
streamline its activities of its Mission. These thematic domains reflect the core priorities and 
provide the policy framework within which schemes and programmes are conceptualised and 
implemented which serve as the foundational pillars in achieving its Mission objectives.  
 
1995Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) 2003Re-named as Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) 2011Sowa Rigpa  (recognized  under IMCC Act, 1970)2014A full-fledged Ministry under Government of India

These include: i. Effective Human Resource Developmentii. Provision of Quality Ayush Servicesiii. Information, Education and Communicationiv. Quality Research in Ayushv. Growth of the Medicinal Plants Sectorvi. Drug Administrationvii. International Exchange Programme/ Summit / Seminar / Workshops in  Ayush Sector 1.5.2 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Ayush continue to strive progressively system specific development to structured integration healthcare delivery mechanisms. operationalising through centrally sponsdevelopment to co-located facilities within primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare centres, thereby enhancing preventive care and accessibilityrecommends for integration of Ayush facilities for boaccess to healthcare under Traditional Indian System of medicine. 1.6 FUNCTIONAL AREAS OF MINISTRY OF FRAMEWORK  1.6.1 The Ministry functions through a multiregulatory bodies, research councils, national institutes and a public sector undertaking etc.The Ministry of Ayush oversees 12 National Institutesregulatory bodies and 1 Public Sector Undertakings with a totalorganisational units functioning under its administrative frameworkbelow:   1.6.2 The Committee understands thatbe responsible for education standards,Councils undertake clinical, fundamental and drug research in respective systems. National Institutes function as apex academic and tertiary care centres while the Public Sector Undertaking supports manufacturing and supply of quality Ayush medicines. Thfirmly opines that the institutional architecture
2 
Effective Human Resource Development Provision of Quality Ayush Services Education and Communication Quality Research in Ayush Growth of the Medicinal Plants Sector Drug Administration International Exchange Programme/ Summit / Seminar / Workshops in is of the view that the Ministry of Ayush continue to strive progressively system specific development to structured integration within public healthcare delivery mechanisms. Such integration should primarilythrough centrally sponsored Schemes and evolve from standalone located facilities within primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare enhancing preventive care and accessibility. The Committee integration of Ayush facilities for boosting preventive care and local access to healthcare under Traditional Indian System of medicine. FUNCTIONAL AREAS OF MINISTRY OF AYUSH& ITS INSTITUTIONAL The Ministry functions through a multi-tier institutional structure comprisingregulatory bodies, research councils, national institutes and a public sector undertaking The Ministry of Ayush oversees 12 National Institutes, 5 Research Councils, 2 statutory regulatory bodies and 1 Public Sector Undertakings with a total of 118 institutions and organisational units functioning under its administrative framework as detailed in the table Committee understands that regulatory bodies under the Ministry of Ayush must responsible for education standards, professional regulation and accreditation. Research Councils undertake clinical, fundamental and drug research in respective systems. National Institutes function as apex academic and tertiary care centres while the Public Sector facturing and supply of quality Ayush medicines. Thinstitutional architecture of Ministry of Ayush should envisage
International Exchange Programme/ Summit / Seminar / Workshops in is of the view that the Ministry of Ayush continue to strive within public primarily aim at from standalone located facilities within primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare . The Committee reventive care and local & ITS INSTITUTIONAL tier institutional structure comprising statutory regulatory bodies, research councils, national institutes and a public sector undertaking , 5 Research Councils, 2 statutory of 118 institutions and as detailed in the table  under the Ministry of Ayush must professional regulation and accreditation. Research Councils undertake clinical, fundamental and drug research in respective systems. National Institutes function as apex academic and tertiary care centres while the Public Sector facturing and supply of quality Ayush medicines. The Committee of Ministry of Ayush should envisage to 


ensure standardisation, accountability and coordinated expansion of Ayush services across the country.  1.6.3 The Ministry has furnished that the country presently has 3844 Ayush Hospitals, 36848 Dispensaries, 886 Undergraduate and 251 Postgraduate colleges lakh registered practitioners in Indiainitiatives, over 12500 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) supported, 203+ new integrated hospitals and widespread upgrading of dispensaries, Ayush Grams and educational institutions etc. to boost traditional medicine accessibility. 1.6.4 The Committee strongly believes thatmust aim to improve accessibility, strengthen preventive healthcare and reduce pressure on conventional health infrastructure. effective implementation of policy/programme/scheme resources, infrastructure utilisation, drug supply mechanisms and coordination with State Governments. The Ministry, therefore chalk out specific course of action to achieve the set objectives.  1.7 Financial Overview and Budgetary Trends 1.7.1  The Demand for Grants for 2026trajectory of the Ministry during the preceding years. The Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual Expenditure for the last three years are as under:  1.7.2 The Ministry of Ayush has been allocated representing an increase of 20 % over the revised estimates in 2025push and commitment for the Traditional Medicine. 1.7.3 The Committee examined the Detailed Demands for Grants for 2026the distribution between Revenue and Capital expenditure as well as the allocations made under Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Centrathat the effective utilisation of funds, their timely release to States and the achievement of measurable outcomes remain critical determinants of the overall impact of these allocations. 1.7.4 The Committee understands that the Demand for Grants 2026strengthen institutional capacity, expand equitable access to Ayush services, promote 
01000200030004000Budget Estimates (BE)2023-243647.52024-253712.492025-263992.9Budgetary Trends 
3 
ensure standardisation, accountability and coordinated expansion of Ayush services across the The Ministry has furnished that the country presently has 3844 Ayush Hospitals, 886 Undergraduate and 251 Postgraduate colleges and more than 7.5 lakh registered practitioners in India. Under the National Ayush Mission and relateover 12500 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) supported, 203+ new integrated hospitals and widespread upgrading of dispensaries, Ayush Grams and educational institutions etc. to boost traditional medicine accessibility. Committee strongly believes that integration model under Ministry of Ayush to improve accessibility, strengthen preventive healthcare and reduce pressure on conventional health infrastructure. The Committee is aware of the fact that sinceof policy/programme/scheme depends upon adequate human resources, infrastructure utilisation, drug supply mechanisms and coordination with The Ministry, therefore chalk out specific course of action to Financial Overview and Budgetary Trends The Demand for Grants for 2026-27 must be viewed in the context of the financial trajectory of the Ministry during the preceding years. The Budget Estimates (BE), Revised ) and Actual Expenditure for the last three years are as under: y of Ayush has been allocated ₹ 4408.93 Crore for BE 2026representing an increase of 20 % over the revised estimates in 2025-26 highlighting the strong tment for the Traditional Medicine. The Committee examined the Detailed Demands for Grants for 2026-27, focusing on the distribution between Revenue and Capital expenditure as well as the allocations made under Centrally Sponsored Schemes and Central Sector Schemes. The Committee believes that the effective utilisation of funds, their timely release to States and the achievement of measurable outcomes remain critical determinants of the overall impact of these allocations.The Committee understands that the Demand for Grants 2026strengthen institutional capacity, expand equitable access to Ayush services, promote 
Budget Estimates (BE)Revised Estimates (RE)Actuals3647.53000 2671.743712.493497.64 3312.053992.93671.82 0Budgetary Trends (₹ In Crore)
ensure standardisation, accountability and coordinated expansion of Ayush services across the The Ministry has furnished that the country presently has 3844 Ayush Hospitals, more than 7.5 . Under the National Ayush Mission and related over 12500 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) supported, 203+ new integrated hospitals and widespread upgrading of dispensaries, Ayush Grams and educational under Ministry of Ayush to improve accessibility, strengthen preventive healthcare and reduce pressure The Committee is aware of the fact that since depends upon adequate human resources, infrastructure utilisation, drug supply mechanisms and coordination with The Ministry, therefore chalk out specific course of action to 27 must be viewed in the context of the financial trajectory of the Ministry during the preceding years. The Budget Estimates (BE), Revised  rore for BE 2026-27, 26 highlighting the strong 27, focusing on the distribution between Revenue and Capital expenditure as well as the allocations made l Sector Schemes. The Committee believes that the effective utilisation of funds, their timely release to States and the achievement of measurable outcomes remain critical determinants of the overall impact of these allocations. The Committee understands that the Demand for Grants 2026-27 seeks to strengthen institutional capacity, expand equitable access to Ayush services, promote 


scientific validation and digital governance and enhance regulatory oversight in the Ayush sector. The Committee observes that such initiatives are pivotal for consolidating the progress achieved in recent years and for strengthening the role of traditional systems of medicine in the national healthcare framework. The Committee howeverof the view that the proposed financial provisions must also be directed towards addressing emerging public health challenges while ensuring effective implementation and optimal utilisation of resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry ensure that the budgetstrategically utilised to consolidate past achievements, expand access to quality Ayush services and support innovation and research, in alignment with the national vision of Viksit Bharat @ 2047 and India’s aspiration to emerge as a global leader in traditional medicine systems.  1.8 Research, Standardisation and Regulatory Strengthening 1.8.1 The Secretary, Ministry of Ayush has furnishedresearch sector emphasising that Centre of Excellence have been established and multiple corroborative research studies such as Mission Utkarsh, Iron deficiency Anaemia study with ICMR etc. are being undertaken apart from issuance of selected disease conditions. Pharmacopoeial standards, drug quality testing laboratories and regulatory scrutiny mechanisms are being strengthened to ensure safety, efficacy and credibility of Ayush medicines.strengthen research validation, standard treatment protocols and pharmacovigilance mechanisms by integration of traditional medicine reporting standards within global classification frameworks.  1.8.2 The Committee emphasises that research, multi-centric clinical trials, publication in peertransparent data dissemination. The Committee therefore, recommends that Ministry further strengthen collaborative research enhance standardisation & quality control mechanism accompanied by systematic documentation and global dissemination of validated research outcomes so as to reinforce the safety, efficacy and credibility of Ayush syste 1.9 Digital Governance and Technological Integration 1.9.1 The Ministry has launched digital governance reforms by developing integrated information platforms, such as A
4 
scientific validation and digital governance and enhance regulatory oversight in the he Committee observes that such initiatives are pivotal for consolidating the progress achieved in recent years and for strengthening the role of traditional systems of medicine in the national healthcare framework. The Committee howeverat the proposed financial provisions must also be directed towards addressing emerging public health challenges while ensuring effective implementation and optimal utilisation of resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budget allocations under the Demand for Grants 2026strategically utilised to consolidate past achievements, expand access to quality Ayush services and support innovation and research, in alignment with the national vision of and India’s aspiration to emerge as a global leader in traditional Research, Standardisation and Regulatory Strengthening The Secretary, Ministry of Ayush has furnished the significant achievements in ing that Centre of Excellence have been established and multiple corroborative research studies such as Mission Utkarsh, Iron deficiency Anaemia study with ICMR etc. are being undertaken apart from issuance of Standard Treatment Guidelines disease conditions. Pharmacopoeial standards, drug quality testing laboratories and regulatory scrutiny mechanisms are being strengthened to ensure safety, efficacy and credibility of Ayush medicines. Further, the Ministry has also undertaken measures to trengthen research validation, standard treatment protocols and pharmacovigilance mechanisms by integration of traditional medicine reporting standards within global The Committee emphasises that sustained focus is required on outcome based centric clinical trials, publication in peer-reviewed journals andtransparent data dissemination. The Committee therefore, recommends that Ministry further strengthen collaborative research with reputed scientific institutions, enhance standardisation & quality control mechanism accompanied by systematic documentation and global dissemination of validated research outcomes so as to reinforce the safety, efficacy and credibility of Ayush systems of medicine. Digital Governance and Technological Integration The Ministry has launched digital governance reforms by developing integrated A-HMIS for hospital management, the NAMASTE and Ayush 
scientific validation and digital governance and enhance regulatory oversight in the he Committee observes that such initiatives are pivotal for consolidating the progress achieved in recent years and for strengthening the role of traditional systems of medicine in the national healthcare framework. The Committee however, is at the proposed financial provisions must also be directed towards addressing emerging public health challenges while ensuring effective implementation and optimal utilisation of resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the allocations under the Demand for Grants 2026-27 are strategically utilised to consolidate past achievements, expand access to quality Ayush services and support innovation and research, in alignment with the national vision of and India’s aspiration to emerge as a global leader in traditional the significant achievements in ing that Centre of Excellence have been established and multiple corroborative research studies such as Mission Utkarsh, Iron deficiency Anaemia study with Guidelines for disease conditions. Pharmacopoeial standards, drug quality testing laboratories and regulatory scrutiny mechanisms are being strengthened to ensure safety, efficacy and Further, the Ministry has also undertaken measures to trengthen research validation, standard treatment protocols and pharmacovigilance mechanisms by integration of traditional medicine reporting standards within global sustained focus is required on outcome based reviewed journals and transparent data dissemination. The Committee therefore, recommends that the with reputed scientific institutions, enhance standardisation & quality control mechanism accompanied by systematic documentation and global dissemination of validated research outcomes so as to  The Ministry has launched digital governance reforms by developing integrated NAMASTE and Ayush 


Research Portal for research documentation, and the oversight and pharmacovigilance. The digital architecture aims to streamline service delivery, data management, and evidence validation within the Ayush framework. Furthermore, Artificial Intelligence-enabled tools and data analytics platforms are being deployed to enhance decision-making and regulatory efficiency 1.9.2 The Committee has taken note of the Ministry’s multiongoing initiatives, including the use integration of Chatbots into the significant potential of these tools, the Committee emphasizes that their ultimate success depends on seamless interoperabilityFurthermore, the Committee strongly recommends implementing measures to accelerate the adoption of these platforms and ensure effective implementation at the field level 1.10 International Cooperation and  1.10.1 The Ministry has entered into Memoranda of Understanding and collaborative frameworks with various countries and international organisations for promotion, research cooperation, academic exchange and standardisation of traditionalefforts include:   1.10.2  The Committee has taken into accountwith global institutions especially World Health Organization in the field of traditional medicine reflects growing international interest. 1.10.3  The Committee observes that such collaborations offer opportunities for knowledge exchange, research cooperation and greater global acceptance of Ayush systems. The Committee howeverimportant, strengthening domestic service delivery, regulatory mechanisms and institutional capacity must remain the primary focus. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Amanner that complements and reinforces national priorities, ensuring that global outreach contributes to improving the quality, accessibility and credibility of Asystems.    
Institutional Frameworks & Diplomatic OutreachCountry to Country MoUs ( Total- 27)Academic Chairs ( Total-15)Ayush Information Cells (43 in 39 countries)Institutional MoUs (Total-52)International Ayush Fellowship/Scholarship Scheme5 
for research documentation, and the Ayush Suraksha Portal for regulatory oversight and pharmacovigilance. The digital architecture aims to streamline service delivery, data management, and evidence validation within the Ayush framework. Furthermore, enabled tools and data analytics platforms are being deployed to making and regulatory efficiency. The Committee has taken note of the Ministry’s multi-dimensional digital initiatives, including the use of AI-based Yoga recommendations and the into the Ayush Grid. The Committee acknowledgessignificant potential of these tools, the Committee emphasizes that their ultimate success interoperabilityvis-a-vis national digital health systems. Furthermore, the Committee strongly recommends implementing capacityto accelerate the adoption of these platforms and ensure effective implementation at the field level. International Cooperation and Global Engagement The Ministry has entered into Memoranda of Understanding and collaborative frameworks with various countries and international organisations for promotion, research cooperation, academic exchange and standardisation of traditional medicine systems.The Committee has taken into account India’s engagement and its initiatives with global institutions especially World Health Organization in the field of traditional international interest. The Committee observes that such collaborations offer opportunities for knowledge exchange, research cooperation and greater global acceptance of Ayush Committee however is of the view that while international engagement is important, strengthening domestic service delivery, regulatory mechanisms and institutional capacity must remain the primary focus. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must pursue international collaborations in a manner that complements and reinforces national priorities, ensuring that global outreach contributes to improving the quality, accessibility and credibility of A
Strategic Collaboration with WHOWHO Global Traditional Medicine Centre (GTMC), Jamnagar, GujaratGlobal Summits (2nd WHO Global Summit on Traditional Medicine)Global Standardization (ICD-11)Trade & "Heal in India" InitiativesMedical Value Travel (MVT)Ayush Visa, Medical Hubs)AYUSH and herbal exportsQuality Mark for Ayush productsTrade Agreement
for regulatory oversight and pharmacovigilance. The digital architecture aims to streamline service delivery, data management, and evidence validation within the Ayush framework. Furthermore, enabled tools and data analytics platforms are being deployed to dimensional digital dations and the The Committee acknowledges the significant potential of these tools, the Committee emphasizes that their ultimate success tional digital health systems. capacity-building to accelerate the adoption of these platforms and ensure effective The Ministry has entered into Memoranda of Understanding and collaborative frameworks with various countries and international organisations for promotion, research medicine systems.Various  and its initiatives with global institutions especially World Health Organization in the field of traditional The Committee observes that such collaborations offer opportunities for knowledge exchange, research cooperation and greater global acceptance of Ayush engagement is important, strengthening domestic service delivery, regulatory mechanisms and institutional capacity must remain the primary focus. The Committee, therefore, pursue international collaborations in a manner that complements and reinforces national priorities, ensuring that global outreach contributes to improving the quality, accessibility and credibility of Ayush 
Trade & "Heal in India" Medical Value Travel (MVT)ecosystem (Eg. Ayush Visa, Medical Hubs)AYUSH and herbal exportsQuality Mark for Ayush products

1.11 MYTH Vs FACTS  1.11.1  The Secretary, Ministry of Ayush apprised the Committee that several myths/misconceptions persist in society regarding the regard, the Ministry highlighted certain commonly held myths and clarified the corresponding factual position relating to the scientific basis, regulatory framework, safety standards, and therapeutic role of Ayush medicines.  1.11.2 The Committee observes that systems of medicine affect public perception and limit theutilisation of Ayush services despite their longincreasing scientific validation.The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush undertake sustained and evidenceto address prevailing misconceptions and disseminate accurate information regarding the safety, efficacy and regulatory oversight of recommends that the Ministry undertake structured outreach campascientific research findings and promote greater engagement with healthcare professionals and academic institutions so as to strengthen public confidence in systems of medicine. 1.12 Future Priorities  1.12.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry has outlined proposals for expansion of national institutes, promotion of medical value travel, strengthening of medicinal plants supply chains, research validation, digital integration and initiatives for global standsetting in the Ayush sector. The Committee observes that these initiatives reflect the growing scope and strategic importance of well as their increasing global relevance.expansion of programmes and institutions must be guided by measurable health outcomes, optimal capacity utilisation, fiscal prudence and principles of regional equity. The Committee further observes that effective implementation at the Savailability of adequately trained practitioners and to strengthen service delivery across the 
6 
Ministry of Ayush apprised the Committee that several misconceptions persist in society regarding the Ayush systems of medicine. In this regard, the Ministry highlighted certain commonly held myths and clarified the corresponding ating to the scientific basis, regulatory framework, safety standards, and medicines. 
The Committee observes that myths & misconceptions clouding over the Ayush affect public perception and limit the wider acceptance and services despite their long-standing traditional knowledge base and increasing scientific validation.The Committee, therefore, recommends that the undertake sustained and evidence-based public awareness initiatives to address prevailing misconceptions and disseminate accurate information regarding the safety, efficacy and regulatory oversight of Ayush medicines. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry undertake structured outreach campaigns, disseminate scientific research findings and promote greater engagement with healthcare professionals and academic institutions so as to strengthen public confidence in The Committee notes that the Ministry has outlined proposals for expansion of national institutes, promotion of medical value travel, strengthening of medicinal plants supply chains, research validation, digital integration and initiatives for global standsector. The Committee observes that these initiatives reflect the growing scope and strategic importance of Ayush systems within the national healthcare framework as well as their increasing global relevance. However, the Committee believes that the expansion of programmes and institutions must be guided by measurable health outcomes, optimal capacity utilisation, fiscal prudence and principles of regional equity. The Committee further observes that effective implementation at the State level will be critical to ensure the availability of adequately trained practitioners and to strengthen service delivery across the 
Ministry of Ayush apprised the Committee that several of medicine. In this regard, the Ministry highlighted certain commonly held myths and clarified the corresponding ating to the scientific basis, regulatory framework, safety standards, and 
 clouding over the Ayush wider acceptance and standing traditional knowledge base and increasing scientific validation.The Committee, therefore, recommends that the areness initiatives to address prevailing misconceptions and disseminate accurate information regarding medicines. The Committee further igns, disseminate scientific research findings and promote greater engagement with healthcare professionals and academic institutions so as to strengthen public confidence in Ayush The Committee notes that the Ministry has outlined proposals for expansion of national institutes, promotion of medical value travel, strengthening of medicinal plants supply chains, research validation, digital integration and initiatives for global standard-sector. The Committee observes that these initiatives reflect the growing systems within the national healthcare framework as believes that the expansion of programmes and institutions must be guided by measurable health outcomes, optimal capacity utilisation, fiscal prudence and principles of regional equity. The Committee tate level will be critical to ensure the availability of adequately trained practitioners and to strengthen service delivery across the 


7 
 
country. The Committee also notes that enhancing the global competitiveness of Ayush 
products and services, including exports, will require sustained policy attention. 
 
1.12.2  The Committee recognises the need for continued institutional 
strengthening of the Ministry of Ayush in view of the expanding role of Ayush systems 
within the national healthcare framework. While the ongoing transition from system-
specific promotion towards structured integration of Ayush within public health 
delivery reflects a calibrated policy approach, the Committee is of the view that this 
transition requires sustained institutional capacity, effective implementation 
mechanisms and strengthened governance structures to translate policy objectives into 
tangible outcomes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry take 
appropriate steps to further strengthen institutional capacities and governance 
mechanisms to support the progressive integration of Ayush systems within the national 
healthcare framework. The Committee further emphasises that infrastructure 
expansion, regulatory reforms and digital governance initiatives should be implemented 
in a coordinated manner so as to facilitate long-term institutional consolidation and 
effective delivery of Ayush services across the country. 
 
1.12.3  The Committee takes into account various initiatives undertaken by the 
Ministry for the promotion and development of Ayush systems across the country. The 
Committee observes that while these initiatives have contributed to strengthening 
institutional infrastructure and expanding outreach, there is a need to ensure that the 
outcomes of these interventions are systematically evaluated. However, the Committee is 
of the view that greater emphasis must now be placed on measurable health outcomes 
and impact assessment, effective capacity utilisation of newly established institutions, 
strengthening of quality assurance and pharmacovigilance mechanisms and improved 
coordination with State Governments in programme implementation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry adopt a more outcome-oriented approach by 
promoting evidence-based research validation and ensuring optimal utilisation of 
budgetary allocations so as to maximise the overall effectiveness of Ayush interventions. 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER - II 
MACRO ANALYSIS OF DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
2.1 The Budget Estimates for FY 2026-27 reflect the financial outlay and structural 
priorities of the Ministry of Ayush across its various components including establishment 
expenditure, statutory institutions, autonomous bodies, Central Sector Schemes and Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes. The Ministry of Ayush has been allocated a total sum of ₹ 4,408.93 
crore comprising both revenue and capital expenditure. The Budget allocation signifies the 
Government’s continued commitment towards strengthening Ayush services, promoting 
research and academic institutions, expanding educational infrastructure, supporting 
medicinal plant conservation, and ensuring focused regional development, particularly in the 
North Eastern Region. A comparative statement of the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates, 
and Actual Expenditure is presented below: 
A. Budget Allocation of Ministry of Ayush 
                                                                    (Table 1)               (₹ in crore) 
Head 
Budget 
Estimates 
2025-26 
Revised 
Estimates 
2025-26 
Actual Expenditure 
2025-26 
(Upto 03.02.2026) 
Budget Estimates 
2026-27 
Revenue 3937.45 3618.47 2791.68 4381.86 
Capital 55.45 53.35 49.39 27.07 
Total 3992.90 3671.82 2841.07 4408.93 
 
B. Component Wise Distribution of Budget Estimates (2026-27) 
                                                                    (Table 2)                                                (₹ in crore) 
Sl.No. Schemes/Programmes BE 2026-27 
1.  Establishment Expenditure 114.86 
2.  Statutory Institutions 276.33 
3.  Autonomous Bodies (CCRAS,CCRUM,CCRH, AIIA-New Delhi, 
NIH-Kolkata) 
1321.99 
4.  All Other Autonomous Bodies 990.15 
5.  Central Sector Schemes of Ayush 405.60 
6.  Central Sponsored Schemes (National Ayush Mission) 1300 
 
2.2.1 The Macro Analysis of Demand No. 4, Ministry of Ayush examines the financial 
architecture, allocation priorities and structural trends reflected in the Demands for Grants for 
2026-27, read alongside the previous years’ Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) 

9 
 
and Actual Expenditure (AE) as contained in the Detailed Demands for Grants and Major 
Head-wise statements. 
2.2 Budget Estimates (BE) - Year-wise Comparison 
                                                                       (Table 3)                           (₹ in crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimates 
Absolute 
Increase 
% Growth in BE terms 
(Y-o-Y) 
Real Growth of 
BE (Avg. Inflation 
~ 5%) 
2014-15 1272.15 - - - 
2022-23 3050.00 +79.70            2.68% 
 
-2.21% 
2023-24 3647.50 +597.50 19.59% 13.89% 
2024-25 3712.49 +64.99 1.78% -3.07% 
2025-26 3992.90 +280.41 7.55%  2.43% 
 
 
2026-27 4408.93 +416.03 10.42% 5.16% 
 
2.2.1 The Ministry informed that the Budget Estimates (BE) of the Ministry of Ayush have 
increased from ₹1272.15 crore in 2014-15 to ₹4408.93 crore in 2026-27, registering an 
overall growth of 246.57 per cent during the period, which indicates a broad upward 
trajectory in allocations and a gradual expansion of Ayush services.  
2.2.2 The Committee observes that a closer examination of the Budget Estimates over 
the past five years reveals that the year-on-year growth has not followed a stable or 
predictable scaling pattern. The annual growth in BE has fluctuated considerably, 
ranging from 2.68 per cent in 2022-23 to 19.59 per cent in 2023-24, followed by a sharp 
moderation to 1.78 per cent in 2024-25 and thereafter moderate increases of 7.55 per 
cent in 2025-26 and 10.42 per cent in 2026-27. The Committee further observes that 
when these nominal increases are adjusted against average inflation levels, certain years 
reflected negative real growth, implying erosion in the effective purchasing power of 
allocations. The Committee is of the view that such volatility suggests episodic 
enhancement rather than a calibrated and programmatic scaling of budgetary support 
for the sector.The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush 
formulate its Budget Estimate projections after duly factoring in realistic assessment of 
each scheme/project and keeping in account prevailing and anticipated inflation as well 
so that real growth in allocations is maintained at a meaningful level to support 
sustained expansion of Ayush services. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry endeavour to adopt a steadier and more incremental pattern of budgetary 
growth to ensure predictability and continuity in financial planning. A calibrated and 
consistent approach would facilitate stable scaling of programmes, safeguard the 

10 
 
purchasing power of allocations and enable systematic strengthening of the Ayush 
sector over the medium to long term. 
2.3 DEMAND VS ALLOCATION CREDIBILITY 
                                                                   (Table 4)                        (₹ in crore) 
Year Projected Demand BE Allocation Shortfall / Excess % Gap 
2014-15 - 1272.15 - - 
2021-22 5435.56 2970.30 -2465.26 45.36% shortfall 
2022-23 3042.32 3050.00 +7.68 0.25% excess 
2023-24 4092.33 3647.50 -444.83 10.87% shortfall 
2024-25 4035.54 3712.49 -323.05 8.00% shortfall 
2025-26 5408.48 3992.90 -1415.58 26.17% shortfall 
2026-27 5679.48 4408.93 -1270.55 22.37% shortfall 
 
2.3.1 The Committee observes that the alignment between projected demand and Budget 
Estimates during 2021-22 to 2026-27 reflects repeated shortfalls except in 2022-23, which 
may affect medium-term planning certainty, prioritisation of projects and phased execution of 
schemes. The Committee is cognizant that deviations between projected demand and final 
allocations in public budgeting processes, particularly repeated shortfalls exceeding 20 per 
cent, may weaken the credibility of demand projections and reduce predictability in resource 
planning. 
2.3.2 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts in presenting comprehensive 
projected demands aimed at expanding the scope, reach and institutional capacity of the 
sector; however, sustained substantial deviations between projected demand and 
approved allocation at BE and RE stage may adversely impact planning stability and 
execution strategy.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
toadvanceplea for the outcome-linked and evidence-based justification of its projected 
demands by clearly demonstrating measurable impact, implementation readiness and 
expected sectoral returns. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry adopt 
a phased and prioritised approach in structuring its demands by distinguishing core 
commitments from expansionary and long-term aspirational components so as to 
facilitate more realistic projection at the stage of budgetestimate keeping in view 
feasibility of project implementation and absorption capacity of implementing agencies. 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry develop a multi-year financial 
projection framework to enable greater predictability in resource planning and 
smoother alignment with the budgetary processes of the Ministry of Finance. 
 

11 
 
2.4  Major Components Contributing Reduction (Projected Demand Vs BE 2026-27) 
                                                                             (Table 5)                                    (₹ in Crore) 
Sl.No. Scheme / Component Projected Allocated 
% 
Reduction 
of PD Vs BE 
% share in 
Total Reduction 
1.  Central Council For Research 
In Yoga And Naturopathy 304.70 137.70 54.82% 13.14% 
2.  
Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta 
Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan 
Yojana (AOGUSY) 
50.60 27.00 46.64% 
 
1.86% 
3.  
CCS for Conservation, 
Development and Sustainable 
Management of Medicinal 
Plants 
121.63 65.00 46.55% 
 
4.46% 
4.  Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) 67.80 45.00 33.63 1.79% 
5.  Central Council for Research 
in Homoeopathy 331.00 227.25 31.34% 8.17% 
6.  National Ayush Mission 
(NAM) 1866.25 1300.00 30.34% 44.57 
7.  North Eastern Institute of 
Ayurveda & Homoeopathy 69.43 49.43 28.81% 1.57 
8.  All India Institute of Ayurveda 
(AIIA) 360.20 270.20 24.99% 7.08% 
9.  
Total 8 Major Reductions 
(Overall Ayush Total) 
3171.61  
(5679.48) 
2121.58  
(4408.93) 
- 
(22.37%) 
82.64%  
(100%) 
 
2.4.1  The Committee observes with serious concern that against the total 
projected demand of ₹ 5,679.48 crore for the year 2026-27, an allocation of only ₹ 
4,408.93 crore has been made at the Budget Estimates stage, resulting in a substantial 
shortfall of ₹ 1,270.55 crore (22.37 %)of  the projected requirement.The Committee 
further observes that this fiscal compression is not uniformly distributed across 
components but is disproportionately concentrated in certain critical and expansion-
oriented segments which includes flagship implementation schemes like NAM & 
CSSCMP; Research bodies like CCRYN &CCRH; premier institutes NIH, AIIA and 
quality strengthening initiatives like the Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam 

12 
 
UtpadanSamvardhan Yojana (AOUGSY) which may have a cascading impact on 
capacity augmentation, infrastructure expansion, research continuity and the overall 
momentum of institutional growth in strategically important and emerging domains of 
the Ayush systems.The Committee also recalls that in 165th Report DFG 2025-26, it had 
recommended seeking supplementary grants at the Revised Estimates stage; however, 
the information furnished instead reflects a reduction of ₹ 321 crore at the RE stage.  
2.4.2 The Committee observes that the reduction in allocations at the Revised 
Estimates stage across several components raises serious concerns regarding the 
adequacy of fiscal support extended to the sector despite acknowledged requirements. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Finance, undertake a mid-year review of allocations with a view to 
providing adequate supplementary support to bridge the critical funding gap.The 
Committee further desires that priority be accorded to key components, particularly 
flagship implementation schemes such as the National Ayush Mission (NAM), research 
councils, premier national institutes and quality-strengthening initiatives, so as to 
prevent disruption of ongoing projects, dilution of research momentum or deferment of 
infrastructure expansion. The Committee emphasizes that these strategic segments 
represent long-term capacity-building investments and should not be subjected to 
disproportionate fiscal contraction.The Committee also urges the Ministry to adopt a 
more realistic and consultative budgeting approach in future cycles to ensure 
adequateBE allocations so that no project/scheme should suffer for want of funds and 
thereby doubly safeguarding programmatic continuity and sustaining the growth 
trajectory of the sector. 
2.5  BE - RE  Discipline with Projected Demand  
                                                                          (Table 6)                                    (₹ in crore) 
Year Projected 
Demand BE RE BE vs PD 
Gap 
RE vs BE 
Gap 
RE vs PD 
Reduction 
2021-22 5435.56 2970.30 2664.42 45.35% -10.30% 50.98% 
2022-23 3042.32 3050.00 2845.75 -0.25% -6.70% 6.46% 
2023-24 4092.33 3647.50 3000.00 10.87% -17.75% 26.69% 
2024-25 4035.54 3712.49 3497.64 8.00% -5.79% 13.33% 
2025-26 5408.48 3992.90 3671.82 26.17% -8.04% 32.11% 
2026-27 5679.48 4408.93 - 22.37% - - 
 
2.5.1 The Committee finds that there has been a dual-level compression in allocation- first 
between the Projected Demand and Budget Estimates and thereafter between the Budget 
Estimates and Revised Estimates. While such fiscal filtering reflects budgetary prudence, the 
recurrence of dual-stage compression assumes significance as unless the BE-level budget is 

13 
 
fully utilised, the objective of reducing the gap between projected demand and budgetary 
allocation at the BE stage cannot be meaningfully achieved.Further, the Committee observes 
that there has been an overall decrease of about 32.11% from Projected Demand to the RE 
stage, reflecting that the originally envisaged initiatives required substantial recalibration, 
prioritisation of projects, and phased execution of schemes. The repeated shortfalls exceeding 
20% on account of dual-level compression may weaken demand credibility and reduce 
predictability in resource planning. 
2.5.2 The Ministry has stated the following major reasons for the reduction from BE to RE 
allocation in 2025-26: 
i. Slow pace of expenditure due to the introduction of the SNA SPARSH system and 
reduction of funds by MoF at the RE stage by almost ₹ 494 crore forming major 
component of reduction at RE stage 
ii. Repeated pattern of “non-approval of construction projects” across many schemes and 
programmes. 
iii.  As per actual requirement. 
iv. Staff non-engagement and vacancy-based reductions. 
v. Unutilised balance with CPWD. 
vi. Fewer project proposals approved in PSC/PAC and consequent reduction by MoF. 
2.5.3 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry needs to revisit and refine its 
approach to budget formulation and expenditure planning process so as to minimise 
recurrent dual-stage compression by more realistic estimation, stronger implementation 
preparedness and closer alignment between projection and absorptive capacity. The 
Committee further emphasises the importance of more effective pre-budget engagement 
with the Ministry of Finance by placing proposals based on outcome orientation and 
implementation ready, supported by defined timelines, clarity regarding approval status 
of projects, staffing position, and procurement readiness. The Committee emphasis that 
construction projects should be included in projections only after obtaining the requisite 
administrative and technical approvals. Similarly, existing vacancies, unspent balances 
with CPWD, and the status of proposals pending before PSC/PAC should be 
realistically assessed at the stage of demand formulation. The Committee considers it a 
budgeting prudence for the Ministry to institute regular quarterly reviews of 
expenditure, closely monitor the rollout of the SNA SPAR system at the State level and 
take timely corrective steps to avoid substantial surrenders or downward revisions at 
the RE stage. These measures so undertaken would contribute to greater credibility in 
budget projections, improve stability in resource planning, and ensure that allocations 
made at the BE stage are effectively and fully utilized while potentially implementing 
the scheme to optimum level thereby, setting bulwark against reduction of budget at 
stage. 
 
2.6 Utilisation& Absorptive Capacity Analysis  

14 
 
                                                                (Table 7)       (₹ in crore) 
Year RE AE AE as % of RE 
2021-22 2664.42 2538.42 95.27% 
2022-23 2845.75 2663.30 93.59% 
2023-24 3000.00 2916.31 97.21% 
2024-25 3497.64 3468.63 99.17% 
2025-26 3671.82 2841.07* 81.60% 
       (*As on 03.02.2026) 
2.6.1 The Committee highlights that the Ministry has consistently maintained high 
levels of utilisationand administrative discipline in deploying funds allocated at the 
Revised Estimate stage. The Committee notes the Ministry’s sustained utilisation 
performance of allocated funds at RE stage and the same demonstrates 
capacity/potential to effectively deploy resources if budgetary allocation is earmarked 
for utilization as per projected demand. In view of this consistent absorptive strength, 
the Committee is of the considered opinion that higher budgetary allocation levels are 
justified therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should continue to 
strengthen quarterly expenditure planning and milestone-based fund release 
mechanisms to ensure balanced spending patterns and avoid excessive concentration of 
expenditure in the closing months of the financial year.Further, the Committee advises 
the Ministry to improve the Actual Expenditure of National Ayush Mission by 
addressing the transitional challenges being faced. 
2.7 Capital Intensity Vs Growth Ambition 
                                                                (Table 8)                               (₹ in crore) 
Year BE Total Capital Capital Exp. Share (%) 
2021-22 2970.30 0.00 - 
2022-23 3050.00 0.00 - 
2023-24 3647.50 5.94 0.16% 
2024-25 3712.49 8.75 0.24% 
2025-26 3992.90 55.45 1.39% 
2026-27 4408.93 27.07 0.61% 
2.7.1 The Committee observes that the capital outlay in the Ayush budget has remained 
modest, reflecting the Ministry’s predominantly revenue-oriented budgetary structure, with 

15 
 
limited identifiable capital expenditure under the direct budget head. The Committee notes 
that major infrastructure interventions in the Ayush sector are largely financed through grants 
under the National Ayush Mission and through component-wise allocations rather than 
through a distinct and consolidated capital outlay at the Ministry level. While acknowledging 
these efforts, the Committee expresses concern over the recurring underutilisation of funds 
under the National Ayush Mission and the reported slow pace of infrastructure development 
in certain autonomous bodies, as reflected in the Ministry’s submissions on infrastructure 
progress. The Committee also notes the Ministry’s submission that the reduction in capital 
outlay at the Revised Estimate stage in the Budget Estimates for 2025-26 was attributable to 
lower fund requirements projected under the Ayush Grid component. 
2.7.2 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts to expand infrastructure in the 
Ayush sector through scheme-based interventions and collaborative federal 
mechanisms, particularly under the National Ayush Mission and the integrative 
healthcare framework. However, the Committee is of the view that sustained sectoral 
growth of Ayush services requires a more predictable and strategically designed 
separate capital investment framework at the Ministry level. The preponderance of 
aspiration to position Ayush as a global leader in traditional medicine would require a 
budgetary architecture that moves beyond a predominantly revenue-driven framework, 
as durable growth depends upon sustained asset creation in institutions, laboratories, 
testing facilities and digital infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry progressively enhance identifiable capital expenditure so that it constitutes 
about 5-7 per cent of the total Budget Estimates over the next three financial years. 
 2.7.3 The Committee further recommends for creation of a dedicated Ayush 
Infrastructure Fund with multi years capital option for institutional upgradation, 
modern drug testing and quality control infrastructure, national research and clinical 
networks, and digital integration including Ayush Grid 2.0. Additionally, future 
Demands for Grants should consider annexing a consolidated statement of capital 
formation across direct budget heads, the National Ayush Mission, Research Councils, 
and Autonomous Bodies to reflect level of capital intensity and support structured long-
term investment planning. 
2.8 Strategic Comparison of Minsitry of Ayush Vs Ministry of Health & Welfare 
Budget Estimates Allocation (2014-15 to 2026-27)  
                                                                 (Table 9)                          (₹ in crore) 
Year H&FW Ministry of Ayush Share (%) 
2014-15 38445.79 1272.15 3.31% 
2021-22 71268.77 2970.30 4.17% 
2022-23 86200.65 3050.00 3.54% 
2023-24 89155.00 3647.50 4.09% 
2024-25 90958.63 3712.49 4.08% 
2025-26 99858.56 3992.90 4.00% 

16 
 
Year H&FW Ministry of Ayush Share (%) 
2026-27 106530.42 4408.93 4.14% 
 
2.8.1 The Committee observes that the Ministry’s proportional share within the health 
sector framework has improved over the decade (3.31% → 4.14%), with a faster growth rate 
(~246% vs ~177%) than the budget growth of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. 
However, a 20% increase to ₹4,408 crore in 2026-27, the Ministry of Ayush still operates 
within a structurally asymmetrical fiscal space with proportional share hovering around 4% in 
last 5 years. 
2.8.2 The Committee appreciates the progressive strengthening of the Ministry’s 
proportional share within the overall health architecture over the past decade, however, 
considering the expanding mandate of the Ministry and its long-term aspirations for 
enhanced global positioning and global leadership, the Committee recommends that 
sustained expansion of Ayush services, research capacity and global engagement would 
require enhanced and consistent budgetary allocation in its share within the national 
health envelope. The Ministry therefore, continue to strengthen evidence-based 
justification of its programmes, demonstrate measurable public health outcomes and 
articulate a medium-term fiscal roadmap aligned with its long-term sectoral 
objectives.The Committee in this regardreiterates its earlier recommendationmade in 
128th Report (Demand for Grants 2025-26) that at least 10% of the total health sector 
budget be earmarked progressively for the Ministry of Ayush for effective pluralistic 
healthcare model. 
2.9 Ayush Ministry’s BE as a share of Union (Total) BE 
                                                                (Table 10)                  (₹ in crore) 
Year Ayush BE Union Total BE  Ayush share (%) 
2014-15 1,272.15 1,794,892.00. 0.0709% 
2021-22 2,970.30 3,483,236.00. 0.0853% 
2022-23 3,050.00 3,944,909.00. 0.0773% 
2023-24 3,647.50 4,503,097.00. 0.0810% 
2024-25 3,712.49 4,820,512.00. 0.0770% 
2025-26 3,992.90 5,065,345.00. 0.0788% 
2026-27 4,408.93 5,347,315.00. 0.0825% 
 

17 
 
2.9.1 The Committee notes that the Budget Estimate for the Ministry of Ayush for the year 
2026-27 stands at ₹4,408 crore against the total Union Government expenditure of ₹53.47 
lakh crore. The allocation thus constitutes approximately 0.082 per cent of the total Union 
Budget, indicating that the Ministry continues to occupy a relatively limited fiscal space 
within the broader expenditure framework of the Union Government. The Committee further 
observes that when assessed against India’s estimated nominal GDP of approximately 
₹345.47 lakh crore for FY 2025-26, the allocation to Ayush represents barely about 0.013 per 
cent of GDP. While the Ministry has recorded comparatively higher year-on-year growth 
rates in recent years, the absolute quantum of allocation remains modest, particularly in the 
context of the Ministry’s stated objective of advancing an integrated and pluralistic healthcare 
model. 
2.9.2 The Committee notes that the Ministry has articulated an ambitious long-term 
vision for the Ayush sector under the Ayush @ 2047 framework, including the objective 
of expanding the Ayush market size to a $200 billion economy by 2030 and 5% of the 
country GDP. The Committee observes that achieving such transformative goals would 
require sustained expansion of institutional capacity, research, education and service 
delivery across the sector. However, the Committee is of the view that the present level 
of budgetary support may not be adequate to fully realise these long-term aspirations. 
Incremental increases from a relatively low fiscal base may limit the pace at which the 
sector can scale its programmes and infrastructure.The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Finance consider undertaking a phased and calibrated 
enhancement of the budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Ayush so as to 
progressively strengthen its fiscal position within the overall Union expenditure 
framework. The Committee is of the considered opinion that a structured medium-term 
fiscal roadmap, aligned with measurable expansion in institutional capacity, research, 
education and service delivery, would be essential to ensure that the Ministry’s 
budgetary positioning adequately reflects its evolving policy mandate and long-term 
developmental objectives. 
2.10 Fiscal Flow under the 15th Finance Commission Period (2021-22 to 2025-26) 
                                                                    (Table 11)                                             (₹ in crore) 
YEAR 
BUDGET ESTIMATES REVISED ESTIMATES ACTUAL 
EXPENDITUR
E 
(As on 03-02-
2026) 
 
PROJECTE
D 
DEMAND 
ALLOCAT
ED FUND 
PROJECTED 
DEMAND 
ALLOCATE
D FUND 
2021-
22 5435.56 2970.30 2795.58 2664.42 2538.42 
2022-
23 3042.32 3050.00 3023.12 2845.75 2663.30 
2023-
24 4092.33 3647.50 3308.03 3000.00 2916.31 

18 
 
2024-
25 4044.29 3712.49 4006.39 3497.64 3468.63 
2025-
26 5408.48 3992.90 4512.47 3671.82 
2841.07 
 
 
2.10.1 The Committee has examined the movement of funds from Projected Demand to 
Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure during the 15th Finance 
Commission period. The data reveals a three-stage fiscal filtration process. At the Budget 
Estimate stage, significant rationalisation of projected demand was observed in certain years, 
particularly in 2021-22 (approximately 45% reduction from projected demand) and 2025-26 
(approximately 26% reduction). Subsequent moderation between Budget Estimates and 
Revised Estimates occurred in all years under review, with 2023-24 witnessing the sharpest 
mid-year compression (about 17.75%). Notwithstanding these reductions, utilisation of funds 
retained at the Revised Estimate stage remained consistently high in completed years, ranging 
between approximately 93% and 99%. The Committee notes that while projected demands 
were substantially filtered at allocation stages, the Ministry has demonstrated strong 
absorptive capacity in deploying the funds ultimately provided. This pattern indicates that 
fiscal constraint has primarily operated at the allocation stage rather than at the level of 
expenditure execution. 
2.10.2 The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s consistent utilisation performance and 
its demonstrated capacity to effectively deploy funds retained at the Revised Estimate 
stage, however, the Committee observes that there have been recurring and substantial 
rationalisation of the Ministry’s projected demands at both the Budget Estimate and 
Revised Estimate stages. The Committee is of the view that such repeated adjustments 
may affect planning predictability and thereby skewed implementation of the projects. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen the evidence-based 
justification of its projected financial requirements and align its demand projections 
more closely with realistic absorption capacity and phased implementation plans. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry undertake enhanced pre-budget 
consultations and adopt strategic financial planning approach to improve predictability 
in allocation flows and minimise the extent of mid-year rationalisation so that projects 
are implemented as per originally conceived vision. Such measures would help improve 
fiscal credibility, planning stability and better alignment between projected demands 
and actual expenditure outcomes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2.11 NORTH EAST BUDGETARY ALLOCATION TRENDS 2.11.1 The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that allocations for the North Eastern Region have shown a generally increasing trend in recent years, reflecting the Government’s commitment to strengthening Ayush interventions in the region. As per the data furnished, the Budget Estimates increased from crore in 2023-24, before stabilizing at around Ministry further informed that the actual expenditure has largely remained close to tRevised Estimates in most years, with utilization reaching as high as 113.44 per cent in 202425. However, in certain years such as 2021expenditure remained comparatively lower than the Revised Estimates. The Commthat while the overall trend indicates sustained financial commitment towards the North Eastern Region, consistent and timely utilization of allocated funds remains an important aspect for ensuring effective implementation of programmes in the 2.11.2 The Committee takes into accountfor the North Eastern Region and recognises the significant potential of the region in promoting Ayush systems of medicine owing to its rich biodiversity and traditional knowledge of medicinal plants. The Committee observes that streninfrastructure and services in the North Eastern States can play an important role in enhancing the wider acceptability and availability of Ayush systems while also supporting the sustainable utilisation of the region’s biodiversity resourceharnessing herbs for Ayush drugsvariations in utilisation and implementation across the region indicate the need for better estimation of requirements, improved financial planning and stronger implementation mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush strengthen its planning, monitoring and implementation mechanisms for schemes in the North Eastern Region. The Committee must focus on timely implementation of projects and improve coordination with implementing agencies and State Governments so that the allocated resources translate into tangible outcomes in terms of strengthened Ayush infrastructure, services and outreach in the region. The Commi
19 
NORTH EAST BUDGETARY ALLOCATION TRENDS 
The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that allocations for the North Eastern Region have shown a generally increasing trend in recent years, reflecting the Government’s commitment to strengthening Ayush interventions in the region. As per the a furnished, the Budget Estimates increased from ₹103.00 crore in 2020-21 to 24, before stabilizing at around ₹214 crore in 2024-25 and 2025Ministry further informed that the actual expenditure has largely remained close to tRevised Estimates in most years, with utilization reaching as high as 113.44 per cent in 202425. However, in certain years such as 2021-22 and 2025-26 (as on 20.02.2026), the expenditure remained comparatively lower than the Revised Estimates. The Commthat while the overall trend indicates sustained financial commitment towards the North Eastern Region, consistent and timely utilization of allocated funds remains an important aspect for ensuring effective implementation of programmes in the region. takes into account the increasing trend of budgetary allocation for the North Eastern Region and recognises the significant potential of the region in promoting Ayush systems of medicine owing to its rich biodiversity and traditional knowledge of medicinal plants. The Committee observes that strengthening Ayush infrastructure and services in the North Eastern States can play an important role in enhancing the wider acceptability and availability of Ayush systems while also supporting the sustainable utilisation of the region’s biodiversity resourceharnessing herbs for Ayush drugs. However, the Committee is of the view that variations in utilisation and implementation across the region indicate the need for better estimation of requirements, improved financial planning and stronger n mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush strengthen its planning, monitoring and implementation mechanisms for schemes in the North Eastern Region. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry lementation of projects and improve coordination with implementing agencies and State Governments so that the allocated resources translate into tangible outcomes in terms of strengthened Ayush infrastructure, services and outreach in the region. The Committee emphasize that attention must be given 
 The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that allocations for the North Eastern Region have shown a generally increasing trend in recent years, reflecting the Government’s commitment to strengthening Ayush interventions in the region. As per the 21 to ₹230.73 25 and 2025-26. The Ministry further informed that the actual expenditure has largely remained close to the Revised Estimates in most years, with utilization reaching as high as 113.44 per cent in 2024-26 (as on 20.02.2026), the expenditure remained comparatively lower than the Revised Estimates. The Committee notes that while the overall trend indicates sustained financial commitment towards the North Eastern Region, consistent and timely utilization of allocated funds remains an important budgetary allocation for the North Eastern Region and recognises the significant potential of the region in promoting Ayush systems of medicine owing to its rich biodiversity and traditional gthening Ayush infrastructure and services in the North Eastern States can play an important role in enhancing the wider acceptability and availability of Ayush systems while also supporting the sustainable utilisation of the region’s biodiversity resources by . However, the Committee is of the view that variations in utilisation and implementation across the region indicate the need for better estimation of requirements, improved financial planning and stronger n mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush strengthen its planning, monitoring and implementation mechanisms for that the Ministry lementation of projects and improve coordination with implementing agencies and State Governments so that the allocated resources translate into tangible outcomes in terms of strengthened Ayush infrastructure, services and emphasize that attention must be given to 


addressing implementation bottlenecks by providing technical guidance and handholding support to States, including assistance in the establishment and strengthening of Ayush Directorates for effective implemenMission, so as to ensure that the funds earmarked for the North Eastern Region are fully and effectively utilised. 2.12 CONTINUATION OF SCHEMES OF MINISTRY OF 2.12.1 The Secretary, Ministry of Ayush informed the CommitteeMinistry are completing their current fivepresently under inter-ministerial consultation. He further apprised the Committee that the Ministry had proposed a higher financial of Finance has restricted the financial outlay for the forthcoming five years to crore, based on a formula limiting the allocation to 5.5 times the average annual expenditure of FY 2021-22 to FY 2022-23 (Actual Expenditure) and FY 2024
2.12.2 The Committee analysed the third party evaluation findings of the various schemes and the above submissions of the Ministry and found that there has been a significant reduction in proposed outlay by MoA and allocation proposed by MoF. The outlay gap percentage has been listed below:   
 20 
addressing implementation bottlenecks by providing technical guidance and handholding support to States, including assistance in the establishment and strengthening of Ayush Directorates for effective implementation of the National Ayush Mission, so as to ensure that the funds earmarked for the North Eastern Region are CONTINUATION OF SCHEMES OF MINISTRY OF AYUSH The Secretary, Ministry of Ayush informed the Committee that all the schemes of the Ministry are completing their current five-year cycle and proposals for their continuation are ministerial consultation. He further apprised the Committee that the Ministry had proposed a higher financial outlay for the next five-year cycle but the Ministry of Finance has restricted the financial outlay for the forthcoming five years to crore, based on a formula limiting the allocation to 5.5 times the average annual expenditure 23 (Actual Expenditure) and FY 2024-25 (Revised Estimates).
The Committee analysed the third party evaluation findings of the various schemes and the above submissions of the Ministry and found that there has been a significant n proposed outlay by MoA and allocation proposed by MoF. The outlay gap rcentage has been listed below: 
addressing implementation bottlenecks by providing technical guidance and handholding support to States, including assistance in the establishment and tation of the National Ayush Mission, so as to ensure that the funds earmarked for the North Eastern Region are that all the schemes of the year cycle and proposals for their continuation are ministerial consultation. He further apprised the Committee that the year cycle but the Ministry of Finance has restricted the financial outlay for the forthcoming five years to ₹ 4,019.25 crore, based on a formula limiting the allocation to 5.5 times the average annual expenditure 25 (Revised Estimates).  The Committee analysed the third party evaluation findings of the various schemes and the above submissions of the Ministry and found that there has been a significant n proposed outlay by MoA and allocation proposed by MoF. The outlay gap 


21 
 
 
2.12.3 The Committee notes that there exists a significant gap between the financial 
outlays proposed by the Ministry of Ayush and the allocation made by the Ministry of 
Finance in certain schemes, particularly Ayurgyan, Ayurswasthya Yojana and 
AOGUSY. The Committee observes that these schemes support critical areas such as 
research, education and strengthening of drug quality infrastructure in the Ayush 
sector and therefore play an important role in the overall development of the sector. The 
Committee, however is of the view that if the reduced ceilings are maintained, several 
schemes may receive allocations lower than those approved during the previous scheme 
cycle, which may adversely affect the expansion and strengthening of these priority 
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush actively 
pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance during forthcoming deliberations and 
appraisal meetings and seek enhanced financial outlays so as to ensure that the 
objectives of research promotion, capacity building and quality assurance in the Ayush 
sector are adequately supported during the current scheme cycle. 
  
Central Sector Schemes 
Central 
Sponsored 
Schemes 
IEC IC CSS-
CDSMMP 
Ayurswasthya 
Yojana Ayurgyan AOGUSY NAM 
-37.42% -0.02% -60.93% -55.86% -65.46%  -86.04% -91.29% 

 MICRO ANALYSIS OF DEMAND FOR GRANTS3.1 This Chapter seeks to undertake a detailed microunder implementation and the statutory, regulatory and autonomous bodies functioning under the Ministry of Ayush with a view to assessing their performance, financial utilization and overall outcomes.  3.2 The Ministry of Ayush implements its mandaarchitecture designed to address the multiple dimensions of traditional systems of medicine in India. The scheme framework of Ministry’s programmes is broadly categorized into Sponsored Schemes (CSS) and Central Sec 3.2.1 At the core of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme is the (NAM), which serves as the principal vehicle for strengthening public health infrastructure, expanding access to Ayush services and promoting integrativeStates and Union Territories. Complementing this, the Central Sector Schemes are designed to address sector-specific priorities across the Ayush ecosystem. These include:i. Conservation, development, and sustainable management of (CSSSDMMP); ii. AOGUSY scheme for promotion of quality assurance and regulatory strengthening of Ayush drugs and products;iii. International cooperation for global collaborations & global positioning of Ayush systems; iv. Information, education and cooutreach; v. Ayurgyan for for capacity building, research, innovation and academic strengthening; and vi. Ayurswasthya for establishment of Centres of Excellence and public healthinterventions.       
 22 
CHAPTER-III  MICRO ANALYSIS OF DEMAND FOR GRANTS  This Chapter seeks to undertake a detailed micro-analysis of the various under implementation and the statutory, regulatory and autonomous bodies functioning under the Ministry of Ayush with a view to assessing their performance, financial utilization and The Ministry of Ayush implements its mandate through a structured scheme architecture designed to address the multiple dimensions of traditional systems of medicine in India. The scheme framework of Ministry’s programmes is broadly categorized into Central Sector Schemes (CS). At the core of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme is the National Ayush Mission , which serves as the principal vehicle for strengthening public health infrastructure, expanding access to Ayush services and promoting integrative healthcare delivery across States and Union Territories. Complementing this, the Central Sector Schemes are designed specific priorities across the Ayush ecosystem. These include: Conservation, development, and sustainable management of medicinal plants AOGUSY scheme for promotion of quality assurance and regulatory strengthening of Ayush drugs and products; International cooperation for global collaborations & global positioning of Ayush Information, education and communication (IEC) initiatives for public awareness and Ayurgyan for for capacity building, research, innovation and academic strengthening; Ayurswasthya for establishment of Centres of Excellence and public health
analysis of the various schemes under implementation and the statutory, regulatory and autonomous bodies functioning under the Ministry of Ayush with a view to assessing their performance, financial utilization and te through a structured scheme architecture designed to address the multiple dimensions of traditional systems of medicine in India. The scheme framework of Ministry’s programmes is broadly categorized into Centrally  National Ayush Mission , which serves as the principal vehicle for strengthening public health infrastructure, healthcare delivery across States and Union Territories. Complementing this, the Central Sector Schemes are designed  medicinal plants AOGUSY scheme for promotion of quality assurance and regulatory strengthening of International cooperation for global collaborations & global positioning of Ayush mmunication (IEC) initiatives for public awareness and Ayurgyan for for capacity building, research, innovation and academic strengthening; Ayurswasthya for establishment of Centres of Excellence and public health-oriented 


23 
 
 
3.3 Scheme-wise Allocation F.Y 2026-27 under Central Sector Schemes of Ayush 
 
                                                                   Table- 12                                (₹ in crore) 
Scheme AE 
2024-25 
BE 
2025-26 
RE 
2025-26 
BE 
2026-
27 
Promotion of International Cooperation 103.86 136.00 142.75 156.00 
Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, 
Development & Sustainable Management of 
Medicinal Plants 
40.00 65.00 35.00 65.00 
Ayurswasthya Yojana 20.61 62.60 46.73 62.60 
Ayurgyan 25.70 50.00 37.81 50.00 
Information, Education & Communication (IEC) 29.82 43.20 73.00 45.00 
Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta 
EvumUtpadanSanvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) 13.92 27.00 17.75 27.00 
Total - Central Sector Schemes of Ayush 233.91 383.80 353.04 405.60 
 
 
National Ayush Mission 1137.65  1275.00 780.96 1300.00 
Total - Central Sponsored Schemes of Ayush 1137.65 1275.00 780.96 1300.00 
Overall Schemes Allocation 1371.56 1658.80 1134.00 1705.60 
 
3.3.1 The Committee has examined the aggregate allocation pattern of the Ministry’s 
schemes, comprising the Central Sector Schemes and the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 
namely the National Ayush Mission (NAM) for the period from AE 2024-25 to BE 2026-27. 
The Committee observes that the schemes have been allocated ₹ 1705.60 crore in BE 2026-27 
which constitutes approximately 39 % of the total Budget allocation of the Ministry. Out of 
the total schemes allocation, the National Ayush Mission accounts for ₹ 1300.00 crore, 
representing about 76.21 % of the overall schemes outlay, thereby reflecting its pivotal 
position and strategic importance within the Ministry’s schemes architecture. The allocation 
under Central Sector Schemes has been enhanced to ₹ 405.60 crore in BE 2026-27 as against 
the Actual Expenditure of ₹ 233.91 crore in 2024-25 indicating an expansionary trend in 
financial commitment.  
 
3.3.2 The Committee expresses serious concern over the substantial downward 
revision of Budget Estimates (BE) at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage for 2025-26 
across several schemes, including the National Ayush Mission which indicates persistent 
underutilization of allocated funds. The Committee emphasizes that recurring BE-to-
RE compression reflects a disconnect between budget formulation and ground-level 
preparedness. The Ministry must ensure that Budget Estimates are aligned with 
implementation readiness, supported by approved action plans and confirmed project 
pipelines. The Committee further recommends overhauling pre-budget appraisal 
mechanisms, instituting strict quarterly monitoring of physical and financial progress 
and enhancing coordination with States and implementing bodies to remove procedural 
delays. A structured capacity-building and execution framework should also be put in 
place to prevent future underutilization and ensure timely and effective deployment of 
allocated funds. 
 
 

24 
 
3.3.3 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry undertake a 
comprehensive review of the implementation architecture under each scheme with a 
view to identifying structural and procedural bottlenecks affecting timely utilisation of 
funds. The Committee is of the view that delays in approvals, procedural complexities 
and implementation constraints may adversely affect the effective translation of 
budgetary allocations into tangible programme outcomes.The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry establish a time-bound corrective action framework 
aimed at improving implementation efficiency. In this regard, greater decentralisation 
of approvals, streamlining of procedural requirements, advance preparation of Annual 
Action Plans and strengthened monitoring of implementing agencies should be 
institutionalised. The Committee also expects the Ministry to present scheme-wise 
corrective measures along with clearly defined timelines in its Action Taken Notes on 
recommendations contained in this report so as to ensure that future budgetary 
allocations at BE stage is not slashed at RE in ensuing financial year so that originally 
conceived goals and objectives are achieved within stipulated timeframe with 
measurable outcomes.  
 
3.4  NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
 
3.4.1 The National Ayush Mission (NAM) is the flagship Centrally Sponsored Scheme of 
the Ministry of Ayush aimed at providing financial assistance to States and Union Territories 
for the promotion and development of Ayush systems of medicine across the country since 
2014-15. The Mission seeks to strengthen institutional capacity, expand healthcare 
infrastructure and enhance access to Ayush services in a structured and phased manner.  
 
3.4.2 The Mission supports operationalisation of Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) by 
upgrading dispensaries and Sub-Health Centres, co-locating Ayush facilities at PHCs, CHCs 
and District Hospitals, establishing standalone Ayush hospitals, supplying essential drugs, 
setting up new Ayush colleges, supporting public health programmes, and strengthening 
UG/PG institutions including PG, pharmacy and paramedical courses. It promotes co-location 
within mainstream public health institutions to offer patients multiple systems of medicine 
under one roof. While the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare supports engagement and 
training of Ayush personnel under NHM, the Ministry of Ayush provides infrastructure, 
equipment and medicines under NAM, reflecting shared institutional responsibility. The 
prominent activities supported under National Ayush Mission till 2025 are as following: 
 
i. 203 units supported for setting up of Integrated Ayush hospitals. 
ii. 518 Ayush Hospitals and 6234 Ayush dispensaries have been supported for Up-
gradation of infrastructure and other facilities.  
iii. 2387 PHCs, 746 CHCs and 319 DHs have been supported under co-location for 
recurring assistance of medicines and contingency on an average in each year. 
iv. 1157 Ayush Hospitals and 12677 Ayush dispensaries have been supported for supply 
of essential Ayush medicines on an average in each year.  
v. 21 units supported for establishment of New Ayush Educational Institutions. 
vi. 78 Under-Graduate and 46 Post-Graduate Ayush Educational Institutes have been 
supported for Upgradation of infrastructure, Library and other things.  
vii. 383 units supported for establishment of New Ayush Dispensaries. 
viii. 1429 Ayush Grams have been supported. 
ix. 12500 Ayush Health &Wellness Centres have been supported 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
3.5 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
 
Table- 13 
Year Projected BE RE RE vs BE (%) Actual % Utilisation of RE 
2022-23 800 800 650 -18.75% 549.15 84.45% 
2023-24 1200 1200 815 -32.08% 869.30 106.66% 
2024-25 1200 1200 1046 -12.83% 1137.65  108.76% 
2025-26 1815 1275 780.96 -38.75% 267.42* 34.24*% 
2026-27 1866.25 1300 - - - - 
                     *as on 03.02.2026                                                  (₹ in crore) 
 
3.5.1 The Committee observes with serious concern that the allocation for the National 
Ayush Mission (NAM) was reduced by 38.75% at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage in 
2025-26. Such substantial reduction is accompanied by poor utilisation of only about 
34% against the RE allocation of ₹ 780.96 crore, leaving an unspent balance of ₹ 513.54 
crore as on 03.02.2026. Such a combination of steep RE reduction and low expenditure 
reflects weaknesses in expenditure planning and evenly distributed expenditure in each 
quarter of financial year under the scheme. The Committee further finds that similar 
BE-to-RE reductions have occurred in preceding years (-18.75% in 2022-23, -32.08% in 
2023-24, -12.83% in 2024-25, and -38.75% in 2025-26), indicating a recurring structural 
issue rather than an isolated instance.  
 
3.5.2 The Committee notes that although there is increasing budgetary support 
provided to the Mission at the RE Stage. However, the Committee observes with 
concern that the trend of recurring pattern of reductions at the Revised Estimates stage 
and suboptimal fund utilisation during the past five years, which indicate persistent 
weaknesses in planning and absorptive capacity. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive review of its annual 
budgeting practices under the Mission so as to align Budget Estimates more realistically 
formulated & allocated with preconceived implementation capacity, project execution 
readiness and bettering expenditure trends. The Committee further recommends for 
evenly distributed expenditure in each quarter of financial year. 
 
3.5.3 The Committee finds that the slow pace of fund utilisation has been attributed to 
the transition to the Single Nodal Agency (SNA-SPARSH) fund flow mechanism. While 
acknowledging the objective of improving transparency and financial discipline, the 
Committee emphasises that procedural reforms must not impede programme 
implementation pace. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry institute 
structured and time-bound capacity-building measures for States/UTs to ensure 
seamless operationalisation of SNA accounts towards intended purpose. The Central 
Programme Management Unit (CPMU) may play pro-active & facilitative role by 
providing technical guidance, resolving onboarding bottlenecks and monitoring state-
wise compliance so that the fund flow reform must strengthens funds utilization rather 
than catalyze procedural delays. 
 
3.5.4  The Committee further observes that persistent delays in utilisation points 
out towards inadequacies in real-time financial and physical monitoring. The absence of 
periodic corrective review results in accumulation of unspent balances and subsequent 
RE-stage reductions. The Committee, therefore, recommends institutionalisation of a 
structured quarterly review mechanism at both Central and State/UT levels, integrating 
financial progress with measurable physical outputs. The framework should enable 

26 
 
early detection of bottlenecks by Central Project Management Unit and timely 
reallocation of funds to better-performing components, ensuring optimal utilisation 
within the financial year and reducing reliance on post-facto budgetary compression. 
 
3.5.5 The Committee observes that while policy emphasis has been placed on 
integration of Ayush services with mainstream healthcare, convergence with NHM 
remains uneven across States. Referral protocols, co-location models, and digital 
integration with national health platforms are not uniformly operationalised. Digital 
systems such as A-HMIS and real-time dashboards remain underutilised in several 
regions. The Committee recommends structured convergence of Ayush services with 
NHM through defined Standard Operating Procedures for co-location, promoting cross 
referral pathways and integration into national public health programmes, particularly 
in Non Communicable Diseases, maternal, and geriatric care. Full operationalisation of 
digital platforms including A-HMIS integration, telemedicine services, and real-time 
project tracking systems, should be prioritised alongside capacity-building initiatives to 
ensure effective utilization of allocated funds. 
 
3.5.6 The Committee has been given to understand regarding the detailed status 
statement of construction projects furnished by the Ministry that against a total 
sanctioned cost of ₹1232.21 crore, an expenditure of ₹ 746.55 crore has been incurred up 
to December 2025, reflecting an overall utilisation of approximately 60%. The project-
wise position reveals significant inter-State variation in physical progress, with only a 
limited number of projects completed and a substantial number remaining in Phase-I, 
Phase-II or preliminary stages. This uneven progress indicates differential 
implementation capacity and possible bottlenecks affecting timely completion. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry adopt a structured, risk-based monitoring 
framework for infrastructure projects under the Mission. Projects progressing as per 
approved timelines may continue under routine review whereas projects that have 
exceeded stipulated completion schedules or exhibit disproportionately slow progress 
should be subjected to intensified supervision, including periodic senior-level review and 
mandatory reporting. The Committee further recommends that fund releases be 
progressively aligned with verified physical progress to prevent idle parking of funds. 
The Digital tracking mechanism of projects need to be strengthen Clear accountability 
mechanisms should be instituted in cases of avoidable delay attributable to 
administrative lapses at the State or implementing agency level. 
 
Third Party Evaluation of Ayushamn Arogya Mandir (Ayush)  
 
3.5.7 The Committee has taken note of the third party evaluation findings fursnished 
by the Ministry and is of the view that strengthening of AAM (Ayush) must be 
supported by measurable accountability mechanisms. The Committee recommends 
development of a State/UT-wise performance benchmarking framework based on 
indicators such as human resource availability, patient footfall, NCD screening 
coverage, telemedicine usage, medicine availability, and convergence with national 
health programmes. A composite performance index may be published annually and 
underperforming States/UTs should submit time-bound corrective action plans. The 
Committee further recommends that a portion of central assistance under NAM/AAM 
(Ayush) be specified to capacity building measures and IEC component activities for 
effective implementation of scheme and generating public awareness of the scheme. 
 
3.5.8 The Committee also recommends publication of an Annual AAM (Ayush) 
Performance Report in the public domain detailing infrastructure status, HR position, 
financial utilization, and service delivery indicators to enhance transparency and 

27 
 
legislative oversight. Additionally, a structured social audit mechanism with beneficiary 
feedback, public disclosure of services and medicine availability and grievance redressal 
tracking mechanism should be institutionalized to strengthen community participation 
and accountability. 
 
3.6  PROMOTION OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
 
3.6.1 The Central Sector Scheme for Promotion of International Co-operation sector in 
Ayush aims to enhance global awareness, recognition and acceptance of Ayush systems of 
medicine through structured international engagement. The scheme supports activities such as 
exchange of experts and officials, incentives to Ayush entrepreneurs and institutions for 
participation in international exhibitions and trade fairs, initiatives for international market 
development including establishment of Ayush Academic Chairs abroad, translation and 
publication of Ayush literature in foreign languages, establishment of Ayush Information 
Cells and health centres in other countries and provision of fellowships and scholarships to 
foreign nationals for pursuing Ayush education in India. Through these interventions, the 
scheme seeks to strengthen academic collaboration, promote global dissemination of 
authentic Ayush knowledge and expand international trade and institutional cooperation in 
Ayush systems. 
 
The budgetary allocation for IC scheme is tabled below: 
 
Table- 14 
Year BE RE Actual % Utilisation of RE 
2022-23 86.10 94.60 138.69 146.60 
2023-24 44.27 27.64 22.85 82.67 
2024-25 137.42 137.07 103.86 75.77 
2025-26 136 142.75 112.18* 88.37* 
2026-27 156.00 -                         *as on 03.02.2026                                                           (₹ in crore) 
 
3.6.2 The Committee notes that as against the actual expenditure of ₹103.86 crore in 2024-
25, an amount of ₹136 crore was allocated for 2025-26, which was subsequently revised to 
₹142 crore at the RE stage. The Ministry has informed that the increase in allocation at the 
RE stage in 2025-26 was primarily to meet the additional financial requirement of ₹15.10 
crore for organizing the Second WHO Global Summit on Traditional Medicine. Further, the 
allocation also includes provisions for two secondment positions at the P-4 level in the World 
Health Organization (WHO), apart from financial requirements towards supporting Ayush 
Chairs abroad. 
 
The Ministry of Ayush has undertaken following activities in 2025: 
i. Establishment of 3 Ayush information Cells in Belarus, Muscat (Oman) and Slovakia 
ii. 2 Country-to-country MoU with Angola and Kazakhstan 
iii. 5 Institute level MoU with Indonesia, USA, Ghana, Magnolia and Cuba  
iv. 1 Chair MoU with Oman 
 
3.6.3 The Ministry also informed the Committee about the outcomes of the International 
Cooperation that a landmark development with signing of International Classification of 
Health Intervention (ICHI) Agreement with World Health Organisation (WHO). Further, the 
Ministry would also establish a BIMSTEC Centre of Excellence in India. The Ministry has 
also signed multinational cooperation in traditional mediciene in SCO, BRICS, IBSA, G20 

28 
 
etc. Moreover, FTA with European union and New Zealand, traditional medicine has been 
incorporated which will enable the traditional medicine practitioners to practice Ayurveda 
and yoga in those countries. 
 
3.6.4 The Committee observes that there has been a consistent increase in allocation 
under the Scheme for Promotion of International Cooperation, reflecting the 
Government’s commitment to strengthening India’s global leadership in traditional 
medicine. The Committee appreciates the Ministry for its sustained efforts for scaling of 
activity with substantial increased allocation particularly the execution of the ICHI 
agreement, the constitution of the BIMSTEC Task Force on Traditional Medicine, 
active multilateral cooperation across various international forums and the organisation 
of global events that have enhanced India’s diplomatic and technical stature in this 
sector. The Committee further notes with satisfaction that India’s digital initiatives, 
including the Aysuh Grid and AI-based innovations have received recognition at the 
WHO level, thereby reinforcing India’s leadership in integrating traditional medicine 
with emerging technologies. 
 
3.6.5 The Committee expresses pleasure over India’s growing global leadership in 
traditional medicine reflected through global engagement and outcomes generated in 
form of MoU, Academic Chair etc.  However, the Committee is of the view that these 
gains need consolidation and sustained once further through recently launched Ayush 
Global Portal. The Committee has also reviewed the Ayush Global Portal and the 
information available for the users on real time basis finding that Ayush Global Portal 
has not been much encouraging as the country specific information is not updated 
including for India and lacks user friendly interface. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends for strengthening of Ayush Global Portal to enhance global visibility, 
interoperability and access to authentic services. The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry leverage the proposed digital interface to facilitate international 
collaboration, knowledge exchange and global access to authentic Ayush services 
including tele-consultation, academic partnerships and dissemination of evidence-based 
resources. Such an integrated platform would enhance India’s soft power in traditional 
medicine while improving transparency, accessibility and global engagement with 
Ayush systems. 
 
3.6.6 The Committee appreciates the extensive diplomatic outreach under the 
International Cooperation Scheme, including the signing of 27 bilateral MoUs, 
establishment of 15 Ayush Academic Chairs, and operationalisation of 43 Ayush 
Information Cells across 43 countries. However, the Committee is of the view that the 
momentum of global recognition should be sustained through structured and outcome-
oriented engagement. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to identify 
priority partner countries and develop targeted collaboration frameworks focusing on 
joint research projects, academic exchanges, clinical studies and capacity-building 
initiatives in traditional medicine so as to deepen scientific engagement and strengthen 
institutional linkages. The Committee further recommends instituting a structured 
performance assessment mechanism with periodic country-wise outcome reports to 
evaluate the operational status of MoUs, academic output of Chairs and the functional 
impact of Ayush Information Cells.  
 
3.7 INFORMATION, EDUCATION & COMMUNICATION (IEC) 
 
3.7.1 The IEC scheme is a strategic public outreach framework designed to create 
awareness, promote informed health choices and encourage adoption of preventive and 
promotive practices under the traditional systems of medicine. These activities aim to 

29 
 
disseminate authentic information, counter misinformation and enhance public confidence in 
Ayush systems through mass media campaigns, community engagement, observance of 
health days, publications and digital platforms. By fostering behavioural change and 
integrating traditional knowledge with contemporary health needs, the IEC initiative plays a 
vital role in strengthening holistic healthcare awareness at national and international levels. 
3.7.2 The Annual Report 2025-26 mentions that the Ministry has undertaken following IEC 
awareness activities in 2025: 
i. Arogya fairs at National Level (Jaipur, Rajasthan) & State Level fair (Jabalpur,MP& 
Shillong, Meghalaya) 
ii. Financial Assistance for three Ayurveda Parv / Yoga Fest 
iii. Financial assistance for two Seminars 
iv. Participation in  eight health fair/mela including Bharat Parv 2025 & IITF, Delhi 
v. Celebration of four health days i.e Unani, Homoeopathy, IDY, Ayurveda. 
 
The comparision of Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure of 
budgetary allocation on IEC 2022-23, 2023-24, 2024-25, 2025-26 is enumerated below: 
 
  
3.7.3 The Committee observes that the Budget Estimates under the IEC Scheme have 
largely remained at a stable level over successive years with minor modification 
primarily at the Revised Estimates stage to accommodate additional expenditure on 
International Day of Yoga (IDY) celebrations. The Committee recommends that 
adequate budgetary allocation at the Budget Estimate stage be ensured so that IEC 
activities aimed at disseminating Ayush outcomes and awareness at the grassroots level 
are not constrained or made contingent upon mid-year revisions. A more predictable 
and sufficiently provisioned budget would enable sustained outreach to the general 
public beyond event-specific expenditure.  
 
3.7.4 The Secretary, Ministry of Ayush has cited NSSO Survey 2022-23 on Ayush 
indicating that approximately 95 per cent of rural and 96 per cent of urban persons aged 15 
years and above are aware of Ayush systems of medicine. However, the Committee observes 
with concern that only 46.3 per cent of rural and 52.9 per cent of urban persons have been 
reported using Ayush for prevention or treatment of ailments during the last 365 days.  
 
2022–23 2023–24 2024–25 2025–26 2026–27BE43.88 41 43.2 43.2 45RE51.6 39.85 33.12 73 0Actual55.4 33.12 29.82 55.64 001020304050607080Comparison of BE, RE & Actuals of IEC SchemeBEREActual(₹  in crore)

 *include Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa 3.7.5 The Committee recognizes that awareness of Ayush systems is praiseworthy but comparatively actual practice of Ayush remains largely confined to Ayurveda and predominantly for preventive and rejuvenative purpcurative treatment.  The Committee notes with concern that divergence between awareness and actual use/practice clearly reflects a structural gap in the translation of awareness into sustained and confidenceof the view that the reason for underuse is public perception of Ayush with limited curative efficacy, quick relief requirements and limited visibility of robust clinical evidence etc. The Committee recommends that the Minisfrom generic awareness campaigns to highlighting disease-specific success stories, clinical research outcomes and standard treatment protocols in a simplified and accessible manner. Public Campaigns and awareness in fair/seminars must focus on demonstrating the curative and management potential of Ayush in chronic and lifestyle disorders rather than limiting messaging to wellness and rejuvenation themes. Structured Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) modules may be developed to build sustained public confidence through testimonials, case documentation, and communityinterventions should intensively integrate digital tools for enhanced outreach, conduct district-level impact assessments and tailor regionthrough social media including digital and audio video publicity. The Ministry explore periodic thematic campaigns linked to specific diseases supported by validated data to reposition Ayush as a credible therapeutic option alongside preventive care. 3.7.6 The Committee has been given to understand that the average per capita expenditure on Ayush treatment remains relatively modest urban areas which indicates its potential affordability as a preventive and supportive healthcare option. In this context, the Committee recommends that Yoga and wellnessbased services be systematically integrated and expanded under the National Programme for Prevention and Control of Non
Table 1: Percentage of persons used Ayush for prevention or treatment of ailments by system of medicineSystem of medicine Rural UrbanAyurveda 40.5 45.5Others* 9.4 12.8Any 46.3 52.9
30 
Unani, Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa and Homoeopathy The Committee recognizes that awareness of Ayush systems is praiseworthy but comparatively actual practice of Ayush remains largely confined to Ayurveda and predominantly for preventive and rejuvenative purposes rather than for therapeutic or curative treatment.  The Committee notes with concern that divergence between awareness and actual use/practice clearly reflects a structural gap in the translation of awareness into sustained and confidence-based healthcare adoption. The Committee is of the view that the reason for underuse is public perception of Ayush with limited curative efficacy, quick relief requirements and limited visibility of robust clinical evidence etc. The Committee recommends that the Ministry’s IEC strategy should shift from generic awareness campaigns to evidence-based therapeutic communicationspecific success stories, clinical research outcomes and standard treatment protocols in a simplified and accessible manner. Public Campaigns and awareness in fair/seminars must focus on demonstrating the curative and management tial of Ayush in chronic and lifestyle disorders rather than limiting messaging to wellness and rejuvenation themes. Structured Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) modules may be developed to build sustained public confidence through cumentation, and community-level engagement. Further, IEC interventions should intensively integrate digital tools for enhanced outreach, conduct level impact assessments and tailor region-specific messaging in local languages including digital and audio video publicity. The Ministry periodic thematic campaigns linked to specific diseases supported by validated data to reposition Ayush as a credible therapeutic option alongside preventive care.ee has been given to understand that the average per capita expenditure on Ayush treatment remains relatively modest ₹ 472 in rural and ₹ 574 in urban areas which indicates its potential affordability as a preventive and supportive is context, the Committee recommends that Yoga and wellnessbased services be systematically integrated and expanded under the National Programme for Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases (NP
Table 1: Percentage of persons used Ayush for prevention or treatment of ailments by system of medicine Urban 45.5 12.8 52.9 Table 2: Average expenditure (₹) per person for prevention or treatment of ailments using Ayush System of medicine Rural UrbanAyurveda 394 499Others* 622 592Any 472 574 The Committee recognizes that awareness of Ayush systems is praiseworthy but comparatively actual practice of Ayush remains largely confined to Ayurveda and oses rather than for therapeutic or curative treatment.  The Committee notes with concern that divergence between awareness and actual use/practice clearly reflects a structural gap in the translation of care adoption. The Committee is of the view that the reason for underuse is public perception of Ayush with limited curative efficacy, quick relief requirements and limited visibility of robust clinical try’s IEC strategy should shift based therapeutic communication specific success stories, clinical research outcomes and standard treatment protocols in a simplified and accessible manner. Public Campaigns and awareness in fair/seminars must focus on demonstrating the curative and management tial of Ayush in chronic and lifestyle disorders rather than limiting messaging to wellness and rejuvenation themes. Structured Behaviour Change Communication (BCC) modules may be developed to build sustained public confidence through level engagement. Further, IEC interventions should intensively integrate digital tools for enhanced outreach, conduct specific messaging in local languages including digital and audio video publicity. The Ministry should periodic thematic campaigns linked to specific diseases supported by validated data to reposition Ayush as a credible therapeutic option alongside preventive care. ee has been given to understand that the average per capita ₹ 472 in rural and ₹ 574 in urban areas which indicates its potential affordability as a preventive and supportive is context, the Committee recommends that Yoga and wellness-based services be systematically integrated and expanded under the National Communicable Diseases (NP-NCD) 
₹) per person for prevention or treatment of ailments using Urban 499 592 574 

31 
 
particularly targeting rural and geriatric populations who bear a disproportionate 
burden of lifestyle-related disorders. Given the comparatively half out-of-pocket 
expenditure associated with Ayush interventions such integration may serve as a cost-
effective preventive model, reduce long-term NCD treatment costs and generate inter-
generational adoption patterns that gradually influence the younger population towards 
sustained wellness practices. 
 
3.7.7 The Committee observes that IEC initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
including fairs, seminars, conferences and promotional campaigns, are presently 
evaluated largely on the basis of the number of activities conducted rather than their 
measurable impact on utilisation of Ayush services. The Committee, therefore, desires 
to be apprised of outcome-based indicators to assess the outreach of initiatives that are 
effectively translating public awareness into behavioural change. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the Ministry establish an outcome-oriented monitoring 
framework under the IEC Scheme incorporating measurable key indicators such as 
increase in utilisation of Ayush services, repeat usage patterns, district-level outreach 
penetration and public confidence indices. Periodic impact assessments should be 
conducted so that IEC strategies may be refined based on evidence of their effectiveness. 
 
3.7.8 The Committee notes that a significant portion of IEC activities’s expenditure 
appears to be associated with large-scale events such as International Day of Yoga 
celebrations and national promotional programmes. While such events play an 
important role in enhancing visibility of Ayush systems, sustained behavioural adoption 
requires continuous and community-level engagement beyond episodic outreach 
activities. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Ayush may 
strengthen year-round community-based communication strategies, encouraging States 
and local implementing agencies to develop region-specific IEC content in local 
languages addressing area-specific health concerns and disease burdens. Greater 
decentralisation of communication efforts, supported by trained grassrootlevel 
functionaries and community institutions would help ensure deeper and more sustained 
outreach translating into actual utilization. 
 
3.7.9 The Committee is given to understand that International day of Yoga 2025 
celebrated on a massive scale which has led to global recognition with two Guinness 
Book of Records including largest Yoga session (3.02 lakh participants) and mass Surya 
Namaskar (22,122 tribal students). Further, the Ministry plans to launch Ayush 
Samagra Swasthya Mission including “Har Ghar Ayur-Yog- self care model in 75% 
households by 2029” as part of the National Ayush Mission. The Committee appreciates 
the global recognition by IDY in previous years and given the substantial public 
expenditure involved to the tune of ₹ 56 crore in 2025 and ₹ 25 crore in 2024, the 
Ministry may consider setting a progressive roadmap towards achieving 100 % 
household coverage in place of 75% under the “Har Ghar Ayur-Yog” initiative by 2029 
as the name of the initiative itself spells out. The Committee further recommends that a 
structured, advance promotion and preparedness campaign and implementation 
milestones be launched especially in schools, colleges to ensure sustained behavioural 
adoption beyond event-based participation. The Committee further recommends that 
the active engagement of trained Yoga Instructors and certified community-level 
trainers be institutionalised to ensure last-mile outreach and sustained household 
adoption under the “Har Ghar Ayur-Yog” initiative. 
 
3.7.10 The Committee has also been apprised by the Secretary, Ministry of Ayush about 
the current status of the nationwide campaign “Desh Ka Prakriti Parikshan”, under 
which more than 1.40 crore Indian citizens aged 18 years and above have undergone 

32 
 
app-based Prakriti assessment. The Committee appreciates the initiative and its wide 
outreach and recommends that the Ministry of Ayush leverage the data generated 
through these Prakriti Parikshan assessments for developing evidence-based preventive 
health strategies and personalised lifestyle advisories rooted in Ayurvedic principles. 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry must ensure wider dissemination 
of the campaign through digital platforms, educational institutions and community 
health networks so that a larger segment of the population, particularly in rural and 
underserved areas can benefit from Prakriti-based health awareness and preventive 
healthcare practices. 
 
3.8 AYURGYAN SCHEME 
 
3.8.1 The Ministry of Ayush is implementing the Central Sector Scheme namely 
AYURGYAN Scheme which has 03 components viz.  
 
i. Capacity Building & Continuing Medical Education (CME) in Ayush - involves 
ongoing professional training and development initiatives for Ayush healthcare 
professionals, including doctors, teachers, and paramedics 
ii. Research & Innovation in Ayush- entails the exploration and development of new 
therapies, drugs, and practices within the Ayush systems of medicine 
iii. Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health Research- aims to bridge traditional Ayurveda 
principles with modern sciences like molecular biology, pharmacology, immunology, 
and bioinformatics. 
 
3.8.2 The budgetary allocation for Aurgyan during last five years alongwith percentage 
utilization is enumerated below: 
 
            (Table-15) 
Year BE RE RE vs BE (%)  Actual % Utilisation of RE 
2022-23 15.50 10.85 70% 9.38 86.45 
2023-24 9.00 15.00 214.28% 14.99 99.93 
2024-25 49.50 27.00 54.54 25.70 95.18 
2025-26 50 37.81 75.62 37.50*  99.18* 
2026-27 50 - - - - 
                         *As on 31.12.2025                                                           (₹ in crore) 
 
3.8.3 The Committee notes with concern that the allocation under the Ayurgyan 
Scheme has witnessed significant downward revision at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage 
in consecutive financial years In 2024-25, the Budget Estimate (BE) of ₹49.50 crore was 
reduced to ₹ 27.00 crore at the RE stage, representing a reduction of approximately 45 
per cent, with actual expenditure of ₹ 25.70 crore. Similarly, in 2025-26, the BE of ₹ 
50.00 crore was reduced to ₹ 37.81 crore at the RE stage. The Committee takes into 
account the submission of the Ministry that due to this reduction of allocation at the RE 
stage, funds could not be released to certain projects approved by the Project 
Sanctioning Committee (PSC). 
 
3.8.4 The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in supporting 
research activities under the Ayurgyan Scheme, is of the view that such recurring mid-
year contraction of funds at RE stage adversely affects the expansion and continuity of 
research projects and leads to delays in the execution of approved studies, particularly 
those sanctioned by the Project Sanctioning Committee. Particularly, the Committee 

33 
 
takes into consideration the submission of the Ministry that reduction of budgetary 
allocation of ₹ 50.00 crore at BE to ₹ 37.81 crore at RE 2025-26 led to non release of 
funds to certain projects as approved by the Committee is further of the view that such 
budgetary uncertainty must have undermined the confidence of participating 
institutions and impede the effective achievement of the objectives of the scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry evolve a protected funding 
mechanism for ongoing research projects so as to avoid slashing of budgetary allocation. 
The Committee further recommends that multi-year research commitments under the 
scheme should be planned and funded in a manner that ensures stability and continuity 
and are not subjected to annual budgetary volatility. 
 
3.8.5 The Committee finds that there has been under-utilisation of funds available 
under the Ayurgyan Scheme during 2024-25. The Committee takes into account the 
submissions of the Ministry that the under-utilisation was primarily due to procedural 
and operational issues such as delays in utilisation of funds by implementing institutions 
and balances lying in the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) accounts beyond the admissible 
limits, which prevented further release of funds and resulted in savings. The Committee, 
in this regard recommends the Ministry to take appropriate precautionary measures so 
that the incident of underutilization funds under the scheme is not repeated in the 
ensuing financial year. 
 
3.8.6 The Committee is anguished to observe that on perusal of the list of projects 
which could not receive funds due to under-utilisation and the CNA ceiling limits,  it 
found that several of these projects involved reputed institutions such as the All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi; All India Institute of Ayurveda 
(AIIA), New Delhi; Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences, Ranchi; Thiruvalluvar 
University, Vellore; Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi; Guru Teg Bahadur 
Hospital, Delhi; and other academic and research institutions. The Committee further 
notes that the proposed studies covered diverse areas including clinical trials, 
pharmacological evaluation of drugs, microbial studies and integrative medicine 
interventions relating to conditions such as psoriasis, cancer, COVID-19 management, 
neurological disorders, depression and other health conditions. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that no projects should be deprived of fund.  
 
3.8.7 The Committee is of the view that while financial prudence and adherence to 
procedural requirements are essential but such bottlenecks should not impede the 
timely execution of research projects under a scheme intended to promote scientific 
validation and innovation in Ayush systems of medicine. The Committee in this 
connection, recommends the Ministry to evolve increased level of monitoring of projects 
sanctioned under the Scheme and institute periodic reviews of their progress so as to 
avoid recurrence of such situations in future. The Committee is constrained to observe 
that the non-execution of such PSC-approved studies represents a missed opportunity 
for generating scientific evidence and advancing research in Ayush systems of medicine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 3.8.8 The Ministry has provided Scheme wise details of Annual Target set for FY 2025and achievement till 31.12.2025 in Ayurgyan which is as follows: 
 3.8.9 The Committee observes that under the Ayurgyan Scheme, the Ministry has supported 39 out of the targeted 50 resear78%). While the progress in sanctioning and supporting research projects is noteworthy, the Committee observes with concern that outcomeremain relatively modest. Against the annual target of 1models, only 6 have been achieved so far (approximately 43%). This indicates that although the initiation and funding of research projects is progressing at a modest pace, the conversion of funded research into validated, standatreatment models remains limited. The Committee further observes that under certain components, research studies have been initiated and in some cases have even exceeded the targeted numbers; however, the corresponding publiof concern. In the component of Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health Research, despite exceeding the target for research studies, no publications in reputed peerjournals have been reported so far. This reflects a signinitiation and dissemination of research findings, which undermines the larger objective of the Ayurgyan scheme to generate credible scientific evidence for Ayush systems. 3.8.10 The Committee notes with satisfaction that although a substantial proportion of the targeted research projects under the Ayurgyan Scheme have been supported so far as reported but despite adequate or even higher initiation of research studies in some components, the publication output remains, primarily a matter of committee’s concern indicating a lag between project implementation and dissemination of credible scientific evidence. In light thereof, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must 
34 
s provided Scheme wise details of Annual Target set for FY 2025and achievement till 31.12.2025 in Ayurgyan which is as follows: 
The Committee observes that under the Ayurgyan Scheme, the Ministry has supported 39 out of the targeted 50 research projects during the year (achievement of 78%). While the progress in sanctioning and supporting research projects is noteworthy, the Committee observes with concern that outcome-level achievements remain relatively modest. Against the annual target of 14 validated drugs/treatment models, only 6 have been achieved so far (approximately 43%). This indicates that although the initiation and funding of research projects is progressing at a modest pace, the conversion of funded research into validated, standardized, and clinically accepted treatment models remains limited. The Committee further observes that under certain components, research studies have been initiated and in some cases have even exceeded the targeted numbers; however, the corresponding publication outputs remain a matter of concern. In the component of Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health Research, despite exceeding the target for research studies, no publications in reputed peerjournals have been reported so far. This reflects a significant lag between project initiation and dissemination of research findings, which undermines the larger objective of the Ayurgyan scheme to generate credible scientific evidence for Ayush systems.The Committee notes with satisfaction that although a substantial proportion of the targeted research projects under the Ayurgyan Scheme have been supported so far as reported but despite adequate or even higher initiation of research studies in some nents, the publication output remains, primarily a matter of committee’s concern indicating a lag between project implementation and dissemination of credible scientific evidence. In light thereof, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must 
s provided Scheme wise details of Annual Target set for FY 2025-26 
 The Committee observes that under the Ayurgyan Scheme, the Ministry has ch projects during the year (achievement of 78%). While the progress in sanctioning and supporting research projects is level achievements 4 validated drugs/treatment models, only 6 have been achieved so far (approximately 43%). This indicates that although the initiation and funding of research projects is progressing at a modest pace, rdized, and clinically accepted treatment models remains limited. The Committee further observes that under certain components, research studies have been initiated and in some cases have even exceeded cation outputs remain a matter of concern. In the component of Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health Research, despite exceeding the target for research studies, no publications in reputed peer-reviewed ificant lag between project initiation and dissemination of research findings, which undermines the larger objective of the Ayurgyan scheme to generate credible scientific evidence for Ayush systems. The Committee notes with satisfaction that although a substantial proportion of the targeted research projects under the Ayurgyan Scheme have been supported so far as reported but despite adequate or even higher initiation of research studies in some nents, the publication output remains, primarily a matter of committee’s concern indicating a lag between project implementation and dissemination of credible scientific evidence. In light thereof, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must 


35 
 
strengthen the monitoring and outcome-tracking mechanisms of the Ayurgyan Scheme 
so that research projects translate into tangible outputs such as validated treatment 
models, standardized drugs and peer-reviewed scientific publications within defined 
timelines. The Ministry may also consider introducing clear milestones, periodic peer 
review and incentives for publication in reputed journals along with stronger 
coordination between research institutions and clinical centres to ensure that funded 
projects effectively for contributing to evidence generation and wider acceptance of 
Ayush therapies. 
 
3.9 SCHEME FOR CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE 
MANAGEMENT OF MEDICINAL PLANTS UNDER NATIONAL MEDICINAL 
PLANTS BOARD (NMPB) 
 
3.9.1 The Ministry of Ayush is implementing a scheme for the conservation, development 
and sustainable management of medicinal plants through the National Medicinal Plants Board 
(NMPB). The Board is responsible for the execution of the scheme in coordination with State 
Medicinal Plants Boards, State Horticulture Departments, and State Forest Departments etc. 
Under this framework, financial assistance is provided to support activities such as cultivation 
of medicinal plants, establishment of nurseries, post-harvest management and other initiatives 
aimed at strengthening the medicinal plant sector and promoting sustainable utilisation of 
medicinal plant resources. 
The budgetary allocation flow table of CSSDMMP is as following: 
 
Table- 16 
Year BE RE RE vs BE (%)  Actual % Utilisation of RE 
2022-23 48.49 48.25 99.50 48.25 100 
2023-24 43.49 20 45.98 19.53 97.65 
2024-25 49.49 40 80.83 40 100 
2025-26 65 35 53 29.59*  84.53* 
2026-27 40 -                    *As on 10.02.2025                                                                 (₹ in crore ) 
 
3.9.2 The Committee finds that the budgetary allocation for the Central Sector 
Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal 
Plants has witnessed significant fluctuations between the Budget Estimates and Revised 
Estimates in recent years. The Committee is of the view that such reductions at the 
Revised Estimate stage may affect the continuity and effectiveness of activities relating 
to conservation, resource augmentation and research support. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush, through the National Medicinal 
Plants Board, undertake more realistic assessment of financial requirements and 
strengthen planning and monitoring mechanisms so that funds allocated under the 
scheme are utilized in a timely and efficient manner, ensuring sustained progress in the 
conservation, development and sustainable management of medicinal plants. 
 
3.9.3 The Committee has been apprised by the Ministry that India currently has 1,178 
medicinal plant species in trade, of which 242 species are in high commercial demand and 
that historically a significant proportion of these plants has been sourced from forests. The 
Ministry has informed that it is promoting a shift from forest-based collection to organised 
cultivation through financial incentives, cultivation clusters, and development of quality 
planting material. 

36 
 
3.9.4 The Committee takes note of the policy shift in direction aimed at reducing 
pressure on forest resources to organized cultivation of quality planting material while 
ensuring sustainable supply of medicinal plants for the Ayush industry. However, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry’s reply to include benchmarks or timelines 
for reducing forest dependency or measurable targets for expanding cultivation of high-
demand species of medicinal plants. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
transition from a purely promotional role to a target-driven roadmap based on species-
specific categorisation and with charted timelines by mandating a minimum 
procurement quota from organized cultivation clusters for gradually reducing 
dependence on forest-sourced medicinal plants. The Committee further recommends 
that Ministry explore for creating guaranteed market for farmers, effectively bridging 
the price gap between forest-sourced materials and cultivated species. The Committee is 
of the view that Ministry should also check out Action Plan to encourage farmers for 
cultivation of medicinal plants in cluster. 
 
3.9.5 The Committee notes that the Ministry has launched the e-CHARAK portal to 
facilitate information exchange among stakeholders in the medicinal plant sector and to 
provide market price information and buyer seller connect and facility to post an item 
availability for approximately 100 medicinal plant species across different herbal markets in 
the country. 
 
3.9.6 The Committee acknowledges the E-Charak portal as a positive step towards 
improving market transparency in the medicinal plants sector. However, the Committee 
has taken hand on experience of the portal and is of the view that the platform presently 
functions largely as an information interface providing price details and buyer seller 
contact channel which may not fully address the challenges faced by cultivators in 
accessing reliable buyers and stable markets. The Committee further notes that 
transactions between buyers and sellers are ultimately concluded through offline 
payment mechanisms which may increase the risk of fraud, delays in supply and lack of 
transaction security. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry to 
further strengthen the E-Charak platform by incorporating additional features such as 
a digital trading interface with secure payment processing, a “soil-to-shelf” traceability 
system for quality assurance, certification and demand forecasting mechanisms for key 
medicinal plant species. The Ministry may also undertake focused efforts to promote 
wider adoption of the platform among farmers and Farmer Producer Organisations 
(FPOs) so as to enhance market access and ensure greater transparency and efficiency 
in the trade of medicinal plants. 
 
3.9.7 The Committee finds that the Ministry has supported seed germplasm centres, 
nurseries and rural collection centres under the Central Sector Scheme of the National 
Medicinal Plants Board. The Ministry has also reported support for quality planting 
material and training of farmers in Good Agricultural Practices. However, the 
adequacy of expansion of these initiatives is still the matter of concern. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry undertake an assessment of the national 
requirement of Quality Planting Material (QPM) for medicinal plants and expand 
nursery networks accordingly, particularly in major cultivation clusters in meeting the 
increasing demand for planting material, particularly in view of the expansion of 
medicinal plant cultivation. 
 
3.9.8 The Committee is given to understand that the Ministry has supported initiatives 
for Good Agricultural and Collection Practices (GACP) and voluntary certification of 
medicinal plant produce through capacity building programmes. However, the Ministry 
has indicated that presently no cultivation clusters are fully compliant with GACP 

37 
 
standards which suggest that the adoption of quality certification frameworks remains 
limited. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that the Ministry takes pro active 
approach to develop a structured roadmap for wider adoption of GACP certification by 
providing technical support and financial incentives for cultivation clusters seeking 
certification. 
 
3.9.9 Further briefing the Committee on the subject during the meeting of the Committee 
held on 23.2.2026, Secretary of the Ministry stated as under: 
 
“Regarding the suggestion made by the Chair of using Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) for medicinal plants, I don’t see any issue in 
that except that CAMPA Fund is used actually in lieu of the forest area which is 
compensated. So, wherever the degraded land is provided or the land is bought and provided 
to the department, these plants can be grown in such areas only provided the local conditions 
and the ecological conditions promote such medicinal plants. So those plantation activities 
which are a part of CAMPA can obviously be taken in.” 
 
3.9.10 The Committee has raised a specific query with respect to the utilization of CAMPA 
funds for growing of medicinal plants. The Ministry has stated that it has proposed for the 
inclusion of plantation of medicinal plants under the Compensatory Afforestation Fund 
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) framework and related programmes such as 
“Ek Ped Maa Ke Naam” implemented by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change. The Ministry further states that a D.O. letter from the Secretary, Ayush was 
addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on 
07.01.2026 and the matter is presently under active consideration. 
 
3.9.11 While appreciating the initiative taken by the Ministry to explore convergence 
with afforestation programmes, the Committee observes that the proposal is still at a 
preliminary stage of inter-ministerial consultation without any timeline for 
operationalising the inclusion of medicinal plant plantations under Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) supported 
activities. The Committee is of the strong view that integration of medicinal plant 
plantations within national afforestation programmes could significantly contribute to 
sustainable supply of raw materials for the Ayush sector while simultaneously 
supporting ecological restoration and livelihood opportunities. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must pursue the proposal 
with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in a time-bound manner 
so that plantation of medicinal plants may be appropriately incorporated within 
CAMPA-supported afforestation activities and related national plantation programmes 
like “Ek Ped Maa ke naam”. The Committee further recommends that, once the 
proposal is finalised, the National Medicinal Plants Board may develop suitable 
guidelines in coordination with State Forest Departments to ensure that plantation of 
medicinal plants are scientifically planned, monitored and linked with conservation as 
well as sustainable utilisation objectives of the Ayush sector.  
 
3.9.12 The Committee is of the considered view that Medicinal plants have been an 
integral part of traditional and modern healthcare systems due to their therapeutic 
potential and bioactive compounds. Medicinal plants offer natural, cost-effective 
remedies with fewer side effects for a wide range of health conditions, including chronic 
diseases, infections, and metabolic disorders. In order to gain maximum benefits of these 
traditional plants, the availability of such medicinal plants are essential. In view of this, 
the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change should make it mandatory that, in case of afforestation in degraded 

38 
 
areas, at least 25 percent of the plantation from CAMPA funds should be of medicinal 
plants, suitable for that particular ecology. The Ministry should ensure that plantations 
contribute meaningfully to carbon sinks and biodiversity restoration rather than short-
term target fulfillment. 
 
3.9.13  The Committee is surprised to note the Ministry’s reply that the National 
Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) does not possess recent data regarding the percentage 
decrease in forest-sourced raw material. The Board has referred to the report “Medicinal 
Plants in India: An Assessment of their Demand and Supply, 2017”, which indicates that 
1,178 medicinal plant species are traded in India, comprising 42% herbs, 27% trees and 31% 
shrubs and climbers. Of these, 242 species are in high commercial demand, with annual 
consumption exceeding 100 metric tonnes. The report further indicates that 15 species (6%) 
are imported, 54 species (22%) are obtained through cultivation, 59 species (25%) are 
collected from landscapes outside forests and 114 species (47%) continue to be harvested 
from forests.  
 
3.9.14 The Committee observes that the assessment of data regarding the percentage 
decrease in forest sourced raw material is nearly a decade old and the demand-supply 
dynamics of medicinal plants might have undergone significant changes in view of the 
Ministry’s recent initiatives for promotion and cultivation of medicinal plants. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake a fresh national 
assessment of demand and supply of medicinal plants to generate updated evidence for 
informed policy planning and scientific development of cultivation clusters. The 
Committee further recommends for establishing a dynamic National Medicinal Plants 
Demand-Supply Database, preferably integrated with the e-Charak Portal and updated 
periodically in coordination with industry stakeholders, State Medicinal Plants Boards 
and Ayush manufacturers. Such a mechanism would enable identification of high-
demand species, facilitate better planning of cultivation initiatives and help address 
issues relating to market uncertainty and price volatility in the medicinal plants sector. 
 
3.9.15 The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that targets such as 
5 medicinal plant species conservation projects, 1500 hectares in-situ resource 
augmentation and 13.5 lakh saplings regeneration have been undertaken. The 
Committee, however, observes that the target set by the Ministry appear limited 
considering India’s vast medicinal plant biodiversity. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that while conservation initiatives are being undertaken, the scale of 
interventions need to be expanded to address threats to rare and endangered medicinal 
plant species. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to scale up conservation 
programmes, particularly for rare, endangered and endemic medicinal plant species, 
and promote community participation in conservation efforts. 
 
3.9.16 The Committee takes recent press release that the National Medicinal Plants Board 
has introduced a component titled Medicinal Plants Business Centre (MPBC) under the 
Central Sector Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of 
Medicinal Plants with the objective of strengthening post-harvest management, storage, 
grading, value addition, packaging and quality testing of medicinal plant produce. The 
Committee is of the view that the medicinal plant sector in the country continues to face 
challenges relating to fragmented value chains, inadequate post-harvest infrastructure and 
limited market-oriented processing facilities which often affect quality and reduce the 
economic returns to cultivators and collectors. 
 
3.9.17 The Committee welcomes the introduction of Medicinal Plants Business Centre 
(MPBC) as an important intervention towards strengthening the value chain mechanism of 

medicinal plants,   however, the Committee desires that the funding pattern, scale, implementation framework or timelines for establishment of such centres must be made clear. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Aestablishment of Medicinal Plants Business Centres with adequate financial provisioning for training local farmers & Farmer Producer Organisationsreduce post-harvest losses, facilitate valuemedicinal plants sector. The Committee further recommends thateach centre be tailored to the specificcatchment area to ensure 100% capacity utilization. 3.10. AYURSWASTHY YOJANA The Ministry of Ayush has apprised the Committee about the component of Ayurswasthya Yojna:  The budgetary allocation to Ayurswasthya  Yojna during  the last five year is enumerated below:   Year 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 2026-27                         *As on 31.01.2026                              3.10.1 The Committee takes note of the budgetary allocations under the Ayurswasthya Scheme. The Budget Estimates (BE) have witnessed substantial revisions at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage across multiple financial years, for instance, the BE of 2022-23 was reduced to ₹ 11.00 crore at the RE stage, while in 2024crore was revised downward to ₹ 29.00 crore. The Ministry has explained the Committee that these reductions were primarily due to higher balances in the Cenaccounts beyond the admissible limits, resulting in the nonCommittee, however, notes withaffected certain institutions including the newly eCollege and Hospital, Chandigarh which faced delays in fund availability.
39 
medicinal plants,   however, the Committee desires that the funding pattern, scale, implementation framework or timelines for establishment of such centres must be made clear. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must ensure establishment of Medicinal Plants Business Centres with adequate financial provisioning for training local farmers & Farmer Producer Organisationsso that these centres can effectively harvest losses, facilitate value addition and strengthen market linkages in the medicinal plants sector. The Committee further recommends that the scale and machineryeach centre be tailored to the specific agro-climatic zones and harvest volumes of the local 100% capacity utilization. AYURSWASTHY YOJANA The Ministry of Ayush has apprised the Committee about the component of Ayurswasthya The budgetary allocation to Ayurswasthya  Yojna during  the last five year is Table-17 BE RE Actual27.79 11.00 6.00 12.85 72.59 29.00 62.60 46.73 62.60 - *As on 31.01.2026                                                          (₹ in crore The Committee takes note of the budgetary allocations under the Ayurswasthya Scheme. The Budget Estimates (BE) have witnessed substantial revisions at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage across multiple financial years, for instance, the BE of ₹ 27.7₹ 11.00 crore at the RE stage, while in 2024-25 the BE of ₹ 29.00 crore. The Ministry has explained the Committee that these reductions were primarily due to higher balances in the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) accounts beyond the admissible limits, resulting in the non-release of further funds. The notes with deep concern that such financial constraints have adversely affected certain institutions including the newly established Shri Dhanwantry Ayurvedic College and Hospital, Chandigarh which faced delays in fund availability. 
medicinal plants,   however, the Committee desires that the funding pattern, scale, implementation framework or timelines for establishment of such centres must be made clear. yush must ensure time-bound establishment of Medicinal Plants Business Centres with adequate financial provisioning for so that these centres can effectively addition and strengthen market linkages in the scale and machinery of and harvest volumes of the local The Ministry of Ayush has apprised the Committee about the component of Ayurswasthya  The budgetary allocation to Ayurswasthya  Yojna during  the last five year is Actual 10.95 20.83 20.61 46.66 - ₹ in crore ) The Committee takes note of the budgetary allocations under the Ayurswasthya Scheme. The Budget Estimates (BE) have witnessed substantial revisions at the Revised ₹ 27.79 crore in 25 the BE of ₹ 72.59 ₹ 29.00 crore. The Ministry has explained the Committee that tral Nodal Agency (CNA) release of further funds. The deep concern that such financial constraints have adversely stablished Shri Dhanwantry Ayurvedic 


40 
 
3.10.2 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to make concerted 
efforts to provide adequate budgetary support to the Ayurswasthya Scheme. The 
Committee views that repeated reduction of Budget Estimates (BE) at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage does not provide a stable equilibrium of the scheme’s financial 
management and may affect effective programme implementation. Moreover, a gap 
between the initial budgetary projections and the actual allocation at BE and RE Stage 
hampers the implementation pace and capacity of the scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry review the fund flow and monitoring 
mechanisms under the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) framework and undertake a 
careful assessment of the factors leading to repeated revisions at the RE stage so as to 
ensure that budgetary allocations translate into timely financial support to 
implementing institutions enabling the institute to achieve the cherished goal of the 
scheme. The Committee further emphases that the Ministry should ensure more 
realistic budgeting, strengthen appraisal of project proposals and align financial 
allocations with implementable project pipelines so that the allocations made at the BE 
stage translate into tangible and credible outcomes.  
 
3.10.3 The Ministry has provided a list of 26 projects supported under Ayush and Public 
health component of Ayurswasthya Yojna, undertaken by different government and non 
government bodies in multiple streams from 2022-23 to 2024-25. 
 
3.10.4 The Committee takes note of the list of 26 projects supported by the Ministry 
under the Ayush and Public Health component of the Ayurswasthya Yojana during the 
financial years 2022-23 to 2024-25. The Committee observes that an overwhelming 
majority of the projects have been undertaken by Government institutions (20 out of 
25), while only a limited number of projects (five) involve non-government institutions, 
including NGOs and trusts. This pattern appears inconsistent with the broader design of 
the scheme, which envisages the participation of a diverse set of stakeholders including 
Government institutions, non-profit and voluntary organisations, NGOs, athletes, and 
other institutions to promote community-based Ayush interventions, research, and 
outreach initiatives. The Committee further notes that the projects supported under the 
scheme appear to be limited in scale and concentrated in a relatively small number of 
institutions and geographical areas. Such trend indicates that the full potential of the 
scheme to mobilise diverse institutional participation for expanding Ayush based 
community health services has not yet been fully realised. The Committee is, therefore, 
of the firm view that the Ministry should take proactive measures to broaden 
institutional participation under the scheme by undertaking targeted outreach and 
awareness initiatives. The Ministry should also encourage the participation of eligible 
non-government institutions by simplifying and standardising the procedures and 
addressing existing bottlenecks. The Committee recommends the Ministry to encourage 
the participants besides ensuring for balanced distribution of projects and promote 
collaborative projects involving government institutions, NGOs and community based 
organisations along with strengthening monitoring and undertaking periodic review of 
project outcomes to ensure that the scheme effectively contributes to expanding 
community-level Ayush services and research activities. 
 
3.10.5 The Committee observes that the financial norms for projects under the 
Ayurswasthya Yojana are framed at the time of the scheme’s launch around 2021-22, 
with a maximum project support of ₹ 1.5 crore for three years under the Public Health 
Intervention component. The Committee is of the view that considering the rise in costs 
of medicines, diagnostics, manpower and programme implementation, the real value of 
financial assistance may not be lucrative for Non-Government organizations to 
undertake initiative under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 

41 
 
Ministry undertake a periodic review of financial norms and cost ceilings under the 
scheme, taking into account inflation and implementation experience so as to ensure 
that the sanctioned projects are adequately resourced to achieve their intended public 
health outcomes. 
 
3.11 Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Utpadan Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) 
 
3.11.1 The scheme aims to regulate Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, and Homeopathy (ASU&H) 
medicines in India, utilizing the framework provided by the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 
and its associated rules. The objectives of the Scheme are as under: 
 
i. To enhance India's manufacturing capabilities and exports of traditional medicines 
and health promotion products under the initiative of Atmanirbhar Bharat. 
ii. To facilitate adequate infrastructural & technological upgradation and institutional 
activities in public and private sector for standardization, quality manufacturing and 
analytical testing of Ayush drugs & materials. 
iii. To strengthen regulatory frameworks at Central and State level for effective quality 
control, safety monitoring and surveillance of misleading advertisements of Ayush 
drugs. 
iv. To encourage building up synergies, collaborations and convergent approaches for 
promoting standards and quality of Ayush drugs & materials. 
 
The budgetary allocation to AOGUSY scheme during last five years is as following: 
 
Table-18 
Year BE RE 
% reduction 
of BE at RE 
stage 
Actual 
2022-23 23.50 20.00 14.89 19.05 
2023-24 20.00 12.26 38.70 11.59 
2024-25 25.00 15.00 20.00 13.92 
2025-26 27.00 17.75 34.25 17.50* 
2026-27 27 - - - 
                      *As on 31.01.2026                                                                    (₹ in crore ) 
 
3.11.2 The Committee, while analysing the budgetary allocation under the Ayush Oushadhi 
Gunvatta Evam Utpadan Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) of the Ministry of Ayush, notes 
with concern that the budgetary allocation for the scheme has not been encouraging over the 
last five years The Committee further observes that there has been a significant reduction of 
the Budget Estimates (BE) at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage, which indicates 
underutilization of allocated funds and reflects the limited absorptive capacity in the 
implementation of the scheme. The Ministry has attributed this reduction primarily to the 
inability of certain grantee organizations to procure heavy machinery and equipment owing to 
issues relating to availability and the lengthy procurement procedures. Additionally, the 
restrictions associated with the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) account mechanism, 
particularly the conditional release of funds linked to utilization levels have reportedly 
resulted in difficulties in timely utilization of funds. The Committee is not inclined to accept 
the explanation furnished by the Ministry of Ayush and observes that the responsibility for 
effective implementation of such a critical scheme aimed at strengthening the quality, safety, 
and efficacy of Ayush drugs cannot be shifted onto the grantee organizations alone. The 
Ministry ought to have acted proactively to ensure effective utilization of funds. The 

Committee also recalls that in its previous report, the Committee had cautioned the Ministry to take effective steps to avoid reduction of allocations at the Revised Estimates stage and to undertake better financial planning.  3.11.3 The Committee expresses serious concern that there has been substantial reduction of BE allocation to AOGUSY  at the RE stage in last five years highlighting the issue of low utilization of funds as recurring phenomena and the Ministry has not taken adequate corrective measures despite a precautionary observation of the Committee in its earlier report, instead the Ministry attributing the shortfall to procedural and operational difficulties faced by the grantee institutions. The Committee believes that such procedural bottlenecks, inadequate implementation support and delays in procurement processes indicate systemic deficiencies that require stronger institutional oversight and facilitation by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Miniimplementation mechanism for the AOGUSY scheme, including periodic review of fund utilization, streamlined procurement procedures, and capacitygrantee institutions to ensure timely execuMinistry must put in place a comprehensive financial planning framework to prevent repeated reduction of Budget Estimates at the Revised Estimates stage and to enhance the absorptive capacity of implementing agencies. 3.11.4 The Ministry has informed about the physical and financial progress of the scheme as under:  Financial progress: i. A total number of 03 DTLs, 05 Pharmacies & Pharmacovigilance Program for ASU&H Drugs (NPvCC, PPvCs&IPvCs) with total grants of ₹ 13.76 Cr. were supported under the scheme in FY 2024 ii. Till date, GIA of ₹ 17.50 Cr. have been released to 05 Pharmacies, 03 DTLs & Pharmacovigilance Program for ASU & H Drugs ((NPvCC, PPvCs&IPvCs) under the AOGUSY scheme.             42 
Committee also recalls that in its previous report, the Committee had cautioned the Ministry to take effective steps to avoid reduction of allocations at the Revised Estimates stage and to undertake better financial planning.  The Committee expresses serious concern that there has been substantial reduction of BE allocation to AOGUSY  at the RE stage in last five years highlighting the issue of low utilization of funds as recurring phenomena and the Ministry has not te corrective measures despite a precautionary observation of the Committee in its earlier report, instead the Ministry attributing the shortfall to procedural and operational difficulties faced by the grantee institutions. The Committee procedural bottlenecks, inadequate implementation support and delays in procurement processes indicate systemic deficiencies that require stronger institutional oversight and facilitation by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush institute a robust monitoring and implementation mechanism for the AOGUSY scheme, including periodic review of fund utilization, streamlined procurement procedures, and capacity-building support for grantee institutions to ensure timely execution of projects under the scheme. The Ministry must put in place a comprehensive financial planning framework to prevent repeated reduction of Budget Estimates at the Revised Estimates stage and to enhance the absorptive capacity of implementing agencies.  The Ministry has informed about the physical and financial progress of the scheme as A total number of 03 DTLs, 05 Pharmacies & Pharmacovigilance Program for ASU&H Drugs (NPvCC, PPvCs&IPvCs) with total 13.76 Cr. were supported under the scheme in FY 2024-25. ₹ 17.50 Cr. have been released to 05 Pharmacies, 03 DTLs & Pharmacovigilance Program for ASU & H Drugs ((NPvCC, PPvCs&IPvCs) under the Physical Progress: i. Till date, 03 pharmacies have applied to obtain WHO-GMP certification from CDSCO under the scheme. Further, other funded institutions under the AOGUSY scheme are in process of obtaining WHO-GMP certification.ii. Under Pharmacovigilance Program for ASU&H Drugs component,numbers of centres functioning currently under this scheme are as below. 
Committee also recalls that in its previous report, the Committee had cautioned the Ministry to take effective steps to avoid reduction of allocations at the Revised Estimates stage and to The Committee expresses serious concern that there has been substantial reduction of BE allocation to AOGUSY  at the RE stage in last five years highlighting the issue of low utilization of funds as recurring phenomena and the Ministry has not te corrective measures despite a precautionary observation of the Committee in its earlier report, instead the Ministry attributing the shortfall to procedural and operational difficulties faced by the grantee institutions. The Committee procedural bottlenecks, inadequate implementation support and delays in procurement processes indicate systemic deficiencies that require stronger institutional oversight and facilitation by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, stry of Ayush institute a robust monitoring and implementation mechanism for the AOGUSY scheme, including periodic review of fund building support for tion of projects under the scheme. The Ministry must put in place a comprehensive financial planning framework to prevent repeated reduction of Budget Estimates at the Revised Estimates stage and to enhance The Ministry has informed about the physical and financial progress of the scheme as 03 pharmacies have applied GMP certification from CDSCO under the scheme. Further, other funded institutions under the AOGUSY scheme are in process of GMP certification. Under Pharmacovigilance Program for ASU&H Drugs component, the numbers of centres functioning currently under this scheme are as  


43 
 
The Ministry has also furnished following achievements: 
 
   SUSPECTED ADVERSE DRUG 
REACTION: 
 
 System Number of Suspected 
ADRs 
F.Y 
2024-
25 
F.Y 2025-26 
(Upto 
December,2025 
1 Ayurveda 290 243 
2 Unani 193 100 
3 Siddha 113 86 
4 Homoeopathy 96 87 
5 Sowa-Rigpa 0 1 
Total 692 517 
PROMOTE UNDERSTANDING AND 
COMMUNICATION TO 
HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONS: 
 
Financial 
Year 
Awareness 
Program 
Beneficiaries 
2024-25 1248 129338 
2025-26* 1062 90766 
Total 2310 220104 
 
Misleading Advertisements Reported 
2024-25 2025-26* 
Total:  11425 Total: 12750 
 
*Upto December 2025 
 
 
3.11.7 The Ministry has informed that a total of 9,047complaints have been received through 
the Ayush Suruksha Portal  which have been forwarded to State Drug licensing authority for 
necessary action. It is further reported that State/UT Licensing Authorities have issued total 
378 notices to the defaulters. 
 
3.11.5 The Committee examined the physical and financial progress indicators along 
with the achievements highlighted by the Ministry. The Committee notes that 
complaints received through the Ayush Suraksha Portal relating to misleading 
advertisements are forwarded to the respective State Drug Licensing Authorities for 
necessary action. The Committee is of the view that such a mechanism may lead to 
inconsistent approaches in dealing with complaints across States, as the capacity, human 
resources, and enforcement priorities of State authorities vary considerably. Further, 
the absence of a uniform timeline and monitoring framework for disposal of complaints 
may defeat the very purpose of the complaint reporting mechanism and could 
potentially discourage citizens from reporting such violations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ayush vertical under the Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organization (CDSCO) should develop a uniform and standardised mechanism 
for handling complaints relating to misleading advertisements of Ayush products. The 
Committee further recommends that clear timelines must be prescribed for action by 
State authorities, along with active monitoring and periodic review at the Central level, 
to ensure timely and effective enforcement of the scheme in addressing complaints that 
have scaled up to a total of 11425 and 12750 during 2024-25 and 2025-26 (up to 
December 2025) The Committee, therefore, recommends for more stringent penal 
provisions for misleading advertisements. 
 
3.11.6 The Committee observes that despite the establishment of a nationwide 
pharmacovigilance network with multiple Intermediary and Peripheral 
Pharmacovigilance Centres, the number of reported Suspected Adverse Drug Reactions 
(ADRs) remains relatively low, which may indicate possible underreporting or limited 
awareness among practitioners and institutions. The Committee, therefore,  
recommends that the Ministry to consider making ADR reporting mandatory for Ayush 
practitioners and pharmacists and strengthen ADR reporting mechanisms through 
enhanced training of practitioners, increased awareness programmes and integration of 

44 
 
pharmacovigilance reporting systems with healthcare institutions so as to ensure more 
comprehensive monitoring of drug safety. 
 
3.11.8 The Committee notes the financial mobilisation under the scheme with nearly 
78% of the total cumulative grants (₹13.76 crore out of ₹17.50 crore) released during 
FY 2024-25. The Committee, however, observes that a gap appears to exist between 
financial outlays and corresponding physical or regulatory outcomes as only three out of 
the five funded pharmacies have progressed from infrastructure upgradation to the 
stage of WHO-GMP certification. The Committee is of the view that despite substantial 
financial allocation, delays in regulatory compliance may hinder the timely achievement 
of the scheme’s objective of ensuring international quality standardisation in Ayush 
drug manufacturing. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should develop a technical mentorship mechanism including pre-audit inspections for 
institutions that remain at the “in-process” stage. The Committee further recommends 
the introduction of targeted capacity-building programmes for pharmacists, 
technicians, and other technical staff working in the pharmacies so as to ensure that 
human resource capabilities keep pace with the upgraded infrastructure and 
technological investments made under the scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
    COMPONENT WISE ANALYSIS:   3.12 INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH IN AYURVEDA (ITRA)  The budgetary allocation of ITRA as per detailed demands for grants 2026-27 is as following:  (Table 19)(₹ in crore ) Major Components Actuals 2024-25 BE 2025-26 RE 2025-26 BE 2026-27 Grants-in-Aid General 56.0 45.00 61.41 50.00 Creation of Capital Assets 32.50 80.15 172.18 120.00 Grants-in-Aid Salaries 41.50 40.00 45.60 49.00 Total (includes SAP GIA) 130.05 165.20 279.24 219.05  3.12.1 The Committee finds that the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda (ITRA) incurred an actual expenditure of ₹130.05 crore during FY 2024-25, mainly under Grants-in-Aid for salaries, general expenditure and creation of capital assets. The Committee further observes that the Budget Estimate (BE) for 2025-26 was ₹165.20 crore, which was subsequently revised upward to ₹279.24 crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage, indicating a significant increase. The Ministry has attributed this increase primarily to payments to CPWD for construction of the WHO-GTMC project at Jamnagar, stipends to UG interns, IPD/OPD related expenses and payment of salaries and allowances. The Committee also observes that the actual expenditure had reached ₹257.23 crore by 31.01.2026, however, the Committee observes that the BE for 2026-27 has been reduced to ₹219.05 crore, which reflects a decline from the previous year’s revised allocation.  3.12.2 The Committee appreciates the ITRA for leveraging its autonomous status and expresses satisfaction that ITRA has been making commendable efforts in the field of Ayurveda education & research upholding its status as an Institute of National Importance. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Ayush should continue to ensure adequate and timely financial support to the Institute so that ongoing infrastructure projects and academic activities are implemented efficiently and the Institute is further strengthened to advance research, education and global outreach in Ayurveda. The Committee recommends the Ministry to encourage ITRA for exploring the enhancement of student intake capacity across all courses (of the institute) considering its pivotal role in propagation and promotion of Ayurveda learning and practices domestically and internationally.  
STATUTORY AND REGULATORY BODIESInstitute of Teaching and Research in AyurvedaNational Commission for HomoeopathyNational Commission for Indian System of MedicineSTATUTORY AND REGULATORY BODIES 

46 
 
3.12.3 The Committee notes that the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda has 
proposed several short-term initiatives to strengthen the Ayurveda ecosystem including the 
establishment of an Ayush Start-up Incubation Centre to promote innovation and “Ayur-tech” 
solutions among young entrepreneurs. The plan also emphasises strengthening the National 
Pharmacovigilance Centre to systematically monitor the safety profile of Ayurvedic 
medicines and align regulatory practices with international standards. Additionally, the 
Institute proposes short-term clinical training programmes for international students to 
expand global outreach and promote Ayurveda education internationally. 
 
3.12.4 The Committee appreciates these short term initiatives proposed to be 
undertaken by the ITRA and and considers that present budgetary allocation may not 
be sufficient to meet the proposed capital intensive initiatives. The Committee therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must examine the needs of the institute positively to 
support the establishment of the Ayush Start-up Incubation Centre with dedicated 
funding, structured mentorship and collaboration with industry and research 
institutions to encourage innovation in Ayurveda-based technologies. The Committee 
further recommends that the Institute undertake a comprehensive human resource 
assessment to strengthen the pharmacovigilance framework by ensuring the 
recruitment of adequate technical manpower, the development of robust digital 
reporting systems and enhanced coordination with national regulatory bodies, so that 
the safety monitoring of Ayurvedic medicines aligns with global standards. In addition, 
the Committee recommends that structured international clinical training programmes 
be developed in collaboration with foreign universities and WHO to promote academic 
exchange, standardised training modules and wider global acceptance of Ayurveda. 
 
3.12.5 The Committee takes note of submission of the Ministry regarding the human 
resource position in the Institute of Teaching and Research in Ayurveda (ITRA) as against a 
total sanctioned strength of 539 posts as many as 324 posts are lying vacant which reflects a 
significant shortage of manpower. Out of these 324 vacancies, 218 posts have been indicated 
as ‘deemed abolished’ for which no justification or explanatory details have been furnished 
by the Ministry. The Committee finds this position unsatisfactory particularly in the case of a 
premier national institute entrusted with responsibilities relating to education, research and 
clinical services in Ayurveda. Even if the deemed abolished posts are excluded, the 
Committee observes that 106 posts remain vacant out of an effective sanctioned strength of 
321 posts, translating to approximately 33 per cent vacancy, i.e., nearly one-third of the 
workforce.  
 
3.12.4 The Committee expresses concern over vacancy of 106 posts against sanctioned 
strength of 321 posts i.e  that one-third of manpower shortage in ITRA that must have  
adversely affected the institute’s ability to discharge its mandate effectively, particularly 
in the areas of research output, academic instruction and patient care services. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to undertake an immediate 
review of the vacant posts so that time-bound measures are undertaken to fill up the 
existing live vacancies so that the institutional capacity of ITRA is strengthened and its 
core functions are not compromised. 
 
3.12.5 The Committee has taken note that the Institute’s reported publication of 160 
research articles and in-house journal “AYU” received 411 article submissions during 
2024-25, out of which only 20 articles were published after the peer review process, 
thereby meaning the acceptability rate is 4.86%. The Committee is of the view that, 
while the volume of research activity appears significant, greater emphasis needs to be 
placed on improving the quality, international indexing and citation impact of research 
outputs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush and the 

47 
 
Institute take focused steps to promote high quality research, encourage publications in 
reputed international journals and strengthen collaborative research with national and 
global institutions so as to enhance the global academic visibility of Ayurveda research. 
 
3.12.6 The Committee appreciates the global collaborations of the Institute of Teaching 
and Research in Ayurveda (ITRA), including its recognition as a WHO Collaborating 
Centre for Traditional Medicine and the existence of eight active international MoUs. 
The Committee however, observes that foreign student enrolment remains limited. As 
per the Annual Report 2024-25 of the institute, Under International Centre for 
Ayurvedic studies, 03 scholars had completed 3-month introductory course of Ayurveda 
programme (300 classes) in this year and there were 13 new admissions for foreign 
nationals across BAMS (8), M.D. (3), and Ph.D. (2) indicating modest global academic 
engagement for an Institute of National Importance. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that ITRA, in coordination with the Ministry of Ayush & WHO strengthen 
international outreach, expand collaborations with foreign universities and introduce 
targeted fellowship or scholarship schemes and short-term training programmes to 
attract more foreign students.   
 
3.13 NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEPATHY (NCH) 
 
3.13.1 The National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) is a statutory body functioning 
under the Ministry of Ayush. It regulates homoeopathic medical education and practice in 
India and aims to modernize the system while ensuring quality standards and transparency in 
the homoeopathy sector. The National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) operates 
through three specialised boards:  
 
i. Homoeopathy Education Board (HEB): Frames curriculum and standards for 
homoeopathy education. 
ii. Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Homoeopathy (MARBH): Assesses 
institutions and approves new colleges or increased intake.  
iii. Board of Ethics and Registration for Homoeopathy (BERH): Maintains the national 
register of practitioners and enforces professional ethics. 
 
The budgetary allocation of NCH as per detailed demands for grants 2026-27 is as following:  
 
(Table 20)(₹ in crore ) 
Major Components Actuals 2024-25 BE 2025-26 RE 2025-26 BE 2026-27 
Grants-in-Aid General 11.50 14 14 14.00 
Grants-in-Aid Salaries 4.50 6.0 5.0 6.00 
Total  16.00 20.00 19.00 20.00 
 
3.13.2 The Committee observes that against the actual expenditure of ₹ 16.00 crore in 
2024-25, an amount of ₹ 20.00 crore has been allocated to the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy (NCH) in 2025-26, and the allocation to the tune of ₹ 20.00 crore has been 
earmarked in BE 2026-27. The Committee notes that the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy has been seeking additional funds for engagement of manpower to 
effectively discharge its regulatory and supervisory functions. The Committee has been 
given to understand that the NCH has granted permissions to a significant number of 
homoeopathy colleges in recent years, including 541 permissions in 2025-26 and 239 in 
2024-25 indicating a substantial expansion in the number of institutions and admissions 
in the homoeopathy education sector. However, the budgetary allocation to the 
Commission does not appear to be commensurate with the growing regulatory 

48 
 
responsibilities arising from such scale of expansion. The Committee is of the view that 
the increase in the number of institutions and student intake necessarily requires 
strengthening of regulatory oversight, including adequate manpower and institutional 
capacity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy undertake a comprehensive assessment of its manpower and functional 
requirements and that the Ministry of Ayush examine the matter and take up the issue 
of increased allocation to Ministry of Finance to consider enhancing the financial 
allocation so as to enable the Commission to effectively regulate homoeopathy education 
and ensure quality standards across institutions. 
 
The following are the head wise break up of NCISM and NCH expenses:- 
 
NCH 
Sr. 
No. 
HEAD Amount 
1 Assessment & Rating 
Exp 
      
4,42,04,594  
2 Computer Pripherals          
18,77,979  
3 Furniture & fixtures            
4,93,341  
4 Library Books                 
6,323  
5 Office Expenses          
20,79,665  
6 Postage & Telegram & 
Telephone 
           
3,02,177  
7 Transport/Taxi           
33,76,056  
8 E-Office Expenditure           
22,92,065  
9 Wages Expenses       
3,36,70,132  
10 Tour & Training meeting  
of Expert, Commission, 
Technical.  
      
2,34,63,941  
11 Rajbhasa Expenditure             
5,82,000  
12 Legal Expense          
18,70,778  
13 Professional Charges          
45,37,285  
14 Training & Seminar 
Expenses 
         
54,38,826  
15 Publication & Printing 
Exp. 
           
5,55,353  
  Total 12,47,50,515  
 
NCISM 
HEAD Amt. in Cr. 
Wages Outsource 5.94 
House Keeping 0.19 
Training 0.05 
Assessment & 
Ratting 2.57 
Stationary 0.14 
Telephone 0.07 
Postage 0.03 
NEET EXAM 0.17 
Audit Fees 0.07 
Printing 0.03 
Legal 0.66 
Misc. 0.05 
Rent 3.22 
IT 5.63 
Maintenance 0.09 
Courier 0.00 
Taxi Hire 0.00 
Prize 0.00 
Hospitality 0.26 
Furniture & Fix. 0.00 
Office Equipment 0.11 
Computer & 
Peripherals 0.22 
Electricity 0.08 
Security & Services 0.13 
Inspection 4.25 
Total 23.97 
 
 
3.13.3 The Committee has undertaken a comparative assessment of the expenditure 
heads of the National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) and the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM). The Committee finds that NCH 
has incurred ₹4.42 crore under the head “Assessment & Rating” whereas NCISM has 
reported ₹2.57 crore under the same head. However, NCISM also reflects a separate 

49 
 
expenditure of ₹4.25 crore under the head “Inspection” which appears to relate to 
regulatory assessment activities. The Committee is of the view that the regulatory 
expenditure should have common & uniform heads for accessing comparative actual 
cost of institutions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush 
adopt a uniform classification of regulatory expenditure across its statutory bodies 
clearly defining heads such as assessment, inspection and rating ensuring enhanced 
transparency, enable meaningful comparison of regulatory costs and promote more 
efficient utilisation of public funds.  
 
3.14 NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE (NCISM) 
 
3.14.1 The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) is a statutory 
body under Ministry of Ayush. Its primary mandate is to regulate and improve the quality of 
medical education and practice in traditional Indian systems, specifically Ayurveda, Unani, 
Siddha, and Sowa-Rigpa (AUS&SR). The National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine (NCISM) functions through four autonomous boards:  
i. Board of Ayurveda - Regulates education and standards in Ayurveda.  
ii. Board of Unani, Siddha and Sowa-Rigpa- Oversees education and standards in Unani, 
Siddha, and Sowa-Rigpa systems.  
iii. Medical Assessment and Rating Board for Indian System of Medicine (MARB-ISM) - 
Assesses and rates institutions and grants permission for new colleges or courses.  
iv. Board of Ethics and Registration for Indian System of Medicine (BER-ISM) - 
Maintains the National Register of practitioners and enforces professional ethics.  
 
The budgetary allocation of NCISM as per detailed demands for grants 2026-27 is as 
following:  
(TABLE 21)                      (₹ in crore ) 
Major Components Actuals  
2024-25 BE 2025-26 RE 2025-26 BE 2026-27 
Grants-in-Aid General 
Major Expenses:  
i. Assessment & rating: 
2.57 cr 
ii. Inspection: 4.25 
iii. Legal: 0.66 cr 
iv. Rent: 3.22 cr 
v. IT: 5.63 cr 
24.43 25.00 25.00 26.95 
Grants-in-Aid Salaries 8.00 9.00 9.00 10.33 
Total  32.43 34.00 34.00 37.28 
 
3.14.2 The Ministry has furnished the cadre-wise position of sanctioned strength, in-position 
and vacancies. It has been stated that against a total sanctioned strength of 127 posts, only 40 
are regular posts while 87 posts are contractual in nature. Out of the 40 sanctioned regular 
posts, 38 posts in the administrative cadre remain vacant, indicating a very high vacancy level 
in Group-A and Group-B cadre. Further, the Commission has engaged 116 outsourced 
personnel including contractual staff to support its functioning. 
 
3.14.3 The Committee observes that the NCISM is largely functioning through 
contractual and outsourced manpower, the number of which is more than double the 
sanctioned strength of regular staff. Such heavy dependence on non-regular personnel 
may adversely affect institutional continuity, accountability and long-term capacity 
building within the Commission. The Committee, therefore recommends that the 

50 
 
Ministry of Ayush undertake a comprehensive review of manpower deployment in its 
statutory regulatory bodies, particularly with regard to the large number of vacant 
regular posts and the growing reliance on contractual and outsourced personnel. The 
Committee further recommends that time-bound steps be taken to fill up the vacant 
sanctioned posts especially in key administrative positions. Such measures would help 
strengthen long-term regulatory capacity, enhance institutional continuity and 
accountability, and reduce excessive dependence on outsourced manpower. 
 
3.14.4 The Committee takes into consideration the steps taken by the NCISM for 
improving quality and affordable medical education in ASUS system including the new 
curricula. The Committee appreciates the reforms taken to integrate modern medical 
science and clinical research with traditional Ayurvedic knowledge and expresses 
satisfaction for adoption of student-centered pedagogy. The new reforms also mandate 
multi-disciplinary education for the students which shall enhance pluralistic healthcare 
in practice. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Ayush and NCISM ensure 
effective implementation of the revised curricula across all institutions through regular 
monitoring, faculty capacity-building and the provision of adequate clinical, teaching 
and laboratory infrastructure. The Committee further recommends that structured 
feedback mechanisms be instituted to obtain inputs from students, faculty and other 
stakeholders so as to assess whether the reforms are achieving their intended outcomes. 
The Ministry should ensure that institutions possess the required infrastructure, 
maintain faculty strength and promote clinical exposure necessary for the effective 
delivery of the revised competency-based curriculum. 
 
3.14.5 The Committee takes note of the curriculum reforms undertaken by the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine indicating the paradigm shift from 
traditional lecture-based teaching to a more competency and skill-based learning 
framework, particularly the restructuring of lecture to non-lecture hours in the ratio of 
1:2 encouraging greater practical exposure and active learning. The Committee also 
finds inconsistencies in internship requirements across different systems and a lack of 
structured research components during these internships. The absence of a structured 
research-oriented component during internship may also limit students’ engagement 
with evidence-based practices. The Committee recommends that the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine must consider introducing a mandatory 
internship component of suitable duration for undergraduates across all systems at their 
respective Central Research Councils under the Ministry of Ayush to provide uniform 
research exposure, strengthen clinical and scientific training and promote integration of 
education with ongoing research activities, thereby improving the overall quality and 
consistency of medical training in the Indian Systems of Medicine. 
 
3.14.6 The Committee was apprised that the National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine has proposed a “Publication Grant” scheme to support eligible candidates in 
publishing research papers in quality journals. The Committee appreciates the proposal 
and considers it a positive step towards encouraging research orientation and academic 
curiosity among scholars. The Committee in this regard recommends that the Ministry 
of Ayush to get approved the schemes and implement them as soon as possible. The 
Committee adds that the Ministry should explore the possibility of scaling the scheme to 
other institutes to promote research output across the Indian systems of medicine. 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
 
 
 
3.15 CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES 
(CCRAS)  
 
3.15.1 The Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) is an autonomous 
organization under the Ministry of Ayush which functions as national body for formulation, 
coordination, and promotion of research in Ayurveda. The Council carries out its activities 
and functions through its network of 30 Institutes across the country. 
 
The budgetary allocation to CCRAS is as under:- 
 
(TABLE 22) 
Year BE RE Actual 
2023-24 379.50 394.95 394.90 
2024-25 413.54 441.73 469.72 
2025-26 457.20 518.85 457.20* 
2026-27 524.05 - - 
                                *As on 31.12.2025                                 (Rs. in crore) 
 
3.15.2 The Committee notes that there has been a regular increase in budgetary allocation for 
the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS). The Ministry has 
informed that during 2024-25, CCRAS completed 92 research projects encompassing clinical, 
drug, and public health research. An additional 38 projects have been completed up to 
January 2026, while 233 research projects are currently in progress across its national 
network of institutes. These projects are expected to culminate in peer-reviewed publications, 
monographs, validated clinical and public health protocols, and other translational research 
outputs. 
 
3.15.3 The Committee finds that the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic 
Sciences (CCRAS) has undertaken numerous clinical trials, community studies and 
public health initiatives. The Committee, however, observes that the completion of 130 
research projects (92 during 2024-25 and an additional 38 up to January 2026) over the 
last two years. The Committee, therefore, recommends for large-scale interdisciplinary 
research collaborations with premier institutions such as AIIMS, ICMR, IITs and other 
major biomedical institutes for enlargement of the scope for generating robust evidence 
and wider scientific validation of Ayurveda-based interventions. The Committee 
believes that expanding multicentric and interdisciplinary research collaborations with 
premier institutions such as AIIMS, ICMR, IITs and reputed international 
organisations, along with greater emphasis on timely completion of projects and 
publication of research in high-quality peer-reviewed journals would strengthen the 
scientific credibility and global acceptance of Ayurveda-based interventions. The 
Committee is of the firm view that the Ministry of Ayush and CCRAS must enhance the 
scale, quality and impact of research undertaken across its institutes. Moreover, the 
Ministry should ensure better translation of CCRAS research findings into evidence-
based clinical guidelines, national health programmes and public health interventions so 
that the outcomes of Ayurveda research can be effectively integrated into the broader 
healthcare system.  
 
3.15.4 The Committee has been given to understand that the Central Council for 
Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) has undertaken research on preventive health 
AUTONOMOUS BODIES 

52 
 
approaches such as Dinacharya, Ritucharya, Rasayana therapies and lifestyle 
interventions aimed at improving quality of life and addressing non-communicable 
diseases. While such initiatives highlight the preventive potential of Ayurveda, the 
Committee observes that there is limited structured research on behaviour change 
models that promote sustained adoption of Ayurvedic lifestyle practices among different 
population groups. The Committee, therefore, recommends that CCRAS must 
undertake structured research on behaviour-change interventions enshrined in 
Ayurvedic principles such as Dinacharya, Ritucharya and Ahara-Vihara. The Committee 
in this regard, recommends that the Ministry must guide CCRAS to undertake the 
development of evidence-based behaviour change modules and community-based 
intervention models integrating Ayurvedic principles with modern behavioural science 
approaches and their pilot implementation across diverse population groups including 
urban communities, school students and high-risk groups vulnerable to lifestyle 
diseases. The Committee desires that the ongoing recruitment drive in CCRAS must be 
completed expeditiously so as to augment the human resource capacity required for 
implementation of the proposed research initiatives. 
 
3.15.5 The Committee takes into account the Five-Year Action Plan (2026-27 to 2030-
31) formulated by CCRAS to expand clinical research in Ayurveda with a focus on non-
communicable diseases, lifestyle disorders, geriatric health, women’s health and 
Panchakarma procedure validation, among others. The Committee notes the submission 
of CCRAS that the Action Plan is only indicative and its implementation is subject to 
necessary administrative, technical, Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC) and financial 
approvals, as well as availability of funds. The Committee therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry must ensure timely administrative, technical and financial approvals for 
Action Plan so that the proposed Action Plan does not remain merely indicative but is 
implemented in letter and spirit in a time-bound manner. The Ministry should also 
ensure adequate allocation of financial resources and strengthening of institutional 
capacity to facilitate the conduct of multicentric clinical trials and collaborative 
research.  
 
3.15.6 The Committee is of the considered view that periodic monitoring mechanisms 
must be instituted to track the progress of the Action Plan and ensure that research 
outcomes should translate into evidence-based policy interventions and standard 
treatment protocols for wider adoption of Ayurveda in the healthcare system.  
 
3.16 CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN HOMOEOPATHY (CCRH)  
 
3.16.1 Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH) is an apex research 
organization under Ministry of Ayush which undertakes, coordinates, develops, disseminates 
and promotes scientific research in Homoeopathy. The Council carries out its activities and 
functions through its network of 33 Institutes across the country. 
 
The budgetary allocation flow chart is as following: 
(TABLE 23) 
Year BE RE Actual 
2023-24 145.00 146.00 143.71 
2024-25 144.00 150.50 162.00 
2025-26 165.00 214.00 175.50* 
2026-27 227.25 - - 
                  *As on 31.12.2025                                                       (₹ in crore) 

53 
 
 
 
 
3.16.2 The Committee observes that CCRH has been receiving continuously enhanced 
budgetary allocations with ₹ 214.00 crore at the Revised Estimates stage in 2025-26 and ₹ 
227.25 crore in the Budget Estimates for 2026-27 reflecting a robust financial position to 
undertake new research projects. The Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH) 
in its written submissions, has informed that CCRH has implemented structured public health 
programmes addressing diseases of national health importance such as malnutrition, Vitamin-
D deficiency, school health and menstrual health and that these initiatives have generated 
programmatic data contributing to evidence-based public health planning. 
 
3.16.3 The CCRH has also furnished data of the research programmes undertaken in last 
three years which is enumerated below: 
 
  
3.16.4 The Committee takes note of the expansion of research activities undertaken by 
the Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH) over the last three years. 
The Committee observes that the increased research activities have not translated into 
commensurate research outcomes as the rate of project conclusion remains relatively 
slow and limited. The Committee is cognizant of the fact that many research projects 
might longer gestation duration and might not yet have reached due date for 
completion. The Committee, nevertheless, recommends CCRH to undertake a 
comprehensive assessment of ongoing projects and strengthen project planning and 
monitoring so that research & activities result in tangible outcomes capable of 
strengthening the evidence base and contributing to the formulation of standard 
treatment guidelines. Further, in view of the continuing observation regarding the 
delayed efficacy of homoeopathic medicines, the Committee emphasizes that projects 
undertaken in the areas of Drug Standardization and Fundamental Research category 
should be accelerated so that the findings can support the development of 
pharmacopoeial standards and quality assurance framework for Homoeopathy. The 
Committee also recommends that research studies in the Public Health Research 
category be expanded given its pivotal role in demonstrating the broader applicability of 
homoeopathy in public health interventions. 
 
3.16.5 Responding to the Committee’s query, the Ministry apprised the Committee that 
certain research infrastructure projects have been deprioritised or delayed due to 
funding constraints including redevelopment and expansion of research facilities and 
construction of new research institutes. Additionally, the Council has submitted that 


54 
 
delays in some research projects occurred due to issues such as procurement 
procedures, staffing shortages and administrative processes. The Committee expresses 
serious concern over such delays that might have adversely affected the pace and quality 
of research activities undertaken by the Council. The Committee, in this connection, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must pay adequate attention to strengthening 
laboratory infrastructure and advanced research facilities to enable high-quality 
experimental and translational research. The Committee is of the firm view that the 
research activities should not be subjected to funds constraints. The Committee, 
therefore recommends CCRH to streamline administrative procedures relating to 
project approvals, procurement and recruitment so as to ensure timely implementation 
of research projects and work towards the capacity building framework. 
 
3.16.6 The Committee is not satisfied to observe the response of the Ministry admitting 
that no independent performance evaluation of the Central Council for Research in 
Homoeopathy (CCRH) has been conducted so far. Considering the increasing allocation 
of public funds for research in traditional systems of medicine, the absence of an 
external evaluation mechanism may leave scope for an objective assessment of the 
Council’s research productivity, institutional efficiency, and public health impact. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush should institute a 
periodic independent performance evaluation of CCRH by a panel of experts drawn 
from biomedical sciences, public health and research management. Such an evaluation 
would help ensure greater transparency, accountability and continuous assessment in 
the Council’s research activities vis-à-vis mandate and goals & objectives of the Council. 
 
3.17 CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN UNANI (CCRUM)  
 
3.17.1 The Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM) is an autonomous 
apex organization under the Ministry of Ayush, dedicated to initiating, aiding and 
coordinating scientific research on the fundamental and applied aspects of the Unani system 
of medicine. 
 
The budgetary allocation to CCRUM since 2023-24 is as under:  
(TABLE 24) 
Year BE RE Actual 
2023-24 173.30 174.10 174.10 
2024-25 228.05 197.05 190.05 
2025-26 214.50 199.00 198.13* 
2026-27 208.50 - - 
                   *As on 10.02.2026                                                          (₹ in crore) 
 
3.17.2 The Committee finds that budgetary allocation made to CCRUM during last three 
years have a declining pattern at BE stages i.e. Rs. 228.05 crore in 2024-25, Rs. 214.50 crore 
in 2025-26 and Rs. 208.50 crore in 2026-27.  However, RE allocation and actual expenditure 
have not seen much variation. 
 
3.17.3 The vacancy position of CCRUM states that out of 766 sanctioned posts, 345 posts are 
presently vacant. Of these, the revival of 131 posts is under process and 21 posts are proposed 
to be abolished. The Committee notes the acute shortage of human resources in the council 
have adversely affected the effective functioning of CCRUM and impede the progress of 
research activities in Unani medicine. 
 

55 
 
3.17.2 The Committee finds that out of 766 sanctioned posts in the Central Council for 
Research in Unani Medicine, 345 posts are presently vacant. The Committee further 
notes that while the revival of 131 posts is under process, 21 posts have been proposed to 
be abolished. The Committee observes with concern that such a high level of vacancies 
may adversely affect the effective functioning of the Council and impede the progress of 
research activities in Unani medicine. The Committee is of the view that adequate 
human resources are essential for the timely implementation of research programmes 
and for strengthening the scientific base of the Unani system of medicine. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must take expeditious 
steps to fill up the vacant posts in the Council so as to ensure that it is adequately staffed 
to effectively carry out its research mandate and promote the development of evidence-
based research in Unani medicine. 
 
3.17.4 The Committee notes that medicinal plants constitute the primary raw material 
base for Unani formulations and are essential for sustaining research and therapeutic 
practices in the Unani system of medicine. However, the availability of several medicinal 
plant species used in Unani pharmacopoeia remains underutilised due to limited 
systematic surveys, inadequate cultivation practices and over-dependence on wild 
sources. The Committee is of firm view that the absence of coordinated efforts for large-
scale cultivation, conservation, and scientific documentation of medicinal plants might 
have affected the long-term sustainability and quality of raw materials required for 
Unani drug development and research. The Committee, therefore, recommends for 
expanding the survey, cultivation and conservation of medicinal plants used in Unani 
medicine and explore further collaboration with agricultural universities and state 
governments to ensure sustainable availability of raw materials and to prevent depletion 
of rare medicinal species. 
 
3.18 ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (AIIA) 
 
The budgetary allocation flow chart is as following:  
 
                                                         (TABLE 25.1 )                              (₹ in crore ) 
Year BE RE Actual 
2023-24 235.15 279.38 280.18 
2024-25 227.20 242.20 243.20 
2025-26 251.20 306.20 282.40* 
2026-27 270.20 
(BE Demanded- 360 Crore) - - 
           *As on 10.02.2026                                                                             
 
The Detailed Demand for Grants 2026-27 for AIIA: 
 
                                                       (TABLE 25.2 )                                         (₹ in crore) 
Major Components Actuals 
2024-25 BE 2025-26 RE 2025-26 BE 2026-27 
Grants-in-Aid General 137.00 120.00 165.00 125.00 
Grants-in-Aid for creation of Capital 
Assests 70.00 95.00 95.00 97.00 
Grants-in-Aid Salaries 36.00 36.00 46.00 48.00 
Total (including Minor expenses) 243.20 251.20 306.20 270.20 

56 
 
 
3.18.1 The Ministry has informed that the AIIA has demanded BE of Rs. 360 crore in 2026-
27 under following components: 
 
i. GIA General: Rs. 210 Crore 
ii. GIA Capital:  Rs. 100 Crore 
iii. GIA Salary:  Rs. 50 Crore 
 
3.18.2 The Committee observes that the Grants-in-Aid (General) component shows a notable 
reduction in the Budget Estimate for 2026-27 (₹ 125 crore) compared to the Revised Estimate 
for 2025-26 (₹165 crore), despite the institution having originally projected ₹ 210 crore under 
the head. This represents a reduction of approximately 24% from the Revised Estimate of 
2025-26 and nearly 40% from the projected demand by AIIA for 2026-27. The Committee 
notes that while allocations under Grants-in-Aid (Salaries) and Grants-in-Aid for Creation of 
Capital Assets have received modest increases of about ₹ 2 crore each over the Revised 
Estimates of 2025-26. The Ministry has attributed the overall reduction from ₹ 306.20 crore 
(RE 2025-26) to ₹270.20 crore (BE 2026-27) primarily to the completion of construction 
work at the AIIA Goa campus, stating that only maintenance expenditure would now be 
required. 
 
3.18.3 The Committee is concerned by the 40 % reduction in allocation under the 
Grants-in-Aid (General) component vis-à-vis the amount projected in BE 2026-27. Since 
the component primarily supports academic activities, outreach programmes, research 
projects, and maintenance of institutional facilities, the Committee apprehends that the 
reduced allocation may constrain the institution’s operational capacity and proposed 
initiatives including research programmes and evidence generation in Ayurveda. The 
Committee observes that recent recruitment is likely to augment the human resource 
capacity of the institute and optimal utilisation of this manpower would require the 
expansion of research initiatives and patient-centric activities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry reassess the fund requirements of AIIA, 
particularly under the GIA (General) head so that the institution’s core activities are 
not adversely affected. Considering the critical role of AIIA as a Centre of Excellence in 
advancing the development and recognition of Ayush, the Committee further 
recommends that AIIA should not face constraints in funding for its core activities and 
that the Ministry may consider providing additional allocation at the Revised Estimate 
stage, keeping in view projected demand of Rs. 370.00 core for 2026-27 for ensuring 
implementation of originally envisaged Action Plan during the year. 
 
3.18.4 The Committee has also taken cognizance of the key concern areas highlighted 
by AIIA, including the development of training centres, establishment of an 
International School campus, and expansion of the existing campus, which indicate the 
need for enhanced budgetary support. The Committee is of the firm view that AIIA, 
being a premier Centre of Excellence in Ayurveda, requires planned expansion of its 
campus, including the establishment of domain-specific Centres of Excellence and 
academic infrastructure such as an international school campus. The Committee point 
out that such view is reinforced by the recent budget announcement regarding the 
establishment of three new AIIA institutions across the country which reflects the 
growing pivotal role of AIIAs in the Ayush sector. In this context, the Committee 
believes that the increasing national and global stature of Ayush necessitates expansion 
of the AIIA campus to support advanced research, training and academic activities. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of AIIA’s expansion requirements vis-à-vis Phase 2 expansions and prepare 
a well-structured development plan and present the same to the Ministry of Finance for 

57 
 
enhanced budgetary allocation so that the proposed initiatives can be implemented in a 
timely and effective manner. 
 
 
3.18.5 The Ministry has furnished the utilisation details of AIIA and its outreach centres as 
indicated below: 
 
 
OPD Patients at AIIA and Outreach Centres (Including AIIA Goa): 
 
                                                                    (TABLE 26) 
Year 
Total 
OPD 
New 
Delhi 
AIIA 
AIIA - 
Arogya 
Van 
(Ayurveda 
Wellness 
Centre) 
AIIA 
(Ayurveda 
Wellness 
Centre) 
LBSNAA, 
Mussoorie 
NCI- 
AIIMS 
OPD 
Ayurveda 
(CAIO) 
Ayurveda 
Wellness 
Centre 
Supreme 
Court 
AIIA - 
VMMC & 
Safdarjung 
Hospital 
(Dept. of 
Integrative 
Medicine) 
Ayurveda 
Clinic 
UPSC 
Bhawan 
AIIA 
Goa 
OPD 
Total 
OPD 
2023 362683 211 2782 1652 - 15391 - 83096  465815 
2024 420594 500 1942 2346 2647 20155 - 206367  654551 
2025 487090 260 1827 2638 2233 23011 2435 259125  778619 
Total 1270367 971 6551 6636 4880 58557 2435 548588  1898985 
 
3.18.6 The Committee finds that there has been a significant increase in OPD footfall at 
AIIA and its outreach centres, rising from 4.65 lakh patients in 2023 to about 7.78 lakh 
patients in 2025, however, the data indicates that nearly 96% of the OPD services are 
concentrated at the two main institutes in New Delhi and Goa, while the outreach 
centres account for only a marginal share. The Committee observes that AIIA Goa has 
shown the most rapid growth, with OPD footfall increasing from 83,096 in 2023 to 
2,59,125 in 2025, representing an increase of about 211%. Such substantial rise suggests 
that establishing a major Ayurveda institute in a prominent tourism destination like 
Goa has been successful in attracting patients and promoting Ayurveda services 
including supporting medical value travel and wellness tourism. The Committee feels 
that the excellence and specialised services of AIIA need to be expanded beyond the 
existing limited outreach network so that the benefits of the institute’s expertise can 
reach a wider population. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
may consider establishing one AIIA institution out of the three AIIAs proposed in 
budget 2026-27 in the North Eastern region which would attract tourists from south east 
countries and  support the Act East Policy by promoting Ayurveda based medical value 
travel and strengthening India’s traditional medicine outreach in the region.  The 
Committee further recommends that AIIA develop stronger referral linkages with 
district hospitals and Ayush health centres, which would help in decentralizing patient 
load from the main institutes while extending specialised Ayurveda services to a larger 
population across the country.  
 
 

58 
 
ACTUAL ADMISSIONS Vs CAPACITY Vs BED UTILISATION GAP 
 
                                                                 (TABLE 27) 
Year Actual 
Admissions 
 
Maximum Possible 
Maximum Possible Admissions per 
Year= Total Beds×365/ 
Average Length of Stay (ALOS) 
(~9 days) 
Utilisation 
 Unused 
Capacity 
 
2023 4660 8111 57% ~3450 patients 
2024 4937 8111 61% ~3170 patients 
2025 5344 8111 66% ~2767 patients 
 
 
3.18.7 The Committee has been given understand that the All India Institute of 
Ayurveda (AIIA), Delhi operates a 200-bed hospital which, based on an average length 
of stay of about 9 days (based on the three-year data provided by the Ministry), has the 
capacity to handle approximately 8,100 inpatient admissions annually. However, the 
data indicates that the actual number of admissions has remained significantly below 
this potential capacity, with 4,660 admissions in 2023, 4,937 in 2024, and 5,344 in 2025, 
reflecting utilisation levels of only about 57%, 61%, and 66% respectively. The 
Committee is of the view that the hospital infrastructure has remained underutilised, 
with an estimated unused capacity ranging from about 2,700 to 3,400 admissions 
annually during the said period. The Committee observes that bed utilisation has shown 
gradual improvement over the years, a substantial proportion of the available bed 
capacity still remains unutilised. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry must take steps to optimiseutilisation of the existing inpatient infrastructure at 
AIIA, Delhi by strengthening referral linkages with district hospitals, Ayush health 
centres and other public healthcare facilities. The Ministry may also explore measures 
such as expanding specialised therapies, promoting Panchakarma and integrative 
treatment services, and increasing awareness about inpatient Ayurveda care, so that the 
available bed capacity is utilised more efficiently. Such measures would help in 
maximising the use of existing infrastructure while improving access to institutional 
Ayurveda treatment services.  
 
3.19 NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY, KOLKATA 
 
The budgetary allocation flow chart is as following:  
 
                                                         (TABLE 28) 
Year BE RE Actual 
2023-24 108.59 94.00 83.69 
2024-25 91.69 86.09 84.08 
2025-26 93.96 86.11 73.22* 
2026-27 91.99 - - 
                     *As on 31.12.2025                                                    (₹ in crore) 
 
3.19.1 The Committee notes that the National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH), Kolkata has 
proposed expansion of its existing 100-bedded hospital to a 250-bedded facility. However, 

59 
 
the Committee observes from the data furnished that the IPD bed occupancy has remained 
below 50 % during the last two years, indicating underutilisation of the existing inpatient 
capacity. On being specifically queried, the Institute stated that a portion of the IPD space is 
presently being utilised for OPD services due to the high average OPD footfall of around 
2,200 patients per day. The Institute has also cited the Minimum Standard Requirements 
(MSR) of the National Commission for Homoeopathy, which prescribe a student-to-bed ratio 
of 3:1 for undergraduate programmes and 1:1 for postgraduate programmes, as well as the 
proposed introduction of new postgraduate courses and increased emphasis on research in 
non-communicable diseases and oncology. The Committee further notes that the Institute has 
reported vacancies in medical and other posts, resulting in additional workload on the existing 
doctors and staff. 
 
3.19.2 The Committee appreciates NIH, Kolkata for servicing 2200 OPD patients per 
day, however, the underutilisation of the existing IPD capacity coupled with shortage of 
doctors and staff raises concern. The Committee is of the view that the OPD patient load 
should be managed by expanding the existing space so that the current infrastructure be 
utilized for the intended purpose as diversion may adversely affect clinical training and 
inpatient-based academic activities of the institute. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry undertake comprehensive assessment of the proposal for expansion of the 
hospital capacity to 250 beds keeping into account the institute’s operational, 
infrastructural and manpower constraints. The Committee views that the Ministry 
should take concrete steps for strengthening human resources, the proposal for 
expansion of hospital capacity should be considered and approved. 
 
3.20 OTHER AUTONOMOUS BODIES 
 
                                             (TABLE 29)                                                     (₹ in Crore) 
Sl. 
No. Institute / Programme 
Budget 
Allocation  
(2026-27) 
% Share of Total Ayush 
Allocation 
1. National Institute of Ayurveda, 
Jaipur 227.85 5.17% 
2. Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth 34.27 0.78% 
3. National Institute of Siddha, 
Chennai 136.59 3.10% 
4. National Institute of Unani 
Medicine, Bangalore 124.50 2.82% 
5. Morarji Desai National Institute 
of Yoga 46.50 1.05% 
6. National Institute of Naturopathy, 
Pune 38.00 0.86% 
7. 
North Eastern Institute of 
Ayurveda & Homoeopathy, 
Shillong 
49.43 1.12% 
8. Central Council for Research in 
Yoga & Naturopathy 137.70 3.12% 
9. National Institute of Sowa Rigpa 42.03 0.95% 
10. Central Council for Research in 
Siddha 120.98 2.74% 
11. North Eastern Institute of 32.30 0.73% 

60 
 
Sl. 
No. Institute / Programme 
Budget 
Allocation  
(2026-27) 
% Share of Total Ayush 
Allocation 
Ayurveda & Folk Medicine 
Research, Pasighat 
Total 990.15 22.46% 
 
 
3.20.1 NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA, JAIPUR 
 
The Ministry has informed about the measurable improvements for NIA, Jaipur as following: 
 
 
OPD & IPD Data: 2025-26 
 
i. OPD- 3,52,000 
ii. IPD- 68886 
 
2026-27: - 
 
i. OPD-3,60,000(Estimated) 
ii. IPD- 70000(Estimated) 
 
The capital expenditure during 2025-26 is as under:  
 
WAPCOS Limited for ongoing 
projects of NIA Panchkula, 
Jaipur 
21.81 Cr 
NPCC for construction work   
at NIA, Jaipur 
27.20 Cr 
Purchase of Machinery & 
Equipment for 
 NIA, Jaipur and Panchkula 
17.57 Cr 
Balance amount is to be  
Utilized for construction work, 
& for 
Purchase of Machinery and 
Equipment at NIA, 
Jaipur/Panchkula 
24.34 Cr 
Total 64.00 Cr 
 
The Building of NIA, panchkula remained incomplete 
as on 23.02.2026. 
 
 
Admission in UG, PG, Ph.D. and 
Diploma in 2025-26: - 
 
Students 
Intake 
Total Admissions 
UG 125 122 
PG 130 130 
Ph.D. 28 27 
DAN&P 30 30 
 
The corresponding students intake and Patient foot 
fall data for the last three years is indicated below:  
 
S.No.  2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
Student Intake 
1. UG- 
PG- 
Ph.D.- 
122 
130 
22 
116 
129 
16 
122 
130 
28 
Patient footfall (OPD and IPD) 
1. OPD 
& IPD 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 
 OPD:  
IPD:- 
426813 
66067 
313502 
55132 
316382 
72809 
 
 
3.20.2 The Committee notes that the National Institute of Ayurveda is delivering substantial 
patient-centric services with increased 3.52 lakh OPD cases and 68,886 IPD admissions in 
2025-26 despite operating with a limited hospital capacity of 280 beds. The Committee 
appreciates that the Budget Estimate (BE) allocation of ₹ 227.25 crore for 2026-27 is broadly 

61 
 
justified considering the scale of clinical services, academic responsibilities and national role 
of the institute. However, the Committee observes that the BE 2026-27 allocation reflects a 
reduction compared to the Revised Estimate (RE) of ₹ 249.61 crore in 2025-26, which may 
constrain the institute’s expansion and service delivery. The Committee also notes with 
concern that the satellite centre at NIA, Panchkula has not been fully operationalised as of 
23.02.2026. Given the significant patient load at the Jaipur campus, the delay in 
operationalising the Panchkula centre has limited the institute’s ability to distribute clinical 
demand and expand regional outreach.  
 
3.20.3 The Committee emphasises that the existing patient load at NIA, Jaipur indicates the 
need for augmentation of hospital infrastructure and bed capacity. The Committee therefore 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush expedite the full operationalisation of the Panchkula 
campus and prioritise capital outlay for expansion of hospital bed capacity and clinical 
infrastructure at NIA, Jaipur so as to strengthen service delivery and prevent institutional 
strain. 
 
3.20.4 The Committee notes that the National Institute of Ayurveda has an inverted 
admission seat structure wherein the postgraduate (PG) intake of 130 seats exceeds the 
undergraduate (UG) intake of 125 seats. Conventionally, in medical and health education 
institutions, the UG intake forms the primary feeder base while PG seats are proportionately 
lower to maintain a sustainable academic pipeline.  
 
3.20.5 The Committee observes that an inverted admission seats structure of NIA, 
Jaipur could dilute the organic academic progression within the institution and may 
also raise concerns regarding the adequacy of clinical exposure, faculty availability and 
teaching infrastructure required for a large PG cohort. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush review the student-faculty-clinical load balance 
and overall academic structure of the institute to ensure that the UG-PG seat ratio 
remains academically sustainable and aligned with regulatory norms. The Ministry may 
consider gradually increasing UG seats to strengthen the institutional academic 
pipeline; or rationalising PG intake in accordance with available teaching faculty, 
clinical material and infrastructure. 
 
3.21 RASHTRIYA AYURVEDA VIDYAPEETH (RAV) 
 
3.21.1 The Committee has been given to understand that the Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth 
is implementing the Guru Shishya Parampara programme with the objective of preserving 
and transmitting traditional Ayurvedic knowledge through mentorship between experienced 
practitioners (Gurus) and young Ayurveda graduates (Shishyas). The programme presently 
covers 100 Gurus and 250 students, with a stipend of ₹ 56,500 per student and an honorarium 
of ₹ 63,000 per Guru under Certificate of Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth (CRAV) course.  
 
3.21.2 The Committee acknowledges that the Guru Shisya Parampara programme in 
RAV plays an important role in bridging the gap between classical textual knowledge 
and practical clinical application. However, the Committee observes that the coverage of 
the programme remains limited in scale considering the large pool of experienced 
traditional practitioners and the growing demand for advanced practical training 
among Ayurveda graduates. The Committee, therefore recommends that the Ministry 
may consider expanding the scope and outreach of the Guru-Shishya Parampara 
programme by increasing the number of participating Gurus and Shishyas and 
ensuring wider geographical coverage.  
 
 

62 
 
3.22 CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN SIDDHA  
 
3.22.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that the Central Council for Research in Siddha 
(CCRS), Chennai is actively strengthening its research framework. Over the past two years, 
the Council has launched 27 new intramural projects focused on medicinal plant surveys, 
literary research, drug standardization, and the clinical validation of Siddha principles. 
Currently, 19 clinical research projects are underway. Additionally, the Council is preserving 
ancient knowledge through Mission P2P (Palm to Paper), an initiative dedicated to the 
collection, digitization, translation, and publication of classical palm-leaf manuscripts. 
 
3.22.2 The Committee observes that these initiatives play an important role in 
promoting research and documentation of the Siddha system of medicine. However, the 
Committee is of the view that Siddha research activities and institutional presence 
remain largely concentrated in the southern region of the country, particularly in Tamil 
Nadu. The Committee further observes that the North Eastern Region, with its rich 
biodiversity and strong traditions of herbal medicine, offers significant potential for 
expanding Siddha research and medicinal plant cultivation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush explore the expansion of Siddha research 
activities and institutional presence in suitable regions beyond southern India, including 
the North Eastern States/Railways/PSUs/CGHS facilities, in order to promote wider 
dissemination of Siddha knowledge and strengthen research on medicinal plants 
relevant to the Siddha system. The Committee believes that such initiatives would 
contribute to the broader development and national outreach of the Siddha system of 
medicine. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
ISSUES PERTAINING TO AYUSH 
 
The Chapter deals with the some of the major issues affecting the Ministry of Ayush and 
raised by the Committee Members during the course of the meeting of the Committee on 
Demand for Grants 2026-27. During the course of examination of the Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Ayush on 23rd February, 2026, the Members of the Committee raised several 
issues seeking the intervention of the Ministry for strengthening the Ayush sector, enhancing 
awareness and promotion of Ayush systems in the country, and for the consolidation, 
propagation, expansion and globalization of Ayush systems of medicine abroad. These 
concerns have been reflected in various parts of the Report. The Committee, however, intends 
the Ministry should to place further emphasis on the following areas: 
ISSUES RAISED BY THE MEMBERS 
4.1 PROPAGATION OF AYURVEDA 
4.1.1 The Member has sought to know the efforts being undertaken by the Ministry for the 
propagation of Ayurveda in the country, particularly with regard to medicinal plants such as 
Aloe vera, Giloy and Sarpagandha etc. The Ministry has informed that the Pharmacopoeia 
Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy (PCIM&H) has laid down formulary 
specifications and pharmacopoeial monographs of Ayurvedic drugs and Ayurveda is being 
promoted through teaching institutions and by Ayurveda practitioners providing treatment to 
patients. Clinical and experimental studies are also being undertaken at the National Institute 
of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur. In addition, multiple patient advisories have been developed and 
initiatives such as the Ayurswasthya Yojana aim to facilitate the rollout of authentic classical 
Ayush interventions. Awareness initiatives such as “Desh Ka Prakriti Parikshan” have also 
been undertaken to generate awareness about the concept of Prakriti. However, the Ministry 
has informed that there is no dedicated scheme exclusively for the propagation of Ayurveda 
and that all Ayush systems are being promoted collectively through Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC) initiatives. 
4.1.2 The Committee notes that the Ministry has undertaken several initiatives for the 
promotion of Ayurveda through research institutions, awareness programmes and 
outreach activities. The Committee however is of the view that these efforts need to 
translate into greater adoption of Ayurveda practices and increased use of medicinal 
plants among the general public. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should intensify its outreach and awareness programmes with a focused 
approach towards encouraging the practical use of Ayurveda at the community level. In 
this regard, wider dissemination of knowledge regarding commonly used medicinal 
plants such as Aloe vera, Giloy and Sarpagandhashould be undertaken through 
educational institutions and community-level campaigns. The Committee expects that 
such initiatives will promote preventive healthcare practices and strengthen the 
grassroots acceptance of Ayurveda across the country. 
4.1.3 The Member have further sought to know the steps being taken to increase the market 
size of Ayush products. The Ministry, through the Ayush Export Promotion Council 
(Ayushexcil), has informed that there are ways to enhance the export potential and global 
market presence of Ayush products. The strategy includes policy initiatives such as expansion 
of Harmonized System of Nomenclature (HSN) codes for proper classification of Ayush 
goods and provision of export incentives through fiscal support for market access and product 

64 
 
registration in foreign countries. The AYUSHEXCIL has also highlighted need for efforts 
towards strengthening quality and standardization through certification benchmarks, scientific 
validation through clinical trials and standardized dosing formats. Further, initiatives aimed at 
increasing global awareness include leveraging digital outreach, educational diplomacy and 
promotion of Ayush through international platforms such as the International Day of Yoga for 
wider global acceptance of Ayurvedic nutrition and wellness products. 
4.1.4 The Committee notes the outreach initiatives taken by the Ministry to enhance 
the global market and export potential of Ayush products through policy support, 
quality standardization and international outreach. The Committee, however, is of the 
view that sustained efforts are required to further strengthen the global recognition, 
standardisation &regulatory acceptance and quality assurance of Ayush medicines and 
wellness products. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must 
intensify its efforts towards strengthening international certification mechanisms, 
scientific validation and market access support for Ayush products in foreign markets. 
The Committee further recommends for extending export incentives and hand holding 
facilitation for foreign market penetration and enhance India’s share in the global 
traditional medicine market and strengthen the international positioning of Ayush 
systems. 
4.2 HIGHER BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND UTILISATION 
4.2.1 The Member sought to know the action plan of the Ministry to reduce the gap between 
the actual expenditure and the Revised Estimates. The Ministry has informed that during the 
financial year 2025-26, a Budget Estimate (BE) of ₹3992.90 crore was allocated, which was 
revised to ₹3671.82 crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage. Out of the RE allocation for 
2025-26, an expenditure of ₹3112.25 crore had been incurred till 28 February 2026 and the 
Ministry has stated that the remaining funds would be utilised by the end of the financial year. 
4.2.2 The Committee notes that a substantial portion of the allocated funds of RE 
2025-26 (around 16%) still remains to be utilised during the closing month of the 
financial year. The Committee is concerned that such last-minute expenditure may lead 
to “March-rush” spending, which has been consistently discouraged by the Ministry of 
Finance as well as by previous recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen its financial planning and quarterly 
monitoring mechanisms to ensure more balanced and timely utilisation of funds 
throughout the financial year. The Committee expects that improved expenditure 
management will enhance financial discipline and ensure more effective implementation 
of Ayush programmes. 
4.3 QUALITY OF AYUSH MEDICAL EDUCATION 
4.3.1 The Member sought to know the steps being taken for improvement in quality 
education and awareness programmes, particularly in Ayurveda. The Ministry has informed 
that several outreach programmes such as Ayurveda Day celebrations, public health 
campaigns and school and community-level sensitisation programmes are being undertaken. 
The National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) has also revised the 
syllabus for Ayurveda education by introducing a uniform and competency-based curriculum, 
prescribing minimum standards for infrastructure and strengthening monitoring and 
accountability through digitalisation and research validation. In addition, the Pharmacopoeia 
Commission for Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy (PCIM&H) has organised exposure 
visits for professional students to enhance awareness regarding quality control provisions and 
techniques for ASU&H drugs. 

65 
 
4.3.2 The Committee notes the multiple initiatives taken by the Ministry and the 
regulatory bodies to strengthen the quality of Ayush education through curriculum 
revision, competency-based training and awareness programmes. The Committee, 
however, is of the view that sustained efforts are required to further improve 
interdisciplinary academic standards, research orientationand practical clinical 
exposure for students pursuing Ayush education. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry continue to strengthen faculty development programmes, 
field level research integration and practical training in teaching institutions as well as 
in research councils. The Committee expects that such measures will contribute towards 
producing well-trained Ayush professionals capable of addressing evolving healthcare 
needs. 
4.3.3 The Members sought to know the status of updating the Ayush curriculum to 
incorporate modern diagnostic techniques and research literacy and whether any bridging 
programmes exist to promote cross-disciplinary understanding between Ayush and modern 
medicine. The Ministry informed that the National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine (NCISM) and the National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) have updated 
their respective curricula by incorporating elements such as modern diagnostics, essential 
modern pharmacology, yoga, medical education technology and Basic Life Support (BLS) 
training. The Ministry further stated that the National Institute of Ayurveda (NIA), Jaipur is 
promoting cross-disciplinary understanding through collaborative academic interactions with 
modern medical institutions and through interdisciplinary seminars and academic 
programmes. 
4.3.4 The Committee observes that the Ministry has initiated measures to incorporate 
modern diagnostics and research literacy within the Ayush curriculum and to promote 
cross-disciplinary engagement with modern medical institutions. However, the 
Committee is of the view that sustained and structured efforts are required to further 
strengthen interdisciplinary learning and practical exposure to integrative healthcare 
systems. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expand bridging 
programmes and institutional collaborations between Ayush and modern medical 
institutions. The Committee expects that such initiatives will enhance the professional 
competence of Ayush practitioners and contribute to the development of a robust 
integrative healthcare framework in the country.  
4.3.5 The Member sought to know the number of Ayush colleges in the country managed 
by private organisations and whether there are any plans to further increase their number. The 
Ministry informed that at present there are 550 private Ayush colleges under the Ayurveda, 
Siddha, Unani and Sowa-Rigpa (ASUS) streams and 251 private Homoeopathic medical 
colleges functioning in the country. 
4.3.6 The Committee observes that a significant proportion of Ayush medical colleges 
in the country are managed by private organisations. However, the Committee is of the 
view that expansion of Ayush education must be accompanied by strict adherence to 
prescribed standards of infrastructure, faculty strength and quality of training. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen its monitoring and 
regulatory mechanisms to ensure that private Ayush institutions maintain the required 
academic and clinical standards. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry 
should make concerted efforts to ensure the complete coverage of the country.  The 
Committee believes that such measures will help in maintaining the quality and 
credibility of Ayush medical education while supporting its expansion in the country. 
 

66 
 
 
4.4 SHORTAGE OF AYUSH DOCTORS& ALLIED HEALTHCARE 
4.4.1 The Member has highlighted the shortage of Ayush doctors in NABH-certified 
hospitals and emphasised the need to address the gap. The Ministry has informed that the 
shortage is being addressed through ongoing direct recruitment of doctors and by engaging 
practitioners on a contractual basis wherever required. 
4.4.2 The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to address the 
shortage of Ayush doctors through recruitment and contractual engagement. The 
Committee, however, is of the view that a long-term strategy is required to ensure 
adequate availability of qualified Ayush practitioners in healthcare institutions. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in coordination with State 
Governments, undertake periodic structured assessment of manpower requirements 
and ensure timely recruitment of Ayush doctors. The Committee expects that the 
Ministry assess the feasibility of replacing contractual doctors with regular doctors for 
improved learning and better education. 
4.4.3 The Member also highlighted the shortage of Ayurvedic and Homoeopathic doctors in 
Government hospitals across the country, particularly in the State of Maharashtra, and 
emphasised the need for their recruitment to strengthen AYUSH healthcare services. In 
response, the Ministry informed that a total of 91,781 practitioners of Homoeopathy are 
registered in the State of Maharashtra, out of which 232 practitioners are currently engaged 
under different schemes. However, the National Ayush Mission (NAM) Section did not 
provide any specific clarification regarding the issue and merely responded with the remark 
“Noted”. 
4.4.4 The Committee observes that the response of the Ministry in regard to the 
number of registered Homoeopathy practitioners in Maharashtra, does not adequately 
address the concern raised regarding the shortage of Ayush doctors in Government 
hospitals. The Committee is of the view that availability of qualified Ayush practitioners 
in public healthcare institutions is essential for strengthening service delivery, 
particularly in underserved areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry, in coordination with the State Governments undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of the requirement of Ayurvedic and Homoeopathic doctors in Government 
hospitals and take necessary steps to address the existing shortages through appropriate 
recruitment and deployment. The Committee further recommends for accessing the 
active practitioners in all the system of medicine. 
4.4.5 The Member highlighted the need for appointing two Yoga teachers (one male and 
one female) in each Panchayat school and making Yoga sessions mandatory in schools across 
all States and Union Territories. In response, the Ministry informed that under the guidelines 
of the National Ayush Mission (NAM), there is a provision for engagement of one male and 
one female Yoga Instructor at each Ayushman Arogya Mandir (AYUSH). These instructors 
are expected to conduct outreach activities, including visits to nearby schools, to promote 
Yoga practices, create awareness about healthy lifestyles and encourage preventive 
healthcare. The Ministry further stated that States and Union Territories may undertake Yoga-
related activities under the flexi-pool component of the National Ayush Mission. 
4.4.6 The Committee observes that Yoga plays a vital role in promoting preventive 
healthcare and improving physical and mental well-being, particularly among school-
going children. While the existing provision under the National Ayush Mission enables 

67 
 
Yoga instructors to conduct outreach activities in schools, the Committee is of the view 
that a more structured approach is required to promote Yoga practices among students. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in coordination with the 
Ministry of Education and State Governments, explore the feasibility of strengthening 
Yoga programmes in schools and encourage wider adoption of regular Yoga sessions. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Ayush should take lead in ensuring regular 
Yoga session at school level and updation of school curriculum to promote healthy 
lifestyle practices and improving the overall well-being of students across the country. 
4.5 AYURVEDA FOR SKIN CARE 
4.5.1 The Member proposed that greater research be undertaken in the field of Ayurveda for 
the treatment and management of skin diseases. The Ministry has informed that Ayurveda has 
significant potential in the management of dermatological conditions and that several 
initiatives have been undertaken to strengthen research, clinical validation and evidence 
generation. Specialized Dermatology Clinics (TwakVikara) and Saundarya Ayurveda Clinics 
have been established for the management of chronic skin diseases. Clinical research studies 
on Ayurvedic formulations and treatment protocols are also being conducted. The All India 
Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) operates dedicated dermatology OPDs and conducts 
Ayurprabha workshops for skill enhancement in skincare. Further, MD and PhD scholars are 
encouraged to undertake research in dermatological disorders. 
4.5.2 The Committee notes the research initiatives undertaken by the Ministry for the 
management of dermatological conditions through Ayurveda. The Committee, however, 
is of the view that greater emphasis is required to be given on scientific validation and 
wider dissemination of research findings in dermatology domain. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should intensify the clinical research and 
promote evidence-based studies on Ayurvedic treatments for common and chronic skin 
diseases. The Committee expects the Ministry to ensure dissemination of 
outcomes/findings which will enhance the credibility and wider acceptance of Ayurvedic 
dermatological treatments. 
4.6 AVAILABILITY OF MEDICINE IN AYUSH FACILITIES 
4.6.1 The Member highlighted the need to ensure adequate availability of Ayush medicines 
in district hospitals, Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and Community Health Centres (CHCs) 
and also emphasised the need for establishing Ayurvedic consultation chambers in such 
facilities. The Ministry has informed that under the co-location model, Ayush doctors and 
paramedics are deployed in healthcare institutions, while support for infrastructure, 
equipment and medicines is provided under the National Ayush Mission (NAM). Training 
and human resource support are undertaken in coordination with the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare. 
4.6.2 The Committee appreciates the co-location model adopted by the Ministry for 
providing Ayush services in public healthcare facilities. However, the Committee is of 
the view that many of the PHCs/CHCs are suffering from shortage of Ayush medicines 
and adequate consultation facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry strengthen E-Aushadhi portal for effective management and ensuring 
adequate and timely supply of Ayush medicines and explore the mechanism for setting 
Ayurvedic consultation cell at district and sub-district healthcare institutions. The 
Committee expects that such measures will improve accessibility and utilisation of 
Ayush healthcare services by the public. 

68 
 
4.7 RESEARCH IN POST PARTUM BLEEDING AND LACTATION 
4.7.1 The Member sought to know about the research undertaken in the field of post-partum 
bleeding, early recovery of mothers and improvement of lactation. The Ministry has informed 
that the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) has undertaken 
clinical studies including a study titled “Clinical evaluation of the efficacy of Ayush-SS 
Granules in exclusively breastfeeding mothers with insufficient lactation.” The Ministry 
further informed that the Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) is implementing 
community-oriented awareness programmes such as Poshan Abhiyan and Nari Shakti, which 
provide integrated antenatal and postnatal care through Siddha medicines, dietetics and 
lifestyle guidance for pregnant and lactating women. 
4.7.2 The Committee has taken note of research initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
in the field of maternal health and lactation support through Ayush systems. The 
Committee however, is of the view that greater emphasis is required on expanding such 
research and integrating validated Ayush interventions into maternal healthcare 
programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen 
research efforts and promote community-based interventions for improving maternal 
health, particularly in the areas of post-partum recovery and lactation support.  
4.8 ESTABLISHMENT OF AYURVEDIC HOSPITAL  
4.8.1  The Member emphasised the need for establishing Ayurvedic hospitals in each district 
of Delhi. The Ministry has informed that promotion and development of Ayush systems are 
being undertaken through the National Ayush Mission (NAM), under which financial 
assistance is provided for establishment of new Ayush hospitals and upgradation of existing 
Government hospitals based on proposals submitted by State Governments through State 
Annual Action Plans (SAAPs). The Ministry has further stated that the Government of Delhi 
has recently established a State Ayush Society and has become eligible for financial 
assistance under NAM. A proposal for the year 2025-26 has been received and is under 
consideration. 
4.8.2 The Committee takes note that the establishment and strengthening of Ayush 
hospitals is undertaken through proposals submitted by State Governments under the 
National Ayush Mission. The Committee, however, is of the view that proactive 
coordination between the Ministry and State Government is necessary to expand Ayush 
healthcare infrastructure in Delhi considering the delay in adoption of Ayushman 
Bharat scheme in Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
actively engage with the Government of NCT of Delhi to facilitate the establishment of 
adequate Ayurvedic hospitals in the National Capital Territory within defined timeline. 
The Committee expects that the Ministry extend adequate support of funds and ensure 
timely release. 
4.8.3 The Member sought to know the plans for establishing an Ayush hospital in 
Moradabad district of Uttar Pradesh. The Ministry has informed that under the National 
Ayush Mission, integrated Ayush hospitals are established based on proposals received from 
State Governments through State Annual Action Plans. The Ministry has further stated that 
no proposal has been received from the Government of Uttar Pradesh for establishing an 
Ayush hospital in Moradabad. 
4.8.4 The Committee notes that no proposal has been received from the State 
Government for establishment of an Ayush hospital in Moradabad district. However, 
considering the growing demand for Ayush healthcare services in the region, the 

69 
 
Committee is of the view that such facilities should be expanded in underserved regions 
like Moradabad. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must 
coordinate with the Government of Uttar Pradesh to explore the feasibility of 
establishing an Ayush hospital in Moradabad under the National Ayush Mission by 
assessing the needs of the Moradabad and providingaccess to traditional healthcare 
services in the region. 
4.9 SCREENING OF STUDENTS IN TRIBAL AREAS 
4.9.1 The Member highlighted the need for conducting health check-ups of students in 
Government schools, including Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS), particularly for 
early detection of Sickle Cell Anaemia in tribal areas. The Ministry has informed that the 
Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) has undertaken health 
initiatives for tribal students in partnership with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR). So far, 14 States have been covered, with 51 EMRS 
included under the programme. A total of 17,911 students have been screened and 52,321 
students have been provided with medical assistance.  
4.9.2 The Committee appreciates for the efforts made for screening for early detection 
of disease and extending healthcare support to tribal students through collaboration 
with other Ministries and research institutions. The Committee, however, is of the view 
that early detection and management of genetic disorders such as Sickle Cell Anaemia 
require wider coverage and sustained intervention at large scale. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry expand such screening programmes to cover 
more tribal districts and strengthen collaboration with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
and other health agencies. 
4.10 INTEGRATION OF AYUSH AND ALLOPATHY 
4.10.1 The Member sought to know the strategy being adopted for integration of Ayush and 
modern medicine and emphasised the need for conducting multi-site clinical trials for 
scientific validation and evaluation of long-term effects. The Ministry has informed that 
Memoranda of Understanding have been signed with the Indian Council of Medical Research 
(ICMR) for conducting high-quality research on integrative medicine. The initiative aims to 
formalise integrative healthcare delivery and support policy recommendations through the All 
India Institute of Ayurveda-Academic Consortium for Integrative Health Research (AI-
AciHR). The Ministry has further informed that collaborative research and clinical trials are 
being undertaken with leading biomedical institutions such as AIIMS and the National 
Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS) to generate scientific evidence in 
priority disease areas. 
4.10.2  The Committee acknowledges the collaborative initiatives undertaken by the 
Ministry with premier research institutions for promoting integrative healthcare. The 
Committee is of the view that stronger scientific evidence and large-scale clinical 
validation are essential for effective integration of Ayush with modern medicine. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expand multi-centric clinical trials 
and strengthen interdisciplinary research to generate robust scientific evidence on 
integrative therapies. The Committee expects that such initiatives will strengthen the 
credibility of integrative healthcare models and promote wider acceptance of Ayush 
systems. 
4.11 UNDERUTILISATION OF FUNDS UNDER NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 

70 
 
4.11.1 The Members raised concerns regarding the underutilisation of funds under the 
National Ayush Mission (NAM) and sought clarification regarding the increase in the scheme 
allocation from ₹1275 crore to ₹1300 crore. The Ministry has informed that during the 
financial years 2023-24 and 2024-25, the scheme received Budget Estimates of ₹815 crore 
and ₹1046 crore respectively, which were actually utilised to the tune of ₹869.31 crore and 
₹1137.65 crore. However, during the financial year 2025-26, the expenditure was less than 50 
percent of the Budget Estimate till the second quarter due to the transition to the SNA-
SPARSH system. The Ministry has stated that technical support and guidance is being 
provided to implementing agencies to address operational issues arising from the new system. 
4.11.2 The Committee has taken note of challenges faced in fund utilisation under the 
National Ayush Mission due to the transition to the SNA-SPARSH system. The 
Committee believes that the Ministry should have anticipated and acted more 
proactively beforehand and procedural and technical issues should not significantly 
affect the timely implementation of healthcare programmes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry strengthen technical support mechanisms at Ayush 
Directorate and monitoring systems at State Ayush Society to ensure timely utilisation 
of funds by States and implementing agencies. The Committee further recommends for 
appointment of financial managers in each Ayush Directorates who shall work in 
tandem with State Ayush Society. 
4.11.3 The Members also sought to know the steps taken to support financially weaker 
States/UTs in meeting their 40% share of funds under the National Ayush Mission. The 
Ministry has informed that it has recommended to the Sixteenth Finance Commission that 
financial support be provided as seed money for establishment of Ayush departments or 
strengthening existing units in such States. 
4.11.4 The Committee appreciates that the proposal submitted to the 16thFinance 
Commission for providing financial assistance to financially weaker States as seed 
money for strengthening Ayush infrastructure. The Committee is concerned to note that 
no such seed money has been recommended by the 16thFinance Commission in its 
recommendation. The Committee is of the view that limited financial resources may 
hinder the expansion of Ayush healthcare services in such States. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry explore additional financial support 
mechanisms for States facing financial constraints by providing seed money from NAM 
allocation. The Committee further recommends for setting up Ayush Infrastructure 
Fund having component of each segements of Ayush for meeting such constraints. 
4.12 SUBMISSION OF UTILISATION CERTIFICATES 
4.12.1 The Member raised the issue of significant backlog in submission of Utilisation 
Certificates, particularly under the National Ayush Mission, and emphasised the need to 
address the matter. The Ministry has informed that it has issued a detailed checklist for 
submission of Utilisation Certificates to enable States and Union Territories to submit 
complete and error-free certificates. The Ministry also stated that regular follow-ups are 
conducted with States and Union Territories through meetings and that monitoring is 
undertaken at the Secretary level on a weekly basis. 
4.12.2  The Committee expresses concern over the persistent backlog in the 
submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) by States and Union Territories. The 
Committee, however is of the view that delays in submission of Utilisation certificates 
affect financial accountability and timely release of funds for development programmes 
like NAM. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen its 

71 
 
monitoring and coordination mechanisms to ensure timely submission of Utilisation 
Certificates by implementing agencies. The Committee further recommends for 
standardising the Utilisation certificate format and consider the secure digitalisation of 
Utilisation Certificates to ensure compliance. 
4.13 SEPARATE REGULATORY MECHANISM FOR AYUSH DRUGS 
4.13.1 The Member pointed out that the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 does not exclusively 
pertain to Ayush medicines and sought clarification regarding the status of establishing a 
separate regulatory mechanism for Ayush drugs. The Ministry has informed that provisions 
relating to Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs are contained in Chapter IVA and Schedule I 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. Further, the Second Schedule of the Act provides 
standards for Homoeopathic drugs. The Ministry also stated that a separate Ayurvedic, 
Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board and consultative committees exist under 
the current legal framework. In addition, State Governments and Union Territories appoint 
licensing authorities and drug inspectors for enforcement of regulatory provisions related to 
Ayush medicines. 
4.13.2 The Committee notes that regulatory provisions exist for the regulation of Ayush 
drugs under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, which contains specific provisions for 
traditional systems of medicine. The Committee is of the view that, with the growing 
scope and global expansion of the Ayush sector, there is a need to further strengthen the 
regulatory legislative framework governing Ayush medicines. Moreover, the 
enforcement of the Act lies within the purview of State Licensing Authorities, which has 
often resulted in fragmented implementation, delays, and ineffective enforcement. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry examine the feasibility of 
strengthening the central regulatory mechanism for the regulation and laying down of 
uniform standards of enforcement and enhancing coordination with State Drug 
Authorities to ensure better standardization, safety, and efficacy of Ayush drugs. 
4.14 RESEARCH OUTCOMES BY RESEARCH COUNCILS 
4.14.1 The Members sought to know the number of research papers published by research 
councils such as the Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH) and the Central 
Council for Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS). The Ministry has informed that 
CCRAS has published a total of 1,812 research papers during the period 2015-16 to 2024-25 
in various national and international journals. CCRH has published 71 research papers up to 
28 February 2026. Further, the Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) has published 
949 research articles in peer-reviewed and indexed journals and has been granted a patent for 
the process for preparation of “Pooneru”, a formulation used in Siddha medicine. 
4.14.2  The Committee notes the research output produced by various research 
councils under the Ministry of Ayush. However, the Committee is of the view that there 
is a need to further enhance the visibility and scientific impact of Ayush research at 
national and international levels. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry must encourage collaborative research with reputed institutions and promote 
publication of research findings in high-impact national and international journals. The 
Committee expects that the findings are also translated into actual Ayush practice at 
grassroots level. 
4.14.3 The Memberhas sought information regarding the extent to which budgetary 
allocation for Ayush translates into tangible health outcomes, including the proportion of 
funds allocated for research, promotion and infrastructure development. The Ministry 

72 
 
informed that the Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Uttpadan Samvardhan Yojana 
(AOGUSY) has an outlay of ₹122 crore for the period 2021-2026 for upgradation of 
infrastructure in State Government pharmacies and drug testing laboratories. The Ministry 
also stated that funds released under the National Ayush Mission have supported 2,023 units 
and that the number of patients availing services at Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) has 
increased from 5.07 crore in 2021-22 to 12.65 crore in 2024-25. The Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC) scheme is also utilised for promotion of Ayush systems in the 
country and third-party evaluation is undertaken during revision of schemes. 
4.14.4  The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry to strengthen 
infrastructure and expand service delivery under various Ayush schemes. The 
Committee further observes that research institutions under the Ministry receive 
support under the Grant-in-Aid (General) component for undertaking various research 
initiatives; however, these activities have largely remained limited to publications in 
journals rather than resulting in measurable outcomes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should undertake periodic independent evaluations and 
impact assessments of the research studies conducted and consider defining the 
expenditure under the GIA-General component for each research project, with a year-
end evaluation to measure outcomes. The Committee expects that such evaluations will 
contribute to improved programme implementation and ensure the optimal utilisation 
of public funds. 
4.14.5 The Member sought to know the plans for establishing an Ayush research centre in 
Shamli district of Uttar Pradesh. The Ministry informed that there is currently no proposal for 
establishing such a centre in Shamli. However, the Central Council for Research in Siddha 
has expressed willingness to participate in the establishment of an Ayush research centre if 
such a proposal is received from the State Government. 
4.14.6 The Committee notes that no proposal has been received for establishing an 
Ayush research centre in Shamli district. However, considering the importance of 
expanding research infrastructure for the development of traditional systems of 
medicine, the Committee is of the view that such initiatives should be encouraged. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry coordinate with the Government 
of Uttar Pradesh to explore the feasibility of establishing an Ayush research centre in 
the region. The Committee expects that expansion of research infrastructure will 
contribute to strengthening research and innovation in Ayush systems. 
4.15 EXPANSION OF AYUSH INFRASTRUCTURE UNDER NAM 
4.15.1 The Member emphasised the need for establishing at least one Ayush hospital in every 
district of the country and sought information regarding the budgetary allocation for 
establishing a 50-bedded Ayush hospital. The Ministry informed that the Sectoral Group of 
Secretaries (SGoS-4) has recommended strengthening secondary and tertiary healthcare 
convergence in accordance with IPHS (Ayush) standards by June 2029. The Ministry also 
stated that under the National Ayush Mission, there are plans to establish five 100-bedded 
integrated Ayush hospitals in Tier-II cities and around 288 districts where such facilities are 
currently unavailable. As per NAM guidelines, a one-time grant of up to ₹15 crore is 
provided for construction and infrastructure along with a recurring grant of ₹1.5 crore per 
annum for manpower, medicines and other operational expenses for establishing a 50-bedded 
integrated Ayush hospital. 
4.15.2  The Committee takes note of the Sectoral Group of Secretaries (SGoS-
4)recommendation for expansion of Ayush hospital infrastructure under the National 

73 
 
Ayush Mission by June 2029. The Committee is of the view that timely implementation 
of proposed 288 Ayush hospitals & otherinitiatives are crucial to improve accessibility 
of Ayush healthcare services across the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must ensure expeditious implementation of proposals for 
establishing integrated Ayush hospitals, particularly in districts currently lacking such 
facilities.  
4.15.3 The Member sought to know the extent of coverage of Ayush hospitals in rural areas 
of Gujarat. In response, the Ministry informed that there are a total of 13 Ayush hospitals 
functioning in rural areas of the State. The Ministry further stated that the State Government 
may seek additional financial assistance for establishment or strengthening of Ayush 
healthcare facilities through the submission of proposals under the State Annual Action Plans 
(SAAPs) in accordance with the guidelines of the National Ayush Mission (NAM). 
4.15.4 The Committee observes that the availability of Ayush hospitals in rural areas 
plays an important role in ensuring access to traditional healthcare services for the 
rural population. The Committee is of the view that the existing number of Ayush 
hospitals in rural areas of Gujarat may not be sufficient to meet the healthcare needs of 
a large rural population. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
encourages State Governments for submitting proposals under the National Ayush 
Mission for expansion and strengthening of Ayush healthcare infrastructure in rural 
areas. The Committee further desires that the guidelines of the National Ayush Mission 
(NAM) be circulated widely among the implementing agencies and State Governments 
so as to facilitate timely submission of proposals and effective utilisation of the scheme 
for strengthening Ayush healthcare infrastructure. 
4.16 ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICAL HUBS AND DRUG TESTING 
 LABORATORIES 
4.16.1 The Members highlighted the need for establishing medical hubs in different regions 
of the country and strengthening drug testing laboratories in high-capacity healthcare 
facilities. The Ministry informed that currently 34 Government drug testing laboratories and 
108 private laboratories have been approved for testing the identity, purity, quality and 
strength of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa and Unani drugs. The Ministry also stated that a 
three-tier pharmacovigilance network has been established comprising a National 
Pharmacovigilance Centre at the All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), five intermediary 
centres and 97 peripheral pharmacovigilance centres across the country. Additionally, five 
medical hubs have been announced in the Union Budget 2026-27 under the leadership of the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT). 
4.16.2 The Committee notes the existing network of drug testing laboratories and 
pharmacovigilance centres established to ensure the quality and safety of Ayush 
medicines. The Committee is of the view that the present network is not adequate in 
view of the expanding Ayush sector, and there is a need to further strengthen the quality 
assurance infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
explore the establishment of additional drug testing laboratories and strengthen 
pharmacovigilance mechanisms across the country, preferably at district hospitals, 
which would enhance efficiency and help avoid delays in the testing of drugs. 
4.17 INNOVATION AND GLOBAL RESEARCH COLLABORATION IN AYUSH 
4.17.1 The Member sought information regarding the steps being taken to position Ayush 
systems in global research collaboration and to encourage start-ups and biotechnology firms 

74 
 
working in the Ayush sector. The Ministry informed that the scheme for Promotion of 
International Cooperation is being implemented to strengthen global research collaboration in 
Ayush systems. The Ministry also provides time to time support to Indian Ayush drug 
manufacturers to enhance export potential and global outreach of Ayush products and 
services. 
4.17.2  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the global collaboration 
undertaken by the Ministry to promote international cooperation has been encouraging 
for Ayush sector. The Committee, however, is of the view that greater encouragement is 
required for innovation, start-ups and biotechnology firms, MSMEs engaged in Ayush-
based research and product development. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should strengthen financial support for all the schemes and promote 
MSMEs, start ups to undertake for innovation and promote collaborative research with 
global institutions.  
4.18 AFFORESTATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS 
4.18.1 The Member raised concerns regarding deforestation and emphasised the need for 
large-scale cultivation and conservation of medicinal plants. The Ministry informed that it is 
implementing the Central Sector Scheme for Conservation and Sustainable Management of 
Medicinal Plants, under which project-based financial assistance is provided to State Forest 
Departments for in-situ and ex-situ conservation and resource augmentation of medicinal 
plants in forest areas across the country. 
4.18.2 The Committee notes the initiatives undertaken for conservation and sustainable 
management of medicinal plants. The Committee is of the view that increased 
cultivation and conservation of medicinal plants are essential to meet the growing 
demand of the Ayush industry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry strengthen collaboration with State Forest Departments and local communities 
to expand cultivation and conservation programmes for medicinal plants. The Ministry 
should encourage farmers for cultivation of medicinal plants to be used as raw material 
for Ayush drugs and finally the Ministry may explore Ayush market in rural areas 
involving farmers & their family under the scheme suggested as “Tera Tujh ko Arpan” 
ensuring handsome increase in farmer’s income and having sound health through 
Ayush products. 
4.19 INTERACTION/COMMUNICATION IN TRIBAL AREAS 
4.19.1 The Member emphasised the need for improved engagement with tribal communities 
to better understand their traditional knowledge systems related to health and longevity. The 
Ministry informed that the National Institute of Homoeopathy (NIH), Kolkata observed 
Janjatiya Gaurav Varsh from 15 November 2024 to 15 November 2025 and conducted 
various programmes aimed at strengthening healthcare awareness among tribal communities. 
The All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) has also been assigned the responsibility of 
addressing adolescent anaemia in tribal areas of Bastar district in Chhattisgarh under Project 
Utkarsh. 
4.19.2  The Committee appreciates the outreach initiatives undertaken for 
promoting health awareness in tribal communities. The Committee, however, is of the 
view that greater engagement with tribal populations is necessary for understanding 
and documenting traditional health practices. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry strengthen community outreach programmes with tribals and 
promote documentation of traditional medicinal knowledge prevalent among tribal 

75 
 
communities. The Committee furtherdesires that the knowledge so accumulated may be 
integrated in local research repositories and used for treating the people. 
4.19.3 The Members expressed the need for sending research scholars to tribal areas to study 
traditional medicinal systems practiced by tribal communities, particularly for addressing 
prevalent diseases such as malaria and dengue. In response, the Ministry informed that the 
Central Council for Research in Siddha (CCRS) has organised a one-day interaction 
programme involving Vaidyars and ethnopractitioners to document traditional knowledge of 
tribal healers. The Ministry further stated that around 50 such traditional healers participated 
in the interaction and shared their ethnomedicinal knowledge related to various ailments for 
the purpose of research and documentation. 
4.19.4 The Committee notes the one day initiative taken by the Ministry to document 
traditional knowledge of tribal healers through interaction programmes. The 
Committee is of the view that a one-time interaction programme may not be sufficient to 
systematically capture and scientifically validate the rich ethnomedicinal knowledge 
available among tribal communities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry undertake structured field-based research by sending research scholars and 
multidisciplinary teams to tribal areas for systematic documentation, validation and 
preservation of traditional medicinal practices. 
4.20 AYUSHMAN BHARAT YOJNA COVERAGE FOR AYUSH 
4.20.1 The Member raised concerns regarding the limited number of Ayush hospitals 
empanelled under the Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY). 
The Ministry informed that the process for inclusion of Ayush treatment packages under AB-
PMJAY has been initiated and consultations are ongoing with the National Health Authority. 
The proposal has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance for approval. 
4.20.2  The Committee notes that the proposal for inclusion of Ayush treatment 
packages under AB-PMJAY is currently under consideration. However, the Committee 
is of the view that integration of Ayush healthcare services under major national health 
insurance schemes would significantly enhance accessibility and utilisation of traditional 
medicine. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expedite 
consultations with the National Health Authority and the Ministry of Finance to 
facilitate inclusion of Ayush treatment packages under AB-PMJAY. The Committee 
expects that such inclusion will expand healthcare choices available to beneficiaries and 
promote wider adoption of Ayush systems. 
4.21 NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR YOGA AND NATUROPATHY 
4.21.1 The Ministry has furnished that Central Council for Research in Yoga and 
Naturopathy (CCRYN) is apex central research council for Yoga apart from teaching 
institutions like National Institute of Naturopathy, Pune and Morarji Desai National Institute 
of Yoga, New Delhi (MDNIY). Further, the Yoga Certification Board, functioning under the 
MDNIY is responsible for certifying Yoga professionals and accrediting Yoga institutions. 
Similarly, Naturopathy Registration Board (NRB) is established under aegis of National 
Institute of Naturopathy, Pune is responsible for the central registration of Naturopathy 
practitioners and accreditation of its educational institutions. 
4.21.2 The Committee notes that the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine 
(NCISM) and the National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) have been established 
primarily to regulate medical education, academic standards and institutions imparting 

76 
 
education in their respective systems of medicine. The Committee observes that these 
Commissions perform important functions relating to curriculum development, accreditation 
of colleges and maintenance of national registers of practitioners. The Committee also notes 
that there exists a regulatory body for different Ayush systems except Yoga and Naturopathy 
at central level, however Yoga & Naturopathy presently lack a central statutory regulatory 
framework for education and practitioner registration.  
4.21.3 The Committee notes the steps taken by the existing regulatory commissions 
(NCISM & NCH) in introducing educational reforms such as competency-based 
curricula in medical education. However, in view of the increasing role of Yoga and 
Naturopathy in preventive and wellness healthcare, the expanding number of 
educational institutions, courses and practitioners and the growing international 
recognition of these disciplines, the Committee is of the view that the absence of a 
dedicated statutory regulatory framework may affect the long-term development and 
credibility of the Yoga and Naturopathy. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush examine the feasibility of establishing a 
National Commission for Yoga and Naturopathy to regulate education standards, 
institutional accreditation and practitioner registration. The Committee believes that 
such a mechanism would ensure uniform academic standards, strengthen professional 
regulation and facilitate the orderly growth of Yoga and Naturopathy education and 
practice in the country. 
4.23 FUNCTIONAL INTEGRATION OF TRADITIONAL MEDICINE 
4.23.1 The Committee notes that India has been moving towards a pluralistic 
healthcare system through co-location models and collaborative infrastructure 
development as envisaged under the National Health Mission. The Committee observes 
that such co-location has expanded healthcare choices for the public and has also 
encouraged research in areas such as herb-drug interactions. However, the Committee 
notes that treatment pathways in most institutions continue to function largely within 
their respective systems with modern medicine and Ayush services operating in parallel 
rather than in a inter- coordination manner. The Committee is of the view that greater 
clinical collaboration between the two systems can significantly enhance continuity of 
care, promote better utilisation of Ayush services and support the development of 
evidence-based integrative healthcare models. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry of Ayush, in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare explore the possibility of devising Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for 
structured cross-referral between modern medicine and Ayush departments preferably 
in tertiary care institutions. The Committee further recommends that these protocols 
clearly define referral pathways for appropriate conditions such as rehabilitation, 
chronic disease management, pain management, lifestyle disorders and preventive care, 
while ensuring that each system continues to function within its respective medical 
framework. 
 
4.24 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGIONAL RAW DRUG REPOSITORIES (RRDRS) 
4.24.1 The Committee notes that Ministry of Ayush, through the National Medicinal Plants 

77 
 
Board (NMPB), has initiated the establishment of eight Regional Raw Drug Repositories (RRDRs) & 
one National Raw drug repository across India for documentation, authentication and preservation of 
medicinal plant raw materials. The Committee notes that as on date, five RRDRs (1-NRDR & 4- 
RRDRs) have been established out of the nine originally planned. However, the repositories proposed 
for the Western Himalayan, Eastern Himalayan and Eastern Plateau & coastal plains regions remain 
under process. 
 
4.24.2 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) in undertaking systematic documentation through the establishment of Regional Raw Drug Repositories (RRDRs). The Committee believes that these repositories play a pivotal role in the collection, documentation, identification and authentication of raw drugs sourced largely from their respective agro-climatic regions. The Committee, however, observes that India possesses vast biodiversity and immense potential in medicinal plants, while the present number of repositories has limited geographical jurisdiction which may not be sufficient to ensure comprehensive and timely documentation of the country’s rich medicinal plant resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that NMPB consider establishing at least three additional Regional Raw Drug Repositories, particularly in biodiversity-rich regions such as the Western Ghats, Eastern Ghats and the North-Eastern region, so as to capture the diverse medicinal plant wealth of these ecologically sensitive zones and strengthen the national database of raw drugs for Ayush systems. The Committee also desires that the remaining four Regional Raw Drug Repositories already envisaged under the existing plan viz Western Himalayas, Eastern Himalayas & Eastern Plateau & Western coastal plains be established expeditiously so as to complete the originally proposed network at the earliest. 
4.25 HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT: PROMOTION OF AYUSH ALLIED 
 SERVICES 
4.25.1 The Committee notes the submission of the Secretary, Ministry of Ayush, that the 
Ministry has undertaken significant education reforms and aligned the curricula of Ayush 
education with the National Education Policy 2020. The Committee further notes that the 
Ministry’s autonomous institutions have collectively provided treatment to more than 62 lakh 
patients through OPD services and over 2.56 lakh patients through IPD services, while also 
contributing to the training and expansion of the Ayush medical workforce.  
4.25.2 The Committee observes that the increasing strength of doctors and expanding 
patient outreach reflect the growing role of these institutions in service delivery, 
education and clinical training within the Ayush sector. The Committee, however, also 
notes that several Ayush healthcare facilities continue to face shortages of doctors 
especially in Maharashtra which may affect the optimal delivery of services. The 
Committee is further of the view that the absence of a comprehensive and updated 
database of practicing professionals across all Ayush systems, including Yoga 
practitioners limits effective workforce planning and management of Ayush services. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush take necessary steps 
to strengthen the availability of doctors in Ayush facilities and develop a comprehensive 
and regularly updated national database of practicing professionals across all Ayush 
systems, including Yoga, so as to facilitate better workforce planning, policy 
formulation and effective management of Ayush services across the country. The 
Committee is of the further view that the Ministry should introduce legislation for 
Ayush allied services to encourage and promote comprehensive Ayush human resource 
development. 
4.25.3 The Committee comes to know that the number of Ayush CGHS Dispensaries is 
less in comparison to Allopathic CGHS Dispensaries. On the lines of promotion to 

78 
 
Ayush and traditional system of medicines, the number of Ayush CGHS dispensaries 
should also be enhanced or co-located with existing allopathic dispensaries. On the 
service conditions of allied healthcare workforce in Ayush Dispensaries, the Committee 
noted that certain cadres like Ayush doctors, pharmacists, etc. are overburdened with 
present workforce and directly affect the delivery of healthcare services. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department urgently prioritize recruitment 
drives, streamline promotion pathways, time-bound or assured career progression 
scheme to keep the morale of the staff high, skill upgradation and rationalisation of 
recruitment rules. The Committee also notes that certain cadres, particularly 
pharmacists (including Ayurvedic and Homeopathic), have limited or no promotion 
avenues within the existing service structure, leading to career stagnation and affecting 
staff motivation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department 
undertake a cadre restructuring to establish a clearer career progression pathway for 
such categories of staff, addressing long-standing anomalies which would improve 
retention and ensure a more motivated workforce within the healthcare system. 
4.26 AYUSHMAN AROGYA MANDIR (AYUSH) 
4.26.1 The Committee notes the submission of the Secretary, Ministry of Ayush, that the 
Ministry has operationalised around 12,500 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs under the Ayush 
component and has also undertaken the upgradation of dispensaries to strengthen primary 
healthcare delivery. The Committee further notes that the number of beneficiaries availing 
services under these facilities has increased significantly from about 5 crore to 12.64 crore, 
reflecting the growing utilisation and public acceptance of Ayush services at the grassroots 
level. 
4.26.2 The Committee welcomes the efforts of the Ministry in expanding Ayush-based 
primary healthcare infrastructure and outreach through 12500 Ayushman Arogya 
Mandirs(Ayush). Nevertheless, the Committee is of the view that sustained focus on 
adequate staffing, availability of medicines, and strengthening of diagnostic and referral 
linkages would be essential to ensure the effective functioning of Ayushman Arogya 
Mandirs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry continue to 
strengthen the operational capacity of these facilities so that they are able to deliver 
comprehensive and quality Ayush healthcare services to the population, particularly in 
underserved and rural areas. 
4.27 INTERMINISTERIAL COLLABORATION 
4.27.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Ayush is increasingly moving towards an 
integrative healthcare approach and has initiated collaborative research with specialised 
institutions such as All India Institute of Medical Sciences and Indian Council of Medical 
Research. The Committee further notes that joint initiatives, including screening programmes 
for tribal students and other collaborative public health interventions, are being undertaken in 
coordination with various institutions and Ministries. The Committee also takes note of the 
Ministry’s proposal to implement programmes for the elderly population in collaboration with 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development. The Committee observes that the expanding 
scope of Ayush across public health, research, preventive healthcare and wellness 
increasingly overlaps with the mandate of several other Ministries and institutions. 
4.27.2 The Committee is of the view that the effectiveness of Inter-Ministerial Ayush 
initiatives would depend upon strong inter-ministerial coordination and clearly defined 
institutional mechanisms for collaboration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of Ayush work in close coordination with concerned Ministries, research 

79 
 
institutions and public health agencies to ensure effective implementation, better 
resource utilisation and measurable outcomes from such collaborative initiatives, 
particularly in the areas of integrative healthcare, research and public health 
interventions. The Committee further desires that the outcomes and findings of such 
collaborative initiatives be widely disseminated among stakeholders, healthcare 
institutions and State Governments so as to create greater awareness and facilitate 
effective implementation at the grassroots level. 
4.28  OTHER KEY RECOMMENDATIONS  
4.28.1 The Committee notes that the growing demand for medicines under Ayush presents a significant opportunity to promote the cultivation of medicinal plants across the country. The Committee recommends that the Government encourage and support local farmers to undertake cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants used in systems such as Ayurveda and Unani through appropriate incentives, assured procurement mechanisms, technical guidance and market linkages. Such initiatives would not only strengthen the raw material supply chain for Ayush medicines but also enhance farmers’ income, promote sustainable agriculture and contribute to rural economic development.  4.28.2 The Committee notes with concern the rapidly rising burden of lifestyle-related non-communicable diseases, including Diabetes Mellitus, hypertension and obesity in the country. Recognizing the strong emphasis of traditional systems on preventive healthcare and healthy living, the Committee recommends that elements of Ayush particularly practices such as Yoga and basic principles of Ayurveda relating to healthy diet and lifestyle- may be gradually introduced in school curricula. Early exposure to these practices can help inculcate healthy habits among children, improve physical and mentalwell-being, and contribute to the long-term prevention of lifestyle diseases. Such initiatives would also help enhance awareness, acceptance, and wider popularity of Ayush systems among the younger generation, thereby strengthening the culture of preventive healthcare in the country.  4.28.3 The Committee is of the view that wider promotion and effective delivery of services under Ayush may be further strengthened through well-structured Public- Private Partnerships. The Committee recommends that the Government explore collaboration with credible private institutions, wellness centres, educational institutions and industry for expanding research, standardization of medicines, training of practitioners, and establishment of integrative wellness facilities. Such partnerships can help leverage private sector expertise, innovation and investment while ensuring adherence to quality and regulatory standards. The Committee believes that encouraging responsible PPP models would improve accessibility of Ayush services, promote evidence-based practices, and enhance the overall reach, popularity and global recognition of India’s traditional systems of healthcare.  4.28.4 The Committee is of the view that greater collaboration between Ayush and modern medicine institutions would help strengthen the evidence base and wider acceptance of traditional healthcare practices. The Committee therefore recommends encouraging collaborative research between Ayush institutions and leading centres of modern medicine to scientifically evaluate therapies, standardize treatment protocols, and generate robust clinical 

80 
 
evidence. Such interdisciplinary research would help identify areas where systems such as Ayurveda and Yoga can complement contemporary medical practice, particularly in preventive care, chronic disease management, and lifestyle disorders. The Committee believes that sustained research collaboration would enhance credibility, promote integrative healthcare, and contribute to improved health outcomes. 
4.29 SECRETARIAT RELATED CAUTION WHILE RESPONDING 
COMMITTEE’S RECOMMENDATION 
4.29.1 The Committee observes that the replies to questionnaires have largely been 
furnished in an institute-wise or section-wise format by the various autonomous bodies 
and organisations under the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that such a format 
often results in multiple responses from different institutions to the same question, 
making the information voluminous and at times leading to fragmented responses and 
varying interpretations of the issue raised. The Committee, therefore, desires that the 
Ministry of Ayush should furnish more consolidated format while furnishing replies to 
the queries raised by the Committee. The Committee desires that the Ministry may 
obtain the required inputs from its subordinate offices, autonomous bodies and research 
councils internally and provide a unified and consolidated response to the Committee’s 
recommendations and observation. The Committee believes that such an approach 
would facilitate clearer presentation of information and enable a more effective and 
holistic examination of the Demands for Grants by the Committee. 
  

81 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
WAY FORWARD:  ROAD AHEAD FOR AYUSH 
 
Vision for Ayush @ 2047 
5.1 India’s traditional systems of medicine- Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, 
Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa and Homoeopathy represent a rich heritage of holistic health knowledge 
developed over centuries has the potential to emerge as a major pillar of India’s healthcare 
system as well as a global leader in traditional and integrative medicine. The Committee 
believes that the coming decades present a unique opportunity to transform Ayush from a 
largely tradition-based healthcare system into a scientifically validated,globally accepted and 
economically vibrant sector contributing significantly to public health, preventive healthcare, 
wellness tourism, pharmaceutical innovation and employment generation. The Committee 
believes that achieving the vision of Ayush @ 2047 will require strategic focus on research, 
education, digitalisation, global outreach, industry development and integration with the 
mainstream healthcare system. 
5.2 UNION BUDGETS HIGHLIGHTS FOR AYUSH SECTOR 
 
5.2.1 The Committee notes that the Union Budget 2026-27 has laid renewed emphasis on 
strengthening the Ayush sector through targeted investments in education, research, quality 
assurance and global outreach. The Budget proposes to support the modernization of Ayush 
education and training, expansion and strengthening of Ayush Health and Wellness Centres 
under the National Ayush Mission, and scaling up of research, standardization and quality 
assurance initiatives in traditional medicine systems. 
 
1. Establishment of New All india Institute of Ayurveda 
5.2.2 The Committee notes the announcement regarding the establishment of three 
new All India Institutes of Ayurveda (AIIA) to strengthen education, clinical services 
and research in Ayurveda. The Committee welcomes this initiative as an important step 
towards expanding tertiary-level Ayush healthcare infrastructure in the country and 
strengthening the quality of Ayurveda education, research and advanced clinical care. 
The Committee, however, is of the view that the effectiveness of these institutions will 
depend upon timely& effective implementation of projects/scheme, creation of adequate 
Ayush infrastructure and the development of a robust research ecosystem. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush formulate a 
comprehensive implementation roadmap for the newly announced AIIAs with clearly 
defined timelines, adequate funding support but with aim of measurable outcomes. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry must take steps to introduce more 
trans-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary courses and research programmes, including 
areas such as biotechnology, public health and engineering-integrated healthcare, so as 
to promote innovation and strengthen the scientific advancement of Ayurveda systems 
of medicine. 

82 
 
2. Upgradation of Ayush Pharmacies and Drug Testing Laboratories 
5.2.3 The Committee notes the announcement in the Union Budget 2026-27 regarding 
the upgradation of Ayush pharmacies and drug testing laboratories aimed at 
strengthening the quality assurance ecosystem of Ayush medicines and ensuring the 
availability of skilled technical manpower. The Committee observes that the credibility, 
safety and wider acceptance of Ayush medicines are closely linked to the robustness of 
quality control and standardisation mechanisms within the sector, particularly in the 
context of expanding domestic use and global trade in Ayush products. However, the 
Committee is of the view that concerns relating to quality standardisation, testing 
capacity, authentication of raw materials and adherence to pharmacopoeial standards 
continue to pose challenges for the sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should take steps to strengthen technical capacity through specialised 
training programmes for laboratory personnel, drug inspectors, pharmacists and 
quality control professionals in collaboration with premier research institutions and 
regulatory bodies. The Committee further recommends that the upgraded laboratories 
be effectively integrated with research and standardisation initiatives, including the 
development of validated testing protocols, authentication of medicinal plant raw 
materials and safety evaluation of classical and proprietary Ayush formulations. The 
Committee believes that such measures would significantly strengthen the quality 
assurance framework of the Ayush sector, enhance consumer confidence and facilitate 
the expansion of Ayush product exports and India’s position in the global traditional 
medicine market. 
3. Establishment of five Regional Medical Hubs 
5.2.4 The Committee notes that the Union Budget 2026-27 proposes to launch a 
scheme to support States in establishing five Regional Medical Hubs in partnership with 
the private sector with the objective of promoting India as a global hub for medical 
tourism services. The Committee welcomes all such initiatives as a step towards 
strengthening India’s position in the global medical value travel ecosystem and observes 
that it offers significant potential to expand the global outreach of Ayush systems of 
medicine. Nevertheless, the Committee is of the view that the success of envisaged hubs 
will depend upon effective coordination between the Central Government, State 
Governments and private sector stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry of Ayush work in close convergence with the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and other concerned Ministries to ensure adequate integration of Ayush 
services within creating effective professional working equilibrium of hubs. The 
Ministry should also ordain a clear framework for infrastructure development, quality 
standards, accreditation and international promotion to maximise the potential of such 
Ayush hubshubs in promoting India’s medical tourism and Ayush sectors. 
4. Upgradation of  the WHO Global Traditional Medicine Centre in Jamnagar  
5.2.5 The Committee appreciates the announcement in the Union Budget 2026-27 for 
the upgradation of the WHO Global Traditional Medicine Centre (GTMC) at Jamnagar 

83 
 
aimed at strengthening global collaboration, research and knowledge exchange in the 
field of traditional medicine. The Committee observes that the Centre holds significant 
potential to position India as a global leader in traditional medicine by promoting 
evidence-based research, standardisation, capacity building and international 
cooperation in Ayush systems. The Committee, however, is of the considered view that 
the full potential of the Centre can be realised only through a well-defined institutional 
framework, enhanced research collaboration and effective global outreach. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush to work in tandem with 
the World Health Organization and other international partners to strengthen research 
networks, develop global standards and promote scientific validation of traditional 
medicine practices. The Committee further recommends that the Centre be leveraged as 
a global platform for policy dialogue, training, knowledge exchange and innovation in 
traditional medicine so as to enhance the international visibility and acceptance of 
Ayush systems and strengthen India’s leadership in the global traditional medicine 
ecosystem. 
5.3 INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR AYUSH TREATMENT 
5.3.1 The Committee notes that despite the growing public acceptance of Ayush 
systems of medicine, insurance coverage for Ayush treatments remains limited and 
inconsistent across different insurance providers. The Committee observes that wider 
and more uniform insurance coverage for Ayush therapies would significantly improve 
the accessibility and affordability of these treatments for the public and support their 
greater integration within the healthcare system. The Committee, however, is of the 
view that the absence of standardised treatment protocols, package rates and regulatory 
clarity continues to limit the inclusion of Ayush therapies within mainstream health 
insurance frameworks. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 
Ayush work in close coordination with the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India (IRDAI) and insurance providers to expand the coverage of Ayush 
treatment packages under health insurance schemes. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should undertake necessary steps to standardise 
treatment protocols and cost structures for Ayush therapies so as to facilitate their 
wider inclusion within mainstream health insurance frameworks and improve access to 
Ayush-based healthcare services. 
5.4 FINANCIAL PROJECTION 
5.4.1 The Ministry has informed that the present budgetary allocation for Ayush has 
witnessed an increase of approximately 246.57%, from ₹ 1272.15 crore in BE 2014-15 to ₹ 
4408.93 crore in BE 2026-27, reflecting the Government’s robust commitment towards the 
promotion, development and mainstreaming of traditional systems of medicine within the 
national healthcare framework. The Committee further notes that the BE allocation for 2026-
27 of ₹4408.93 crore represents an increase of nearly 20% over the Revised Estimates of 
2025-26 and about 10.4% over the Budget Estimates of 2025-26 (₹3992.90 crore), indicating 

continued prioritisation of the Ayush sector in the Union Budget. The Ministry has further informed that it aims to increase the Ayush sector’s share in India’s GDP from the present 1.1% to about 5% by the year 2047.
5.4.1 The Committee takes into accountpromotion and mainstreaming of Committee observes that the Ministry has articulated an ambitious vision of increasing the Ayush sector’s share in India’s GDP from the present 1.1 per cent to about 5 per cent by 2047. The Committee notes that achieving such expAyush ecosystem to grow at a significantly higher decades for the expansion of industries, exports, medical value travel and wellness services. The Committee is of thefinancial support, greater private sector participationprogressive strengthening of infrastructure, research and global outreach initiatives within the Ayush sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that tnecessary steps to ensure that the growth trajectory of budgetary allocations for the Ayush sector must progressively accelerated beyond the cent. The Committee, in this regard pressures and the need for real expansion in research, infrastructure and global outreach, the Budget Estimates for the Ministry of Ayush may be targeted to grow at a minimum of 15 per cent annually in nominal terms in the coming years so as tadequately support the long-term expansion and global positioning of the Ayush sector.5.5 INSTITUTIONAL EXPANSION AND INFRASTRUCTURE5.5.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry has proposed a total outlay of crore for the continuation of theCommission cycle (2026-27 to 2030such as the launch of the Har Ghar Ayur Yog
84 
continued prioritisation of the Ayush sector in the Union Budget. The Ministry has further that it aims to increase the Ayush sector’s share in India’s GDP from the present 1.1% to about 5% by the year 2047. 
takes into account the trend of budgetary support for the promotion and mainstreaming of traditional systems of medicine with concern.Committee observes that the Ministry has articulated an ambitious vision of increasing the Ayush sector’s share in India’s GDP from the present 1.1 per cent to about 5 per cent by 2047. The Committee notes that achieving such expansion would require the Ayush ecosystem to grow at a significantly higher budgetary trajectory over the coming the expansion of industries, exports, medical value travel and wellness Committee is of the firm view that such growth would require stronger financial support, greater private sector participation under PPP modelprogressive strengthening of infrastructure, research and global outreach initiatives sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry take necessary steps to ensure that the growth trajectory of budgetary allocations for the progressively accelerated beyond the existing trend to about 10.9 per ee, in this regard recommends that, considering pressures and the need for real expansion in research, infrastructure and global outreach, the Budget Estimates for the Ministry of Ayush may be targeted to grow at a minimum of 15 per cent annually in nominal terms in the coming years so as tterm expansion and global positioning of the Ayush sector.INSTITUTIONAL EXPANSION AND INFRASTRUCTURE The Committee notes that the Ministry has proposed a total outlay of crore for the continuation of the National Ayush Mission (NAM) during the 16th Finance 27 to 2030-31). The proposal includes several strategic initiatives Har Ghar Ayur Yog initiative, establishment of 100
continued prioritisation of the Ayush sector in the Union Budget. The Ministry has further that it aims to increase the Ayush sector’s share in India’s GDP from the present  budgetary support for the medicine with concern. The Committee observes that the Ministry has articulated an ambitious vision of increasing the Ayush sector’s share in India’s GDP from the present 1.1 per cent to about 5 per ansion would require the trajectory over the coming the expansion of industries, exports, medical value travel and wellness would require stronger under PPP model and a progressive strengthening of infrastructure, research and global outreach initiatives he Ministry take necessary steps to ensure that the growth trajectory of budgetary allocations for the about 10.9 per recommends that, considering inflationary pressures and the need for real expansion in research, infrastructure and global outreach, the Budget Estimates for the Ministry of Ayush may be targeted to grow at a minimum of 15 per cent annually in nominal terms in the coming years so as to term expansion and global positioning of the Ayush sector. The Committee notes that the Ministry has proposed a total outlay of ₹ 46,175.80 National Ayush Mission (NAM) during the 16th Finance 31). The proposal includes several strategic initiatives initiative, establishment of 100-bedded 


integrated Ayush hospitals (Phase 2), addition of 12,500 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) and continuation and strengthening of existing NAM activities, with the objective of ensuring wider participation of States/UTs and effective implementation and coverathe country.  
5.5.2 The Committee takes note with concernrestricted the financial outlay crore based on a formula limiting the allocation to 5.5 expenditure of FY 2021-22 to FY 2022(Revised Estimates). The Committee observes that there exists a significant gap between the outlay proposed by the Ministry of Ayush and the allocation appMinistry of Finance, which may adversely impact the pace of infrastructure augmentation and programme expansion envisaged for the Ayush sector under the vision of Viksit Bharat @ 2047applied by the Ministry of Financerequirements of the scheme, particularly in light of implementation challenges faced in recent years, including delays associated with the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) fund fmechanism considering visionary goals and objectives of Ayush @ 2047time, the Committee is of the view that bottlenecks may not accurately reflect the genuine financial needs for the expansionAyush infrastructure and services under the National Ayush Mission (NAM). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush ensure optimal utilisation of the Budget Estimates for 2026address implementation bottlenecks, including issues related to the SNA fund flow mechanism. The Committee recommends thatengage with the Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocations in subsequent years and concurrently, the Ministry of Ayush may Project Management Unit and the State Ayush Societies so as to 
85 
integrated Ayush hospitals (Phase 2), addition of 12,500 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) and continuation and strengthening of existing NAM activities, with the objective of ensuring wider participation of States/UTs and effective implementation and coverage of NAM across 
takes note with concern that the Ministry of Finance has  of Ministry of Ayush for the next five years to crore based on a formula limiting the allocation to 5.5 times the average annual 22 to FY 2022-23 (Actual Expenditure) and FY 2024(Revised Estimates). The Committee observes that there exists a significant gap between the outlay proposed by the Ministry of Ayush and the allocation approved by the Ministry of Finance, which may adversely impact the pace of infrastructure augmentation and programme expansion envisaged for the Ayush sector under the Viksit Bharat @ 2047. The Committee highlights that the restriction formula ied by the Ministry of Finance for the Ayush sector may not fully capture the actual requirements of the scheme, particularly in light of implementation challenges faced in recent years, including delays associated with the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) fund fconsidering visionary goals and objectives of Ayush @ 2047. , the Committee is of the view that preceding expenditure trends affected by such bottlenecks may not accurately reflect the genuine financial needs for the expansionAyush infrastructure and services under the National Ayush Mission (NAM). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush ensure optimal utilisation of the Budget Estimates for 2026-27 under NAM and take proactive steps to mentation bottlenecks, including issues related to the SNA fund flow mechanism. The Committee recommends that while the Ministry must progressively engage with the Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocations in subsequent years and try of Ayush may strengthen coordination between the Central Project Management Unit and the State Ayush Societies so as to ensure maximum
integrated Ayush hospitals (Phase 2), addition of 12,500 Ayushman Arogya Mandirs (Ayush) and continuation and strengthening of existing NAM activities, with the objective of ensuring ge of NAM across 
 that the Ministry of Finance has for the next five years to ₹4,019.25 times the average annual 23 (Actual Expenditure) and FY 2024-25 (Revised Estimates). The Committee observes that there exists a significant gap between roved by the Ministry of Finance, which may adversely impact the pace of infrastructure augmentation and programme expansion envisaged for the Ayush sector under the that the restriction formula may not fully capture the actual requirements of the scheme, particularly in light of implementation challenges faced in recent years, including delays associated with the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) fund flow . At the same expenditure trends affected by such bottlenecks may not accurately reflect the genuine financial needs for the expansion of Ayush infrastructure and services under the National Ayush Mission (NAM). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush ensure optimal 27 under NAM and take proactive steps to mentation bottlenecks, including issues related to the SNA fund flow progressively engage with the Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocations in subsequent years and strengthen coordination between the Central ensure maximum fund 


utilisation and facilitate the timely expansion of Ayush infrastructure across the country to achieve the objective and goals of Ayush at 2047.5.6 SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND EVIDENCE GENERATION 
5.6.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Ayush has undertaken several initiatives in recent years to strengthen research in Ayush systems, including activities of the Central Research Councils, collaborative research programmes and the launch of digital platforms such as the National Ayush Research Portal for dissemination of scientific publications and research outcomes. The Committee observes that these initiatives represent an important step towards strengthening evidence generation and promoting scientific research in the Ayush sector. However, the Committee is of the view that largeAyush remain limited, which may constrain the systematic scientific validation and wider acceptance of Ayush therapies, medicines and treatment protocols. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministrylarge-scale multicentric clinical trials to evaluate Ayush interventions for major noncommunicable diseases and lifestyle disorders. The Committeethat collaboration between Ayush research institutions and premier biomedical institutions such as AIIMS, ICMR iand that dedicated Centres for Integrative Medicine Research be established to evaluate combined Ayush and modern medicine treatment models. The Committee also recommends that the National Ayush Research Pcomprehensive repository of research data, clinical studies and scientific publications. The Committee believes that such measures would significantly strengthen the evidence base of Ayush systems and enhance their credib
86 
utilisation and facilitate the timely expansion of Ayush infrastructure achieve the objective and goals of Ayush at 2047. SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND EVIDENCE GENERATION 
The Committee notes that the Ministry of Ayush has undertaken several initiatives in recent years to strengthen research in Ayush systems, including activities of the Central Research Councils, collaborative research programmes and the launch of digital platforms such as the National Ayush Research Portal for dissemination of scientific publications and research outcomes. The Committee observes t these initiatives represent an important step towards strengthening evidence generation and promoting scientific research in the Ayush sector. However, the Committee is of the view that large-scale clinical research and translational studies in ain limited, which may constrain the systematic scientific validation and wider acceptance of Ayush therapies, medicines and treatment protocols. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must take steps to undertake linical trials to evaluate Ayush interventions for major noncommunicable diseases and lifestyle disorders. The Committee,therefore, that collaboration between Ayush research institutions and premier biomedical institutions such as AIIMS, ICMR institutes, IITs and CSIR laboratories be expanded, and that dedicated Centres for Integrative Medicine Research be established to evaluate combined Ayush and modern medicine treatment models. The Committee also recommends that the National Ayush Research Portal be further strengthened as a comprehensive repository of research data, clinical studies and scientific publications. The Committee believes that such measures would significantly strengthen the evidence base of Ayush systems and enhance their credibility, acceptance and global integration.
utilisation and facilitate the timely expansion of Ayush infrastructure and services 
 The Committee notes that the Ministry of Ayush has undertaken several initiatives in recent years to strengthen research in Ayush systems, including the activities of the Central Research Councils, collaborative research programmes and the launch of digital platforms such as the National Ayush Research Portal for dissemination of scientific publications and research outcomes. The Committee observes t these initiatives represent an important step towards strengthening evidence generation and promoting scientific research in the Ayush sector. However, the scale clinical research and translational studies in ain limited, which may constrain the systematic scientific validation and wider acceptance of Ayush therapies, medicines and treatment protocols. The take steps to undertake linical trials to evaluate Ayush interventions for major non- recommends that collaboration between Ayush research institutions and premier biomedical nstitutes, IITs and CSIR laboratories be expanded, and that dedicated Centres for Integrative Medicine Research be established to evaluate combined Ayush and modern medicine treatment models. The Committee also ortal be further strengthened as a comprehensive repository of research data, clinical studies and scientific publications. The Committee believes that such measures would significantly strengthen the evidence ility, acceptance and global integration. 


87 
 
5.6.2 The Committee takes note of emerging initiatives such as Biopharma SHAKTI 
provide an opportunity to integrate traditional knowledge systems with modern 
biotechnology and pharmaceutical innovation. The Committee observes that Ayush 
systems have significant potential in the development of plant-based therapeutic 
products, particularly phyto-pharmaceuticals, which can serve as a bridge between 
traditional herbal formulations and modern biopharmaceutical products. The 
Committee, however, is of the view that the absence of harmonised quality standards 
and robust clinical validation may limit the global competitiveness of Ayush products. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayushmust promote the 
development of phyto-pharmaceuticals and establish a quality certification framework 
aligned with internationally accepted Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). The 
Committee further recommends leveraging institutions such as the WHO Global 
Traditional Medicine Centre for multi-centric clinical research so as to strengthen 
scientific validation and enhance India’s position in the global market for nature-based 
therapeutics. 
5.7 STANDARDIZATION OF ASU&H  vis-a-vis PHARMACOVIGILANCE 
5.7.1 The Secretary, Ministry of Ayush informed that the Ministry has taken several 
measures are being taken to strengthen the quality assurance and safety monitoring of Ayush 
drugs through regulatory safeguards, pharmacovigilance mechanisms and scientific research 
initiatives through provisions such as cautionary labelling for medicines containing 
ingredients listed under Schedule E(I) of the Drugs Rules, 1945, regulation of online sales 
through advisories issued by the Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA), and 
directions issued by the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM) 
regarding clear prescription of dosage and duration represent important steps towards 
ensuring the safe use of Ayush medicines. The Ministry further informed that the 
implementation of the Pharmacovigilance Programme for ASU&H drugs through a 
nationwide three-tier network (NPvCC/IPvCs/PPvCs), along with the launch of the Ayush 
Suraksha Portal for reporting adverse reactions and misleading advertisements, has 
strengthened the institutional framework for safety monitoring and consumer protection in the 
Ayush sector. 
5.7.2 The Committee appreciates the progress made by the Ministry in strengthening 
the quality assurance framework for Ayush drugs and in expanding pharmacovigilance 
mechanisms within the sector. The Committee observes that these initiatives are 
important for ensuring the safety, credibility and wider acceptance of Ayush medicines. 
The Committee, however, is of the view that the scientific validation of Ayurvedic and 
other Ayush formulations needs to be further strengthened through systematic pre-
clinical, clinical and observational studies, including toxicity assessments, herb-drug 
interaction studies, pharmacological evaluations and well-designed clinical trials across 
a range of disease conditions. The Committee further observes that there persists a 

perception among sections of practitioners and the public that natural medicines are inherently harmless, which may discourage the identification and reporting of potential adverse effects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush strengthen scientific research and pharmacovigilance systems to promote evidencebased validation and safety profiling of Ayush medicines. The Committee further recommends that robust mechanisms for quality control, traceability of raw materials and systematic documentation of adverse drug reactions be strengthened so as to enhance public confidence& acceptabilitymedicines from being primarily based healthcare interventions.5.8 EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT5.8.1 The Ministry has informed that there has been a significant expansion in educational infrastructure with UG colleges inccolleges rising from 138 to 266. Correspondingly, UG seats have increased from 31,514 to 66,413, while PG seats have grown from 3,167 to 8,106, reflecting enhanced capacity for training Ayush professionals. The key reforms under education sector include the implementation of the NCISM and NCH Act, 2020, introduction of an eManagement System, and promotion of interdisciplinary and creditpostgraduate and Ph.D. programmes inbeen integrated into the MBBS curriculum through a mandatory oneyoga training. Additionally, 124 Ayush educational institutions have been upgraded under the National Ayush Mission, strengthening academic infrastructure and quality of education.5.8.2 The Committee takes note ofstrengthening Ayush education through institutional expansion and various policy reforms. The Committee observes tthe need of hour for developing competent healthcare professionals and promoting 
88 
perception among sections of practitioners and the public that natural medicines are inherently harmless, which may discourage the identification and reporting of potential erse effects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush strengthen scientific research and pharmacovigilance systems to promote evidencebased validation and safety profiling of Ayush medicines. The Committee further obust mechanisms for quality control, traceability of raw materials and systematic documentation of adverse drug reactions be strengthened so as to & acceptability and support the transition of Ayush medicines from being primarily faith-based to scientifically validated and evidencebased healthcare interventions. EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT The Ministry has informed that there has been a significant expansion in educational infrastructure with UG colleges increasing from 520 in 2013-14 to 942 in 2025, and PG colleges rising from 138 to 266. Correspondingly, UG seats have increased from 31,514 to 66,413, while PG seats have grown from 3,167 to 8,106, reflecting enhanced capacity for . The key reforms under education sector include the implementation of the NCISM and NCH Act, 2020, introduction of an eManagement System, and promotion of interdisciplinary and credit-based courses, including postgraduate and Ph.D. programmes in integrative healthcare. Further, Ayush exposure has been integrated into the MBBS curriculum through a mandatory one-week internship and yoga training. Additionally, 124 Ayush educational institutions have been upgraded under the trengthening academic infrastructure and quality of education.takes note of the attention of the Ministry of Ayush strengthening Ayush education through institutional expansion and various policy reforms. The Committee observes that strengthening the quality of Ayush education is for developing competent healthcare professionals and promoting 
perception among sections of practitioners and the public that natural medicines are inherently harmless, which may discourage the identification and reporting of potential erse effects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush strengthen scientific research and pharmacovigilance systems to promote evidence-based validation and safety profiling of Ayush medicines. The Committee further obust mechanisms for quality control, traceability of raw materials and systematic documentation of adverse drug reactions be strengthened so as to and support the transition of Ayush based to scientifically validated and evidence-The Ministry has informed that there has been a significant expansion in educational 14 to 942 in 2025, and PG colleges rising from 138 to 266. Correspondingly, UG seats have increased from 31,514 to 66,413, while PG seats have grown from 3,167 to 8,106, reflecting enhanced capacity for . The key reforms under education sector include the implementation of the NCISM and NCH Act, 2020, introduction of an e-Learning based courses, including integrative healthcare. Further, Ayush exposure has week internship and yoga training. Additionally, 124 Ayush educational institutions have been upgraded under the trengthening academic infrastructure and quality of education.  of the Ministry of Ayush for strengthening Ayush education through institutional expansion and various policy hat strengthening the quality of Ayush education is for developing competent healthcare professionals and promoting 


89 
 
evidence-based practice within the sector. The Committee, however, is of the view that 
Ayush education and training require deeper alignment with the objectives of the 
National Education Policy (NEP), 2020, particularly in promoting interdisciplinary, 
research-oriented and skill-based learning. The Committee further observes that with 
increasing emphasis on scientific research, evidence-based practice and digital 
integration, there is a need to strengthen capacity building of faculty and students and 
upgrade existing educational infrastructure with better integration of modern 
diagnostic tools and technologies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry initiate the establishment of dedicated training institutes for teachers and 
develop skill laboratories in Ayush colleges to improve the quality of teaching and 
practical training. The Committee further recommends that the undergraduate and 
postgraduate curricula be revised to include the management of diseases of national 
importance and other public health challenges prevalent in society. The Committee also 
recommends that emerging research findings and scientific evidence be systematically 
incorporated into the Ayush curriculum so as to make Ayush scholars more aware of 
contemporary scientific developments and strengthen the overall quality of Ayush 
education. 
5.8.3 The Committee observes that the Indian healthcare framework is increasingly 
moving towards a pluralistic model with growing co-location and integration of 
traditional and modern systems of medicine. The Committee further observes that such 
integration requires practitioners across different systems to possess a basic 
understanding of each other’s principles and approaches in order to ensure effective 
and coordinated healthcare delivery. The Committee, however, is of the view that the 
present healthcare education framework provides limited interdisciplinary exposure 
and does not adequately incorporate the Indian Knowledge System (IKS). The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush take appropriate steps to 
strengthen the integration of the Indian Knowledge System within the evolving 
integrative healthcare education framework so as to promote interdisciplinary 
understanding and support a more holistic approach to healthcare delivery in the 
country. 
5.8.4 The Committee observes that the effective delivery of healthcare services 
increasingly requires integration of traditional systems of medicine with modern 
diagnostic tools and technologies. The Committee is of the strong opinion that improved 
familiarity of Ayush practitioners with modern diagnostic techniques would enhance 
clinical decision-making, strengthen patient confidence and facilitate better integration 
of Ayush services within the broader healthcare system. The Committee, however, 
highlights that the existing training framework for Ayush practitioners provides limited 
structured exposure to modern diagnostic tools and technologies. The Committee, 
therefore, desires that the Ministry of Ayush must take steps to promote targeted 
training and capacity-building programmes to familiarise Ayush practitioners with 
modern diagnostic tools and techniques, while preserving the core principles and 
philosophy of traditional systems of medicine. The Committee believes that such 
initiatives would contribute to improving the quality of healthcare delivery and 
strengthening the credibility of Ayush systems in the evolving healthcare landscape. 

90 
 
5.9 AYUSH DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM 
5.9.1 The Ministry has informed that the Ayush Grid Project has been envisaged as a 
comprehensive IT backbone for the Ayush sector with the objective of digitizing service 
delivery across key domains such as healthcare, research and development, education and 
awareness, drug administration, capacity building and medicinal plants. Under this initiative, 
several digital platforms have been developed and rolled out across the country. These 
include the MAISP Portal, which provides a centralized platform for Ayush services and 
supports data-driven decision-making; the Ayush Hospital Management Information System 
(AHMIS) for streamlining hospital management, diagnostics and patient services; the Ayush 
Research Portal for strengthening evidence-based research and knowledge sharing; the Ayush 
Nivesh Saarthi Portal to facilitate investments in the Ayush sector; and the Yoga Portal aimed 
at promoting awareness and participation in yoga practices. The Ministry has further stated 
that these platforms are accessible online nationwide and are being progressively 
implemented to digitally integrate various Ayush services. 
 
5.9.2 The Committee takes into account that the Ministry has initiated several digital 
initiatives under the Ayush Grid Project with the objective of creating a robust digital 
integration framework for the Ayush sector. The Committee observes that such 
initiatives, including emerging areas like Ayurgenomics, have received international 
recognition, including acknowledgement by the World Health Organization (WHO), 
and hold significant potential for strengthening digital health integration, research 
dissemination and evidence generation in the Ayush sector. However, the Committee 


91 
 
finds that the extent of actual adoption of these digital platforms across institutions, 
their interoperability with national digital health systems and their measurable impact 
on service delivery and research outcomes still contain scope for further expansion in 
terms of Artificial Intelligence integration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should take time-bound steps to ensure wider adoption and effective 
operationalisation of the digital platforms developed under the Ayush Grid Project 
across Ayush hospitals, research institutions, educational bodies and regulatory 
authorities. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry establish clear 
implementation milestones, monitoring mechanisms and periodic reporting systems to 
track the usage and outcomes of these platforms. The Committee also recommends that 
necessary measures be taken to ensure interoperability of Ayush Grid platforms with 
national digital health initiatives, including the Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission and 
that the data generated through these platforms be effectively utilised for policy 
planning, research advancement and evidence generation with incorporation of 
artificial intelligence. The Committee believes that strengthening digital integration 
along with capacity building& training of Ayush practitioners and institutional staff 
would facilitate the effective integration of Ayush services within the broader digital 
health ecosystem. 
5.10 GLOBALISATION OF AYUSH 
5.10.1 The Committee notes that the Government has articulated a long-term vision for 
the globalisation of Ayush as an important component of the broader Viksit Bharat @ 
2047 roadmap. The Committee observes that the increasing global interest in holistic, 
preventive and traditional systems of medicine presents a significant opportunity for 
India to position Ayush systems as an important pillar of global healthcare. The 
Committee further observes that initiatives such as the strengthening of the WHO 
Global Traditional Medicine Centre (GTMC) at Jamnagar, expansion of international 
collaborations, promotion of Ayush-based medical value travel and the global adoption 
of quality certification mechanisms such as the Ayush Mark have the immense potential 
to significantly enhance the international visibility and acceptance of Ayush systems. 
The Committee agrees that initiatives like the International Day of Yoga have played an 
important role in strengthening global awareness and acceptance of traditional Indian 
wellness practices and have emerged as a strong instrument of India’s soft power and 
health diplomacy. However, the Committee is of the firm view that achieving the vision 
of positioning India as a global leader in traditional and holistic healthcare would 
require a more coordinated and structured approach towards international 
engagement, research collaboration, quality assurance and global market development. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must develop a 
comprehensive strategy for the globalisation of Ayush with visionary policy priorities 
relating to establishing Centre of Excellence abroad, international research 
collaborations, global standardisation of Ayush products and therapies, promotion of 
Ayush-based medical value travel and strengthening of export promotion mechanisms. 
The Committee further recommends that initiatives such as the International Day of 
various systems of Ayush especially Yoga be strategically leveraged to enhance global 
awareness and institutional partnerships so as to position Ayush systems more 

92 
 
prominently within the global healthcare ecosystem and contribute to India’s leadership 
in traditional medicine. 
5.10.2 The Committee notes that India has emerged as an important destination for 
medical value travel owing to its skilled healthcare workforce, cost-effective treatments 
and well-established traditional wellness systems. The Committee observes that Ayush 
therapies, particularly Yoga, Panchakarma and other wellness treatments, possess 
considerable potential to attract international patients seeking holistic healthcare 
solutions. The Committee, however, is of the view that since the integration of Ayush 
therapies within the broader medical value travel ecosystem remains limited and 
requires greater policy focus for international promotion. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush develop dedicated strategies to integrate Ayush 
therapies within the broader medical value travel ecosystem in coordination with other 
relevant Ministries and stakeholders. The Committee considers that focused efforts be 
made to promote affordable Ayush-based wellness packages and therapies at the 
international level so as to position India as a global hub for holistic wellness and 
traditional medicine. 
5.11 AYUSH MARKET SIZE VIS-À-VIS EXPORTS 
5.11.1 The Secretary, Ministry of Ayush has informed that the Ayush sector currently 
contributes around 1.06% to India’s GDP and aims to increase its share to 5% by 2047. The 
Ministry further informed that India’s Ayush market size is presently estimated at US$ 43.4 
billion (₹3,599 billion), comprising ₹1,931 billion from manufacturing and ₹1,667 billion 
from services. Further, the Ayush manufacturing sector has witnessed significant growth, 
registering nearly a six-fold increase between 2014 and 2020 and about an eight-fold increase 
between 2014 and 2022 with the manufacturing segment growing at a compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) of around 17% during 2014-2020. The Secretary has further projected 
that the Ayush market is expected to reach around US$ 200 billion by 2030 and that 
achieving this target would require the sector to grow at an estimated CAGR of about 21% 
over the coming years. 

5.11.2 The Committee envisageswellness products is steadily increasing and presents significant opportunities for the Ayush sector. The Committee observes that while the domestic manufacturingAyush products has expanded considerably in recent years, the sector’s export potential remains underutilised due to challenges relating to quality assurance, product standardisation, certification and international regulatory compliance. The Comvisualizes that achieving the projected Ayush market size of US$ 200 billion by 2030 would require substantial expansion of exports supported by robust quality assurance and international standardisation mechanisms. However, the Committee is of the that the existing ecosystem for promotion of Ayush exports requires further strengthening in terms of product authentication, regulatory alignment and global market access. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush, in coordination with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, develop a comprehensive export promotion strategy for Ayush products with a focus on strengthening quality assurance, standardisation, certification and international regulatory compliance. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry explore policy measures such as the introduction of export incentives, creation of separate Harmonised System of Nomenclature (HSN) codes for Ayush products and strengthening of authentication and certification mechanisms including Ayush Mark and adherence to WHOguidelines. The Committee believes that such measures would significantly enhance the export competitiveness of Ayush products, improve global acceptance of Ayush systems and contribute towards achieving the proj5.11.3 The Committee points outinternational markets is an important objective of the International Cooperation Scheme and appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry and strengthening global engagement. The Committee establishment of the Ayush Export Promotion Council (Ayush-related provisions in Free Trade Agreements and thecertification and laboratory standards global market access for Ayush
93 
envisages that the global demand for traditional medicine and wellness products is steadily increasing and presents significant opportunities for the Ayush sector. The Committee observes that while the domestic manufacturingAyush products has expanded considerably in recent years, the sector’s export potential remains underutilised due to challenges relating to quality assurance, product standardisation, certification and international regulatory compliance. The Comthat achieving the projected Ayush market size of US$ 200 billion by 2030 would require substantial expansion of exports supported by robust quality assurance and international standardisation mechanisms. However, the Committee is of the that the existing ecosystem for promotion of Ayush exports requires further strengthening in terms of product authentication, regulatory alignment and global market access. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush, in on with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, develop a comprehensive export promotion strategy for Ayush products with a focus on strengthening quality assurance, standardisation, certification and international regulatory compliance. The er recommends that the Ministry explore policy measures such as the introduction of export incentives, creation of separate Harmonised System of Nomenclature (HSN) codes for Ayush products and strengthening of authentication and cluding Ayush Mark and adherence to WHOguidelines. The Committee believes that such measures would significantly enhance the export competitiveness of Ayush products, improve global acceptance of Ayush systems and contribute towards achieving the projected growth of the Ayush sector.points out that the promotion of Ayush products and services in international markets is an important objective of the International Cooperation Scheme and appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry in facilitating export growth and strengthening global engagement. The Committee views that initiatives such as the Export Promotion Council (AyushEXCIL), incorporation of related provisions in Free Trade Agreements and the strengthening of quality certification and laboratory standards signals significant steps towards improving Ayush products. However, the Committee is of the view that 
 that the global demand for traditional medicine and wellness products is steadily increasing and presents significant opportunities for the Ayush sector. The Committee observes that while the domestic manufacturing base for Ayush products has expanded considerably in recent years, the sector’s export potential remains underutilised due to challenges relating to quality assurance, product standardisation, certification and international regulatory compliance. The Committee that achieving the projected Ayush market size of US$ 200 billion by 2030 would require substantial expansion of exports supported by robust quality assurance and international standardisation mechanisms. However, the Committee is of the view that the existing ecosystem for promotion of Ayush exports requires further strengthening in terms of product authentication, regulatory alignment and global market access. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush, in on with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, develop a comprehensive export promotion strategy for Ayush products with a focus on strengthening quality assurance, standardisation, certification and international regulatory compliance. The er recommends that the Ministry explore policy measures such as the introduction of export incentives, creation of separate Harmonised System of Nomenclature (HSN) codes for Ayush products and strengthening of authentication and cluding Ayush Mark and adherence to WHO-GMP guidelines. The Committee believes that such measures would significantly enhance the export competitiveness of Ayush products, improve global acceptance of Ayush systems ected growth of the Ayush sector. products and services in international markets is an important objective of the International Cooperation in facilitating export growth that initiatives such as the EXCIL), incorporation of strengthening of quality steps towards improving products. However, the Committee is of the view that 


94 
 
the sustained expansion of Ayush exports would require more focused export promotion 
strategies, greater international visibility and stronger institutional support for 
manufacturers, particularly MSMEs, in accessing regulated global markets. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must intensify targeted 
export promotion initiatives including the organisation of dedicated International Ayush 
Expos, trade fairs and global business conferences in strategic markets so as to facilitate 
direct engagement between Indian manufacturers and foreign regulators, distributors, 
healthcare providers and investors. The Committee understands that structured global 
awareness campaigns highlighting quality standards, safety certifications and scientific 
validation of Ayush products must be undertaken to enhance consumer confidence and 
brand recognition. The Committee wishes that measurable indicators such as export 
growth, market diversification, certification uptake and regulatory approvals secured 
under Free Trade Agreement frameworks be periodically monitored and reported so as 
to assess the tangible economic impact of these initiatives and strengthen India’s global 
position in the Ayush sector. 
5.12 Way Forward for National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) 
5.12.1 The Committee notes that the National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) has 
taken initiatives to support farmers through the establishment of nurseries for raising 
planting material of medicinal plants under the Forward and Backward Linkages in the 
Supply Chain of Medicinal Plants. The Committee observes that the medicinal plants 
sector holds considerable potential for strengthening the Ayush industry, supporting 
rural livelihoods and enhancing India’s bio-economy through the development of 
pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, wellness products and medicinal plant-based 
industries. The Committee, however wishes to point out that the absence of updated 
demand supply assessment data of medicinal plants and a comprehensive State-wise 
inventory may hinder effective planning for cultivation, value chain development and 
realisation of India’s export potential in medicinal plants and herbal products. The 
Committee further observes that the sector presently needs adequate industrial 
ecosystems to support large-scale product innovation, startup incubation, technology 
transfer and value addition, which in turn will promote the commercialisation and 
global competitiveness of Ayush products. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry must undertake a comprehensive national assessment study in 
coordination with State Medicinal Plants Boards to determine State-wise availability of 
medicinal plants and updated demand-supply projections, including global market 
demand. The Committee is of the strong view that the Ministry must strengthen the 
medicinal plants value chain through the establishment of Medicinal Plants Business 
Processing Centres (MBPCs) along with quality certification and traceability 
mechanisms to enhance value addition and export competitiveness. The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry should develop supportive industrial ecosystems, 
including dedicated Ayush innovation and industry clusters, to promote product 
development, startup incubation, technology transfer and export promotion so as to 
fully realise the economic potential of the Ayush sector. 
 

95 
 
5.13 AYUSH POTENTIAL IN NORTH EASTERN REGION 
5.13.1 The Committee observes that the North Eastern Region of India possesses rich 
biodiversity and holds immense potential for the cultivation and sustainable utilisation 
of medicinal plants used in Ayush systems of medicine. The Committee further observes 
that the NER can play a pivotal role in strengthening the supply chain of medicinal 
plants and supporting the growth of the Ayush sector through cultivation, processing 
and value addition. However, the Committee is of the view that the full potential of the 
region remains underutilised due to limited infrastructure for cultivation, processing 
and market linkages. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 
Ayush accord special emphasis to the development of medicinal plant cultivation, 
processing and value addition in the North Eastern States under relevant schemes. The 
Committee further recommends that appropriate measures be taken to strengthen 
market linkages, promote sustainable harvesting practices and support livelihood 
opportunities for local communities so as to harness the region’s biodiversity potential 
while contributing to the growth of the Ayush sector. 
5.14 CROP INSURANCE FOR MEDICINAL PLANTS 
5.14.1  The Committee notes that there has been a gradual shift in approach in 
the medicinal plants sector from forest-based collection to cultivation-based production. 
The Committee further notes that the National Medicinal Plants Board under the 
Ministry of Ayush has been assisting farmers in the cultivation of quality planting 
material and promoting the organised cultivation of medicinal plants. The Committee 
observes that such efforts are important for ensuring a sustainable supply of raw 
materials for Ayush systems while also creating additional livelihood opportunities for 
farmers. The Committee wills to point out that medicinal plant cultivation is often 
subject to price fluctuations and crop damage, which may expose farmers to financial 
risks and discourage wider adoption of such cultivation. The Committee is of the view 
that adequate risk mitigation mechanisms are essential to promote the long-term 
sustainability of medicinal plant cultivation. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry of Ayush, in coordination with the concerned Ministries and 
stakeholders, explore the feasibility of introducing crop insurance framework for 
medicinal plants so as to provide financial protection to farmers and encourage greater 
participation in the cultivation of medicinal plant for export promotion and increasing 
farmer’s income to desirable level and enhancing contribution of Ayush in GDP. 
5.15 PROPAGATION AND PROMOTION OF AYUSH 
5.15.1 The Committee takes note that despite the widespread presence of Ayush systems 
of medicine in the country, public awareness regarding their preventive and promotive 
healthcare benefits remains limited. The Committee observes that Ayush systems offer 
huge potential for promoting preventive healthcare and healthy lifestyles through 
practices such as Yoga, appropriate dietary habits and traditional wellness approaches. 
However, the Committee is of the view that existing awareness initiatives largely focus 
on information dissemination and require greater emphasis on encouraging behavioural 
change towards the adoption of Ayush-based lifestyle practices. The Committee, 

96 
 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush strengthen its public outreach 
programmes with a greater focus on behaviour change communication strategies aimed 
at promoting the adoption of Ayush-based preventive healthcare practices such as Yoga, 
dietary regulation through incorporating Millet diets and traditional wellness practices. 
The Committee believes that such initiatives would contribute to improving public 
health outcomes while strengthening the role of Ayush systems in preventive and 
promotive healthcare. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
5.16.1 The Committee believes that the vision of Ayush @ 2047 offers a historic 
opportunity to transform India’s traditional systems of medicine into a scientifically 
robust, globally respected and economically vibrant component of the national 
healthcare ecosystem, while reinforcing Bharat’s leadership in promoting traditional 
medicine at the global level. The vision is guided by the civilisational ethos of 
VasudhaivaKutumbakam - the world as one family, the Committee emphasises that 
achieving the vision will require sustained and coordinated efforts towards 
strengthening scientific research and evidence generation, expanding institutional and 
educational infrastructure, ensuring standardisation and quality assurance of Ayush 
medicines and accelerating digital integration through initiatives such as the Ayush 
Grid. The Committee further underscores the importance of promoting global 
engagement, expanding medical value travel, strengthening export competitiveness of 
Ayush products and developing sustainable medicinal plant value chains to support the 
long-term growth of the sector, thereby positioning Bharat as a leading global hub for 
traditional and integrative medicine. The Committee is of the considered view that 
enhanced financial support, stronger inter-ministerial coordination, active participation 
of States and greater private sector involvement will be essential for unlocking the full 
potential of the Ayush ecosystem. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Ayush will 
take appropriate and time-bound steps to address the issues highlighted in this Report 
and effectively implement the recommendations made therein so as to realise the vision 
of Ayush @ 2047 and further strengthen Bharat’s global leadership in holistic, 
preventive and integrative healthcare. 
 
********** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE- 
AT A GLANCE 
 
 
Thematic Domains of the Ministry 
 
1. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Ayush continue to strive 
progressively system specific development to structured integration within public 
healthcare delivery mechanisms. Such integration should primarily aim at 
operationalising through centrally sponsored Schemes and evolve from standalone 
development to co-located facilities within primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare 
centres, thereby enhancing preventive care and accessibility. The Committee 
recommends for integration of Ayush facilities for boosting preventive care and local 
access to healthcare under Traditional Indian System of medicine. 
PARA 1.5.2 
  
Functional Areas Of Ministry Of Ayush & Its Institutional Framework 
 
2. The Committee strongly believes that integration model under Ministry of Ayush 
must aim to improve accessibility, strengthen preventive healthcare and reduce pressure 
on conventional health infrastructure. The Committee is aware of the fact that since 
effective implementation of policy/programme/scheme depends upon adequate human 
resources, infrastructure utilisation, drug supply mechanisms and coordination with 
State Governments. The Ministry, therefore chalk out specific course of action to 
achieve the set objectives. 
PARA 1.6.4 
 
Financial Overview and Budgetary Trends 
 
3. The Committee understands that the Demand for Grants 2026-27 seeks to 
strengthen institutional capacity, expand equitable access to Ayush services, promote 
scientific validation and digital governance and enhance regulatory oversight in the 
Ayush sector. The Committee observes that such initiatives are pivotal for consolidating 
the progress achieved in recent years and for strengthening the role of traditional 
systems of medicine in the national healthcare framework. The Committee however, is 
of the view that the proposed financial provisions must also be directed towards 
addressing emerging public health challenges while ensuring effective implementation 
and optimal utilisation of resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry ensure that the budget allocations under the Demand for Grants 2026-27 are 
strategically utilised to consolidate past achievements, expand access to quality Ayush 
services and support innovation and research, in alignment with the national vision of 
Viksit Bharat @ 2047 and India’s aspiration to emerge as a global leader in traditional 
medicine systems. 
PARA 1.7.4 
 
Research, Standardisation and Regulatory Strengthening 
 
4. The Committee emphasises that sustained focus is required on outcome-based 
research, multi-centric clinical trials, publication in peer-reviewed journals and 
transparent data dissemination. The Committee therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry further strengthen collaborative research with reputed scientific institutions, 

98 
 
enhance standardisation & quality control mechanism accompanied by systematic 
documentation and global dissemination of validated research outcomes so as to 
reinforce the safety, efficacy and credibility of Ayush systems of medicine. 
PARA 1.8.2 
 
Digital Governance and Technological Integration 
 
5. The Committee has taken note of the Ministry’s multi-dimensional digital 
ongoing initiatives, including the use of AI-based Yoga recommendations and the 
integration of Chatbots into the Ayush Grid. The Committee acknowledges the 
significant potential of these tools, the Committee emphasizes that their ultimate success 
depends on seamless interoperability vis-a-vis national digital health systems. 
Furthermore, the Committee strongly recommends implementing capacity-building 
measures to accelerate the adoption of these platforms and ensure effective 
implementation at the field level. 
PARA 1.9.2 
 
International Cooperation and Global Engagement 
 
6. The Committee observes that such collaborations offer opportunities for 
knowledge exchange, research cooperation and greater global acceptance of Ayush 
systems. The Committee however is of the view that while international engagement is 
important, strengthening domestic service delivery, regulatory mechanisms and 
institutional capacity must remain the primary focus. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must pursue international collaborations in a 
manner that complements and reinforces national priorities, ensuring that global 
outreach contributes to improving the quality, accessibility and credibility of Ayush 
systems. 
 
PARA 1.10.3  
 
MYTH Vs FACTS 
 
7. The Committee observes that myths & misconceptions clouding over the Ayush 
systems of medicine affect public perception and limit the wider acceptance and 
utilisation of Ayush services despite their long-standing traditional knowledge base and 
increasing scientific validation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry of Ayush undertake sustained and evidence-based public awareness initiatives 
to address prevailing misconceptions and disseminate accurate information regarding 
the safety, efficacy and regulatory oversight of Ayush medicines. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry undertake structured outreach campaigns, disseminate 
scientific research findings and promote greater engagement with healthcare 
professionals and academic institutions so as to strengthen public confidence in Ayush 
systems of medicine. 
PARA 1.11.2 
Future Priorities 
 
8. The Committee recognises the need for continued institutional strengthening of 
the Ministry of Ayush in view of the expanding role of Ayush systems within the 
national healthcare framework. While the ongoing transition from system-specific 
promotion towards structured integration of Ayush within public health delivery 
reflects a calibrated policy approach, the Committee is of the view that this transition 
requires sustained institutional capacity, effective implementation mechanisms and 

99 
 
strengthened governance structures to translate policy objectives into tangible 
outcomes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry take appropriate 
steps to further strengthen institutional capacities and governance mechanisms to 
support the progressive integration of Ayush systems within the national healthcare 
framework. The Committee further emphasises that infrastructure expansion, 
regulatory reforms and digital governance initiatives should be implemented in a 
coordinated manner so as to facilitate long-term institutional consolidation and effective 
delivery of Ayush services across the country. 
PARA 1.12.2 
 
 
9. The Committee takes into account various initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
for the promotion and development of Ayush systems across the country. The 
Committee observes that while these initiatives have contributed to strengthening 
institutional infrastructure and expanding outreach, there is a need to ensure that the 
outcomes of these interventions are systematically evaluated. However, the Committee is 
of the view that greater emphasis must now be placed on measurable health outcomes 
and impact assessment, effective capacity utilisation of newly established institutions, 
strengthening of quality assurance and pharmacovigilance mechanisms and improved 
coordination with State Governments in programme implementation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry adopt a more outcome-oriented approach by 
promoting evidence-based research validation and ensuring optimal utilisation of 
budgetary allocations so as to maximise the overall effectiveness of Ayush interventions. 
 
PARA 1.12.2 
 
Budget Estimates (BE) - Year-wise Comparison 
10. The Committee observes that a closer examination of the Budget Estimates over 
the past five years reveals that the year-on-year growth has not followed a stable or 
predictable scaling pattern. The annual growth in BE has fluctuated considerably, 
ranging from 2.68 per cent in 2022-23 to 19.59 per cent in 2023-24, followed by a sharp 
moderation to 1.78 per cent in 2024-25 and thereafter moderate increases of 7.55 per 
cent in 2025-26 and 10.42 per cent in 2026-27. The Committee further observes that 
when these nominal increases are adjusted against average inflation levels, certain years 
reflected negative real growth, implying erosion in the effective purchasing power of 
allocations. The Committee is of the view that such volatility suggests episodic 
enhancement rather than a calibrated and programmatic scaling of budgetary support 
for the sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush 
formulate its Budget Estimate projections after duly factoring in realistic assessment of 
each scheme/project and keeping in account prevailing and anticipated inflation as well 
so that real growth in allocations is maintained at a meaningful level to support 
sustained expansion of Ayush services. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry endeavour to adopt a steadier and more incremental pattern of budgetary 
growth to ensure predictability and continuity in financial planning. A calibrated and 
consistent approach would facilitate stable scaling of programmes, safeguard the 
purchasing power of allocations and enable systematic strengthening of the Ayush 
sector over the medium to long term. 
PARA 2.2.2 
 
DEMAND VS ALLOCATION CREDIBILITY 
 
11. The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts in presenting comprehensive 
projected demands aimed at expanding the scope, reach and institutional capacity of the 

100 
 
sector; however, sustained substantial deviations between projected demand and 
approved allocation at BE and RE stage may adversely impact planning stability and 
execution strategy.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry to 
advance plea for the outcome-linked and evidence-based justification of its projected 
demands by clearly demonstrating measurable impact, implementation readiness and 
expected sectoral returns. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry adopt 
a phased and prioritised approach in structuring its demands by distinguishing core 
commitments from expansionary and long-term aspirational components so as to 
facilitate more realistic projection at the stage of budget estimate keeping in view 
feasibility of project implementation and absorption capacity of implementing agencies. 
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry develop a multi-year financial 
projection framework to enable greater predictability in resource planning and 
smoother alignment with the budgetary processes of the Ministry of Finance. 
 
PARA 2.3.2 
 
Major Components Contributing Reduction (Projected Demand Vs BE 2026-27) 
12. The Committee observes with serious concern that against the total projected 
demand of ₹ 5,679.48 crore for the year 2026-27, an allocation of only ₹ 4,408.93 crore 
has been made at the Budget Estimates stage, resulting in a substantial shortfall of ₹ 
1,270.55 crore (22.37 %)of  the projected requirement.The Committee further observes 
that this fiscal compression is not uniformly distributed across components but is 
disproportionately concentrated in certain critical and expansion-oriented segments 
which includes flagship implementation schemes like NAM & CSSCMP; Research 
bodies like CCRYN &CCRH; premier institutes NIH, AIIA and quality strengthening 
initiatives like the Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Utpadan Samvardhan Yojana 
(AOUGSY) which may have a cascading impact on capacity augmentation, 
infrastructure expansion, research continuity and the overall momentum of institutional 
growth in strategically important and emerging domains of the Ayush systems.The 
Committee also recalls that in 165th Report DFG 2025-26, it had recommended seeking 
supplementary grants at the Revised Estimates stage; however, the information 
furnished instead reflects a reduction of ₹ 321 crore at the RE stage.  
 
PARA 2.4.1 
 
13. The Committee observes that the reduction in allocations at the Revised 
Estimates stage across several components raises serious concerns regarding the 
adequacy of fiscal support extended to the sector despite acknowledged requirements. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Finance, undertake a mid-year review of allocations with a view to 
providing adequate supplementary support to bridge the critical funding gap. The 
Committee further desires that priority be accorded to key components, particularly 
flagship implementation schemes such as the National Ayush Mission (NAM), research 
councils, premier national institutes and quality-strengthening initiatives, so as to 
prevent disruption of ongoing projects, dilution of research momentum or deferment of 
infrastructure expansion. The Committee emphasizes that these strategic segments 
represent long-term capacity-building investments and should not be subjected to 
disproportionate fiscal contraction. The Committee also urges the Ministry to adopt a 
more realistic and consultative budgeting approach in future cycles to ensure adequate 
BE allocations so that no project/scheme should suffer for want of funds and thereby 
doubly safeguarding programmatic continuity and sustaining the growth trajectory of 
the sector. 
PARA 2.4.2 

101 
 
 
BE - RE  Discipline with Projected Demand  
 
14. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry needs to revisit and refine its 
approach to budget formulation and expenditure planning process so as to minimise 
recurrent dual-stage compression by more realistic estimation, stronger implementation 
preparedness and closer alignment between projection and absorptive capacity. The 
Committee further emphasises the importance of more effective pre-budget engagement 
with the Ministry of Finance by placing proposals based on outcome orientation and 
implementation ready, supported by defined timelines, clarity regarding approval status 
of projects, staffing position, and procurement readiness. The Committee emphasis that 
construction projects should be included in projections only after obtaining the requisite 
administrative and technical approvals. Similarly, existing vacancies, unspent balances 
with CPWD, and the status of proposals pending before PSC/PAC should be 
realistically assessed at the stage of demand formulation. The Committee considers it a 
budgeting prudence for the Ministry to institute regular quarterly reviews of 
expenditure, closely monitor the rollout of the SNA SPAR system at the State level and 
take timely corrective steps to avoid substantial surrenders or downward revisions at 
the RE stage. These measures so undertaken would contribute to greater credibility in 
budget projections, improve stability in resource planning, and ensure that allocations 
made at the BE stage are effectively and fully utilized while potentially implementing 
the scheme to optimum level thereby, setting bulwark against reduction of budget at 
stage. 
PARA 2.5.3 
 
Utilisation& Absorptive Capacity Analysis  
 
15. The Committee highlights that the Ministry has consistently maintained high 
levels of utilisation and administrative discipline in deploying funds allocated at the 
Revised Estimate stage. The Committee notes the Ministry’s sustained utilisation 
performance of allocated funds at RE stage and the same demonstrates 
capacity/potential to effectively deploy resources if budgetary allocation is earmarked 
for utilization as per projected demand. In view of this consistent absorptive strength, 
the Committee is of the considered opinion that higher budgetary allocation levels are 
justified therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should continue to 
strengthen quarterly expenditure planning and milestone-based fund release 
mechanisms to ensure balanced spending patterns and avoid excessive concentration of 
expenditure in the closing months of the financial year. Further, the Committee advises 
the Ministry to improve the Actual Expenditure of National Ayush Mission by 
addressing the transitional challenges being faced. 
PARA 2.6.1 
 
Capital Intensity Vs Growth Ambition 
 
16. The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts to expand infrastructure in the 
Ayush sector through scheme-based interventions and collaborative federal 
mechanisms, particularly under the National Ayush Mission and the integrative 
healthcare framework. However, the Committee is of the view that sustained sectoral 
growth of Ayush services requires a more predictable and strategically designed 
separate capital investment framework at the Ministry level. The preponderance of 
aspiration to position Ayush as a global leader in traditional medicine would require a 
budgetary architecture that moves beyond a predominantly revenue-driven framework, 
as durable growth depends upon sustained asset creation in institutions, laboratories, 

102 
 
testing facilities and digital infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry progressively enhance identifiable capital expenditure so that it constitutes 
about 5-7 per cent of the total Budget Estimates over the next three financial years.  
 
PARA 2.7.2 
 
17. The Committee further recommends for creation of a dedicated Ayush 
Infrastructure Fund with multi years capital option for institutional upgradation, 
modern drug testing and quality control infrastructure, national research and clinical 
networks, and digital integration including Ayush Grid 2.0. Additionally, future 
Demands for Grants should consider annexing a consolidated statement of capital 
formation across direct budget heads, the National Ayush Mission, Research Councils, 
and Autonomous Bodies to reflect level of capital intensity and support structured long-
term investment planning. 
PARA 2.7.3 
 
Strategic Comparison of Minsitry of Ayush Vs Ministry of Health & Welfare Budget 
Estimates Allocation (2014-15 to 2026-27)  
 
18. The Committee appreciates the progressive strengthening of the Ministry’s 
proportional share within the overall health architecture over the past decade, however, 
considering the expanding mandate of the Ministry and its long-term aspirations for 
enhanced global positioning and global leadership, the Committee recommends that 
sustained expansion of Ayush services, research capacity and global engagement would 
require enhanced and consistent budgetary allocation in its share within the national 
health envelope. The Ministry therefore, continue to strengthen evidence-based 
justification of its programmes, demonstrate measurable public health outcomes and 
articulate a medium-term fiscal roadmap aligned with its long-term sectoral objectives. 
The Committee in this regard reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 128th 
Report (Demand for Grants 2025-26) that at least 10% of the total health sector budget 
be earmarked progressively for the Ministry of Ayush for effective pluralistic healthcare 
model. 
PARA 2.8.2 
 
Ayush Ministry’s BE as a share of Union (Total) BE 
 
19. The Committee notes that the Ministry has articulated an ambitious long-term 
vision for the Ayush sector under the Ayush @ 2047 framework, including the objective 
of expanding the Ayush market size to a $200 billion economy by 2030 and 5% of the 
country GDP. The Committee observes that achieving such transformative goals would 
require sustained expansion of institutional capacity, research, education and service 
delivery across the sector. However, the Committee is of the view that the present level 
of budgetary support may not be adequate to fully realise these long-term aspirations. 
Incremental increases from a relatively low fiscal base may limit the pace at which the 
sector can scale its programmes and infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Finance consider undertaking a phased and calibrated 
enhancement of the budgetary allocation for the Ministry of Ayush so as to 
progressively strengthen its fiscal position within the overall Union expenditure 
framework. The Committee is of the considered opinion that a structured medium-term 
fiscal roadmap, aligned with measurable expansion in institutional capacity, research, 
education and service delivery, would be essential to ensure that the Ministry’s 
budgetary positioning adequately reflects its evolving policy mandate and long-term 
developmental objectives. 

103 
 
PARA 2.9.2 
 
Fiscal Flow under the 15th Finance Commission Period (2021-22 to 2025-26) 
20. The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s consistent utilisation performance and 
its demonstrated capacity to effectively deploy funds retained at the Revised Estimate 
stage, however, the Committee observes that there have been recurring and substantial 
rationalisation of the Ministry’s projected demands at both the Budget Estimate and 
Revised Estimate stages. The Committee is of the view that such repeated adjustments 
may affect planning predictability and thereby skewed implementation of the projects. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen the evidence-based 
justification of its projected financial requirements and align its demand projections 
more closely with realistic absorption capacity and phased implementation plans. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry undertake enhanced pre-budget 
consultations and adopt strategic financial planning approach to improve predictability 
in allocation flows and minimise the extent of mid-year rationalisation so that projects 
are implemented as per originally conceived vision. Such measures would help improve 
fiscal credibility, planning stability and better alignment between projected demands 
and actual expenditure outcomes. 
PARA 2.10.2 
 
NORTH EAST BUDGETARY ALLOCATION TRENDS 
 
21. The Committee takes into account the increasing trend of budgetary allocation 
for the North Eastern Region and recognises the significant potential of the region in 
promoting Ayush systems of medicine owing to its rich biodiversity and traditional 
knowledge of medicinal plants. The Committee observes that strengthening Ayush 
infrastructure and services in the North Eastern States can play an important role in 
enhancing the wider acceptability and availability of Ayush systems while also 
supporting the sustainable utilisation of the region’s biodiversity resources by 
harnessing herbs for Ayush drugs. However, the Committee is of the view that 
variations in utilisation and implementation across the region indicate the need for 
better estimation of requirements, improved financial planning and stronger 
implementation mechanisms. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
of Ayush strengthen its planning, monitoring and implementation mechanisms for 
schemes in the North Eastern Region. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry 
must focus on timely implementation of projects and improve coordination with 
implementing agencies and State Governments so that the allocated resources translate 
into tangible outcomes in terms of strengthened Ayush infrastructure, services and 
outreach in the region. The Committee emphasize that attention must be given to 
addressing implementation bottlenecks by providing technical guidance and 
handholding support to States, including assistance in the establishment and 
strengthening of Ayush Directorates for effective implementation of the National Ayush 
Mission, so as to ensure that the funds earmarked for the North Eastern Region are 
fully and effectively utilised. 
PARA 2.11.2 
 
CONTINUATION OF SCHEMES OF MINISTRY OF AYUSH 
 
22. The Committee notes that there exists a significant gap between the financial 
outlays proposed by the Ministry of Ayush and the allocation made by the Ministry of 
Finance in certain schemes, particularly Ayurgyan, Ayurswasthya Yojana and 
AOGUSY. The Committee observes that these schemes support critical areas such as 
research, education and strengthening of drug quality infrastructure in the Ayush 

104 
 
sector and therefore play an important role in the overall development of the sector. The 
Committee, however is of the view that if the reduced ceilings are maintained, several 
schemes may receive allocations lower than those approved during the previous scheme 
cycle, which may adversely affect the expansion and strengthening of these priority 
areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush actively 
pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance during forthcoming deliberations and 
appraisal meetings and seek enhanced financial outlays so as to ensure that the 
objectives of research promotion, capacity building and quality assurance in the Ayush 
sector are adequately supported during the current scheme cycle. 
PARA 2.12.3 
 
Scheme-wise Allocation F.Y 2026-27 under Central Sector Schemes of Ayush 
 
23. The Committee expresses serious concern over the substantial downward 
revision of Budget Estimates (BE) at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage for 2025-26 
across several schemes, including the National Ayush Mission which indicates persistent 
underutilization of allocated funds. The Committee emphasizes that recurring BE-to-
RE compression reflects a disconnect between budget formulation and ground-level 
preparedness. The Ministry must ensure that Budget Estimates are aligned with 
implementation readiness, supported by approved action plans and confirmed project 
pipelines. The Committee further recommends overhauling pre-budget appraisal 
mechanisms, instituting strict quarterly monitoring of physical and financial progress 
and enhancing coordination with States and implementing bodies to remove procedural 
delays. A structured capacity-building and execution framework should also be put in 
place to prevent future underutilization and ensure timely and effective deployment of 
allocated funds. 
PARA 3.3.2 
 
 
24. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry undertake a 
comprehensive review of the implementation architecture under each scheme with a 
view to identifying structural and procedural bottlenecks affecting timely utilisation of 
funds. The Committee is of the view that delays in approvals, procedural complexities 
and implementation constraints may adversely affect the effective translation of 
budgetary allocations into tangible programme outcomes.The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry establish a time-bound corrective action framework 
aimed at improving implementation efficiency. In this regard, greater decentralisation 
of approvals, streamlining of procedural requirements, advance preparation of Annual 
Action Plans and strengthened monitoring of implementing agencies should be 
institutionalised. The Committee also expects the Ministry to present scheme-wise 
corrective measures along with clearly defined timelines in its Action Taken Notes on 
recommendations contained in this report so as to ensure that future budgetary 
allocations at BE stage is not slashed at RE in ensuing financial year so that originally 
conceived goals and objectives are achieved within stipulated timeframe with 
measurable outcomes.  
PARA 3.3.3 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION 
 
25. The Committee observes with serious concern that the allocation for the National 
Ayush Mission (NAM) was reduced by 38.75% at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage in 
2025-26. Such substantial reduction is accompanied by poor utilisation of only about 
34% against the RE allocation of ₹ 780.96 crore, leaving an unspent balance of ₹ 513.54 

105 
 
crore as on 03.02.2026. Such a combination of steep RE reduction and low expenditure 
reflects weaknesses in expenditure planning and evenly distributed expenditure in each 
quarter of financial year under the scheme. The Committee further finds that similar 
BE-to-RE reductions have occurred in preceding years (-18.75% in 2022-23, -32.08% in 
2023-24, -12.83% in 2024-25, and -38.75% in 2025-26), indicating a recurring structural 
issue rather than an isolated instance.  
PARA 3.5.1 
 
26. The Committee notes that although there is increasing budgetary support 
provided to the Mission at the RE Stage. However, the Committee observes with 
concern that the trend of recurring pattern of reductions at the Revised Estimates stage 
and suboptimal fund utilisation during the past five years, which indicate persistent 
weaknesses in planning and absorptive capacity. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive review of its annual 
budgeting practices under the Mission so as to align Budget Estimates more realistically 
formulated & allocated with preconceived implementation capacity, project execution 
readiness and bettering expenditure trends. The Committee further recommends for 
evenly distributed expenditure in each quarter of financial year. 
PARA 3.5.2 
 
27. The Committee finds that the slow pace of fund utilisation has been attributed to 
the transition to the Single Nodal Agency (SNA-SPARSH) fund flow mechanism. While 
acknowledging the objective of improving transparency and financial discipline, the 
Committee emphasises that procedural reforms must not impede programme 
implementation pace. The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry institute 
structured and time-bound capacity-building measures for States/UTs to ensure 
seamless operationalisation of SNA accounts towards intended purpose. The Central 
Programme Management Unit (CPMU) may play pro-active & facilitative role by 
providing technical guidance, resolving onboarding bottlenecks and monitoring state-
wise compliance so that the fund flow reform must strengthens funds utilization rather 
than catalyze procedural delays. 
PARA 3.5.3 
 
28. The Committee further observes that persistent delays in utilisation points out 
towards inadequacies in real-time financial and physical monitoring. The absence of 
periodic corrective review results in accumulation of unspent balances and subsequent 
RE-stage reductions. The Committee, therefore, recommends institutionalisation of a 
structured quarterly review mechanism at both Central and State/UT levels, integrating 
financial progress with measurable physical outputs. The framework should enable 
early detection of bottlenecks by Central Project Management Unit and timely 
reallocation of funds to better-performing components, ensuring optimal utilisation 
within the financial year and reducing reliance on post-facto budgetary compression. 
 
PARA 3.5.4 
 
 
29. The Committee observes that while policy emphasis has been placed on 
integration of Ayush services with mainstream healthcare, convergence with NHM 
remains uneven across States. Referral protocols, co-location models, and digital 
integration with national health platforms are not uniformly operationalised. Digital 
systems such as A-HMIS and real-time dashboards remain underutilised in several 
regions. The Committee recommends structured convergence of Ayush services with 
NHM through defined Standard Operating Procedures for co-location, promoting cross 

106 
 
referral pathways and integration into national public health programmes, particularly 
in Non Communicable Diseases, maternal, and geriatric care. Full operationalisation of 
digital platforms including A-HMIS integration, telemedicine services, and real-time 
project tracking systems, should be prioritised alongside capacity-building initiatives to 
ensure effective utilization of allocated funds. 
PARA 3.5.5 
 
 
30. The Committee has been given to understand regarding the detailed status 
statement of construction projects furnished by the Ministry that against a total 
sanctioned cost of ₹1232.21 crore, an expenditure of ₹ 746.55 crore has been incurred up 
to December 2025, reflecting an overall utilisation of approximately 60%. The project-
wise position reveals significant inter-State variation in physical progress, with only a 
limited number of projects completed and a substantial number remaining in Phase-I, 
Phase-II or preliminary stages. This uneven progress indicates differential 
implementation capacity and possible bottlenecks affecting timely completion. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry adopt a structured, risk-based monitoring 
framework for infrastructure projects under the Mission. Projects progressing as per 
approved timelines may continue under routine review whereas projects that have 
exceeded stipulated completion schedules or exhibit disproportionately slow progress 
should be subjected to intensified supervision, including periodic senior-level review and 
mandatory reporting. The Committee further recommends that fund releases be 
progressively aligned with verified physical progress to prevent idle parking of funds. 
The Digital tracking mechanism of projects need to be strengthen Clear accountability 
mechanisms should be instituted in cases of avoidable delay attributable to 
administrative lapses at the State or implementing agency level. 
PARA 3.5.6 
 
 
31. The Committee has taken note of the third party evaluation findings fursnished 
by the Ministry and is of the view that strengthening of AAM (Ayush) must be 
supported by measurable accountability mechanisms. The Committee recommends 
development of a State/UT-wise performance benchmarking framework based on 
indicators such as human resource availability, patient footfall, NCD screening 
coverage, telemedicine usage, medicine availability, and convergence with national 
health programmes. A composite performance index may be published annually and 
underperforming States/UTs should submit time-bound corrective action plans. The 
Committee further recommends that a portion of central assistance under NAM/AAM 
(Ayush) be specified to capacity building measures and IEC component activities for 
effective implementation of scheme and generating public awareness of the scheme. 
 
PARA 3.5.7 
 
 
32. The Committee also recommends publication of an Annual AAM (Ayush) 
Performance Report in the public domain detailing infrastructure status, HR position, 
financial utilization, and service delivery indicators to enhance transparency and 
legislative oversight. Additionally, a structured social audit mechanism with beneficiary 
feedback, public disclosure of services and medicine availability and grievance redressal 
tracking mechanism should be institutionalized to strengthen community participation 
and accountability. 
PARA 3.5.8 
 

107 
 
PROMOTION OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
 
33. The Committee observes that there has been a consistent increase in allocation 
under the Scheme for Promotion of International Cooperation, reflecting the 
Government’s commitment to strengthening India’s global leadership in traditional 
medicine. The Committee appreciates the Ministry for its sustained efforts for scaling of 
activity with substantial increased allocation particularly the execution of the ICHI 
agreement, the constitution of the BIMSTEC Task Force on Traditional Medicine, 
active multilateral cooperation across various international forums and the organisation 
of global events that have enhanced India’s diplomatic and technical stature in this 
sector. The Committee further notes with satisfaction that India’s digital initiatives, 
including the Aysuh Grid and AI-based innovations have received recognition at the 
WHO level, thereby reinforcing India’s leadership in integrating traditional medicine 
with emerging technologies. 
PARA 3.6.4 
 
34. The Committee expresses pleasure over India’s growing global leadership in 
traditional medicine reflected through global engagement and outcomes generated in 
form of MoU, Academic Chair etc.  However, the Committee is of the view that these 
gains needs consolidation and sustained once further through recently launched Ayush 
Global Portal. The Committee has also reviewed the Ayush Global Portal and the 
information available for the users on real time basis finding that Ayush Global Portal 
has not been much encouraging as the country specific information is not updated 
including for India and lacks user friendly interface. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends for strengthening of Ayush Global Portal to enhance global visibility, 
interoperability and access to authentic services. The Committee also recommends that 
the Ministry leverage the proposed digital interface to facilitate international 
collaboration, knowledge exchange and global access to authentic Ayush services 
including tele-consultation, academic partnerships and dissemination of evidence-based 
resources. Such an integrated platform would enhance India’s soft power in traditional 
medicine while improving transparency, accessibility and global engagement with 
Ayush systems. 
PARA 3.6.5 
 
35. The Committee appreciates the extensive diplomatic outreach under the 
International Cooperation Scheme, including the signing of 27 bilateral MoUs, 
establishment of 15 Ayush Academic Chairs, and operationalisation of 43 Ayush 
Information Cells across 43 countries. However, the Committee is of the view that the 
momentum of global recognition should be sustained through structured and outcome-
oriented engagement. The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry to identify 
priority partner countries and develop targeted collaboration frameworks focusing on 
joint research projects, academic exchanges, clinical studies and capacity-building 
initiatives in traditional medicine so as to deepen scientific engagement and strengthen 
institutional linkages. The Committee further recommends instituting a structured 
performance assessment mechanism with periodic country-wise outcome reports to 
evaluate the operational status of MoUs, academic output of Chairs and the functional 
impact of Ayush Information Cells.  
PARA 3.6.6 
 
 
INFORMATION, EDUCATION & COMMUNICATION (IEC) 
 

108 
 
36. The Committee observes that the Budget Estimates under the IEC Scheme have 
largely remained at a stable level over successive years with minor modification 
primarily at the Revised Estimates stage to accommodate additional expenditure on 
International Day of Yoga (IDY) celebrations. The Committee recommends that 
adequate budgetary allocation at the Budget Estimate stage be ensured so that IEC 
activities aimed at disseminating Ayush outcomes and awareness at the grassroots level 
are not constrained or made contingent upon mid-year revisions. A more predictable 
and sufficiently provisioned budget would enable sustained outreach to the general 
public beyond event-specific expenditure.  
PARA 3.7.3 
 
 
37. The Committee recognizes that awareness of Ayush systems is praiseworthy but 
comparatively actual practice of Ayush remains largely confined to Ayurveda and 
predominantly for preventive and rejuvenative purposes rather than for therapeutic or 
curative treatment.  The Committee notes with concern that divergence between 
awareness and actual use/practice clearly reflects a structural gap in the translation of 
awareness into sustained and confidence-based healthcare adoption. The Committee is 
of the view that the reason for underuse is public perception of Ayush with limited 
curative efficacy, quick relief requirements and limited visibility of robust clinical 
evidence etc. The Committee recommends that the Ministry’s IEC strategy should shift 
from generic awareness campaigns to evidence-based therapeutic communication 
highlighting disease-specific success stories, clinical research outcomes and standard 
treatment protocols in a simplified and accessible manner. Public Campaigns and 
awareness in fair/seminars must focus on demonstrating the curative and management 
potential of Ayush in chronic and lifestyle disorders rather than limiting messaging to 
wellness and rejuvenation themes. Structured Behaviour Change Communication 
(BCC) modules may be developed to build sustained public confidence through 
testimonials, case documentation, and community-level engagement. Further, IEC 
interventions should intensively integrate digital tools for enhanced outreach, conduct 
district-level impact assessments and tailor region-specific messaging in local languages 
through social media including digital and audio video publicity. The Ministry should 
explore periodic thematic campaigns linked to specific diseases supported by validated 
data to reposition Ayush as a credible therapeutic option alongside preventive care. 
 
PARA 3.7.5 
 
38. The Committee has been given to understand that the average per capita 
expenditure on Ayush treatment remains relatively modest ₹ 472 in rural and ₹ 574 in 
urban areas which indicates its potential affordability as a preventive and supportive 
healthcare option. In this context, the Committee recommends that Yoga and wellness-
based services be systematically integrated and expanded under the National 
Programme for Prevention and Control of Non-Communicable Diseases (NP-NCD) 
particularly targeting rural and geriatric populations who bear a disproportionate 
burden of lifestyle-related disorders. Given the comparatively half out-of-pocket 
expenditure associated with Ayush interventions such integration may serve as a cost-
effective preventive model, reduce long-term NCD treatment costs and generate inter-
generational adoption patterns that gradually influence the younger population towards 
sustained wellness practices. 
PARA 3.7.6 
 
39. The Committee observes that IEC initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
including fairs, seminars, conferences and promotional campaigns, are presently 

109 
 
evaluated largely on the basis of the number of activities conducted rather than their 
measurable impact on utilisation of Ayush services. The Committee, therefore, desires 
to be apprised of outcome-based indicators to assess the outreach of initiatives that are 
effectively translating public awareness into behavioural change. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the Ministry establish an outcome-oriented monitoring 
framework under the IEC Scheme incorporating measurable key indicators such as 
increase in utilisation of Ayush services, repeat usage patterns, district-level outreach 
penetration and public confidence indices. Periodic impact assessments should be 
conducted so that IEC strategies may be refined based on evidence of their effectiveness. 
 
PARA 3.7.7 
 
40. The Committee notes that a significant portion of IEC activities’s expenditure 
appears to be associated with large-scale events such as International Day of Yoga 
celebrations and national promotional programmes. While such events play an 
important role in enhancing visibility of Ayush systems, sustained behavioural adoption 
requires continuous and community-level engagement beyond episodic outreach 
activities. The Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry of Ayush may 
strengthen year-round community-based communication strategies, encouraging States 
and local implementing agencies to develop region-specific IEC content in local 
languages addressing area-specific health concerns and disease burdens. Greater 
decentralisation of communication efforts, supported by trained grassrootlevel 
functionaries and community institutions would help ensure deeper and more sustained 
outreach translating into actual utilization. 
PARA 3.7.8 
 
41. The Committee is given to understand that International day of Yoga 2025 
celebrated on a massive scale which has led to global recognition with two Guinness 
Book of Records including largest Yoga session (3.02 lakh participants) and mass Surya 
Namaskar (22,122 tribal students). Further, the Ministry plans to launch Ayush 
Samagra Swasthya Mission including “Har Ghar Ayur-Yog- self care model in 75% 
households by 2029” as part of the National Ayush Mission. The Committee appreciates 
the global recognition by IDY in previous years and given the substantial public 
expenditure involved to the tune of ₹ 56 crore in 2025 and ₹ 25 crore in 2024, the 
Ministry may consider setting a progressive roadmap towards achieving 100 % 
household coverage in place of 75% under the “Har Ghar Ayur-Yog” initiative by 2029 
as the name of the initiative itself spells out. The Committee further recommends that a 
structured, advance promotion and preparedness campaign and implementation 
milestones be launched especially in schools, colleges to ensure sustained behavioural 
adoption beyond event-based participation. The Committee further recommends that 
the active engagement of trained Yoga Instructors and certified community-level 
trainers be institutionalised to ensure last-mile outreach and sustained household 
adoption under the “Har Ghar Ayur-Yog” initiative. 
PARA 3.7.9 
 
 
42. The Committee has also been apprised by the Secretary, Ministry of Ayush about 
the current status of the nationwide campaign “Desh Ka Prakriti Parikshan”, under 
which more than 1.40 crore Indian citizens aged 18 years and above have undergone 
app-based Prakriti assessment. The Committee appreciates the initiative and its wide 
outreach and recommends that the Ministry of Ayush leverage the data generated 
through these Prakriti Parikshan assessments for developing evidence-based preventive 
health strategies and personalised lifestyle advisories rooted in Ayurvedic principles. 

110 
 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry must ensure wider dissemination 
of the campaign through digital platforms, educational institutions and community 
health networks so that a larger segment of the population, particularly in rural and 
underserved areas can benefit from Prakriti-based health awareness and preventive 
healthcare practices. 
PARA 3.7.10 
 
AYURGYAN SCHEME 
 
43. The Committee notes with concern that the allocation under the Ayurgyan 
Scheme has witnessed significant downward revision at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage 
in consecutive financial years In 2024-25, the Budget Estimate (BE) of ₹49.50 crore was 
reduced to ₹ 27.00 crore at the RE stage, representing a reduction of approximately 45 
per cent, with actual expenditure of ₹ 25.70 crore. Similarly, in 2025-26, the BE of ₹ 
50.00 crore was reduced to ₹ 37.81 crore at the RE stage. The Committee takes into 
account the submission of the Ministry that due to this reduction of allocation at the RE 
stage, funds could not be released to certain projects approved by the Project 
Sanctioning Committee (PSC). 
PARA 3.8.3 
 
44. The Committee, while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in supporting 
research activities under the Ayurgyan Scheme, is of the view that such recurring mid-
year contraction of funds at RE stage adversely affects the expansion and continuity of 
research projects and leads to delays in the execution of approved studies, particularly 
those sanctioned by the Project Sanctioning Committee. Particularly, the Committee 
takes into consideration the submission of the Ministry that reduction of budgetary 
allocation of ₹ 50.00 crore at BE to ₹ 37.81 crore at RE 2025-26 led to non release of 
funds to certain projects as approved by the Committee is further of the view that such 
budgetary uncertainty must have undermined the confidence of participating 
institutions and impede the effective achievement of the objectives of the scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry evolve a protected funding 
mechanism for ongoing research projects so as to avoid slashing of budgetary allocation. 
The Committee further recommends that multi-year research commitments under the 
scheme should be planned and funded in a manner that ensures stability and continuity 
and are not subjected to annual budgetary volatility. 
PARA 3.8.4 
 
45. The Committee finds that there has been under-utilisation of funds available 
under the Ayurgyan Scheme during 2024-25. The Committee takes into account the  
submissions of the Ministry that the under-utilisation was primarily due to procedural 
and operational issues such as delays in utilisation of funds by implementing institutions 
and balances lying in the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) accounts beyond the admissible 
limits, which prevented further release of funds and resulted in savings. The Committee, 
in this regard recommends the Ministry to take appropriate precautionary measures so 
that the incident of underutilization funds under the scheme is not repeated in the 
ensuing financial year. 
PARA 3.8.5 
 
46. The Committee is anguished to observe that on perusal of the list of projects 
which could not receive funds due to under-utilisation and the CNA ceiling limits,  it 
found that several of these projects involved reputed institutions such as the All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi; All India Institute of Ayurveda 
(AIIA), New Delhi; Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences, Ranchi; Thiruvalluvar 

111 
 
University, Vellore; Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi; Guru Teg Bahadur 
Hospital, Delhi; and other academic and research institutions. The Committee further 
notes that the proposed studies covered diverse areas including clinical trials, 
pharmacological evaluation of drugs, microbial studies and integrative medicine 
interventions relating to conditions such as psoriasis, cancer, COVID-19 management, 
neurological disorders, depression and other health conditions. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that no projects should be deprived of fund.  
 
PARA 3.8.6 
 
47. The Committee is of the view that while financial prudence and adherence to 
procedural requirements are essential but such bottlenecks should not impede the 
timely execution of research projects under a scheme intended to promote scientific 
validation and innovation in Ayush systems of medicine. The Committee in this 
connection, recommends the Ministry to evolve increased level of monitoring of projects 
sanctioned under the Scheme and institute periodic reviews of their progress so as to 
avoid recurrence of such situations in future. The Committee is constrained to observe 
that the non-execution of such PSC-approved studies represents a missed opportunity 
for generating scientific evidence and advancing research in Ayush systems of medicine. 
 
PARA 3.8.7 
 
48. The Committee observes that under the Ayurgyan Scheme, the Ministry has 
supported 39 out of the targeted 50 research projects during the year (achievement of 
78%). While the progress in sanctioning and supporting research projects is 
noteworthy, the Committee observes with concern that outcome-level achievements 
remain relatively modest. Against the annual target of 14 validated drugs/treatment 
models, only 6 have been achieved so far (approximately 43%). This indicates that 
although the initiation and funding of research projects is progressing at a modest pace, 
the conversion of funded research into validated, standardized, and clinically accepted 
treatment models remains limited. The Committee further observes that under certain 
components, research studies have been initiated and in some cases have even exceeded 
the targeted numbers; however, the corresponding publication outputs remain a matter 
of concern. In the component of Ayurveda Biology Integrated Health Research, despite 
exceeding the target for research studies, no publications in reputed peer-reviewed 
journals have been reported so far. This reflects a significant lag between project 
initiation and dissemination of research findings, which undermines the larger objective 
of the Ayurgyan scheme to generate credible scientific evidence for Ayush systems. 
 
PARA 3.8.9 
 
 
49. The Committee notes with satisfaction that although a substantial proportion of 
the targeted research projects under the Ayurgyan Scheme have been supported so far 
as reported but despite adequate or even higher initiation of research studies in some 
components, the publication output remains, primarily a matter of committee’s concern 
indicating a lag between project implementation and dissemination of credible scientific 
evidence. In light thereof, the Committee recommends that the Ministry must 
strengthen the monitoring and outcome-tracking mechanisms of the Ayurgyan Scheme 
so that research projects translate into tangible outputs such as validated treatment 
models, standardized drugs and peer-reviewed scientific publications within defined 
timelines. The Ministry may also consider introducing clear milestones, periodic peer 
review and incentives for publication in reputed journals along with stronger 

112 
 
coordination between research institutions and clinical centres to ensure that funded 
projects effectively for contributing to evidence generation and wider acceptance of 
Ayush therapies. 
PARA 3.8.10 
 
 
SCHEME FOR CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND SUSTAINABLE 
MANAGEMENT OF MEDICINAL PLANTS UNDER NATIONAL MEDICINAL 
PLANTS BOARD (NMPB) 
 
50. The Committee finds that the budgetary allocation for the Central Sector 
Scheme for Conservation, Development and Sustainable Management of Medicinal 
Plants has witnessed significant fluctuations between the Budget Estimates and Revised 
Estimates in recent years. The Committee is of the view that such reductions at the 
Revised Estimate stage may affect the continuity and effectiveness of activities relating 
to conservation, resource augmentation and research support. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush, through the National Medicinal 
Plants Board, undertake more realistic assessment of financial requirements and 
strengthen planning and monitoring mechanisms so that funds allocated under the 
scheme are utilized in a timely and efficient manner, ensuring sustained progress in the 
conservation, development and sustainable management of medicinal plants. 
 
PARA 3.9.2 
 
 
51. The Committee takes note of the policy shift in direction aimed at reducing 
pressure on forest resources to organized cultivation of quality planting material while 
ensuring sustainable supply of medicinal plants for the Ayush industry. However, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry’s reply to include benchmarks or timelines 
for reducing forest dependency or measurable targets for expanding cultivation of high-
demand species of medicinal plants. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
transition from a purely promotional role to a target-driven roadmap based on species-
specific categorisation and with charted timelines by mandating a minimum 
procurement quota from organized cultivation clusters for gradually reducing 
dependence on forest-sourced medicinal plants. The Committee further recommends 
that Ministry explore for creating guaranteed market for farmers, effectively bridging 
the price gap between forest-sourced materials and cultivated species. The Committee is 
of the view that Ministry should also check out Action Plan to encourage farmers for 
cultivation of medicinal plants in cluster. 
PARA 3.9.4 
 
52. The Committee acknowledges the E-Charak portal as a positive step towards 
improving market transparency in the medicinal plants sector. However, the Committee 
has taken hand on experience of the portal and is of the view that the platform presently 
functions largely as an information interface providing price details and buyer seller 
contact channel which may not fully address the challenges faced by cultivators in 
accessing reliable buyers and stable markets. The Committee further notes that 
transactions between buyers and sellers are ultimately concluded through offline 
payment mechanisms which may increase the risk of fraud, delays in supply and lack of 
transaction security. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry to 
further strengthen the E-Charak platform by incorporating additional features such as 
a digital trading interface with secure payment processing, a “soil-to-shelf” traceability 
system for quality assurance, certification and demand forecasting mechanisms for key 

113 
 
medicinal plant species. The Ministry may also undertake focused efforts to promote 
wider adoption of the platform among farmers and Farmer Producer Organisations 
(FPOs) so as to enhance market access and ensure greater transparency and efficiency 
in the trade of medicinal plants. 
PARA 3.9.6 
 
53. The Committee finds that the Ministry has supported seed germplasm centres, 
nurseries and rural collection centres under the Central Sector Scheme of the National 
Medicinal Plants Board. The Ministry has also reported support for quality planting 
material and training of farmers in Good Agricultural Practices. However, the 
adequacy of expansion of these initiatives is still the matter of concern. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry undertake an assessment of the national 
requirement of Quality Planting Material (QPM) for medicinal plants and expand 
nursery networks accordingly, particularly in major cultivation clusters in meeting the 
increasing demand for planting material, particularly in view of the expansion of 
medicinal plant cultivation. 
PARA 3.9.7 
 
54. The Committee is given to understand that the Ministry has supported initiatives 
for Good Agricultural and Collection Practices (GACP) and voluntary certification of 
medicinal plant produce through capacity building programmes. However, the Ministry 
has indicated that presently no cultivation clusters are fully compliant with GACP 
standards which suggest that the adoption of quality certification frameworks remains 
limited. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that the Ministry takes pro active 
approach to develop a structured roadmap for wider adoption of GACP certification by 
providing technical support and financial incentives for cultivation clusters seeking 
certification. 
PARA 3.9.8 
 
55. While appreciating the initiative taken by the Ministry to explore convergence 
with afforestation programmes, the Committee observes that the proposal is still at a 
preliminary stage of inter-ministerial consultation without any timeline for 
operationalising the inclusion of medicinal plant plantations under Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) supported 
activities. The Committee is of the strong view that integration of medicinal plant 
plantations within national afforestation programmes could significantly contribute to 
sustainable supply of raw materials for the Ayush sector while simultaneously 
supporting ecological restoration and livelihood opportunities. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must pursue the proposal 
with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in a time-bound manner 
so that plantation of medicinal plants may be appropriately incorporated within 
CAMPA-supported afforestation activities and related national plantation programmes 
like “Ek Ped Maa ke naam”. The Committee further recommends that, once the 
proposal is finalised, the National Medicinal Plants Board may develop suitable 
guidelines in coordination with State Forest Departments to ensure that plantation of 
medicinal plants are scientifically planned, monitored and linked with conservation as 
well as sustainable utilisation objectives of the Ayush sector.  
PARA 3.9.11 
 
56. The Committee is of the considered view that Medicinal plants have been an 
integral part of traditional and modern healthcare systems due to their therapeutic 
potential and bioactive compounds. Medicinal plants offer natural, cost-effective 
remedies with fewer side effects for a wide range of health conditions, including chronic 

114 
 
diseases, infections, and metabolic disorders. In order to gain maximum benefits of these 
traditional plants, the availability of such medicinal plants are essential. In view of this, 
the Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change should make it mandatory that, in case of afforestation in degraded 
areas, at least 25 percent of the plantation from CAMPA funds should be of medicinal 
plants, suitable for that particular ecology. The Ministry should ensure that plantations 
contribute meaningfully to carbon sinks and biodiversity restoration rather than short-
term target fulfillment. 
PARA 3.9.12 
 
 
57. The Committee observes that the assessment of data regarding the percentage 
decrease in forest sourced raw material is nearly a decade old and the demand-supply 
dynamics of medicinal plants might have undergone significant changes in view of the 
Ministry’s recent initiatives for promotion and cultivation of medicinal plants. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake a fresh national 
assessment of demand and supply of medicinal plants to generate updated evidence for 
informed policy planning and scientific development of cultivation clusters. The 
Committee further recommends for establishing a dynamic National Medicinal Plants 
Demand-Supply Database, preferably integrated with the e-Charak Portal and updated 
periodically in coordination with industry stakeholders, State Medicinal Plants Boards 
and Ayush manufacturers. Such a mechanism would enable identification of high-
demand species, facilitate better planning of cultivation initiatives and help address 
issues relating to market uncertainty and price volatility in the medicinal plants sector. 
 
PARA 3.9.14 
 
58. The Committee takes note of the submission of the Ministry that targets such as 
5 medicinal plant species conservation projects, 1500 hectares in-situ resource 
augmentation and 13.5 lakh saplings regeneration have been undertaken. The 
Committee, however, observes that the target set by the Ministry appear limited 
considering India’s vast medicinal plant biodiversity. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that while conservation initiatives are being undertaken, the scale of 
interventions need to be expanded to address threats to rare and endangered medicinal 
plant species. The Committee also recommends the Ministry to scale up conservation 
programmes, particularly for rare, endangered and endemic medicinal plant species, 
and promote community participation in conservation efforts. 
PARA 3.9.15 
 
AYURSWASTHY YOJANA 
 
59. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to make concerted 
efforts to provide adequate budgetary support to the Ayurswasthya Scheme. The 
Committee views that repeated reduction of Budget Estimates (BE) at the Revised 
Estimate (RE) stage does not provide a stable equilibrium of the scheme’s financial 
management and may affect effective programme implementation. Moreover, a gap 
between the initial budgetary projections and the actual allocation at BE and RE Stage 
hampers the implementation pace and capacity of the scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry review the fund flow and monitoring 
mechanisms under the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) framework and undertake a 
careful assessment of the factors leading to repeated revisions at the RE stage so as to 
ensure that budgetary allocations translate into timely financial support to 
implementing institutions enabling the institute to achieve the cherished goal of the 

115 
 
scheme. The Committee further emphases that the Ministry should ensure more 
realistic budgeting, strengthen appraisal of project proposals and align financial 
allocations with implementable project pipelines so that the allocations made at the BE 
stage translate into tangible and credible outcomes.  
PARA 3.10.2 
 
60. The Committee takes note of the list of 26 projects supported by the Ministry 
under the Ayush and Public Health component of the Ayurswasthya Yojana during the 
financial years 2022-23 to 2024-25. The Committee observes that an overwhelming 
majority of the projects have been undertaken by Government institutions (20 out of 
25), while only a limited number of projects (five) involve non-government institutions, 
including NGOs and trusts. This pattern appears inconsistent with the broader design of 
the scheme, which envisages the participation of a diverse set of stakeholders including 
Government institutions, non-profit and voluntary organisations, NGOs, athletes, and 
other institutions to promote community-based Ayush interventions, research, and 
outreach initiatives. The Committee further notes that the projects supported under the 
scheme appear to be limited in scale and concentrated in a relatively small number of 
institutions and geographical areas. Such trend indicates that the full potential of the 
scheme to mobilise diverse institutional participation for expanding Ayush based 
community health services has not yet been fully realised. The Committee is, therefore, 
of the firm view that the Ministry should take proactive measures to broaden 
institutional participation under the scheme by undertaking targeted outreach and 
awareness initiatives. The Ministry should also encourage the participation of eligible 
non-government institutions by simplifying and standardising the procedures and 
addressing existing bottlenecks. The Committee recommends the Ministry to encourage 
the participants besides ensuring for balanced distribution of projects and promote 
collaborative projects involving government institutions, NGOs and community based 
organisations along with strengthening monitoring and undertaking periodic review of 
project outcomes to ensure that the scheme effectively contributes to expanding 
community-level Ayush services and research activities. 
PARA 3.10.4 
 
 
61. The Committee observes that the financial norms for projects under the 
Ayurswasthya Yojana are framed at the time of the scheme’s launch around 2021-22, 
with a maximum project support of ₹ 1.5 crore for three years under the Public Health 
Intervention component. The Committee is of the view that considering the rise in costs 
of medicines, diagnostics, manpower and programme implementation, the real value of 
financial assistance may not be lucrative for Non-Government organizations to 
undertake initiative under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry undertake a periodic review of financial norms and cost ceilings under the 
scheme, taking into account inflation and implementation experience so as to ensure 
that the sanctioned projects are adequately resourced to achieve their intended public 
health outcomes. 
PARA 3.10.5 
 
Ayush Oushadhi Gunvatta Evam Utpadan Samvardhan Yojana (AOGUSY) 
 
62. The Committee expresses serious concern that there has been substantial 
reduction of BE allocation to AOGUSY  at the RE stage in last five years highlighting 
the issue of low utilization of funds as recurring phenomena and the Ministry has not 
taken adequate corrective measures despite a precautionary observation of the 
Committee in its earlier report, instead the Ministry attributing the shortfall to 

116 
 
procedural and operational difficulties faced by the grantee institutions. The Committee 
believes that such procedural bottlenecks, inadequate implementation support and 
delays in procurement processes indicate systemic deficiencies that require stronger 
institutional oversight and facilitation by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush institute a robust monitoring and 
implementation mechanism for the AOGUSY scheme, including periodic review of fund 
utilization, streamlined procurement procedures, and capacity-building support for 
grantee institutions to ensure timely execution of projects under the scheme. The 
Ministry must put in place a comprehensive financial planning framework to prevent 
repeated reduction of Budget Estimates at the Revised Estimates stage and to enhance 
the absorptive capacity of implementing agencies.  
PARA 3.11.3 
 
63. The Committee examined the physical and financial progress indicators along 
with the achievements highlighted by the Ministry. The Committee notes that 
complaints received through the Ayush Suraksha Portal relating to misleading 
advertisements are forwarded to the respective State Drug Licensing Authorities for 
necessary action. The Committee is of the view that such a mechanism may lead to 
inconsistent approaches in dealing with complaints across States, as the capacity, human 
resources, and enforcement priorities of State authorities vary considerably. Further, 
the absence of a uniform timeline and monitoring framework for disposal of complaints 
may defeat the very purpose of the complaint reporting mechanism and could 
potentially discourage citizens from reporting such violations. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ayush vertical under the Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organization (CDSCO) should develop a uniform and standardised mechanism 
for handling complaints relating to misleading advertisements of Ayush products. The 
Committee further recommends that clear timelines must be prescribed for action by 
State authorities, along with active monitoring and periodic review at the Central level, 
to ensure timely and effective enforcement of the scheme in addressing complaints that 
have scaled up to a total of 11425 and 12750 during 2024-25 and 2025-26 (up to 
December 2025) The Committee, therefore, recommends for more stringent penal 
provisions for misleading advertisements. 
PARA 3.11.5 
 
 
64. The Committee observes that despite the establishment of a nationwide 
pharmacovigilance network with multiple Intermediary and Peripheral 
Pharmacovigilance Centres, the number of reported Suspected Adverse Drug Reactions 
(ADRs) remains relatively low, which may indicate possible underreporting or limited 
awareness among practitioners and institutions. The Committee, therefore,  
recommends that the Ministry to consider making ADR reporting mandatory for Ayush 
practitioners and pharmacists and strengthen ADR reporting mechanisms through 
enhanced training of practitioners, increased awareness programmes and integration of 
pharmacovigilance reporting systems with healthcare institutions so as to ensure more 
comprehensive monitoring of drug safety. 
PARA 3.11.6 
 
65. The Committee notes the financial mobilisation under the scheme with nearly 
78% of the total cumulative grants (₹13.76 crore out of ₹17.50 crore) released during 
FY 2024-25. The Committee, however, observes that a gap appears to exist between 
financial outlays and corresponding physical or regulatory outcomes as only three out of 
the five funded pharmacies have progressed from infrastructure upgradation to the 
stage of WHO-GMP certification. The Committee is of the view that despite substantial 

117 
 
financial allocation, delays in regulatory compliance may hinder the timely achievement 
of the scheme’s objective of ensuring international quality standardisation in Ayush 
drug manufacturing. In this regard, the Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should develop a technical mentorship mechanism including pre-audit inspections for 
institutions that remain at the “in-process” stage. The Committee further recommends 
the introduction of targeted capacity-building programmes for pharmacists, 
technicians, and other technical staff working in the pharmacies so as to ensure that 
human resource capabilities keep pace with the upgraded infrastructure and 
technological investments made under the scheme. 
PARA 3.11.8 
 
INSTITUTE OF TEACHING AND RESEARCH IN AYURVEDA (ITRA) 
 
66. The Committee appreciates the ITRA for leveraging its autonomous status and 
expresses satisfaction that ITRA has been making commendable efforts in the field of 
Ayurveda education & research upholding its status as an Institute of National 
Importance. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Ayush should continue to 
ensure adequate and timely financial support to the Institute so that ongoing 
infrastructure projects and academic activities are implemented efficiently and the 
Institute is further strengthened to advance research, education and global outreach in 
Ayurveda. The Committee recommends the Ministry to encourage ITRA for exploring 
the enhancement of student intake capacity across all courses (of the institute) 
considering its pivotal role in propagation and promotion of Ayurveda learning and 
practices domestically and internationally. 
PARA 3.12.2 
 
 
67. The Committee appreciates these short term initiatives proposed to be 
undertaken by the ITRA and and considers that present budgetary allocation may not 
be sufficient to meet the proposed capital intensive initiatives. The Committee therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must examine the needs of the institute positively to 
support the establishment of the Ayush Start-up Incubation Centre with dedicated 
funding, structured mentorship and collaboration with industry and research 
institutions to encourage innovation in Ayurveda-based technologies. The Committee 
further recommends that the Institute undertake a comprehensive human resource 
assessment to strengthen the pharmacovigilance framework by ensuring the 
recruitment of adequate technical manpower, the development of robust digital 
reporting systems and enhanced coordination with national regulatory bodies, so that 
the safety monitoring of Ayurvedic medicines aligns with global standards. In addition, 
the Committee recommends that structured international clinical training programmes 
be developed in collaboration with foreign universities and WHO to promote academic 
exchange, standardised training modules and wider global acceptance of Ayurveda. 
 
PARA 3.12.4 
 
68. The Committee expresses concern over vacancy of 106 posts against sanctioned 
strength of 321 posts i.e  that one-third of manpower shortage in ITRA that must have  
adversely affected the institute’s ability to discharge its mandate effectively, particularly 
in the areas of research output, academic instruction and patient care services. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Ministry to undertake an immediate 
review of the vacant posts so that time-bound measures are undertaken to fill up the 
existing live vacancies so that the institutional capacity of ITRA is strengthened and its 
core functions are not compromised. 

118 
 
PARA 3.12.4 
 
 
69. The Committee has taken note that the Institute’s reported publication of 160 
research articles and in-house journal “AYU” received 411 article submissions during 
2024-25, out of which only 20 articles were published after the peer review process, 
thereby meaning the acceptability rate is 4.86%. The Committee is of the view that, 
while the volume of research activity appears significant, greater emphasis needs to be 
placed on improving the quality, international indexing and citation impact of research 
outputs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush and the 
Institute take focused steps to promote high quality research, encourage publications in 
reputed international journals and strengthen collaborative research with national and 
global institutions so as to enhance the global academic visibility of Ayurveda research. 
 
PARA 3.12.5 
 
70. The Committee appreciates the global collaborations of the Institute of Teaching 
and Research in Ayurveda (ITRA), including its recognition as a WHO Collaborating 
Centre for Traditional Medicine and the existence of eight active international MoUs. 
The Committee however, observes that foreign student enrolment remains limited. As 
per the Annual Report 2024-25 of the institute, Under International Centre for 
Ayurvedic studies, 03 scholars had completed 3-month introductory course of Ayurveda 
programme (300 classes) in this year and there were 13 new admissions for foreign 
nationals across BAMS (8), M.D. (3), and Ph.D. (2) indicating modest global academic 
engagement for an Institute of National Importance. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that ITRA, in coordination with the Ministry of Ayush & WHO strengthen 
international outreach, expand collaborations with foreign universities and introduce 
targeted fellowship or scholarship schemes and short-term training programmes to 
attract more foreign students.   
PARA 3.12.6 
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR HOMOEPATHY (NCH) 
 
71. The Committee observes that against the actual expenditure of ₹ 16.00 crore in 
2024-25, an amount of ₹ 20.00 crore has been allocated to the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy (NCH) in 2025-26, and the allocation to the tune of ₹ 20.00 crore has been 
earmarked in BE 2026-27. The Committee notes that the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy has been seeking additional funds for engagement of manpower to 
effectively discharge its regulatory and supervisory functions. The Committee has been 
given to understand that the NCH has granted permissions to a significant number of 
homoeopathy colleges in recent years, including 541 permissions in 2025-26 and 239 in 
2024-25 indicating a substantial expansion in the number of institutions and admissions 
in the homoeopathy education sector. However, the budgetary allocation to the 
Commission does not appear to be commensurate with the growing regulatory 
responsibilities arising from such scale of expansion. The Committee is of the view that 
the increase in the number of institutions and student intake necessarily requires 
strengthening of regulatory oversight, including adequate manpower and institutional 
capacity. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the National Commission for 
Homoeopathy undertake a comprehensive assessment of its manpower and functional 
requirements and that the Ministry of Ayush examine the matter and take up the issue 
of increased allocation to Ministry of Finance to consider enhancing the financial 
allocation so as to enable the Commission to effectively regulate homoeopathy education 
and ensure quality standards across institutions. 

119 
 
PARA 3.13.2 
 
72. The Committee has undertaken a comparative assessment of the expenditure 
heads of the National Commission for Homoeopathy (NCH) and the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine (NCISM). The Committee finds that NCH 
has incurred ₹4.42 crore under the head “Assessment & Rating” whereas NCISM has 
reported ₹2.57 crore under the same head. However, NCISM also reflects a separate 
expenditure of ₹4.25 crore under the head “Inspection” which appears to relate to 
regulatory assessment activities. The Committee is of the view that the regulatory 
expenditure should have common & uniform heads for accessing comparative actual 
cost of institutions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush 
adopt a uniform classification of regulatory expenditure across its statutory bodies 
clearly defining heads such as assessment, inspection and rating ensuring enhanced 
transparency, enable meaningful comparison of regulatory costs and promote more 
efficient utilisation of public funds.  
PARA 3.13.3 
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR INDIAN SYSTEM OF MEDICINE (NCISM) 
 
73. The Committee observes that the NCISM is largely functioning through 
contractual and outsourced manpower, the number of which is more than double the 
sanctioned strength of regular staff. Such heavy dependence on non-regular personnel 
may adversely affect institutional continuity, accountability and long-term capacity 
building within the Commission. The Committee, therefore recommends that the 
Ministry of Ayush undertake a comprehensive review of manpower deployment in its 
statutory regulatory bodies, particularly with regard to the large number of vacant 
regular posts and the growing reliance on contractual and outsourced personnel. The 
Committee further recommends that time-bound steps be taken to fill up the vacant 
sanctioned posts especially in key administrative positions. Such measures would help 
strengthen long-term regulatory capacity, enhance institutional continuity and 
accountability, and reduce excessive dependence on outsourced manpower. 
 
PARA 3.14.3 
 
74. The Committee takes into consideration the steps taken by the NCISM for 
improving quality and affordable medical education in ASUS system including the new 
curricula. The Committee appreciates the reforms taken to integrate modern medical 
science and clinical research with traditional Ayurvedic knowledge and expresses 
satisfaction for adoption of student-centered pedagogy. The new reforms also mandate 
multi-disciplinary education for the students which shall enhance pluralistic healthcare 
in practice. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Ayush and NCISM ensure 
effective implementation of the revised curricula across all institutions through regular 
monitoring, faculty capacity-building and the provision of adequate clinical, teaching 
and laboratory infrastructure. The Committee further recommends that structured 
feedback mechanisms be instituted to obtain inputs from students, faculty and other 
stakeholders so as to assess whether the reforms are achieving their intended outcomes. 
The Ministry should ensure that institutions possess the required infrastructure, 
maintain faculty strength and promote clinical exposure necessary for the effective 
delivery of the revised competency-based curriculum. 
PARA 3.14.4 
 
 

120 
 
75. The Committee takes note of the curriculum reforms undertaken by the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine indicating the paradigm shift from 
traditional lecture-based teaching to a more competency and skill-based learning 
framework, particularly the restructuring of lecture to non-lecture hours in the ratio of 
1:2 encouraging greater practical exposure and active learning. The Committee also 
finds inconsistencies in internship requirements across different systems and a lack of 
structured research components during these internships. The absence of a structured 
research-oriented component during internship may also limit students’ engagement 
with evidence-based practices. The Committee recommends that the National 
Commission for Indian System of Medicine must consider introducing a mandatory 
internship component of suitable duration for undergraduates across all systems at their 
respective Central Research Councils under the Ministry of Ayush to provide uniform 
research exposure, strengthen clinical and scientific training and promote integration of 
education with ongoing research activities, thereby improving the overall quality and 
consistency of medical training in the Indian Systems of Medicine. 
PARA 3.14.5 
 
 
76. The Committee was apprised that the National Commission for Indian System of 
Medicine has proposed a “Publication Grant” scheme to support eligible candidates in 
publishing research papers in quality journals. The Committee appreciates the proposal 
and considers it a positive step towards encouraging research orientation and academic 
curiosity among scholars. The Committee in this regard recommends that the Ministry 
of Ayush to get approved the schemes and implement them as soon as possible. The 
Committee adds that the Ministry should explore the possibility of scaling the scheme to 
other institutes to promote research output across the Indian systems of medicine. 
 
PARA 3.14.6 
 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN AYURVEDIC SCIENCES (CCRAS)  
 
77. The Committee finds that the Central Council for Research in Ayurvedic 
Sciences (CCRAS) has undertaken numerous clinical trials, community studies and 
public health initiatives. The Committee, however, observes that the completion of 130 
research projects (92 during 2024-25 and an additional 38 up to January 2026) over the 
last two years. The Committee, therefore, recommends for large-scale interdisciplinary 
research collaborations with premier institutions such as AIIMS, ICMR, IITs and other 
major biomedical institutes for enlargement of the scope for generating robust evidence 
and wider scientific validation of Ayurveda-based interventions. The Committee 
believes that expanding multicentric and interdisciplinary research collaborations with 
premier institutions such as AIIMS, ICMR, IITs and reputed international 
organisations, along with greater emphasis on timely completion of projects and 
publication of research in high-quality peer-reviewed journals would strengthen the 
scientific credibility and global acceptance of Ayurveda-based interventions. The 
Committee is of the firm view that the Ministry of Ayush and CCRAS must enhance the 
scale, quality and impact of research undertaken across its institutes. Moreover, the 
Ministry should ensure better translation of CCRAS research findings into evidence-
based clinical guidelines, national health programmes and public health interventions so 
that the outcomes of Ayurveda research can be effectively integrated into the broader 
healthcare system.  
PARA 3.15.3 
 

121 
 
78. The Committee has been given to understand that the Central Council for 
Research in Ayurvedic Sciences (CCRAS) has undertaken research on preventive health 
approaches such as Dinacharya, Ritucharya, Rasayana therapies and lifestyle 
interventions aimed at improving quality of life and addressing non-communicable 
diseases. While such initiatives highlight the preventive potential of Ayurveda, the 
Committee observes that there is limited structured research on behaviour change 
models that promote sustained adoption of Ayurvedic lifestyle practices among different 
population groups. The Committee, therefore, recommends that CCRAS must 
undertake structured research on behaviour-change interventions enshrined in 
Ayurvedic principles such as Dinacharya, Ritucharya and Ahara-Vihara. The Committee 
in this regard, recommends that the Ministry must guide CCRAS to undertake the 
development of evidence-based behaviour change modules and community-based 
intervention models integrating Ayurvedic principles with modern behavioural science 
approaches and their pilot implementation across diverse population groups including 
urban communities, school students and high-risk groups vulnerable to lifestyle 
diseases. The Committee desires that the ongoing recruitment drive in CCRAS must be 
completed expeditiously so as to augment the human resource capacity required for 
implementation of the proposed research initiatives. 
PARA 3.15.4 
 
79. The Committee takes into account the Five-Year Action Plan (2026-27 to 2030-
31) formulated by CCRAS to expand clinical research in Ayurveda with a focus on non-
communicable diseases, lifestyle disorders, geriatric health, women’s health and 
Panchakarma procedure validation, among others. The Committee notes the submission 
of CCRAS that the Action Plan is only indicative and its implementation is subject to 
necessary administrative, technical, Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC) and financial 
approvals, as well as availability of funds. The Committee therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry must ensure timely administrative, technical and financial approvals for 
Action Plan so that the proposed Action Plan does not remain merely indicative but is 
implemented in letter and spirit in a time-bound manner. The Ministry should also 
ensure adequate allocation of financial resources and strengthening of institutional 
capacity to facilitate the conduct of multicentric clinical trials and collaborative 
research.  
PARA 3.15.5 
 
80. The Committee is of the considered view that periodic monitoring mechanisms 
must be instituted to track the progress of the Action Plan and ensure that research 
outcomes should translate into evidence-based policy interventions and standard 
treatment protocols for wider adoption of Ayurveda in the healthcare system.  
 
PARA 3.15.6 
 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN HOMOEOPATHY (CCRH)  
 
81. The Committee takes note of the expansion of research activities undertaken by 
the Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH) over the last three years. 
The Committee observes that the increased research activities have not translated into 
commensurate research outcomes as the rate of project conclusion remains relatively 
slow and limited. The Committee is cognizant of the fact that many research projects 
might longer gestation duration and might not yet have reached due date for 
completion. The Committee, nevertheless, recommends CCRH to undertake a 
comprehensive assessment of ongoing projects and strengthen project planning and 
monitoring so that research & activities result in tangible outcomes capable of 

122 
 
strengthening the evidence base and contributing to the formulation of standard 
treatment guidelines. Further, in view of the continuing observation regarding the 
delayed efficacy of homoeopathic medicines, the Committee emphasizes that projects 
undertaken in the areas of Drug Standardization and Fundamental Research category 
should be accelerated so that the findings can support the development of 
pharmacopoeial standards and quality assurance framework for Homoeopathy. The 
Committee also recommends that research studies in the Public Health Research 
category be expanded given its pivotal role in demonstrating the broader applicability of 
homoeopathy in public health interventions. 
PARA 3.16.4 
 
82. Responding to the Committee’s query, the Ministry apprised the Committee that 
certain research infrastructure projects have been deprioritised or delayed due to 
funding constraints including redevelopment and expansion of research facilities and 
construction of new research institutes. Additionally, the Council has submitted that 
delays in some research projects occurred due to issues such as procurement 
procedures, staffing shortages and administrative processes. The Committee expresses 
serious concern over such delays that might have adversely affected the pace and quality 
of research activities undertaken by the Council. The Committee, in this connection, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must pay adequate attention to strengthening 
laboratory infrastructure and advanced research facilities to enable high-quality 
experimental and translational research. The Committee is of the firm view that the 
research activities should not be subjected to funds constraints. The Committee, 
therefore recommends CCRH to streamline administrative procedures relating to 
project approvals, procurement and recruitment so as to ensure timely implementation 
of research projects and work towards the capacity building framework. 
 
PARA 3.16.5 
 
83. The Committee is not satisfied to observe the response of the Ministry admitting 
that no independent performance evaluation of the Central Council for Research in 
Homoeopathy (CCRH) has been conducted so far. Considering the increasing allocation 
of public funds for research in traditional systems of medicine, the absence of an 
external evaluation mechanism may leave scope for an objective assessment of the 
Council’s research productivity, institutional efficiency, and public health impact. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush should institute a 
periodic independent performance evaluation of CCRH by a panel of experts drawn 
from biomedical sciences, public health and research management. Such an evaluation 
would help ensure greater transparency, accountability and continuous assessment in 
the Council’s research activities vis-à-vis mandate and goals & objectives of the Council. 
 
PARA 3.16.6 
 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN UNANI (CCRUM)  
 
 
84. The Committee finds that out of 766 sanctioned posts in the Central Council for 
Research in Unani Medicine, 345 posts are presently vacant. The Committee further 
notes that while the revival of 131 posts is under process, 21 posts have been proposed to 
be abolished. The Committee observes with concern that such a high level of vacancies 
may adversely affect the effective functioning of the Council and impede the progress of 
research activities in Unani medicine. The Committee is of the view that adequate 
human resources are essential for the timely implementation of research programmes 

123 
 
and for strengthening the scientific base of the Unani system of medicine. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must take expeditious 
steps to fill up the vacant posts in the Council so as to ensure that it is adequately staffed 
to effectively carry out its research mandate and promote the development of evidence-
based research in Unani medicine. 
PARA 3.17.2 
 
85. The Committee notes that medicinal plants constitute the primary raw material 
base for Unani formulations and are essential for sustaining research and therapeutic 
practices in the Unani system of medicine. However, the availability of several medicinal 
plant species used in Unani pharmacopoeia remains underutilised due to limited 
systematic surveys, inadequate cultivation practices and over-dependence on wild 
sources. The Committee is of firm view that the absence of coordinated efforts for large-
scale cultivation, conservation, and scientific documentation of medicinal plants might 
have affected the long-term sustainability and quality of raw materials required for 
Unani drug development and research. The Committee, therefore, recommends for 
expanding the survey, cultivation and conservation of medicinal plants used in Unani 
medicine and explore further collaboration with agricultural universities and state 
governments to ensure sustainable availability of raw materials and to prevent depletion 
of rare medicinal species. 
PARA 3.17.4 
 
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA (AIIA) 
 
86. The Committee is concerned by the 40 % reduction in allocation under the 
Grants-in-Aid (General) component vis-à-vis the amount projected in BE 2026-27. Since 
the component primarily supports academic activities, outreach programmes, research 
projects, and maintenance of institutional facilities, the Committee apprehends that the 
reduced allocation may constrain the institution’s operational capacity and proposed 
initiatives including research programmes and evidence generation in Ayurveda. The 
Committee observes that recent recruitment is likely to augment the human resource 
capacity of the institute and optimal utilisation of this manpower would require the 
expansion of research initiatives and patient-centric activities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry reassess the fund requirements of AIIA, 
particularly under the GIA (General) head so that the institution’s core activities are 
not adversely affected. Considering the critical role of AIIA as a Centre of Excellence in 
advancing the development and recognition of Ayush, the Committee further 
recommends that AIIA should not face constraints in funding for its core activities and 
that the Ministry may consider providing additional allocation at the Revised Estimate 
stage, keeping in view projected demand of Rs. 370.00 core for 2026-27 for ensuring 
implementation of originally envisaged Action Plan during the year. 
PARA 3.18.3 
 
87. The Committee has also taken cognizance of the key concern areas highlighted 
by AIIA, including the development of training centres, establishment of an 
International School campus, and expansion of the existing campus, which indicate the 
need for enhanced budgetary support. The Committee is of the firm view that AIIA, 
being a premier Centre of Excellence in Ayurveda, requires planned expansion of its 
campus, including the establishment of domain-specific Centres of Excellence and 
academic infrastructure such as an international school campus. The Committee point 
out that such view is reinforced by the recent budget announcement regarding the 
establishment of three new AIIA institutions across the country which reflects the 
growing pivotal role of AIIAs in the Ayush sector. In this context, the Committee 

124 
 
believes that the increasing national and global stature of Ayush necessitates expansion 
of the AIIA campus to support advanced research, training and academic activities. The 
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of AIIA’s expansion requirements vis-à-vis Phase 2 expansions and prepare 
a well-structured development plan and present the same to the Ministry of Finance for 
enhanced budgetary allocation so that the proposed initiatives can be implemented in a 
timely and effective manner. 
PARA 3.18.4 
 
88. The Committee finds that there has been a significant increase in OPD footfall at 
AIIA and its outreach centres, rising from 4.65 lakh patients in 2023 to about 7.78 lakh 
patients in 2025, however, the data indicates that nearly 96% of the OPD services are 
concentrated at the two main institutes in New Delhi and Goa, while the outreach 
centres account for only a marginal share. The Committee observes that AIIA Goa has 
shown the most rapid growth, with OPD footfall increasing from 83,096 in 2023 to 
2,59,125 in 2025, representing an increase of about 211%. Such substantial rise suggests 
that establishing a major Ayurveda institute in a prominent tourism destination like 
Goa has been successful in attracting patients and promoting Ayurveda services 
including supporting medical value travel and wellness tourism. The Committee feels 
that the excellence and specialised services of AIIA need to be expanded beyond the 
existing limited outreach network so that the benefits of the institute’s expertise can 
reach a wider population. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
may consider establishing one AIIA institution out of the three AIIAs proposed in 
budget 2026-27 in the North Eastern region which would attract tourists from south east 
countries and  support the Act East Policy by promoting Ayurveda based medical value 
travel and strengthening India’s traditional medicine outreach in the region.  The 
Committee further recommends that AIIA develop stronger referral linkages with 
district hospitals and Ayush health centres, which would help in decentralizing patient 
load from the main institutes while extending specialised Ayurveda services to a larger 
population across the country.  
PARA 3.18.6 
 
89. The Committee has been given understand that the All India Institute of 
Ayurveda (AIIA), Delhi operates a 200-bed hospital which, based on an average length 
of stay of about 9 days (based on the three-year data provided by the Ministry), has the 
capacity to handle approximately 8,100 inpatient admissions annually. However, the 
data indicates that the actual number of admissions has remained significantly below 
this potential capacity, with 4,660 admissions in 2023, 4,937 in 2024, and 5,344 in 2025, 
reflecting utilisation levels of only about 57%, 61%, and 66% respectively. The 
Committee is of the view that the hospital infrastructure has remained underutilised, 
with an estimated unused capacity ranging from about 2,700 to 3,400 admissions 
annually during the said period. The Committee observes that bed utilisation has shown 
gradual improvement over the years, a substantial proportion of the available bed 
capacity still remains unutilised. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry must take steps to optimiseutilisation of the existing inpatient infrastructure at 
AIIA, Delhi by strengthening referral linkages with district hospitals, Ayush health 
centres and other public healthcare facilities. The Ministry may also explore measures 
such as expanding specialised therapies, promoting Panchakarma and integrative 
treatment services, and increasing awareness about inpatient Ayurveda care, so that the 
available bed capacity is utilised more efficiently. Such measures would help in 
maximising the use of existing infrastructure while improving access to institutional 
Ayurveda treatment services.  
PARA 3.18.7 

125 
 
 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF HOMOEOPATHY, KOLKATA 
 
90. The Committee appreciates NIH, Kolkata for servicing 2200 OPD patients per 
day, however, the underutilisation of the existing IPD capacity coupled with shortage of 
doctors and staff raises concern. The Committee is of the view that the OPD patient load 
should be managed by expanding the existing space so that the current infrastructure be 
utilized for the intended purpose as diversion may adversely affect clinical training and 
inpatient-based academic activities of the institute. The Committee recommends the 
Ministry undertake comprehensive assessment of the proposal for expansion of the 
hospital capacity to 250 beds keeping into account the institute’s operational, 
infrastructural and manpower constraints. The Committee views that the Ministry 
should take concrete steps for strengthening human resources, the proposal for 
expansion of hospital capacity should be considered and approved. 
PARA 3.19.2 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF AYURVEDA, JAIPUR 
 
91. The Committee observes that an inverted admission seats structure of NIA, 
Jaipur could dilute the organic academic progression within the institution and may 
also raise concerns regarding the adequacy of clinical exposure, faculty availability and 
teaching infrastructure required for a large PG cohort. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush review the student-faculty-clinical load balance 
and overall academic structure of the institute to ensure that the UG-PG seat ratio 
remains academically sustainable and aligned with regulatory norms. The Ministry may 
consider gradually increasing UG seats to strengthen the institutional academic 
pipeline; or rationalising PG intake in accordance with available teaching faculty, 
clinical material and infrastructure. 
PARA 3.20.5 
 
RASHTRIYA AYURVEDA VIDYAPEETH (RAV) 
 
92. The Committee acknowledges that the Guru Shisya Parampara programme in 
RAV plays an important role in bridging the gap between classical textual knowledge 
and practical clinical application. However, the Committee observes that the coverage of 
the programme remains limited in scale considering the large pool of experienced 
traditional practitioners and the growing demand for advanced practical training 
among Ayurveda graduates. The Committee, therefore recommends that the Ministry 
may consider expanding the scope and outreach of the Guru-Shishya Parampara 
programme by increasing the number of participating Gurus and Shishyas and 
ensuring wider geographical coverage.  
PARA 3.21.2 
 
CENTRAL COUNCIL FOR RESEARCH IN SIDDHA  
 
93. The Committee observes that these initiatives play an important role in 
promoting research and documentation of the Siddha system of medicine. However, the 
Committee is of the view that Siddha research activities and institutional presence 
remain largely concentrated in the southern region of the country, particularly in Tamil 
Nadu. The Committee further observes that the North Eastern Region, with its rich 
biodiversity and strong traditions of herbal medicine, offers significant potential for 
expanding Siddha research and medicinal plant cultivation. The Committee, therefore, 

126 
 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush explore the expansion of Siddha research 
activities and institutional presence in suitable regions beyond southern India, including 
the North Eastern States/Railways/PSUs/CGHS facilities, in order to promote wider 
dissemination of Siddha knowledge and strengthen research on medicinal plants 
relevant to the Siddha system. The Committee believes that such initiatives would 
contribute to the broader development and national outreach of the Siddha system of 
medicine. 
PARA 3.22.2 
 
ISSUES RAISED BY THE MEMBERS 
 
94. The Committee notes that the Ministry has undertaken several initiatives for the 
promotion of Ayurveda through research institutions, awareness programmes and 
outreach activities. The Committee however is of the view that these efforts need to 
translate into greater adoption of Ayurveda practices and increased use of medicinal 
plants among the general public. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should intensify its outreach and awareness programmes with a focused 
approach towards encouraging the practical use of Ayurveda at the community level. In 
this regard, wider dissemination of knowledge regarding commonly used medicinal 
plants such as Aloe vera, Giloy and Sarpagandha etc. should be undertaken through 
educational institutions and community-level campaigns. The Committee expects that 
such initiatives will promote preventive healthcare practices and strengthen the 
grassroots acceptance of Ayurveda across the country. 
PARA 4.1.2 
 
95. The Committee notes the outreach initiatives taken by the Ministry to enhance 
the global market and export potential of Ayush products through policy support, 
quality standardization and international outreach. The Committee, however, is of the 
view that sustained efforts are required to further strengthen the global recognition, 
standardisation & regulatory acceptance and quality assurance of Ayush medicines and 
wellness products. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must 
intensify its efforts towards strengthening international certification mechanisms, 
scientific validation and market access support for Ayush products in foreign markets. 
The Committee further recommends for extending export incentives and hand holding 
facilitation for foreign market penetration and enhance India’s share in the global 
traditional medicine market and strengthen the international positioning of Ayush 
systems. 
PARA 4.1.4 
 
96. The Committee notes that a substantial portion of the allocated funds of RE 
2025-26 (around 16%) still remains to be utilised during the closing month of the 
financial year. The Committee is concerned that such last-minute expenditure may lead 
to “March-rush” spending, which has been consistently discouraged by the Ministry of 
Finance as well as by previous recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen its financial planning and quarterly 
monitoring mechanisms to ensure more balanced and timely utilisation of funds 
throughout the financial year. The Committee expects that improved expenditure 
management will enhance financial discipline and ensure more effective implementation 
of Ayush programmes. 
PARA 4.2.2 
 
97. The Committee notes the multiple initiatives taken by the Ministry and the 
regulatory bodies to strengthen the quality of Ayush education through curriculum 

127 
 
revision, competency-based training and awareness programmes. The Committee, 
however, is of the view that sustained efforts are required to further improve 
interdisciplinary academic standards, research orientation and practical clinical 
exposure for students pursuing Ayush education. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry continue to strengthen faculty development programmes, 
field level research integration and practical training in teaching institutions as well as 
in research councils. The Committee expects that such measures will contribute towards 
producing well-trained Ayush professionals capable of addressing evolving healthcare 
needs. 
PARA 4.3.2 
 
98. The Committee observes that the Ministry has initiated measures to incorporate 
modern diagnostics and research literacy within the Ayush curriculum and to promote 
cross-disciplinary engagement with modern medical institutions. However, the 
Committee is of the view that sustained and structured efforts are required to further 
strengthen interdisciplinary learning and practical exposure to integrative healthcare 
systems. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expand bridging 
programmes and institutional collaborations between Ayush and modern medical 
institutions. The Committee expects that such initiatives will enhance the professional 
competence of Ayush practitioners and contribute to the development of a robust 
integrative healthcare framework in the country.  
PARA 4.3.4 
 
99. The Committee observes that a significant proportion of Ayush medical colleges 
in the country are managed by private organisations. However, the Committee is of the 
view that expansion of Ayush education must be accompanied by strict adherence to 
prescribed standards of infrastructure, faculty strength and quality of training. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen its monitoring and 
regulatory mechanisms to ensure that private Ayush institutions maintain the required 
academic and clinical standards. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry 
should make concerted efforts to ensure the complete coverage of the country.  The 
Committee believes that such measures will help in maintaining the quality and 
credibility of Ayush medical education while supporting its expansion in the country. 
 
PARA 4.3.6 
 
100. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to address the 
shortage of Ayush doctors through recruitment and contractual engagement. The 
Committee, however, is of the view that a long-term strategy is required to ensure 
adequate availability of qualified Ayush practitioners in healthcare institutions. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in coordination with State 
Governments, undertake periodic structured assessment of manpower requirements 
and ensure timely recruitment of Ayush doctors. The Committee expects that the 
Ministry assess the feasibility of replacing contractual doctors with regular doctors for 
improved learning and better education. 
PARA 4.4.2 
 
101. The Committee observes that the response of the Ministry in regard to the 
number of registered Homoeopathy practitioners in Maharashtra, does not adequately 
address the concern raised regarding the shortage of Ayush doctors in Government 
hospitals. The Committee is of the view that availability of qualified Ayush practitioners 
in public healthcare institutions is essential for strengthening service delivery, 
particularly in underserved areas. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 

128 
 
Ministry, in coordination with the State Governments undertake a comprehensive 
assessment of the requirement of Ayurvedic and Homoeopathic doctors in Government 
hospitals and take necessary steps to address the existing shortages through appropriate 
recruitment and deployment. The Committee further recommends for accessing the 
active practitioners in all the system of medicine. 
PARA 4.4.4 
 
102. The Committee observes that Yoga plays a vital role in promoting preventive 
healthcare and improving physical and mental well-being, particularly among school-
going children. While the existing provision under the National Ayush Mission enables 
Yoga instructors to conduct outreach activities in schools, the Committee is of the view 
that a more structured approach is required to promote Yoga practices among students. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry, in coordination with the 
Ministry of Education and State Governments, explore the feasibility of strengthening 
Yoga programmes in schools and encourage wider adoption of regular Yoga sessions. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry of Ayush should take lead in ensuring regular 
Yoga session at school level and updation of school curriculum to promote healthy 
lifestyle practices and improving the overall well-being of students across the country. 
 
PARA 4.4.6 
 
103. The Committee notes the research initiatives undertaken by the Ministry for the 
management of dermatological conditions through Ayurveda. The Committee, however, 
is of the view that greater emphasis is required to be given on scientific validation and 
wider dissemination of research findings in dermatology domain. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should intensify the clinical research and 
promote evidence-based studies on Ayurvedic treatments for common and chronic skin 
diseases. The Committee expects the Ministry to ensure dissemination of 
outcomes/findings which will enhance the credibility and wider acceptance of Ayurvedic 
dermatological treatments. 
 
PARA 4.5.2 
 
104. The Committee appreciates the co-location model adopted by the Ministry for 
providing Ayush services in public healthcare facilities. However, the Committee is of 
the view that many of the PCs/CHCs are suffering from shortage of Ayush medicines 
and adequate consultation facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry strengthen E-Aushadhi portal for effective management and ensuring 
adequate and timely supply of Ayush medicines and explore the mechanism for setting  
Ayurvedic consultation cell at district and sub-district healthcare institutions. The 
Committee expects that such measures will improve accessibility and utilisation of 
Ayush healthcare services by the public. 
PARA 4.6.2 
 
105. The Committee has taken note of research initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
in the field of maternal health and lactation support through Ayush systems. The 
Committee however, is of the view that greater emphasis is required on expanding such 
research and integrating validated Ayush interventions into maternal healthcare 
programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen 
research efforts and promote community-based interventions for improving maternal 
health, particularly in the areas of post-partum recovery and lactation support.  
 
PARA 4.7.2 

129 
 
106. The Committee takes note that the establishment and strengthening of Ayush 
hospitals is undertaken through proposals submitted by State Governments under the 
National Ayush Mission. The Committee, however, is of the view that proactive 
coordination between the Ministry and State Government is necessary to expand Ayush 
healthcare infrastructure in Delhi considering the delay in adoption of Ayushman 
Bharat scheme in Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
actively engage with the Government of NCT of Delhi to facilitate the establishment of 
adequate Ayurvedic hospitals in the National Capital Territory within defined timeline. 
The Committee expects that the Ministry extend adequate support of funds and ensure 
timely release. 
PARA 4.8.2 
 
107. The Committee notes that no proposal has been received from the State 
Government for establishment of an Ayush hospital in Moradabad district. However, 
considering the growing demand for Ayush healthcare services in the region, the 
Committee is of the view that such facilities should be expanded in underserved regions 
like Moradabad. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must 
coordinate with the Government of Uttar Pradesh to explore the feasibility of 
establishing an Ayush hospital in Moradabad under the National Ayush Mission by 
assessing the needs of the Moradabad and providing access to traditional healthcare 
services in the region. 
PARA 4.8.4 
  
108. The Committee appreciates for the efforts made for screening for early detection 
of disease and extending healthcare support to tribal students through collaboration 
with other Ministries and research institutions. The Committee, however, is of the view 
that early detection and management of genetic disorders such as Sickle Cell Anaemia 
require wider coverage and sustained intervention at large scale. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry expand such screening programmes to cover 
more tribal districts and strengthen collaboration with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
and other health agencies. 
PARA 4.9.2 
 
109. The Committee acknowledges the collaborative initiatives undertaken by the 
Ministry with premier research institutions for promoting integrative healthcare. The  
Committee is of the view that stronger scientific evidence and large-scale clinical 
validation are essential for effective integration of Ayush with modern medicine. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expand multi-centric clinical trials 
and strengthen interdisciplinary research to generate robust scientific evidence on 
integrative therapies. The Committee expects that such initiatives will strengthen the 
credibility of integrative healthcare models and promote wider acceptance of Ayush 
systems. 
PARA 4.10.2 
  
110. The Committee has taken note of challenges faced in fund utilisation under the 
National Ayush Mission due to the transition to the SNA-SPARSH system. The 
Committee believes that the Ministry should have anticipated and acted more 
proactively beforehand and procedural and technical issues should not significantly 
affect the timely implementation of healthcare programmes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry strengthen technical support mechanisms at Ayush 
Directorate and monitoring systems at State Ayush Society to ensure timely utilisation 
of funds by States and implementing agencies. The Committee further recommends for 

130 
 
appointment of financial managers in each Ayush Directorates who shall work in 
tandem with State Ayush Society. 
PARA 4.11.2 
 
111. The Committee appreciates that the proposal submitted to the 16th Finance 
Commission for providing financial assistance to financially weaker States as seed 
money for strengthening Ayush infrastructure. The Committee is concerned to note that 
no such seed money has been recommended by the 16th Finance Commission in its 
recommendation. The Committee is of the view that limited financial resources may 
hinder the expansion of Ayush healthcare services in such States. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry explore additional financial support 
mechanisms for States facing financial constraints by providing seed money from NAM 
allocation. The Committee further recommends for setting up Ayush Infrastructure 
Fund having component of each segements of Ayush for meeting such constraints. 
 
PARA 4.11.4 
 
112. The Committee expresses concern over the persistent backlog in the submission 
of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) by States and Union Territories. The Committee, 
however is of the view that delays in submission of Utilisation certificates affect financial 
accountability and timely release of funds for development programmes like NAM. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry strengthen its monitoring and 
coordination mechanisms to ensure timely submission of Utilisation Certificates by 
implementing agencies. The Committee further recommends for standardising the 
Utilisation certificate format and consider the secure digitalisation of Utilisation 
Certificates to ensure compliance. 
PARA 4.12.2 
 
113. The Committee notes that regulatory provisions exist for the regulation of Ayush 
drugs under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, which contains specific provisions for 
traditional systems of medicine. The Committee is of the view that, with the growing 
scope and global expansion of the Ayush sector, there is a need to further strengthen the 
regulatory legislative framework governing Ayush medicines. Moreover, the 
enforcement of the Act lies within the purview of State Licensing Authorities, which has 
often resulted in fragmented implementation, delays, and ineffective enforcement. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry examine the feasibility of 
strengthening the central regulatory mechanism for the regulation and laying down of 
uniform standards of enforcement and enhancing coordination with State Drug 
Authorities to ensure better standardization, safety, and efficacy of Ayush drugs. 
 
PARA 4.13.2 
 
114. The Committee notes the research output produced by various research councils 
under the Ministry of Ayush. However, the Committee is of the view that there is a need 
to further enhance the visibility and scientific impact of Ayush research at national and 
international levels. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must 
encourage collaborative research with reputed institutions and promote publication of 
research findings in high-impact national and international journals. The Committee 
expects that the findings are also translated into actual Ayush practice at grassroot 
level. 
PARA 4.14.2 
  

131 
 
115. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry to strengthen 
infrastructure and expand service delivery under various Ayush schemes. The 
Committee further observes that research institutions under the Ministry receive 
support under the Grant-in-Aid (General) component for undertaking various research 
initiatives; however, these activities have largely remained limited to publications in 
journals rather than resulting in measurable outcomes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should undertake periodic independent evaluations and 
impact assessments of the research studies conducted and consider defining the 
expenditure under the GIA-General component for each research project, with a year-
end evaluation to measure outcomes. The Committee expects that such evaluations will 
contribute to improved programme implementation and ensure the optimal utilisation 
of public funds. 
PARA 4.14.4  
 
116. The Committee notes that no proposal has been received for establishing an 
Ayush research centre in Shamli district. However, considering the importance of 
expanding research infrastructure for the development of traditional systems of 
medicine, the Committee is of the view that such initiatives should be encouraged. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry coordinate with the Government 
of Uttar Pradesh to explore the feasibility of establishing an Ayush research centre in 
the region. The Committee expects that expansion of research infrastructure will 
contribute to strengthening research and innovation in Ayush systems. 
PARA 4.14.6 
 
117. The Committee takes note of the Sectoral Group of Secretaries (SGoS-4) 
recommendation for expansion of Ayush hospital infrastructure under the National 
Ayush Mission by June 2029. The Committee is of the view that timely implementation 
of proposed 288 Ayush hospitals & other initiatives are crucial to improve accessibility 
of Ayush healthcare services across the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry must ensure expeditious implementation of proposals for 
establishing integrated Ayush hospitals, particularly in districts currently lacking such 
facilities.  
PARA 4.15.2 
 
118. The Committee observes that the availability of Ayush hospitals in rural areas 
plays an important role in ensuring access to traditional healthcare services for the 
rural population. The Committee is of the view that the existing number of Ayush 
hospitals in rural areas of Gujarat may not be sufficient to meet the healthcare needs of 
a large rural population. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
encourages State Governments for submitting proposals under the National Ayush 
Mission for expansion and strengthening of Ayush healthcare infrastructure in rural 
areas. The Committee further desires that the guidelines of the National Ayush Mission 
(NAM) be circulated widely among the implementing agencies and State Governments 
so as to facilitate timely submission of proposals and effective utilisation of the scheme 
for strengthening Ayush healthcare infrastructure. 
PARA 4.15.4 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF MEDICAL HUBS AND DRUG TESTING LABORATORIES 
119. The Committee notes the existing network of drug testing laboratories and 
pharmacovigilance centres established to ensure the quality and safety of Ayush 
medicines. The Committee is of the view that the present network is not adequate in 
view of the expanding Ayush sector, and there is a need to further strengthen the quality 
assurance infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 

132 
 
explore the establishment of additional drug testing laboratories and strengthen 
pharmacovigilance mechanisms across the country, preferably at district hospitals, 
which would enhance efficiency and help avoid delays in the testing of drugs. 
PARA 4.16.2 
 
INNOVATION AND GLOBAL RESEARCH COLLABORATION IN AYUSH 
 
120. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the global collaboration undertaken 
by the Ministry to promote international cooperation has been encouraging for Ayush 
sector.  The Committee, however, is of the view that greater encouragement is required 
for innovation, start-ups and biotechnology firms, MSMEs engaged in Ayush-based 
research and product development. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry should strengthen financial support for all the schemes and promote MSMEs, 
start ups to undertake for innovation and promote collaborative research with global 
institutions.  
PARA 4.17.2  
 
AFFORESTATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS 
 
121. The Committee notes the initiatives undertaken for conservation and sustainable 
management of medicinal plants. The Committee is of the view that increased 
cultivation and conservation of medicinal plants are essential to meet the growing 
demand of the Ayush industry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry strengthen collaboration with State Forest Departments and local communities 
to expand cultivation and conservation programmes for medicinal plants. The Ministry 
should encourage farmers for cultivation of medicinal plants to be used as raw material 
for Ayush drugs and finally the Ministry may explore Ayush market in rural areas 
involving farmers & their family under the scheme suggested as “Tera Tujh ko Arpan” 
ensuring handsome increase in farmer’s income and having sound health through 
Ayush products. 
PARA 4.18.2 
 
INTERACTION/COMMUNICATION IN TRIBAL AREAS 
 
122.  The Committee appreciates the outreach initiatives undertaken for 
promoting health awareness in tribal communities. The Committee, however, is of the 
view that greater engagement with tribal populations is necessary for understanding 
and documenting traditional health practices. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry strengthen community outreach programmes with tribals and 
promote documentation of traditional medicinal knowledge prevalent among tribal 
communities. The Committee further desires that the knowledge so accumulated may be 
integrated in local research repositories and used for treating the people. 
PARA 4.18.2 
 
123. The Committee notes the one day initiative taken by the Ministry to document 
traditional knowledge of tribal healers through interaction programmes. The 
Committee is of the view that a one-time interaction programme may not be sufficient to 
systematically capture and scientifically validate the rich ethnomedicinal knowledge 
available among tribal communities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry undertake structured field-based research by sending research scholars and 
multidisciplinary teams to tribal areas for systematic documentation, validation and 
preservation of traditional medicinal practices. 
PARA 4.19.4 

133 
 
AYUSHMAN BHARAT YOJNA COVERAGE FOR AYUSH 
 
124.  The Committee notes that the proposal for inclusion of Ayush treatment 
packages under AB-PMJAY is currently under consideration. However, the Committee 
is of the view that integration of Ayush healthcare services under major national health 
insurance schemes would significantly enhance accessibility and utilisation of traditional 
medicine. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry expedite 
consultations with the National Health Authority and the Ministry of Finance to 
facilitate inclusion of Ayush treatment packages under AB-PMJAY. The Committee 
expects that such inclusion will expand healthcare choices available to beneficiaries and 
promote wider adoption of Ayush systems. 
PARA 4.20.2 
 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR YOGA AND NATUROPATHY 
 
125. The Committee notes the steps taken by the existing regulatory commissions 
(NCISM & NCH) in introducing educational reforms such as competency-based 
curricula in medical education. However, in view of the increasing role of Yoga and 
Naturopathy in preventive and wellness healthcare, the expanding number of 
educational institutions, courses and practitioners and the growing international 
recognition of these disciplines, the Committee is of the view that the absence of a 
dedicated statutory regulatory framework may affect the long-term development and 
credibility of the Yoga and Naturopathy. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush examine the feasibility of establishing a 
National Commission for Yoga and Naturopathy to regulate education standards, 
institutional accreditation and practitioner registration. The Committee believes that 
such a mechanism would ensure uniform academic standards, strengthen professional 
regulation and facilitate the orderly growth of Yoga and Naturopathy education and 
practice in the country. 
PARA 4.22.2  
 
FUNCTIONAL INTEGRATION OF TRADITIONAL MEDICINE 
 
126. The Committee notes that India has been moving towards a pluralistic 
healthcare system through co-location models and collaborative infrastructure 
development as envisaged under the National Health Mission. The Committee observes 
that such co-location has expanded healthcare choices for the public and has also 
encouraged research in areas such as herb-drug interactions. However, the Committee 
notes that treatment pathways in most institutions continue to function largely within 
their respective systems with modern medicine and Ayush services operating in parallel 
rather than in a inter- coordination manner. The Committee is of the view that greater 
clinical collaboration between the two systems can significantly enhance continuity of 
care, promote better utilisation of Ayush services and support the development of 
evidence-based integrative healthcare models. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry of Ayush, in coordination with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare explore the possibility of devising Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for 
structured cross-referral between modern medicine and Ayush departments preferably 
in tertiary care institutions. The Committee further recommends that these protocols 
clearly define referral pathways for appropriate conditions such as rehabilitation, 
chronic disease management, pain management, lifestyle disorders and preventive care, 
while ensuring that each system continues to function within its respective medical 
framework. 
PARA 4.23.1 

134 
 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF REGIONAL RAW DRUG REPOSITORIES (RRDRS) 
 
127. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Medicinal Plants Board 
(NMPB) in undertaking systematic documentation through the establishment of 
Regional Raw Drug Repositories (RRDRs). The Committee believes that these 
repositories play a pivotal role in the collection, documentation, identification and 
authentication of raw drugs sourced largely from their respective agro-climatic regions. 
The Committee, however, observes that India possesses vast biodiversity and immense 
potential in medicinal plants, while the present number of repositories has limited 
geographical jurisdiction which may not be sufficient to ensure comprehensive and 
timely documentation of the country’s rich medicinal plant resources. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that NMPB consider establishing at least three additional 
Regional Raw Drug Repositories, particularly in biodiversity-rich regions such as the 
Western Ghats, Eastern Ghats and the North-Eastern region, so as to capture the 
diverse medicinal plant wealth of these ecologically sensitive zones and strengthen the 
national database of raw drugs for Ayush systems. The Committee also desires that the 
remaining four Regional Raw Drug Repositories already envisaged under the existing 
plan viz Western Himalayas, Eastern Himalayas & Eastern Plateau & Western coastal 
plains be established expeditiously so as to complete the originally proposed network at 
the earliest. 
PARA 4.24.2 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT: PROMOTION OF AYUSH ALLIED 
SERVICES 
 
128. The Committee observes that the increasing strength of doctors and expanding 
patient outreach reflect the growing role of these institutions in service delivery, 
education and clinical training within the Ayush sector. The Committee, however, also 
notes that several Ayush healthcare facilities continue to face shortages of doctors 
especially in Maharashtra which may affect the optimal delivery of services. The 
Committee is further of the view that the absence of a comprehensive and updated 
database of practicing professionals across all Ayush systems, including Yoga 
practitioners limits effective workforce planning and management of Ayush services. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush take necessary steps 
to strengthen the availability of doctors in Ayush facilities and develop a comprehensive 
and regularly updated national database of practicing professionals across all Ayush 
systems, including Yoga, so as to facilitate better workforce planning, policy 
formulation and effective management of Ayush services across the country. The 
Committee is of the further view that the Ministry should introduce legislation for 
Ayush allied services to encourage and promote comprehensive Ayush human resource 
development. 
PARA 4.25.2 
 
129. The Committee comes to know that the number of Ayush CGHS Dispensaries is 
less in comparison to Allopathic CGHS Dispensaries. On the lines of promotion to 
Ayush and traditional system of medicines, the number of Ayush CGHS dispensaries 
should also be enhanced or co-located with existing allopathic dispensaries. On the 
service conditions of allied healthcare workforce in Ayush Dispensaries, the Committee 
noted that certain cadres like Ayush doctors, pharmacists, etc. are overburdened with 
present workforce and directly affect the delivery of healthcare services. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department urgently prioritize recruitment 
drives, streamline promotion pathways, time-bound or assured career progression 

135 
 
scheme to keep the morale of the staff high, skill upgradation and rationalisation of 
recruitment rules. The Committee also notes that certain cadres, particularly 
pharmacists (including Ayurvedic and Homeopathic), have limited or no promotion 
avenues within the existing service structure, leading to career stagnation and affecting 
staff motivation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department 
undertake a cadre restructuring to establish a clearer career progression pathway for 
such categories of staff, addressing long-standing anomalies which would improve 
retention and ensure a more motivated workforce within the healthcare system. 
 
PARA 4.25.3 
 
AYUSHMAN AROGYA MANDIR (AYUSH) 
 
130. The Committee welcomes the efforts of the Ministry in expanding Ayush-based 
primary healthcare infrastructure and outreach through 12500 Ayushman Arogya 
Mandirs(Ayush). Nevertheless, the Committee is of the view that sustained focus on 
adequate staffing, availability of medicines, and strengthening of diagnostic and referral 
linkages would be essential to ensure the effective functioning of Ayushman Arogya 
Mandirs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry continue to 
strengthen the operational capacity of these facilities so that they are able to deliver 
comprehensive and quality Ayush healthcare services to the population, particularly in 
underserved and rural areas. 
PARA 4.26.2 
INTERMINISTERIAL COLLABORATION 
131. The Committee is of the view that the effectiveness of Inter-Ministerial Ayush 
initiatives would depend upon strong inter-ministerial coordination and clearly defined 
institutional mechanisms for collaboration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry of Ayush work in close coordination with concerned Ministries, research 
institutions and public health agencies to ensure effective implementation, better 
resource utilisation and measurable outcomes from such collaborative initiatives, 
particularly in the areas of integrative healthcare, research and public health 
interventions. The Committee further desires that the outcomes and findings of such 
collaborative initiatives be widely disseminated among stakeholders, healthcare 
institutions and State Governments so as to create greater awareness and facilitate 
effective implementation at the grassroots level. 
PARA 4.27.2 
 
OTHER KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
132. The Committee notes that the growing demand for medicines under Ayush 
presents a significant opportunity to promote the cultivation of medicinal plants across 
the country. The Committee recommends that the Government encourage and support 
local farmers to undertake cultivation of medicinal and aromatic plants used in systems 
such as Ayurveda and Unani through appropriate incentives, assured procurement 
mechanisms, technical guidance and market linkages. Such initiatives would not only 
strengthen the raw material supply chain for Ayush medicines but also enhance 
farmers’ income, promote sustainable agriculture and contribute to rural economic 
development. 
PARA 4.28.1 
 
133. The Committee notes with concern the rapidly rising burden of lifestyle-related 
non-communicable diseases, including Diabetes Mellitus, hypertension and obesity in 
the country. Recognizing the strong emphasis of traditional systems on preventive 

136 
 
healthcare and healthy living, the Committee recommends that elements of Ayush 
particularly practices such as Yoga and basic principles of Ayurveda relating to healthy 
diet and lifestyle- may be gradually introduced in school curricula. Early exposure to 
these practices can help inculcate healthy habits among children, improve physical and 
mental well-being, and contribute to the long-term prevention of lifestyle diseases. Such 
initiatives would also help enhance awareness, acceptance, and wider popularity of 
Ayush systems among the younger generation, thereby strengthening the culture of 
preventive healthcare in the country. 
PARA 4.28.2 
 
134. The Committee is of the view that wider promotion and effective delivery of 
services under Ayush may be further strengthened through well-structured Public-
Private Partnerships. The Committee recommends that the Government explore 
collaboration with credible private institutions, wellness centres, educational institutions 
and industry for expanding research, standardization of medicines, training of 
practitioners, and establishment of integrative wellness facilities. Such partnerships can 
help leverage private sector expertise, innovation and investment while ensuring 
adherence to quality and regulatory standards. The Committee believes that 
encouraging responsible PPP models would improve accessibility of Ayush services, 
promote evidence-based practices, and enhance the overall reach, popularity and global 
recognition of India’s traditional systems of healthcare. 
PARA 4.28.3 
 
135. The Committee is of the view that greater collaboration between Ayush and 
modern medicine institutions would help strengthen the evidence base and wider 
acceptance of traditional healthcare practices. The Committee therefore recommends 
encouraging collaborative research between Ayush institutions and leading centres of 
modern medicine to scientifically evaluate therapies, standardize treatment protocols, 
and generate robust clinical evidence. Such interdisciplinary research would help 
identify areas where systems such as Ayurveda and Yoga can complement 
contemporary medical practice, particularly in preventive care, chronic disease 
management, and lifestyle disorders. The Committee believes that sustained research 
collaboration would enhance credibility, promote integrative healthcare, and contribute 
to improved health outcomes. 
PARA 4.28.4  
 
SECRETARIAT RELATED CAUTION WHILE RESPONDING COMMITTEE’S 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
136. The Committee observes that the replies to questionnaires have largely been 
furnished in an institute-wise or section-wise format by the various autonomous bodies 
and organisations under the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that such a format 
often results in multiple responses from different institutions to the same question, 
making the information voluminous and at times leading to fragmented responses and 
varying interpretations of the issue raised. The Committee, therefore, desires that the 
Ministry of Ayush should furnish more consolidated format while furnishing replies to 
the queries raised by the Committee. The Committee desires that the Ministry may 
obtain the required inputs from its subordinate offices, autonomous bodies and research 
councils internally and provide a unified and consolidated response to the Committee’s 
recommendations and observation. The Committee believes that such an approach 
would facilitate clearer presentation of information and enable a more effective and 
holistic examination of the Demands for Grants by the Committee. 
PARA 4.29.1 

137 
 
Establishment of New All india Institute of Ayurveda 
 
137. The Committee notes the announcement regarding the establishment of three 
new All India Institutes of Ayurveda (AIIA) to strengthen education, clinical services 
and research in Ayurveda. The Committee welcomes this initiative as an important step 
towards expanding tertiary-level Ayush healthcare infrastructure in the country and 
strengthening the quality of Ayurveda education, research and advanced clinical care. 
The Committee, however, is of the view that the effectiveness of these institutions will 
depend upon timely & effective implementation of projects/scheme, creation of adequate 
Ayush infrastructure and the development of a robust research ecosystem. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush formulate a 
comprehensive implementation roadmap for the newly announced AIIAs with clearly 
defined timelines, adequate funding support but with aim of measurable outcomes. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry must take steps to introduce more 
trans-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary courses and research programmes, including 
areas such as biotechnology, public health and engineering-integrated healthcare, so as 
to promote innovation and strengthen the scientific advancement of Ayurveda systems 
of medicine. 
PARA 5.2.2 
 
Upgradation of Ayush Pharmacies and Drug Testing Laboratories 
 
138. The Committee notes the announcement in the Union Budget 2026-27 regarding 
the upgradation of Ayush pharmacies and drug testing laboratories aimed at 
strengthening the quality assurance ecosystem of Ayush medicines and ensuring the 
availability of skilled technical manpower. The Committee observes that the credibility, 
safety and wider acceptance of Ayush medicines are closely linked to the robustness of 
quality control and standardisation mechanisms within the sector, particularly in the 
context of expanding domestic use and global trade in Ayush products. However, the 
Committee is of the view that concerns relating to quality standardisation, testing 
capacity, authentication of raw materials and adherence to pharmacopoeial standards 
continue to pose challenges for the sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should take steps to strengthen technical capacity through specialised 
training programmes for laboratory personnel, drug inspectors, pharmacists and 
quality control professionals in collaboration with premier research institutions and 
regulatory bodies. The Committee further recommends that the upgraded laboratories 
be effectively integrated with research and standardisation initiatives, including the 
development of validated testing protocols, authentication of medicinal plant raw 
materials and safety evaluation of classical and proprietary Ayush formulations. The 
Committee believes that such measures would significantly strengthen the quality 
assurance framework of the Ayush sector, enhance consumer confidence and facilitate 
the expansion of Ayush product exports and India’s position in the global traditional 
medicine market. 
PARA 5.2.3 
Establishment of five Regional Medical Hubs 
 
139. The Committee notes that the Union Budget 2026-27 proposes to launch a 
scheme to support States in establishing five Regional Medical Hubs in partnership with 
the private sector with the objective of promoting India as a global hub for medical 
tourism services. The Committee welcomes all such initiatives as a step towards 
strengthening India’s position in the global medical value travel ecosystem and observes 
that it offers significant potential to expand the global outreach of Ayush systems of 
medicine. Nevertheless, the Committee is of the view that the success of envisaged hubs 

138 
 
will depend upon effective coordination between the Central Government, State 
Governments and private sector stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry of Ayush work in close convergence with the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and other concerned Ministries to ensure adequate integration of Ayush 
services within creating effective professional working equilibrium of hubs. The 
Ministry should also ordain a clear framework for infrastructure development, quality 
standards, accreditation and international promotion to maximise the potential of such 
Ayush hubs hubs in promoting India’s medical tourism and Ayush sectors. 
PARA 5.2.4 
 
Upgradation of  the WHO Global Traditional Medicine Centre in Jamnagar  
 
140. The Committee appreciates the announcement in the Union Budget 2026-27 for 
the upgradation of the WHO Global Traditional Medicine Centre (GTMC) at Jamnagar 
aimed at strengthening global collaboration, research and knowledge exchange in the 
field of traditional medicine. The Committee observes that the Centre holds significant 
potential to position India as a global leader in traditional medicine by promoting 
evidence-based research, standardisation, capacity building and international 
cooperation in Ayush systems. The Committee, however, is of the considered view that 
the full potential of the Centre can be realised only through a well-defined institutional 
framework, enhanced research collaboration and effective global outreach. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush to work in tandem with 
the World Health Organization and other international partners to strengthen research 
networks, develop global standards and promote scientific validation of traditional 
medicine practices. The Committee further recommends that the Centre be leveraged as 
a global platform for policy dialogue, training, knowledge exchange and innovation in 
traditional medicine so as to enhance the international visibility and acceptance of 
Ayush systems and strengthen India’s leadership in the global traditional medicine 
ecosystem. 
PARA 5.2.5 
 
INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR AYUSH TREATMENT 
 
145. The Committee notes that despite the growing public acceptance of Ayush 
systems of medicine, insurance coverage for Ayush treatments remains limited and 
inconsistent across different insurance providers. The Committee observes that wider 
and more uniform insurance coverage for Ayush therapies would significantly improve 
the accessibility and affordability of these treatments for the public and support their 
greater integration within the healthcare system. The Committee, however, is of the 
view that the absence of standardised treatment protocols, package rates and regulatory 
clarity continues to limit the inclusion of Ayush therapies within mainstream health 
insurance frameworks. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 
Ayush work in close coordination with the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority of India (IRDAI) and insurance providers to expand the coverage of Ayush 
treatment packages under health insurance schemes. The Committee further 
recommends that the Ministry should undertake necessary steps to standardise 
treatment protocols and cost structures for Ayush therapies so as to facilitate their 
wider inclusion within mainstream health insurance frameworks and improve access to 
Ayush-based healthcare services. 
 
 
PARA 5.3.1 
 

139 
 
FINANCIAL PROJECTION 
 
146. The Committee takes into account the trend of budgetary support for the 
promotion and mainstreaming of traditional systems of medicine with concern. The 
Committee observes that the Ministry has articulated an ambitious vision of increasing 
the Ayush sector’s share in India’s GDP from the present 1.1 per cent to about 5 per 
cent by 2047. The Committee notes that achieving such expansion would require the 
Ayush ecosystem to grow at a significantly higher budgetary trajectory over the coming 
decades for the expansion of industries, exports, medical value travel and wellness 
services. The Committee is of the firm view that such growth would require stronger 
financial support, greater private sector participation under PPP model and a 
progressive strengthening of infrastructure, research and global outreach initiatives 
within the Ayush sector. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry take 
necessary steps to ensure that the growth trajectory of budgetary allocations for the 
Ayush sector must progressively accelerated beyond the existing trend to about 10.9 per 
cent. The Committee, in this regard recommends that, considering inflationary 
pressures and the need for real expansion in research, infrastructure and global 
outreach, the Budget Estimates for the Ministry of Ayush may be targeted to grow at a 
minimum of 15 per cent annually in nominal terms in the coming years so as to 
adequately support the long-term expansion and global positioning of the Ayush sector. 
 
PARA 5.4.1 
 
INSTITUTIONAL EXPANSION AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
147. The Committee takes note with concern that the Ministry of Finance has 
restricted the financial outlay of Ministry of Ayush for the next five years to ₹4,019.25 
crore based on a formula limiting the allocation to 5.5 times the average annual 
expenditure of FY 2021-22 to FY 2022-23 (Actual Expenditure) and FY 2024-25 
(Revised Estimates). The Committee observes that there exists a significant gap between 
the outlay proposed by the Ministry of Ayush and the allocation approved by the 
Ministry of Finance, which may adversely impact the pace of infrastructure 
augmentation and programme expansion envisaged for the Ayush sector under the 
vision of Viksit Bharat @ 2047. The Committee highlights that the restriction formula 
applied by the Ministry of Finance for the Ayush sector may not fully capture the actual 
requirements of the scheme, particularly in light of implementation challenges faced in 
recent years, including delays associated with the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) fund flow 
mechanism considering visionary goals and objectives of Ayush @ 2047. At the same 
time, the Committee is of the view that preceding expenditure trends affected by such 
bottlenecks may not accurately reflect the genuine financial needs for the expansion of 
Ayush infrastructure and services under the National Ayush Mission (NAM). The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush ensure optimal 
utilisation of the Budget Estimates for 2026-27 under NAM and take proactive steps to 
address implementation bottlenecks, including issues related to the SNA fund flow 
mechanism. The Committee recommends that while the Ministry must progressively 
engage with the Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocations in subsequent years and 
concurrently, the Ministry of Ayush may strengthen coordination between the Central 
Project Management Unit and the State Ayush Societies so as to ensure maximum fund 
utilisation and facilitate the timely expansion of Ayush infrastructure and services 
across the country to achieve the objective and goals of Ayush at 2047. 
 
PARA 5.5.2 
 

140 
 
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND EVIDENCE GENERATION 
 
148. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Ayush has undertaken several 
initiatives in recent years to strengthen research in Ayush systems, including the 
activities of the Central Research Councils, collaborative research programmes and the 
launch of digital platforms such as the National Ayush Research Portal for 
dissemination of scientific publications and research outcomes. The Committee observes 
that these initiatives represent an important step towards strengthening evidence 
generation and promoting scientific research in the Ayush sector. However, the 
Committee is of the view that large-scale clinical research and translational studies in 
Ayush remain limited, which may constrain the systematic scientific validation and 
wider acceptance of Ayush therapies, medicines and treatment protocols. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must take steps to undertake 
large-scale multicentric clinical trials to evaluate Ayush interventions for major non-
communicable diseases and lifestyle disorders. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that collaboration between Ayush research institutions and premier biomedical 
institutions such as AIIMS, ICMR institutes, IITs and CSIR laboratories be expanded, 
and that dedicated Centres for Integrative Medicine Research be established to evaluate 
combined Ayush and modern medicine treatment models. The Committee also 
recommends that the National Ayush Research Portal be further strengthened as a 
comprehensive repository of research data, clinical studies and scientific publications. 
The Committee believes that such measures would significantly strengthen the evidence 
base of Ayush systems and enhance their credibility, acceptance and global integration. 
 
PARA 5.6.1 
 
149. The Committee takes note of emerging initiatives such as Biopharma SHAKTI 
provide an opportunity to integrate traditional knowledge systems with modern 
biotechnology and pharmaceutical innovation. The Committee observes that Ayush 
systems have significant potential in the development of plant-based therapeutic 
products, particularly phyto-pharmaceuticals, which can serve as a bridge between 
traditional herbal formulations and modern biopharmaceutical products. The 
Committee, however, is of the view that the absence of harmonised quality standards 
and robust clinical validation may limit the global competitiveness of Ayush products. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must promote the 
development of phyto-pharmaceuticals and establish a quality certification framework 
aligned with internationally accepted Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP). The 
Committee further recommends leveraging institutions such as the WHO Global 
Traditional Medicine Centre for multi-centric clinical research so as to strengthen 
scientific validation and enhance India’s position in the global market for nature-based 
therapeutics. 
PARA 5.6.2 
 
STANDARDIZATION OF ASU&H  vis-a-vis PHARMACOVIGILANCE 
 
150. The Committee appreciates the progress made by the Ministry in strengthening 
the quality assurance framework for Ayush drugs and in expanding pharmacovigilance 
mechanisms within the sector. The Committee observes that these initiatives are 
important for ensuring the safety, credibility and wider acceptance of Ayush medicines. 
The Committee, however, is of the view that the scientific validation of Ayurvedic and 
other Ayush formulations needs to be further strengthened through systematic pre-
clinical, clinical and observational studies, including toxicity assessments, herb-drug 
interaction studies, pharmacological evaluations and well-designed clinical trials across 

141 
 
a range of disease conditions. The Committee further observes that there persists a 
perception among sections of practitioners and the public that natural medicines are 
inherently harmless, which may discourage the identification and reporting of potential 
adverse effects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush 
strengthen scientific research and pharmacovigilance systems to promote evidence-
based validation and safety profiling of Ayush medicines. The Committee further 
recommends that robust mechanisms for quality control, traceability of raw materials 
and systematic documentation of adverse drug reactions be strengthened so as to 
enhance public confidence & acceptability and support the transition of Ayush 
medicines from being primarily faith-based to scientifically validated and evidence-
based healthcare interventions. 
PARA 5.7.2 
 
EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 
151. The Committee takes note of the attention of the Ministry of Ayush for 
strengthening Ayush education through institutional expansion and various policy 
reforms. The Committee observes that strengthening the quality of Ayush education is 
the need of hour for developing competent healthcare professionals and promoting 
evidence-based practice within the sector. The Committee, however, is of the view that 
Ayush education and training require deeper alignment with the objectives of the 
National Education Policy (NEP), 2020, particularly in promoting interdisciplinary, 
research-oriented and skill-based learning. The Committee further observes that with 
increasing emphasis on scientific research, evidence-based practice and digital 
integration, there is a need to strengthen capacity building of faculty and students and 
upgrade existing educational infrastructure with better integration of modern 
diagnostic tools and technologies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry initiate the establishment of dedicated training institutes for teachers and 
develop skill laboratories in Ayush colleges to improve the quality of teaching and 
practical training. The Committee further recommends that the undergraduate and 
postgraduate curricula be revised to include the management of diseases of national 
importance and other public health challenges prevalent in society. The Committee also 
recommends that emerging research findings and scientific evidence be systematically 
incorporated into the Ayush curriculum so as to make Ayush scholars more aware of 
contemporary scientific developments and strengthen the overall quality of Ayush 
education. 
PARA 5.8.2 
 
152. The Committee observes that the Indian healthcare framework is increasingly 
moving towards a pluralistic model with growing co-location and integration of 
traditional and modern systems of medicine. The Committee further observes that such 
integration requires practitioners across different systems to possess a basic 
understanding of each other’s principles and approaches in order to ensure effective 
and coordinated healthcare delivery. The Committee, however, is of the view that the 
present healthcare education framework provides limited interdisciplinary exposure 
and does not adequately incorporate the Indian Knowledge System (IKS). The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush take appropriate steps to 
strengthen the integration of the Indian Knowledge System within the evolving 
integrative healthcare education framework so as to promote interdisciplinary 
understanding and support a more holistic approach to healthcare delivery in the 
country. 
PARA 5.8.3 
 

142 
 
153. The Committee observes that the effective delivery of healthcare services 
increasingly requires integration of traditional systems of medicine with modern 
diagnostic tools and technologies. The Committee is of the strong opinion that improved 
familiarity of Ayush practitioners with modern diagnostic techniques would enhance 
clinical decision-making, strengthen patient confidence and facilitate better integration 
of Ayush services within the broader healthcare system. The Committee, however, 
highlights that the existing training framework for Ayush practitioners provides limited 
structured exposure to modern diagnostic tools and technologies. The Committee, 
therefore, desires that the Ministry of Ayush must take steps to promote targeted 
training and capacity-building programmes to familiarise Ayush practitioners with 
modern diagnostic tools and techniques, while preserving the core principles and 
philosophy of traditional systems of medicine. The Committee believes that such 
initiatives would contribute to improving the quality of healthcare delivery and 
strengthening the credibility of Ayush systems in the evolving healthcare landscape. 
 
PARA 5.8.4 
AYUSH DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM 
 
154. The Committee takes into account that the Ministry has initiated several digital 
initiatives under the Ayush Grid Project with the objective of creating a robust digital 
integration framework for the Ayush sector. The Committee observes that such 
initiatives, including emerging areas like Ayurgenomics, have received international 
recognition, including acknowledgement by the World Health Organization (WHO), 
and hold significant potential for strengthening digital health integration, research 
dissemination and evidence generation in the Ayush sector. However, the Committee 
finds that the extent of actual adoption of these digital platforms across institutions, 
their interoperability with national digital health systems and their measurable impact 
on service delivery and research outcomes still contain scope for further expansion in 
terms of Artificial Intelligence integration. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry should take time-bound steps to ensure wider adoption and effective 
operationalisation of the digital platforms developed under the Ayush Grid Project 
across Ayush hospitals, research institutions, educational bodies and regulatory 
authorities. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry establish clear 
implementation milestones, monitoring mechanisms and periodic reporting systems to 
track the usage and outcomes of these platforms. The Committee also recommends that 
necessary measures be taken to ensure interoperability of Ayush Grid platforms with 
national digital health initiatives, including the Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission and 
that the data generated through these platforms be effectively utilised for policy 
planning, research advancement and evidence generation with incorporation of 
artificial intelligence. The Committee believes that strengthening digital integration 
along with capacity building & training of Ayush practitioners and institutional staff 
would facilitate the effective integration of Ayush services within the broader digital 
health ecosystem. 
PARA 5.9.2 
 
GLOBALISATION OF AYUSH 
 
155. The Committee notes that the Government has articulated a long-term vision for 
the globalisation of Ayush as an important component of the broader Viksit Bharat @ 
2047 roadmap. The Committee observes that the increasing global interest in holistic, 
preventive and traditional systems of medicine presents a significant opportunity for 
India to position Ayush systems as an important pillar of global healthcare. The 
Committee further observes that initiatives such as the strengthening of the WHO 

143 
 
Global Traditional Medicine Centre (GTMC) at Jamnagar, expansion of international 
collaborations, promotion of Ayush-based medical value travel and the global adoption 
of quality certification mechanisms such as the Ayush Mark have the immense potential 
to significantly enhance the international visibility and acceptance of Ayush systems. 
The Committee agrees that initiatives like the International Day of Yoga have played an 
important role in strengthening global awareness and acceptance of traditional Indian 
wellness practices and have emerged as a strong instrument of India’s soft power and 
health diplomacy. However, the Committee is of the firm view that achieving the vision 
of positioning India as a global leader in traditional and holistic healthcare would 
require a more coordinated and structured approach towards international 
engagement, research collaboration, quality assurance and global market development. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush must develop a 
comprehensive strategy for the globalisation of Ayush with visionary policy priorities 
relating to establishing Centre of Excellence abroad, international research 
collaborations, global standardisation of Ayush products and therapies, promotion of 
Ayush-based medical value travel and strengthening of export promotion mechanisms. 
The Committee further recommends that initiatives such as the International Day of 
various systems of Ayush especially Yoga be strategically leveraged to enhance global 
awareness and institutional partnerships so as to position Ayush systems more 
prominently within the global healthcare ecosystem and contribute to India’s leadership 
in traditional medicine. 
PARA 5.10.1 
 
156. The Committee notes that India has emerged as an important destination for 
medical value travel owing to its skilled healthcare workforce, cost-effective treatments 
and well-established traditional wellness systems. The Committee observes that Ayush 
therapies, particularly Yoga, Panchakarma and other wellness treatments, possess 
considerable potential to attract international patients seeking holistic healthcare 
solutions. The Committee, however, is of the view that since the integration of Ayush 
therapies within the broader medical value travel ecosystem remains limited and 
requires greater policy focus for international promotion. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Ayush develop dedicated strategies to integrate Ayush 
therapies within the broader medical value travel ecosystem in coordination with other 
relevant Ministries and stakeholders. The Committee considers that focused efforts be 
made to promote affordable Ayush-based wellness packages and therapies at the 
international level so as to position India as a global hub for holistic wellness and 
traditional medicine. 
PARA 5.10.2 
 
AYUSH MARKET SIZE VIS-À-VIS EXPORTS 
 
157. The Committee envisages that the global demand for traditional medicine and 
wellness products is steadily increasing and presents significant opportunities for the 
Ayush sector. The Committee observes that while the domestic manufacturing base for 
Ayush products has expanded considerably in recent years, the sector’s export potential 
remains underutilised due to challenges relating to quality assurance, product 
standardisation, certification and international regulatory compliance. The Committee 
visualizes that achieving the projected Ayush market size of US$ 200 billion by 2030 
would require substantial expansion of exports supported by robust quality assurance 
and international standardisation mechanisms. However, the Committee is of the view 
that the existing ecosystem for promotion of Ayush exports requires further 
strengthening in terms of product authentication, regulatory alignment and global 
market access. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush, in 

144 
 
coordination with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, develop a comprehensive 
export promotion strategy for Ayush products with a focus on strengthening quality 
assurance, standardisation, certification and international regulatory compliance. The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry explore policy measures such as the 
introduction of export incentives, creation of separate Harmonised System of 
Nomenclature (HSN) codes for Ayush products and strengthening of authentication and 
certification mechanisms including Ayush Mark and adherence to WHO-GMP 
guidelines. The Committee believes that such measures would significantly enhance the 
export competitiveness of Ayush products, improve global acceptance of Ayush systems 
and contribute towards achieving the projected growth of the Ayush sector. 
 
PARA 5.11.2 
 
158. The Committee points out that the promotion of Ayush products and services in 
international markets is an important objective of the International Cooperation 
Scheme and appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry in facilitating export growth 
and strengthening global engagement. The Committee views that initiatives such as the 
establishment of the Ayush Export Promotion Council (AyushEXCIL), incorporation of 
Ayush-related provisions in Free Trade Agreements and the strengthening of quality 
certification and laboratory standards signals significant steps towards improving 
global market access for Ayush products. However, the Committee is of the view that 
the sustained expansion of Ayush exports would require more focused export promotion 
strategies, greater international visibility and stronger institutional support for 
manufacturers, particularly MSMEs, in accessing regulated global markets. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must intensify targeted 
export promotion initiatives including the organisation of dedicated International Ayush 
Expos, trade fairs and global business conferences in strategic markets so as to facilitate 
direct engagement between Indian manufacturers and foreign regulators, distributors, 
healthcare providers and investors. The Committee understands that structured global 
awareness campaigns highlighting quality standards, safety certifications and scientific 
validation of Ayush products must be undertaken to enhance consumer confidence and 
brand recognition. The Committee wishes that measurable indicators such as export 
growth, market diversification, certification uptake and regulatory approvals secured 
under Free Trade Agreement frameworks be periodically monitored and reported so as 
to assess the tangible economic impact of these initiatives and strengthen India’s global 
position in the Ayush sector. 
 
PARA 5.11.3 
 
Way Forward for National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) 
 
159. The Committee notes that the National Medicinal Plants Board (NMPB) has 
taken initiatives to support farmers through the establishment of nurseries for raising 
planting material of medicinal plants under the Forward and Backward Linkages in the 
Supply Chain of Medicinal Plants. The Committee observes that the medicinal plants 
sector holds considerable potential for strengthening the Ayush industry, supporting 
rural livelihoods and enhancing India’s bio-economy through the development of 
pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, wellness products and medicinal plant-based 
industries. The Committee, however wishes to point out that the absence of updated 
demand supply assessment data of medicinal plants and a comprehensive State-wise 
inventory may hinder effective planning for cultivation, value chain development and 
realisation of India’s export potential in medicinal plants and herbal products. The 
Committee further observes that the sector presently needs adequate industrial 

145 
 
ecosystems to support large-scale product innovation, startup incubation, technology 
transfer and value addition, which in turn will promote the commercialisation and 
global competitiveness of Ayush products. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry must undertake a comprehensive national assessment study in 
coordination with State Medicinal Plants Boards to determine State-wise availability of 
medicinal plants and updated demand-supply projections, including global market 
demand. The Committee is of the strong view that the Ministry must strengthen the 
medicinal plants value chain through the establishment of Medicinal Plants Business 
Processing Centres (MBPCs) along with quality certification and traceability 
mechanisms to enhance value addition and export competitiveness. The Committee 
further recommends that the Ministry should develop supportive industrial ecosystems, 
including dedicated Ayush innovation and industry clusters, to promote product 
development, startup incubation, technology transfer and export promotion so as to 
fully realise the economic potential of the Ayush sector. 
PARA 5.12.1 
 
AYUSH POTENTIAL IN NORTH EASTERN REGION 
 
160. The Committee observes that the North Eastern Region of India possesses rich 
biodiversity and holds immense potential for the cultivation and sustainable utilisation 
of medicinal plants used in Ayush systems of medicine. The Committee further observes 
that the NER can play a pivotal role in strengthening the supply chain of medicinal 
plants and supporting the growth of the Ayush sector through cultivation, processing 
and value addition. However, the Committee is of the view that the full potential of the 
region remains underutilised due to limited infrastructure for cultivation, processing 
and market linkages. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 
Ayush accord special emphasis to the development of medicinal plant cultivation, 
processing and value addition in the North Eastern States under relevant schemes. The 
Committee further recommends that appropriate measures be taken to strengthen 
market linkages, promote sustainable harvesting practices and support livelihood 
opportunities for local communities so as to harness the region’s biodiversity potential 
while contributing to the growth of the Ayush sector. 
PARA 5.12.1 
 
 
CROP INSURANCE FOR MEDICINAL PLANTS 
 
161. The Committee notes that there has been a gradual shift in approach in the 
medicinal plants sector from forest-based collection to cultivation-based production. 
The Committee further notes that the National Medicinal Plants Board under the 
Ministry of Ayush has been assisting farmers in the cultivation of quality planting 
material and promoting the organised cultivation of medicinal plants. The Committee 
observes that such efforts are important for ensuring a sustainable supply of raw 
materials for Ayush systems while also creating additional livelihood opportunities for 
farmers. The Committee wills to point out that medicinal plant cultivation is often 
subject to price fluctuations and crop damage, which may expose farmers to financial 
risks and discourage wider adoption of such cultivation. The Committee is of the view 
that adequate risk mitigation mechanisms are essential to promote the long-term 
sustainability of medicinal plant cultivation. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry of Ayush, in coordination with the concerned Ministries and 
stakeholders, explore the feasibility of introducing crop insurance framework for 
medicinal plants so as to provide financial protection to farmers and encourage greater 

146 
 
participation in the cultivation of medicinal plant for export promotion and increasing 
farmer’s income to desirable level and enhancing contribution of Ayush in GDP. 
 
PARA 5.14.1 
 
PROPAGATION AND PROMOTION OF AYUSH 
 
162. The Committee takes note that despite the widespread presence of Ayush systems 
of medicine in the country, public awareness regarding their preventive and promotive 
healthcare benefits remains limited. The Committee observes that Ayush systems offer 
huge potential for promoting preventive healthcare and healthy lifestyles through 
practices such as Yoga, appropriate dietary habits and traditional wellness approaches. 
However, the Committee is of the view that existing awareness initiatives largely focus 
on information dissemination and require greater emphasis on encouraging behavioural 
change towards the adoption of Ayush-based lifestyle practices. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Ayush strengthen its public outreach 
programmes with a greater focus on behaviour change communication strategies aimed 
at promoting the adoption of Ayush-based preventive healthcare practices such as Yoga, 
dietary regulation through incorporating Millet diets and traditional wellness practices. 
The Committee believes that such initiatives would contribute to improving public 
health outcomes while strengthening the role of Ayush systems in preventive and 
promotive healthcare. 
PARA 5.15.1  
 
 
163. The Committee believes that the vision of Ayush @ 2047 offers a historic 
opportunity to transform India’s traditional systems of medicine into a scientifically 
robust, globally respected and economically vibrant component of the national 
healthcare ecosystem, while reinforcing Bharat’s leadership in promoting traditional 
medicine at the global level. The vision is guided by the civilisational ethos of 
Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam - the world as one family, the Committee emphasises that 
achieving the vision will require sustained and coordinated efforts towards 
strengthening scientific research and evidence generation, expanding institutional and 
educational infrastructure, ensuring standardisation and quality assurance of Ayush 
medicines and accelerating digital integration through initiatives such as the Ayush 
Grid. The Committee further underscores the importance of promoting global 
engagement, expanding medical value travel, strengthening export competitiveness of 
Ayush products and developing sustainable medicinal plant value chains to support the 
long-term growth of the sector, thereby positioning Bharat as a leading global hub for 
traditional and integrative medicine. The Committee is of the considered view that 
enhanced financial support, stronger inter-ministerial coordination, active participation 
of States and greater private sector involvement will be essential for unlocking the full 
potential of the Ayush ecosystem. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Ayush will 
take appropriate and time-bound steps to address the issues highlighted in this Report 
and effectively implement the recommendations made therein so as to realise the vision 
of Ayush @ 2047 and further strengthen Bharat’s global leadership in holistic, 
preventive and integrative healthcare. 
PARA 5.16.1 
***** 
 