PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 12 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
 
DECEMBER, 2005/AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA) 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http//rajyasabha.nic.in 
E.mail:rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING   
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005 
LITERACY 
(MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE D 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA  SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK  SABHA ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2005/AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)) 
 


CONTENTS 
 PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................................... (i)—(iii) 
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................... (v) 
3. R EPORT ..................................................................................................................... 1—7 
4. O BSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE ............................................... 8—9  
5. A NNEXURE ................................................................................................................. 11—28 
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................... 29—36 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2004-05) 
 1. Shri Amar Singh —    Chairman 
  MEMBERS 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
 3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar 
 4. Dr. A.K. Patel 
 5. Shrimati Maya Singh 
 *6. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 7. Shri R. Sarath Kumar 
 8. Shri Lalming Liana 
 **9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
 $10. Shri M.P. Abdussamad Samadani 
 11. Vacant 
  LOK SABHA  
 12. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu 
 13. Shri M.H. Ambareesh  
 14. Shrimati B. Sushila Devi Laxman 
 15. Dr. M. Baburao 
 16. Dr. R.C. Dome 
 17. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 18. Shrimati Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali 
 19. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah 
 20. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 21. Shri Rasheed Masood 
 22. Ms. Archana Nayak 
 23. Shri D.B. Patil 
 24. Shri Nakul Das Rai 
 25. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 26. Shrimati K. Rani 
 27. Md. Shahabuddin   
 28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 29. Shri Uday Singh 
 30. Shrimati V. Radhika Selvi 
 31. Shri Kailash Nath Yadav 
 32. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director 

  Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
  Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer 
   
 
*Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 31st August, 2004. 
** Nominated w.e.f. 31st August, 2004. 
$  Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 14th December, 2004. 
   

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2005-06) 
 1. Shri Amar Singh —    Chairman 
  MEMBERS 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
 3. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar 
 4. Prof. P.J. Kurian 
 5. Dr. A.K. Patel 
 6. Shrimati Maya Singh 
 7. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy 
 8. Shri R. Sarath Kumar 
 9. Shri Lalhming Liana 
 *10. Shri Digvijay Singh 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu 
 12. Shri M. Ambareesh  
 13. Shrimati B. Sushila Devi Laxman 
 14. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
 15. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 16. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 17. Shrimati Bhavana Pundlikrao Gawali 
 18. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah 
 19. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 20. Shri Rasheed Masood 
 21. Shrimati Archana Nayak 
 22. Shri D.B. Patil 
 23. Shri Nakul Das Rai 
 24. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 25. Shrimati K. Rani 
 26. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin   
 27. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 28. Shri Uday Singh 
 29. Shrimati V. Radhika Selvi 
 30. Shri Kailash Nath Yadav 
 31. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.R. Guharoy, Director 
  Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
  Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer 
   
* 
Nominated w.e.f. 13th December, 2005 
. 

PREFACE 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parl iamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family 
Welfare, having been authorised by the Committee to pr esent the Report on its behalf, present this Twelfth 
Report of the Committee on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005.* 
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Proced ure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States, 
relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha, referred** the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendme nt) Bill, 2005 (Annexure-I) as introduced in the 
Rajya Sabha on the 10 th May 2005 and pending therein, to the Committee on the 18 th May 2005 for 
examination and report. 
3. A Press Release inviting suggestions/comments from  general public was issued in June, 2005. In 
response, a number of memoranda were received.  
4. The Committee considered the Bill  in its meetings held on the 14 th July, 9th September, 17th 
November and 15
th
 December, 2005. 
5. The Committee held wide ranging discussions with all the stake-holders on the various provisions  
of the Bill. Divergent views were expressed by repres entatives of associations of drug manufacturers,  
chemists, stockists etc. NGOs highlighting concerns  of consumers also appeared before the Committee 
(Annexure-II). The Committee also ha d the opportunity to interact with the Secretary, Department of 
Health and Family Welfare, Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare an d the Drug Controller General of 
India. The Committee sought clarifications not only on  the various view points put forth before it on the 
Bill but also shared its apprehensions on the present drug control scenario in the country. The Committee, 
thereafter, considered the draft Report in its meeting held on 15th December, 2005 and adopted the same. 
6. The Committee has relied upon the following do cuments/information in finalizing its Report: 
 (i) Background Note on the Bill received from the Department of Health and Family Welfare; 
 (ii) Presentation and clarification given by th e Secretary of the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare and Drug Controller General of India; 
 (iii) Memoranda received on the Bill fro m various associations, NGOs and experts; 
 (iv) Replies to the Questionnaire on the Bill; and  
 (v) Oral evidence on the Bill. 
7. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions made by 
those who deposed before the Committee and submitted th eir valuable suggestions on the subject matter of 
the Bill. 
8. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
  AMAR SINGH 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman, 
15 December, 2005 Department-related Parliamentary 
24 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
  Health and Family Welfare. 
  
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated 10th May, 2005.   
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No 42207, dated 19th May, 2005. 
 

REPORT 
 No country is reported to be immune from the problem of adulterated or spurious drugs and India is 
no exception. While counterfeiting of consumer goods is a general problem, the issue of adulterated or 
spurious drugs acquires a much more serious dimensi on because it involves medicinal use. Spurious or 
adulterated drugs can cause serious, or even fatal injury, if they do not contain the required active 
ingredients or contain harmful substances. Reported large-scale production and trading of spurious drugs in 
India is a cause of concern not only to the consumers w ithin the country but is also  affecting the credibility 
of drug products from India. 
2. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill is as under:— 
 “The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 is a consum er protection legislation, which is mainly 
concerned with the standards and quality of drugs manufactured in this country and control of the import, 
manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs and cosmet ics. There have been widespread reports regarding 
the easy movement and harmful consequences of adulterated and spurious drugs in the country and wide 
ranging national concern has been expressed on these re ports. The issue of adulterated or spurious drugs 
has serious dimensions because it in volves medicinal use and can lead to serious and even fatal injury. 
There is also loss of revenue to the Government due to the manufacture and sale of adulterated or spurious 
drugs. 
2.1 Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 was amended in 1982 so as to impose more stringent penalties on the 
anti-social elements indulging in the manufacture or sa le of adulterated or spurious drugs or drugs not of 
standard quality which are likely to cause death or grievous hurt to  the user. However, the penalties 
existing in the said Act are not found effective. On e of the reasons for the existing penalties not being 
effective is that manufacture and sa le of adulterated and spurious drugs is primarily clandestine activity 
which is showing increasing involvement of organized crime in recent years. Besides, offenders often obtain 
bail as the offences are non-cognizable and bailabl e under the existing provisions of the Act. The 
offenders remain on bail due to delay in disposal of cases for manufacture and sale of adulterated and 
spurious drugs. Many cases for violation are detected and investigated by the police who needs to be 
conferred upon the power to prosecute such cases promptly. 
2.2 The Central Government cons tituted an Expert Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. R.A. 
Mashelkar, Director General of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research in January, 2003 to 
undertake a comprehensive examination of drugs regu latory issues, including the problem of spurious 
drugs, evaluate the extent of the problem of spurious or substandard drugs recommend measures required 
to deal with the problem effectively. The Committee, inter alia, recommended for enhancement of penalties, 
designation of Special Court for speedy trial of spurious  drugs cases, making offences relating to spurious 
drugs cognizable and non-bailable, authorising the poli ce to file prosecution for offences related to 
spurious drugs and compounding of offences, etc. A Bill to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 
broadly to give effect to the reco mmendations of the aforesaid Committee was introduced on the 22nd 
December, 2003 in Lok Sabha and the Bill lapsed due to dissolution of Lok Sabha. 
3. Committee’s attention has been drawn by the very low rate of prosecution cases with regard to 
adulterated/spurious drugs and even lower rates of cases launched in the country. Following figures support 
the contention of the Committee:— 
Year Cases launched Cases decided 
2001-2002 538 171 
2002-2003 449 105 
2003-2004 570 166 
3.1 On a specific query about the factors responsib le for such a dismal scenario, the Committee was 
given to understand that different pattern of infrastruc ture and logistics for drugs quality control in States 
was primarily responsible. Prolonged procedure for settlement of court cases was another hindrance. The 

Committee notes that the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendme nt) Bill, 2005 seeks to impose more stringent 
penalties on manufacture/sale of adulterated/spurio us/sub-standard drugs. The Committee, however, does 
not foresee any significant improvement, keeping in view  the existing manpower of 1040 Drug Inspectors 
and annual rate of 35,000 samples tested against total number of 11,000 Drug Manufacturers/Loan Licensee 
and 3,50,000 sales premises. The Committee observes that after passage of the Bill, the Government 
proposes to have interactive discussions with stat e authorities including police authorities and have 
orientation programmes arranged for its effective impl ementation. The Committee, however, is of the view 
that such initiatives alone will not serve the pu rpose. What is required is strengthening of 
infrastructure/manpower for drug quality control in all the States/UTs and its constant monitoring. 
4. The clauses in respect of which amendments ha ve been suggested by the Committee, are discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Clause 2 
4.1 Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to amend Section 27 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act-1940 regarding 
‘Penalty for manufacture, sale etc. of drugs’. As en umerated in the clause, penalties i.e. both term of 
imprisonment and amount of fine are proposed to be enhanced considerably for manufacture/ 
sale/distribution stocking/exhibiting/by any person di rectly or any other person on his behalf of 
adulterated/spurious/ not of standard quality drugs. The proposed amendment seeks to enhance the term of 
imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and also 
the amount of fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees or three times value of the drugs confiscated, 
whichever is more. 
4.2 The Committee has been given to understand that the proposed amendment is broadly based on the 
recommendations made by the Mashel kar Committee. The Committee, how ever, finds that there is a major 
difference. The Expert Committee’s recommendation for death penalty for the said offence has been 
replaced by imprisonment for life. The Committee wa s informed that this modification was made in 
pursuance of the directions from the Cabinet. All experts, representatives of associations and NGOs 
appearing before the Committee while welcoming  the increase in fine were also not in favour of death 
penalty. The Committee also holds the same view. 
4.3 While interacting with various stake-holders,  the Committee came across divergent views on the 
criteria for imposition of penalties. Apprehensions were  voiced about there being no difference in the level 
of penalty for different categories of persons. As a result, manufacturer/distributor/stockist/seller/person 
exhibiting or offering for sale/distribution or his nominee are liable to undergo the same penalty. Another 
viewpoint was that penalties should be commensurate with the gravity of offence. Penalties should be 
highest for such acts which are done deliberately with the clear intention of making profit. Punishment 
should be more severe in case of life-saving drugs. 
4.4 Response of the Ministry to these reservations was that the object of the Act is to deal strongly with 
the harmful consequences of spurious  drugs. It was a matter of national concern to safeguard the health of 
society from the harmful consequences and ill effects of  spurious drugs and hence, it becomes necessary to 
deal with the manufacturer and the dealer on the same footing with respect to spurious drugs in the larger 
interest of the society. The Committee is in agreement with the view point of the Ministry that the 
enhancement in penalty under Section 27 of the Act would act as a deterrent for offenders. 
4.5 Committee’s attention was also drawn to there being instances of patients suffering from prolonged 
illness primarily due to the use of spurious/adulterated drugs. However, such cases are not covered under 
section 27 (a). It was suggested that besides death an d grievous hurt, prolonged illness should also be made 
the criteria for imposition of fine/imprisonment. The Committee feels that prolonged illness might occur 
due to a variety of reasons. There may be ca ses where doctor inadvertently or deliberately  may be 
responsible for delay in getting the patient cured. However, if it is due to use of adulterated or 
spurious drugs, then this aspect needs to be l ooked into. The Committee, accordingly, recommends 
that the Department may explore the possibility of bringing such cases under Section 27 (a). 

4.6 Another suggestion made before the Committee was that ‘not of standard quality drugs’ should be 
taken out from the ambit of Section 27. It was emphas ized that ‘not of standard quality drugs’ should 
neither be confused with spurious or adulterated drug s nor construed as spurious or adulterated drugs. It 
was pointed out that quality parameters as were provid ed under Section 16 for such drugs cannot be treated 
at par with adulterated/spurious drugs and hence de serve comparatively lesser penalties. The Committee is, 
however, not inclined to agree with this view-point. The Committee notes that Section 16 and second 
schedule specifics the standard of quality to be maintained by drugs. In the case of patent or 
proprietary medicines, the list of ingredients is to be displayed in the prescribed manner on the label 
or container. In the case of vaccines, sera, toxins, toxoids, antitoxins, antigens and biological products 
of like nature, standards are to be maintained by the labs recognized by WHO from time to time. The 
Committee is of the view that any deviation in the prescribed standards of medicines is equally 
serious when compared wi th adulterated and spurious drugs an d needs to be treated at the same 
footing. 
4.7 Clause 2 (B) of the Bill seeks to insert two prov isos under Section 27 (a) whereby the victim or in 
the case of his death his relative is liable to be pa id the amount of fine as compensation. The Committee 
notes that by way of explanation an exhaustive list of ‘relatives’ has been given, which indicates that 
dependence on the deceased person’s earning is the sole criteria for making a relative eligible for 
compensation. The only exception is the spouse of the deceased person, minor legitimate son and 
unmarried legitimate daughter and a widowed mother. The Committee has strong reservations in this regard 
as in its opinion dependence on the deceased person should not be the only criteria as loss of loved one can 
never be compensated. It can be the criteria to increase the amount of compensation. 
4.8 A suggestion made to the Committee was that divorced /deserted sister or daughter-in law should also 
be covered under ‘relatives’. Rese rvation was also expressed about including only widowed mother. It was 
felt that mother needed to be include d. The Committee also observes that parents of infant child victim are 
not covered under the proposed definition. On a specific query in this regard, the Department has submitted 
“that the joint and harmonious reading of the second proviso and the Explanation (ii) of the term ‘relative’ 
makes it clear that a minor legitimate son/daughter as well as an infant, as the case may be, is a relative and 
hence covered under the said section”. The Committee is not convinced with the reply and feels that the 
Department, perhaps, has not addressed the issue appropriately. Apprehensions were also voiced 
about the chance of conflict in the event of there being more than one claimant being covered by the 
term ‘relative’. There was thus a need for categorizing the same. 
4.9 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that parents of infant victim should be covered 
under the definition of “relative” v ery explicitly so that the parents in  case of such an eventuality are 
not deprived of their right of compensation. 
4.10 Definition should also include deserted/divorced  sister/daughter-in law and mother instead of 
only widowed mother. The Committee is convinced by the clarification of the Department that it 
should be left to the co urt of law to decide the bona fide recipient and the quan tum of compensation 
to be paid to him/her. 
Clause 2 (ii), 3 and 4 
4.11 These clauses propose to enhance the penalty unde r Section 27 (b), (c) and (d), 28 and 28A of 
the Act. The Committee is in ag reement with these amendments a nd, accordingly, adopts these 
clauses. 
Clause-5 
5.1 Clause 5 seeks to increase the penalty for subseq uent offences by proposing amendments in clause 
(a) and (b) of Section 30. The Comm ittee, however, notes that clause (c) of Section 30 which deals with 
penalty for subsequent offences co mmitted under Section 27 (d) is propo sed to be deleted. Clause (c) 
provided that any person if again convicted of an offence under clause (d) of Section 27 shall be punishable 

with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less th en two years but which may extend to four years or 
with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both. 
5.2 The Committee notes that Section 27 (d) provide s for penalty, i.e. imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less then one year but which may extend to  two years and fine for sale/manufacture etc of any 
drug not covered by Clause (a), (b) and (c) of Section 27, in contravention of any provision under chapter 
IV of the Act or any rule making power thereunder. It  also gives the court discretionary powers to reduce 
the imprisonment term. The Committee fails to understand the ra tionale for deletion of this clause, 
especially whereas all other penalties under the ot her provisions under Chapter IV are proposed to 
be enhanced. Chapter IV deals with  manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs. Section-33 under 
this Chapter relates to the rules making power of the Central Government which include very vital 
subjects, for example, establishment of labs, methods of test/ analysis of drugs, qualification/duties of 
Govt. Analysts/ Inspectors, prohibition of sale/stocking/exhibition for sale/ distribution of drugs after 
the expiry date/specification of offence regarding wh ich order of confiscation is required to be made 
etc. As per Section 30 (c), penalty for subsequent  offence was more stringen t when compared with 
penalty for first offence under Section 27 (d). The Committee, therefore, is of the view that Section 30 
(c) should not be deleted and penalty for subsequent  offence in Section 30 (c) should be suitably 
enhanced. 
5.3 The Committee notes that Clause 5 also proposes deletion of Sub-Section (2) of Section 30. This 
Sub-Section relates to penalty for subsequent offence of use of Govt. Analysts report for advertising. 
Penalty for subsequent offence was higher then the pe nalty for the first offence i.e. against a fine for 
Rs. 500/- penalty for subsequent offence is maximum imprisonment of ten years or with fine or with 
both. No justification has been given by the Depa rtment for deletion of this Sub-section. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should review this amendment. 
Clause-6 
6.1 Clause 6 of the Bill proposes to substitute Sub-Section 1 and 2 of Section 32 relating to cognizance 
of offences. The Committee notes that this am endment is based on the Mashelkar Committee 
recommendations which suggested that in addition to the Drugs Inspectors, police authorities may also be 
authorized at an early stage to fi le prosecutions for spurious drugs offences. The Committee notes that a 
police officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector has, accordingly, been given the power to prosecute in 
the Bill. The Committee, however, observes that pros ecution power is also proposed for Central/ State 
Govt. officers. On a specific query in this regard, th e Department submitted that due to there being a large 
number of vacancies of State Drug Inspectors remaining unfilled, it was th ought that to prevent delays and 
to expedite the process of prosecution, officers of the Central or State Government may also be authorized. 
6.2 One view which emerged before the Committee wa s that Drug Inspectors being conversant with 
drugs and its formulations, are most capable in assessi ng drug-related cases. Ap prehensions were voiced 
about involvement of police personnel which may lead to unnecessary harassment of the license holder. It 
was, accordingly, su ggested that involvement of police should only be made on written request from the 
Drugs Licensing Authority of the area. 
6.3 The Committee also feels that a police officer or an officer of the Central  Government or State 
Government do not have the requir ed professional qualification to  handle drug-related cases. 
Therefore, for the purpose of proper prosecution,  involvement of Drug Licensing Authority is 
necessary. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in case of pros ecution by the police inspector 
or Govt. Officer, prior permission of the Drug Li censing Authority of the concerned area should be 
made a precondition. 
Clause-7 
7. Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 32B after section 32 A which provides for 
compounding of offences. The Committee was given to understand that the power to compound the offence 

should not be made so simple or easy that it is le ft entirely to the discretion of the Govt. officer. The 
procedure should be made more transparent. To ac hieve these objectives ther e should be certain pre-
requisites for compounding. Firstly, the aggrieved party’s concurrence should be there. Secondly, the 
amount compounded should be adequate to compensate the aggrieved person. Thirdly, the cost of litigation 
should also be included in the sum compounded. The Committee concurs with this view and 
recommends the Department to amend Section 32 B in the light of the above observation. 
Clause-10 
8.1 Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to insert a new Section 36 AB which mentions about designating one 
or more Courts of Sessions as special court for the trial of such offences. 
8.2 The Committee would like to mention that th e Expert Committee had recommended constitution of 
Special Courts and not the designation of some selected Courts as Special Courts for speedy trial of drug 
related offences. On a specific query, the Department  has submitted that setting up of Special Courts by 
designating existing courts would save time. However, if new courts have to be set up as Special Courts, 
then this issue would have to be resolved in consultation with Ministry of Law. The Committee, however, 
is not inclined to believe that mere designation of one or more courts of Sessions as Special Court will 
help in expeditious disposal of cases as the Sessi ons Courts are already ov erburdened with a large 
number of cases. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that new courts need to be set up for the 
purpose of trying offences under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act. 
9. The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of  the Bill, including enacting formula and the 
title without any amendment. 
General 
10. The Committee has taken note of the suggestion of the Expert Commi ttee that a specific provision, 
on the lines of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act-1985, needs to be made in the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act-1940 that will allow the person indulging in the spurious drug offences to be detained 
for a minimum period of three months. This would serv e as an effective deterrent for such offenders. 
Explaining the reasons for not including this recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry submitted 
that the proposed Act envisages imprisonment for a term which shall be not less than ten years but which 
may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh 
rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more, to all those persons indulging in 
offences pertaining to spurious drugs. The Comm ittee has also been given to understand that these 
provisions will work as an effective deterrent and are far more stringent than NDPS Act. The Committee 
would, however, like to point out that intera ction with various stake-holder s indicates that persons accused 
of manufacturing or trading in spurious or adulterated drugs usually get bail very easily and thereafter either 
intimidate or influence the witnesses and try to win ov er them. They also manipulate the administrative and 
judicial system. In this manner they  weaken the case of the prosecuti on and such cases thus drag on for 
years together. The conviction rate, due to the reason s mentioned above, is very low in drug related 
offences. The Committee, therefore, thinks  that in order to realize the deterrent effects of the 
proposed Bill, first of all a successful conviction in the court of law is necessary and for that to 
happen it should be ensured that the accused is prevented from manipulating the system to his 
advantage. The Committee also feels that peddling in spurious or adulterated drugs is no way less 
serious than peddling in narcotics. The Committ ee, therefore, recommends that the Department 
should incorporate similar provisions in the Bill, as exist in the NDPS Act. 
11. The Committee is constrained to observe that ther e is no mechanism to make aware the consumers or 
public at large about the harmful effect of certain drugs or banned drugs. The Committee 
strongly feels that the Central Govt. needs to make efforts for publishing a list of banned drugs for the 
information of all concerned. The Committee was inform ed that a New Task Force on the subject is being 
set up which will review the existing procedure for dr ug verification to make it more user friendly. The 

Committee emphasizes that action to increase public awareness abou t harmful/banned drugs should 
be initiated at the earliest.  
12. It is a well-known fact that a drug manufacturer in one state mo ves freely in interstate commerce as 
well as in export market. However, the infrastru cture facilities, the number and quality of drug 
inspectors, testing facilities support systems etc. cont inue to vary significantly from State to State. Not 
only this, a large number of States still do not have  drug-testing labs. The Committee finds that out of 
the 17 drugs testing labs functioning in different States , only 7 are reported to have the capacity to test 
all categories of drugs. In view of  such a situation, there is an urgent need for not only establishing 
viable testing facilities but also providing Intelligence Cells working in coordination with the different 
States. The Committee has been informed that un der the World Bank assisted Capacity Building 
project for Food Safety and Quality Control of Drugs, upgradation/construction of at least one state of 
the art Drug Testing Laboratory in each State/UT a nd also some central labs is already in progress. 
Besides, in order to introduce further uniformity in the implementation of the Drugs and Cosmetices 
Act in the States, selected labs in the States are being provided with modern equipment and trainings 
are being provided to both the laboratory and drug re gulatory personnel. Simila rly, an IEC strategy is 
being developed for ensuring a bette r-informed and more aware consumer. The Committee hopes that 
with all these measures the situation would improve in the States. 
 Committee’s attention has been drawn by another observation made by the Mashelkar Committee for 
there being a need for surveillance over distribution of drugs through medical practitioners. The 
Department also accepts this observa tion as distribution of drugs throu gh medical practitioners is a major 
channel of distribution of spurious/adulterated dr ugs. Medical practitioners are exempted from the 
provisions of the Chapter IV of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act dealing with manufacture, sale and 
distribution of drugs and Rules made there under (Entry 5 of Schedule ‘K’ of the Rules). The Committee 
has, however, been given to underst and that many registered medica l practitioners dispensing drugs to 
their patients, do not always purchase their supplies from authorized sources. On a specific query about 
putting a check on such activities, the Committee was informed that provisions are already in existence to 
inspect the stock of drugs retained by the Register ed Medical Practitioners and procurement of drugs in 
such cases should be made from authorized dealer wi th proper purchase voucher. In case of spurious 
drugs, the concerned Medical Practitioner should also be made an accused if the investigation so reveal. 
However, when asked about number of such cases of violation by medical practitioners registered so far, 
the Drug Controller General of India categorically admitted that not even a single case has been registered 
so far. The Committee finds it rather surprising. The Committee strongly feels that the Department has to 
take in the initiative in this matter. An effective monitoring mechanism needs to be set up to present such 
cases. At the same time, public should also be made aware of such provisions. 
 The Committee observes that the definition of  adulterated and spurious drugs - Allopathic, 
Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddha drugs is the same. Howe ver, similar provision for penalty for manufacture, 
sale etc. of AYUSH drugs is not there. As per media reports, Ayurvedic drugs containing metals and 
steroids are in circulation and sometimes cause griev ous hurt to the users. On a specific query in this 
regard, Department clarified that presence of metals and steroids in Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani 
medicines could be due to the contamination of raw material of natural origin i.e. soil-water 
contamination. Therefore, raw material testing to exclude the heavy metal presence above the permissible 
level is needed which requires good laboratories to undertake this testing at an affordable time. This will 
add to the cost of AYUSH medicine significantly. Ph ytosteroids are also present in plants naturally. 
Therefore, only adulteration of steroid should be penal offence. The Committee observes that Section 33(1) 
and (J) of the Drugs & Cosmetics Act provides pena lty for manufacture, sale etc. of spurious and 
adulterated Ayurvedic, Siddha drugs and for subsequent offences respectively. The Committee however 
feels that more stringent penalties are required to be  imposed in the case of spurious/adulterated/not of 
standard quality Ayurvedic/Unani/Sidd ha drugs also. The Committee, ther efore, is of the view that the 
penalty provision for AYUSH drug should be reviewed so as to make changes, if necessary. The 

Committee also emphasizes the need for strengthenin g the testing labs for AYUSH drugs, the present 
status of which cannot be considered satisfactory. 

OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 The Committee also holds the same view. (Para 4.2) 
 The Committee is in ag reement with the view po int of the Ministry th at the enhancement in 
penalty under Section 27 of the Act would act as a deterrent for offenders.  (Para 4.4) 
 The Committee feels that prolonged illness might occur due to a variety of reasons. There may 
be cases where doctor inadvertently or deliberately may be responsible for delay in getting the 
patient cured. However, if it is due to use of adulte rated or spurious drugs, then this aspect needs to 
be looked into. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department may explore the 
possibility of bringing such cases under Section 27 (a).  (Para 4.5) 
 The Committee notes that Section 16 and second  schedule specifics the standard of quality to 
be maintained by drugs. In the case of patent or pr oprietary medicines, the list of ingredients is to be 
displayed in the prescribed manner on the label or container. In the case of vaccines, sera, toxins, 
toxoids, antitoxins, antigens and biological products of like nature, standards are to be maintained by 
the labs recognized by WHO from time to time. The Committee is of the view that any deviation in 
the prescribed standards of medicines is equall y serious when compared with adulterated and 
spurious drugs and needs to be treated at the same footing.  (Para 4.6) 
 The Committee is not convinced with the reply and feels that the Department, perhaps, has not 
addressed the issue appropriately. Apprehensions were also voiced about the chance of conflict in the 
event of there being more than one claimant being covered by the term ‘rel ative’. There was thus a 
need for categorizing the same. (Para 4.8) 
 The Committee, accordingly, recommends that parents of infant victim should be covered 
under the definition of “relative” v ery explicitly so that the parents in case of such an eventuality are 
not deprived of their right of compensation,  (Para 4.9) 
 Definition should also include deserted/divorced  sister/daughter-in law and mother instead of 
only widowed mother. The Committe e is convinced by the clarification of the Department that it 
should be left to the co urt of law to decide the bona fide recipient and the quan tum of compensation 
to be paid to him/her.  (Para 4.10) 
 These clauses propose to enhance the penalty unde r Section 27 (b), (c) and (d), 28 and 28A of 
the Act. The Committee is in ag reement with these amendments a nd, accordingly, adopts these 
clauses.  (Para 4.11) 
 The Committee fails to understand the rationale for deletion of this clause, especially whereas 
all other penalties under the other provisions un der Chapter IV are proposed to be enhanced. 
Chapter IV deals with manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs. Section 33 underthis Chapter 
relates to the rules making power of the Central Government which include very vital subjects, for 
example, establishment of labs, methods of test/ana lysis of drugs, qualification/duties of Government 
Analysts/Inspectors, prohibition of sale/stocking/ex hibition for sale/distribution of drugs after the 
expiry date/specification of offence regarding which order of confiscation is required to be made etc. 
As per Section 30 (c), penalty for subsequent offence was more stringent when compared with 
penalty for first offence under Section 27 (d). The Committee, therefore, is of the view that Section 30 
(c) should not be deleted and penalty for subsequent  offence in Section 30 (c) should be suitably 
enhanced.  (Para 5.2) 
 The Committee notes that Clause 5 also proposes deletion of Sub-Section (2) of Section 30. This 
Sub-Section relates to penalty for subsequent offe nce of use of Government Analysts report for 
advertising. Penalty for subsequent offence was higher than the penalty for the first offence  i.e. 
against a fine for Rs. 500/- penalt y for subsequent offence is maximum imprisonment of ten years or 

with fine or with both. No justification has been given by the Department for deletion of this Sub-
section. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should review this amendment. 
   (Para 5.3) 
 The Committee also feels that a police officer or  an officer of the Central Government or State 
Government do not have the requ ired professional qualification to handle drug-related cases. 
Therefore, for the purpose of proper prosecution,  involvement of Drug Licensing Authority is 
necessary. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in case of pros ecution by the police inspector 
or Government Officer, prior permission of the Drug Licensing Authority of the concerned area 
should be made a precondition.  (Para 6.3) 
 The Committee concurs with this view and re commends the Department to amend Section 32 
B in the light of the above observation. (Para 7.1) 
 The Committee, however, is not inclined to beli eve that mere designation of one or more courts 
of Sessions as Special Court will help in expeditious disposal of cases as the Sessions Courts are 
already overburdened with a large number of cases. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
new courts need to be set up for the purpose of trying offences under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act. 
   (Para 8.2) 
 The Committee adopts the remaining clauses of  the Bill, including enacting formula and the 
title without any amendment. (Para 9) 
 The Committee, therefore, thinks that in ord er to realize the deterrent-effects of the proposed 
Bill, first of all a successful conviction in the court of law is necessary and for that to happen it should 
be ensured that the accused is prevented from manipulating the system to his advantage. The 
Committee also feels that peddling in spurious or  adulterated drugs is no way less serious than 
peddling in narcotics. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Department should 
incorporate similar provisions in the Bill, as exist in the NDPS Act. (Para 10) 
 The Committee emphasizes that action to increase public awareness about harmful/banned 
drugs should be initiated at the earliest. (Para 11) 
 The Committee hopes that with all these measur es the situation would improve in the States. 
   (Para 12) 
 The Committee finds it rather surprising. The Committee strongly feels that the Department has to 
take in the initiative in this matter. An effective monitoring mechanism needs to be set up to present such 
cases. At the same time, public should also be made aware of such provisions. (Para 13(ii)) 
 The Committee however feels that mo re stringent penalties are required to be imposed in the case 
of spurious/adulterated/ not of standard qualit y Ayurvedic/Unani/Siddha dr ugs also. The Committee, 
therefore, is of the view that the penalty provision for AYUSH drug should be reviewed so as to make 
changes, if necessary. The Committee also emphasizes  the need for strengthening the testing labs for 
AYUSH drugs, the present status of which cannot be considered satisfactory. (Para 14) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-I
AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA 
10 May, 2005 
Bill No. LIV of 2005 
THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. 
 
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:— 
 
 
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics 
(Amendment) Act, 2005. 
Short title and 
mencement. 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
commencement of that provision. 
 

Amendment of 
section 27 2. In section 27 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act. 1940 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— 
 (i)  in clause (a),— 
 (A) for the words “punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five 
years but which may extend to a term of life and with fine 
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees;’”, the 
words “punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine which 
shall not be less than ten lakh rupees or three times value of 
the drugs confiscated, which ever is more:” shall be 
substituted;    
(B) the following provisos shall be inserted, 
namely:—  
“Provided that the fine imposed on and realised 
from, the person convicted under this clause shall be 
paid, by way of compensation, to the person who had 
used the adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this 
clause:  
Provided further that where the use of the 
adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause 
has caused the death of a person who used such drugs, 
the fine imposed on and realised from, the person 
convicted under this clause, shall be paid to the relative 
of the person who had died due to the use of the 
adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of the second 
proviso, the expression “relative” means— 
(i) spouse of the deceased person; or 
(ii) a minor legitimate son, and unmarried 
legitimate daughter and a widowed mother; or 
(iii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of 
the deceased person at the time of his death, a son 
or a daughter who has attained the age of eighteen 
years; or 
(iv) any person, if wholly or in part, 
dependent on the earnings of the deceased person 
af the time of his death,— 
(a) the parent; or 
(b) a minor brother or an unmarried sister; or 
(c) a widowed daughter-in-law; or 
(d) a widowed sister; or 
(e) a minor child of a pre-deccased son; or 
23 of 1940 

(f) a minor child of a pre-deccased daughter 
where no parent of the child is alive; or 
(g) the paternal grandparent if no parent of the 
member is alive;"; 
(ii)  in clause (b),— 
(A)  for the words “not be leas than or” year but 
which may extend to three years and with fine which shall 
not be less than five thousand rupees”, the words “not be 
less than three years but which may extend to five years 
and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees” 
shall be substituted; 
(B)  in the proviso, for the words “less than one year 
and of fine of less than five thousand rupees”, the words 
“less than three years and of fine ofless than one lakh 
rupees” shall be substituted; 
 (i)  in clause (c),— 
(A)  for the words “not be less than three years but 
which may extend to five years and with fine which shall 
not be less than five thousand rupees”, the words “not less 
than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for 
life and with fine which shall not be three lakhs rupees or 
three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is 
more” shall be substituted; 
(B)  in the proviso, for the words “less than three 
years but not less than one y ear”, the words “less than 
seven years but not less than three years and of fine of less 
than one lakh rupees” shall be substituted;   
(iv) in clause (d), for the words “and with  fine”, the words 
“and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand 
rupees” shall be substituted. 
 
 3. In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words “with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both”, the words 
“with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with 
both” shall be substituted. 
 
Amendment of 
section 28. 
Amendment of 
section 28A. 
4. In section 28A.of the principal Act, for the words “with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both”, the words 
“with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees or with 
both” shall be substituted. 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 30. 
5. In section 30 of the principal Act,— 
 (a) in sub-section (1),— 
  (i)  in clause (a),— 
(A)  for the words “not be less than two years but 
 

which may extend to six years and with fine which 
shall not be less than ten th ousand rupees”, the words 
“not be less than seven years but which may extend to 
ten years and with fine which shall not be less than two 
lakhs rupees” shall be substituted; 
(B) in the proviso, for the words “less than two 
years and of fine of less than ten thousand rupees”, the 
words “less than seven years and of fine of less than 
one lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii)  in clause (b), for the words “shall not be less than 
six years but which may extend to ten years and with fine 
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees”, the 
words “shall not be less than ten years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall 
not be less than three lakhs rupees” shall be substituted; 
(iii) clause (c) shall be omitted;  
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
Amendment of 
section 32. 
6.   In section 32 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (1) and 
(2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: —  
“(1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted 
except by—  
(a) an inspector; or 
(b) any police officer (not below the rank of Sub-
Inspector of Police; as referred to in the Police Act. 1861 or 
any member of the police es tablishment not below the rank 
of Sub-Inspector of the Special Police Force constituted 
under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946; or 
(c) any officer of the Central Government or a State 
Government authorised in writing in this behalf by the 
Central Government or a State Government bv a general or 
special order made in this behelf by that Government; or 
(d) the person aggrieved; or 
(e)  a recognised consumer association whether such 
person is a member of that association or not. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court inferior to 
that of a Court of Session shall tr y an offence punishable under this 
Chapter.”. 
 
 7. After section 32A of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely: — 
Insertion of new 
section 32B. 
2 of 1974 “32B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, any offence punishable under clause 
(b) of sub-section (1) of section 13,clause    (b) of sub-section (2) 
of section 13, section 28 and sect ion 28A of this Act (whether 
commined by a company or any officer thereof), not being an 
offence punishable with imprisonment only, or with 
imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after the 
institution of any prosecution, be compounded by the Central 
Government or by any State Government or any officer 
Compounding of 
certain offences. 

authorised in this behalf by th e Central Government or a State 
Government, on payment   for credit to that Government   of such 
sum as   that Government may, by rules made in this behalf, 
specify: 
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the 
maximum amount of the fine which may be imposed under this 
Act for the offence so compounded. 
(2) When the accused has been commined for trial or when 
he has been convicted and an appeal is pending, no composition 
for the offence shall be allowed w ithout the leave of the court to 
which he is committed or, as the case may be, before which the 
appeal is to be heard. 
(3) Where an offence is  compounded under sub-section 
(1), no proceeding or further proceeding, as the case may be, shall 
be taken against the offender in respect of the offence so 
compounded and the offender, if in custody, shall be re-leased 
forthwith.”. 
 8. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after 
clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(r) sum which may be specified by the Central 
Government under section 32B.” 
Amendment of 
section 33. 
 9. In section 36A of the principal Act, for die words “all offences 
under this Act”, the words, brackets, figures and letters “all offences 
(except the offences triable by the Special 
Court under section 36AB or Court of Session) under this Act” shall 
be substituted. 
Amendment of 
section 36A. 
Insertion of new 
sections 36AB, 
36AC, 36AD 
and 36AE. 
10. After section 36A of the principal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely: — 
 
Special Courts. 36AB. (1) The Central Government, or the State 
Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High 
Court, shall, for trial of offences relating to adulterated drugs or 
spurious drugs and punishable under clauses (a) and (b) of 
section 13, sub-section (3) of section 22, clauses (a) and (c) of 
section 27, section 28, section 28A, section 28B and clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section 30 and other offences relating to 
adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, by notification, designate one 
or more Courts of Session as a Special Court or Special Courts 
for such area or areas or for such case or class or yroup of cases 
as may be specified in the notification. 
Explanation—In this sub-section, “High Court” means the 
High Court of the State in which a Court of Session designated as 
Special Court was functioning imrnediately before such 
designation. 
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, n Special Court shall 
also try an offence, ot her than an offence refe rred to in sub-section 
(7), with which the accused may. under the Code of Criminal 
 

Procedure, 1973, be charged at the same trial. 
Offences to be 
coganizable and 
non-bailable in 
certain cases 
36AC. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973,—  
(a) every offence, relating to adulterated or spurious drug 
and punishable under clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 13, clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 13, sub-section 
(3) of section 22, clauses (a) and (c) of section 27, section 28, 
section 28A, section 2SB and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 
30 and other offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious 
drugs, shall be cognizable; 
(b) no person accused, of an offence punishable under 
clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 13, clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 13, sub-section (3) of section 22. 
clauses (a) and (c) of section 27, section 28, section 28A, section 
28B and sub-sections (1) and (2) of section   30 and other 
offences relating to adulterated drugs or spurious drugs, shall be 
released on bail or on his own bond unless— 
(i) the  Public Prosecutor has been given an 
opportunity to oppose the application for such release; and 
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the 
application, the court is satisfied that there are reasonable 
grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence 
and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on 
bail: 
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years, or 
is a woman or is sick or infirm, may be released on bail, if the Special 
Court so directs. 
2 of 1974 
2 of 1974 (2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) is in addition to the limitations under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force 
on granting of bail. 
 
 
 (3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the 
special powers of the High Court regarding bail under section 439 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the High Court may 
exercise such powers including the power under clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of that section as if the re ference to “Magistrate” in that 
section includes also a reference to a “Special Court” designated 
under section 36AB. 
 
2 of 1974 36 AD. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (including the 
provisions as to bails or bonds), shall apply to the proceedings before 
a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the 
Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the person 
conducting the prosecution before th e Special Court, shall be deemed 
to be a Public Prosecutor: 
Provided that the Central Government or the State Government 
Application of 
Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 
to proceedings 
before Special 
Court. 

may also appoint, for any case or class or group of cases, a Special 
Public Prosecutor. 
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public 
Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section unless he 
has been in practice as an advocat e for not less than seven years, 
under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law. 
2 of 1974 (3) Every person appointed as a Pu blic Prosecutor or a Special 
Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a Public 
Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (ii) of section 2 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure. 1971 and the provisions of that Code shall 
have effect accordingly. 
 
 36AE. The High Court may exercise, so far as may be 
applicable, all the powers confer red by Chapter XXIX or Chapter 
XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, on a High Court, as if 
a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High 
Court were a Court of Session trying  cases within the local limits of 
the jurisdiction of the High Court. 
Appeal and 
revision 
 
  

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act. 1940 is a consumer protection legislation, 
which is mainly concerned with the standards and quality of drugs manufactured in 
this country and control of the import, manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs 
and cosmetics. 
2. There have been widespread reports regarding the easy movement and 
harmful consequences of adulterated and spurious drugs in the country and wide 
ranging national concern has been expressed on these reports. The issue of 
adulterated or spurious drugs has serious dimensions because it involves medicinal 
use and can lead to serious and even fatal in jury. There is also loss of revenue to the 
Government due to the manufacture and sale of adulterated or spurious drugs. 
3. Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 was amended in 1982 so as to impose more 
stringent penalties on the anti-social elements indulging in the manufacture or sale of 
adulterated or spurious drugs or drugs no t of standard qualiry which are likely to 
cause death or grievous hurt to the user. Ho wever, the penalties existing in the said 
Act are not found effective. One of the r easons for the existing penalties not being 
effective is that manufacture and sale of adulterated and spurious drugs is primarily 
clandestine activity which is showing incr easing involvement of organised crime in 
recent years. Besides, offenders often obtain  bail as the offences are non-cognizable 
and bailable under the existing provisions of the Act. The offenders remain on bail 
due to delay in disposal of cases for manufacture and sale of adulterated and spurious 
drugs. Many cases for violation are detected and investigated by the police who 
needs to be conferred upon the power to prosecute such cases promptly. 
4. The Central Government constitu ted an Expert Committee under the 
chairmanship of Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Director General of Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research in January, 2003 to undertake a comprehensive examination of 
drugs regulatory issues, including the problem of spurious drugs, evaluate the extent 
of the problem of spurious or sub-standard drugs and recommend measures required 
to deal with the problem effectively. The Committee, inter alia, recommended for 
enhancement of penalties, designation of Special Court for speedy trial of spurious 
drugs cases, making offences relating to spurious drugs and cognizable and non-
bailable, authorising the police to file pros ecution for offences related to spurious 
drugs and compounding of offences, etc. A Bill to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics 
Act, 1940 broadly to give effect to the recommendations of the aforesaid Committee 
was introduced on the 22nd December, 2003 in Lok Sabha and the Bill lapsed due to 
dissolution of Lok Sabha. The Central Government, inter alia, proposes to make the 
following amendments in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, broadly on the lines of 
the earlier Bill introduced with certain modifications which relate to enhancement of 
punishment and doing away with the death penalty as proposed in the said Bill, 
namely:— 
(i) The existing provisions contained in  section 27 of the aforesaid Act, inter 
alia, provide for scale of punishment for the firs t offence in respect of adulterated or 
spurious drugs. Clause (a) of section 27 of the aforesaid Act, provides for imprison-
ment for not less than five years which may extend to life and with fine of not less 
than rupee:; ten thousand for the manufacture and sale of adulterated or spurious 
drugs or drugs not of standard quality which are likely to cause death of the patients 
or harm on the patient’s body as would amount  to grievous hurt. It is proposed to 
enhance the period of imprisonment fur a term which shall not be less than ten years 

but which may externd to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable 10 fine of ten 
lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more: 
(ii) It is also proposed to insert two provisos in the said clause (a) so as to 
provide that the fine imposed on the convicted person and realised from him under 
the said clause shall be paid to the person who used such adulterated or spurious drug 
and in case of his death, to his relative: 
(iii) Clause (b) of said section 27 provides for punishment of imprisonment for 
not less than one year which may extend to three years and fine of not less than 
rupees five thousand for manufacture and sale of any adulterated drug (not being a 
drug referred to in section 17A) or manufacture and sale of drugs without a valid 
licence. It is proposed to enhance the said punishment of imprisonment being not less 
than three years but may extend to five y ears and with fine which shall not be less 
than one lakh rupees; 
(iv) Clause (c) of aforesaid section 27 provides for punishment of 
imprisonment for not less than one year wh ich may extend to three years but which 
may extend to five years and with fine wh ich shall not be less than rupees five 
thousand for manufacture and sale of any spurious drug (not being a drug referred to 
in section 17B). It is proposed to enhance the said punishment of imprisonment being 
not less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with 
fine which shall be three lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs seized, 
whichever is more; 
(v) Clause (d) of aforesaid section 27 provides for punishment of 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend 
to two years and with fine. It is proposed to provide that the fine shall not be less 
than twenty thousand rupees; 
(vi) It is also proposed to provide for a fine of not less than twenty thousand 
rupees under section 28 for non-disclosure of the name of the manufacturer and 
under section 28 A for not keeping docum ents, etc., and for not disclosure of 
information; 
(vii) It is also proposed to enhance punishment specified under section 30 for 
subsequent offences. Clause (a) of said section 30 provides for punishment for 
imprisonment not less than rwo years which may extend to six years and with fine of 
not less than rupees ten thousand for manufacture and sale of any adulterated drug or 
manufacture and sale of drugs without a valid licence. It is proposed to enhance the 
said punishment which shall not be less th an seven years but which may extend to 
ten years and with fine which shall not be less than rwo lakh rupees. Clause (b) of 
aforesaid section 30 provides for punishment for imprisonment for not less than six 
years which may extend to ten years and with fine o’f not less than rupees ten 
thousand for manufacture and sale ofa spuri ous drug. It is proposed to enhance the 
punishment of imprisonment which shall not be less than ten years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than three lakh 
rupees; 
(viii) It is also proposed to designate one or more Court of Session as Special 
Court for trial of offences related to adulterated or spurious drugs; 
(ix) It is also proposed to make offences relating to adulterated or spurious ‘ 
drugs as cognizable and non-bailable in certain cases; 

(x) It is also proposed to confer power s upon the police officers not below the 
rank of sub-inspector of police and other officers of the Central Government or State 
Government authorised by it to institute the prosecution under the aforesaid Act; 
(xi) It is also proposed to provide compounding of certain offences not being 
an offence punishable with imprisonment only or with imprisonment and also with 
fine. 
5.   The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects 
N
EW DELHI, ANBUMANI RAMDOSS. 
The 2nd May 2005. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to insert a new section 32B in the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 to provide for compounding of certain offences by the Central 
Government or. by any State Government or any officer authorised in this behalf by the 
Central Government or a State Government on payment for credit to that government of 
such sum as that Government may, by rules specify. Clause 8 of the Bill proposes to 
insert a clause (r) in sub-section (2) of section 33 of the said Act to confer power upon 
the Central Government to make such rules. 
2. The matter in respect of which rules may be made are matter of procedure and 
detail and it is not practicable to provide for it in the Bill itself. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

   

 
 ANNEXURE  
EXTRACTS FROM THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 
1940 (23 OF 1940) 
* * * * *  
 
 
Penalty for 
Manufacture, sale, 
etc. of drugs in 
contravention of 
this Chapter. 
27. Whoever, himself or by any other person on his 
behalf manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or 
stocks or exhibits or offers for sale or distributes,— 
(a) any drug deemed to be adulterated under 
section 17A or spurious under section 17B or which 
when used by any person for or in the diagnosis, 
treatment, mitigation, or prevention of any disease or 
disorder is likely to cause his death or is likely to cause 
such harm on his body as would amount to grievous hurt 
within the meaning of section 320 of the Indian Penal 
Code, solely on account of such drug being adulterated or 
spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may be, 
shall be punishable with im prisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than five ye ars but which may extend to 
a term of life and with Tine which shall not be less than 
ten thousand rupees; 
(b) any drug—  
(i) deemed to be adulterated under section 17 
A, but not being a drug referred to in clause (a), or 
(ii) without a valid licence as required under 
clause (c) of section 18, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than one year but which may extend to 
three years and with fine which shall not be less than five 
thousand rupees: 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and 
special reasons to be record ed in the judgment, impose a 
sentence of imprisonment for a term of leu than one year 
and of fine of less than five thousand rupees; 
(c) any drug deemed to be spurious under section 
17B, but not being a drug referred to in clause (a) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than three years but which may extend to five 
years and with fine which shall not be less than five 
thousand rupees: 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and 
special reasons, to be recorded in the judgment, impose a 
sentence of imprisonment for a terms of less than three 
years but not less than one year; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      45 of 1860
 

(d) any drug, other than a drug referred to in clause 
(a) or clause (b) or clause (c), in contravention of any 
other provision of this Chapter or any rule made 
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than one year but which may 
extend to two years and with fine: 
Provided that the Court may for any adequate and 
special reasons to be record ed in the judgment impose a 
sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one 
year. 
* * * * * 
 
 28. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 18A 
or section 24 shall be punish-able with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
* * * * * 
Penalty for non 
disclosure of the name 
of the manufacturer etc. 
 28A. Whoever, without reas.onable cause or excuse, 
contravenes the provisions of section I SB shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with 
both 
* * * * * 
Penalty for not keeping 
documents. etc. and for 
non-disclosure of in 
formation. 
 30. (1) Whoever having been convicted of an offence,— 
(a) under clause (b) of section 27 is again 
convicted of an offence under that clause, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than two years but which may extend to six years 
and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand 
rupees: 
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and 
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than two 
years and of fine of less than ten thousand rupees; 
(b)  under clause (c) of section 27, is again 
convicted of an offence und er that clause shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than six years but which may extend to ten years 
and with fine which shall not be less than ten
thousand rupees; 
(c)  under clause (d) of section 27, is again 
convicted of an offence und er that clause shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than two years but which may extend to four years 
or with fine which shall not be less than five thousand 
Penalty for subsequent 
offences. 

rupees, or with both. 
* * * * *  
(2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under 
section 29 is again convicted of an offence under the same 
section shall be punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to ten years or with fine, or with both. 
* * * * * 
Cognizance of 
offences. 
32.(1) No prosecution under this Chapter shall be 
instituted except by an Inspector or by the person aggrieved or 
by a recognised consumer association whether such person is 
a member of that association or not. 
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate 
or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try an offence 
punishable under this Chapter. 
* * * * *  
 
Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 
33.(7)*  * * * * 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may— 
* * * * * 
 
Certain offences to 
be tried summorily. 
"36A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, all offences under this Act, 
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three 
years, other than an offence under clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 33-I,. shall be tried in a summary way by a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf 
by the State Government or by a Metropolitan Magistrate and 
the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the 
said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to such trial: 
Provided that, in the cas e of any conviction in a 
summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful for the 
Magistrate to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding one year:  
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or 
in the course of, a summary trial under this section it appears 
to the Magistrate that the nature  of the case is such that a 
sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may 
have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, 
undesirable to try the case summarily, the Magistrate shall, 
after hearing the parties, record  an order to that effect and 
thereafter recall any witness who has been examined and 
proceed to hear or rehear the case in the manner provided by 
the said Code. 
* * * * * 
 
2 of 1974 
 
 
 
 

RAJYA SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare) 

ANNEXURE-II  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE 
Sl.No. NAME OF WITNESS (ES) 
 
Date of Hearing-14th July, 2005 
1. Shri S.Y. Quraishi, Special Secretary & D.G. (NACO) 
2. Dr. S.P. Agarwal, Director  General (Health Service)  
3. Dr. Ashwani Kumar, Drug Controller General of India 
 Date of Hearing-9th September, 2005 
(A) REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN DRUG MANUFACTURERS ASSOCATION, 
MUMBAI 
4. Shri G.V. Vakankar, Executive Director  
5. Shri S.K Arya, Joint Director 
(B) REPRESENTATIVES OF THE ALL INDIA ORGANISATION OF CHEMISTS AND  
DRUGGISTS, MUMBAI 
6. Shri R.B. Puri, President, AIOCD 
7. Shri J.S. Shinde, Hon. Gen. Secretary, AIOCD 
(C) REPRESENTATIVES OF INDIAN PHARMACEUTICAL ALLIANCE, MUMBAI 
8. Shri D.G.Shah, Secretary General 
9. Shri Raghu Cidambi, Dr. Reddy’s 
(D) REPRESENTATIVES OF CONFEDERATION OF INDIAN PHARJVIACEUTICAL 
INDUSTRY (SMALL SCALE), DELHI 
10. Shri P.K.Gupta, Co-Chairman 
11. Shri Subhash Malhotra 
12. Shri Sudesh Kumar 
(E) REPRESENTATIVES OF VOICE, DELHI 
13. Dr. Sri Ram Khana, Managing Trustee 
14. Shri H.W. Awasthi, Manager Legal 
(F) REPRESENTATIVES OF VHAI, DELHI 
15. Dr. Mira Shiva, Director, WHD & Rational Drug Policy 
16. Dr. C.M. Gulati, Editor, Monthly Index of Medical Specialties 
 Date of Hearing- 17th November, 2005 
1. Shri P.K. Hota, Secretary, Deptt. of Health & Family Welfare 
2. Dr. Asliwini Kumar, Drug Controller General Of India 
3. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Director General of Health Services 
4. Smt. Rita Teaotia, Joint Secretary 
5. Dr. S.K. Sharma, Advisor (Ayurveda) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 14 th July, 2005 in Room No. 63, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri Amar Singh   —   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
 3. Dr. A.K. Patel 
 4. Shrimati Maya Singh 
  LOK SABHA 
 5. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu 
 6. Shrimati Sushila Bangaru Laxman 
 7. Dr. M Baburao 
 8. Dr. R.C. Dome 
 9. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah 
 10. Md. Shahabuddin 
 11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 12. Shri Uday Singh 
 13. Shrimati V. Radhika Selvi 
 14. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav 
 15. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director 
  Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
  Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer 
  REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH 
  1. Shri S.Y. Quraishi, Special Secretary & D.G. (NACO) 
  2. Dr. S.P. Agarwal, Director General (Health Service) 
  3. Dr. Ashwani Kumar, Drug Controller General of India 
  4. Shrimati Rita Teaotia, Joint Secretary 
  5. Shri Rajesh Bhushan, Director 
  6. Dr. N.S. Dharamshakhu, Addl. Project Director (NACO) 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. The Special Secretary, 
Department of Health then gave a brief presentatio n on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005. 
The Members raised certain issues in respect of the Bill to which the Spl. Secretary assured to submit 
written reply later. 
3. * * * 
4. * * * 
4A. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4:00 
P.M. 
 
*** Relates to some other matters. 

I 
FIRST MEETING 
 The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 9 th September, 2005 in Room No. 139, First Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri Amar Singh   —   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof. P.J. Kurian 
 3. Dr. A.K. Patel 
 4. Shrimati Maya Singh 
 5. Shri Lalhming Liana 
  LOK SABHA 
 6. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 7. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 8. Shrimati Sushila Bangaru Laxman 
 9. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah 
 10. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
 11. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 12. Shri D.B. Patil 
 13. Shri Nakul Das Rai 
 14. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma 
 15. Shri Uday Singh 
 16. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director 
  Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
  Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  (A) Representatives of Indian Drug Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 
   1. Shri G. Wakankar, Executive Director 
   2. Shri S.K. Arya, Joint Director 
  (B) Represeentative of the All India Organisation of Chemists & Druggists, Mumbai 
   1. Shri R.B. Puri, President, AIOCD 
   2. Shri J.S. Shinde, Hon. Gen. Secretary, AIOCD 
  (C) Representatives of Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance, Mumbai 
   1. Shri D.G. Shah, Secretary General 
   2. Shri Raghu Cidambi, Dr. Reddy's 
  (D) Representatives of Confederation of Indian Pharmaceutical Industry (Small Scale), 
   Delhi  
   1. Shri P.K. Gupta, Co-Chairman 
   2. Shri Subhash Malhotra 
   3. Shri Sudesh Kumar 
  (E) Representatives of Voice, Delhi 
   1. Dr. Sri Ram Khana, Managing Trustee 
   2. Shri H.W. Awasthi, Manager Legal 
  (F) Representatives of VHAI, Delhi 
   1. Dr. Mira Shiva, Director, WHD & Rational Drug Policy 
   2. Dr. C.M. Gulati, Editor, Monthly Index of Medical Specialities 

2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the me mbers of the re-constituted Committee to its first 
meeting. 
3.  The Chairman apprised the Committee that a de tailed questionnaire on the Drugs and Cosmetics 
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 has been prepared by the Secretariat and forwarded to the Department of Health & 
Family Welfare for their comments. The Committee thereafter heard a number of witnesses representing 
various organizations and also NGOs on the Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005. The members 
raised queries on certain provisions of the Bill to which the witnesses gave their reply. 
4. * * * 
4A. A verbatim record of the proceddings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 2:15 
P.M. to meet again on Monday the 26th September, 2005 at 
11:00 A.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*** Relates to some other matters. 

 
 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 17 th November, 2005 in Committee Room "A", 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri Amar Singh   —   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shrimati Sukhbuns Kaur 
 3. Dr. A.K. Patel 
 4. Shrimati Maya Singh 
  LOK SABHA 
 5. Shri D.K. Audikesavulu 
 6. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 7. Shri Rajendra Kumar 
 8. Shrimati Sushila Bangaru Laxman 
 9. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah 
 10. Dr. Babu Rao Mediyam 
 11. Dr. Chinta Mohan 
 12. Shri Uday Singh 
 13. Shrimati V. Radhika Selvi 
 16. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director 
  Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
  Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
 (A) *  * * 
  (B) Represeentative of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
   1. Shri P.K. Hota, Secretary, Deptt. of Health & Family Welfare 
   2. Dr. Ashwini Kumar, Drug Controller General of India 
   3. Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Dir ector General of Health Services 
   4. Shrimati Rita Teaotia, Joint Secretary 
   5. Dr. S.K. Sharma, Advisor (Ayurveda) 
 (C) *  * *  
 (D) *  * *  
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. 
3.   The Committee thereafter heard the Secretary,  Department of Health and Family and the Drug 
Controller General of India on various provisions relating to the Durgs and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 
2005. The members raised a number of queries and the witnesses replied thereto. 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. A verbatim record of the proceddings was kept. 

7.The Committee then adjourned at 6:15 P.M. 
 
 
*** 
Relates to some other matters. 
 

V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15 th December, 2005 in Committee Room 63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri Amar Singh   —   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Prof. P.J. Kurian 
  LOK SABHA 
 3. Shri D.K. Adikesavulu 
 4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome 
 5. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
 6. Shri S. Mallikarjunaiah 
 7. Dr. Baburao Mediyam 
 8. Shri Nakul Das Rai 
 9. Shri Uday Singh 
 10. Shrimati V. Radhika Selvi 
 11. Shri Kailash Nath Singh Yadav 
 12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Vandana Ga rg, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Director 
  Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary 
  Shri S.C. Dixit, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. The Committee then 
considered and adopted the following Reports:— 
 (i) 12th Report of the Committee on the Dr ugs and Cosmetics (Amendments) Bill, 2005. 
 (ii) * * * 
 (iii) * * * 
 (iv) * * * 
2A. The Committee also decided that the 12th, 13th, 14th and 15th Reports ma y be presented in Rajya 
Sabha by the Chairman and in his absence, by Prof. P. J. Kurian and in his absence by Shrimati Maya Singh 
and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha by Dr. Karan Singh  Yadav and in his absence by Shri Uday Singh on 
the 21st December, 2005. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 3:00 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
*** 
Relates to some other matters. 
 