PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New DelhiDecember, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY EIACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE     148TH REPORT MANAGEMENT IN CONTEMPORARY MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 
 
     PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE       Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)     
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT  ON  ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE     REPORT ON "MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND ITS MANAGEMENT IN CONTEMPORARY TIMES" PERTAINING TO MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025)   Y STANDING  WELFARE REPORT NO.  158 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE     "MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND ITS TIMES" PERTAINING TO 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://sansad.in/rs 
E-mail: rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 
  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARCOMMITTEEON HEALTH AND FAMILY
Rajya Sabha December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY EIACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE     148TH REPORT MANAGEMENT IN CONTEMPORARY TIMES" PERTAINING TO MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  
 
  PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA   RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE     Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi December, 2024/ Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)       
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT  ON  ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE     REPORT ON "MENTAL HEALTH CARE AND ITS MANAGEMENT IN CONTEMPORARY TIMES" PERTAINING TO MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE  Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2024) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th February, 2025) Y STANDING WELFARE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE     MANAGEMENT IN CONTEMPORARY TIMES" PERTAINING TO 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE i 
2.  PREFACE ii 
3.  ACRONYMS iii - iv 
4.  REPORT 
 
Chapter-I       
Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Ministry  
 
Chapter-II     
Recommendations/observations on which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Ministry’s replies  
 
Chapter-III   
Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by 
the committee  
 
Chapter - IV   
Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been received 
v 
 
1-12 
 
 
 
13-24 
 
 
 
25-29 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A GLANCE 31-32 
6 *MINUTES - 
*To be appended at the later stage. 
 

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sanjeev Arora 
3. Shri Rajib Bhattacharjee  
4. Dr. Ajeet Madhavrao Gopchade 
5. Dr. Sikander Kumar  
6. Shri Shambhu Sharan Patel  
7. Shri B. Parthasaradhi Reddy  
8. Shri Ashok Singh  
9. Shri RameswarTeli 
10. Shri Babubhai Jesangbhai Desai 
LOK SABHA  
11. Shri Ramvir Singh Bidhuri 
12. Dr. Vinod Kumar Bind  
13. Ms Iqra Choudhary  
14. Shri Mukeshkumar Chandrakaant Dalal  
15. Shri Sanjay Uttamrao Deshmukh  
16. Dr. Bachhav Shobha Dinesh  
17. Dr. Dharamvira Gandhi  
18. Dr. Kadiyam Kavya  
19. Dr. Prabha Mallikarjun  
20. Dr. C. N. Manjunath  
21. Shri Balya Mama Suresh Gopinath Mhatre 
22. Dr. Rajesh Mishra 
23. Shrimati Aparajita Sarangi  
24. Dr. Sharmila Sarkar  
25. Dr. Hemant Vishnu Savara  
26. Dr. Byreddy Shabari  
27. Dr. Mahesh Sharma  
28. Dr. Rani Srikumar  
29. Shri Parimal Suklabaidya  
30. Dr. Alok Kumar Suman 
31. Mrs. Ruchi Vira 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sumant Narain   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Shashi Bhushan   Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Saket Kumar   Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Renu Sreekanth   Under Secretary 
  

ii 
 
PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this 158th Report of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/ Observations contained in the 148th Report on “Mental Health Care and its 
Management in Contemporary Times” pertaining to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
 
2.  The One Hundred Forty-Eight Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 4th August 2023. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare on 29th November 2023. 
 
3.  The Committee made a total of 49 recommendations in the 148th Report, out of which 22 
recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and has been categorized under Chapter-I. 
There are 22 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Ministry’s replies that have been categorized under Chapter-II. There are 4 
recommendations/observations, in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon and 
have been categorized under Chapter-III while 1 recommendation/observation in respect of 
which final replies of the Ministry has not been received has been categorized under Chapter-IV. 
 
4.  The Committee, in its meeting held on the 18th December, 2024 considered the Draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
December 2024 
Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV  
                            Chairman, 
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
AIIMS 
ASHAs 
ANM 
BIMSTEC 
 
CBAC 
CEO 
CIDT 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
Accredited Social Health Activists 
Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation 
Community-Based Risk Assessment  
Chief Executive Officer 
Community Informant Decision Tool  
CSE 
CRPD 
CHCs 
CHO 
CMHA 
Civil Services Examination 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Community Health Centres 
Community Health Officer 
Central Mental Health Authority 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
DMHP 
DDRS 
District Mental Health Programme 
Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme 
DRPSC 
HWCs 
ICT 
Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
Health and Wellness Centres 
Information and Communication Tools 
IIT 
iGOT 
IHBAS 
INI 
IRDAI 
Indian Institute of Technology 
Integrated Government Online training 
Institute of Human Behaviour and Allied Sciences 
Institute of National Importance 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
LMICs 
LGBRIMH 
MHEs 
MHCA 
MHRB 
Low- and Middle-Income Countries 
Lokopriya Gopinath Bordoloi Regional Institute of Mental Health 
Mental Health Establishments 
Mental Healthcare Act 
Mental Health Review Board 
MHQ 
MNS 
MO 
NCRB 
NHRC 
Mental Health Quotient 
Mental, Neurological and Substance 
Medical Officer 
National Crime Records Bureau 
National Human Rights Commission  
MoH&FW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
NGO 
PTSD 
PHCs 
Non-Government Organisation 
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder 
Primary Health Centres 
NIMHANS 
NMHS 
NMHP 
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences 
National Mental Health Survey  
National Mental Health Programme 
NITI   
NMC 
National Institution for Transforming India 
National Medical Commission 
NSPS National Suicide Prevention Strategy 

iv 
 
NIMH 
SAARC 
National Institute of Mental Health 
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
SDGs 
SMHA 
SSC 
UPSC 
UNICEF 
WHO 
 
 
Sustainable Development Goals 
State Mental Health Authority 
Staff Selection Commission 
Union Public Service Commission 
United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund 
World Health Organisation 
 
  
 

v 
 
REPORT 
 
 The One Hundred Forty-Eight Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 4th August 2023. The Action Taken Notes of the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Report was received from the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare on 29th November 2023. 
2.  The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare respect of the recommendations contained in the Report. They have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para number 1.7, 1.11, 1.12, 1.24, 1.30, 1.39, 2.11, 2.22, 2.31, 3.5, 3.15, 3.16, 
3.24, 3.28, 3.30, 3.35, 3.37, 3.38, 3.47, 3.50, 3.55 and 3.57 of the Report. 
Total- 22(Chapter-I) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies: Para number: 1.16, 1.29, 1.37, 1.38, 2.9, 
2.15, 2.17, 2.19, 2.25, 2.26, 2.30, 3.10, 3.11, 3.20, 3.21, 3.22, 3.29, 3.32, 3.33, 
3.40, 3.41 and 3.51 of the Report. 
Total- 22 (Chapter-II) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: Para number 1.28, 2.10, 2.23 and 
3.48 of the Report. 
Total- 4 (Chapter-III) 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is still awaited: Para number 3.42 of the Report. 
Total- 1 (Chapter-IV) 
3.  The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding part of the 
Report. 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
1.1 Present status of mental health issues in India 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.1.1 The Committee notes that the National Mental Health Survey 2015-16 played a crucial 
role in highlighting the state of mental health in our country as it was arguably the first large-
scale exercise in India to assess the prevalence of mental health morbidity and the availability of 
mental health care services across the country. It provided valuable insights into the state of 
mental health in India and offered a comprehensive overview of the challenges and gaps in 
addressing mental health issues. 
(Para 1.7of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.1.2 An observation 
1.2 Treatment Gap 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.2.1 The Committee notes that most of the issues highlighted by the National Mental Health 
Survey 2015-16 have remained almost the same even in 2023. There is still considerable scope to 
improve the treatment gap that results from the lack of mental health professionals, weak mental 
healthcare infrastructure, inadequate and inequitable access to mental health services, stigma 
and discrimination. 
(Para 1.11of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.2.2 An observation.  There have been many initiatives taken by the States and UTs to 
improve access to mental health care and begin to align with the Mental Health Care Act 2017. 
The second National Mental Health Survey currently underway will reassess the situation and 
examine the impact of these initiatives and measures to address existing gaps. 
 
Recommendations/Observations : 
 
1.2.3 The Committee also observes that while National Mental Health Survey 2015 was a 
welcome step, it still had scope to be more comprehensive, viz. the Survey, which was done only 
in 12 states out of 36 states/UTs in India, covered only about 40,000 people which is a tiny 
sample considering the population of the country. Secondly, the Survey relied on self-reporting 
(and not clinical analysis) of mental morbidities by the interviewees, which can be subject to 

2 
 
recall biases and underreporting due to the stigma associated with mental health. Furthermore, 
the Survey was limited to collecting data on certain specific mental disorders, potentially 
overlooking mild or moderate mental health issues like emotional breakdown, etc, that may still 
require support and intervention. Additionally, the Survey did not include specific vulnerable 
populations, such as homeless individuals, prisoners, and those living in institutions, which may 
have led to underestimating the prevalence of mental disorders. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to address these issues in its next National Mental Health Survey 
(NMHS) and conduct a comprehensive study of the mental health issues and mental healthcare 
landscape in India. 
(Para 1.12 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.2.4 Yes, for the phase-2 of the survey (NMHS-2), each of the 36 states and Union Territories 
will be covered individually. For NMHS-2, validated tools and instruments are planned to be 
used which gives us comprehensive clinical analysis of the mental morbidity. The survey will 
expand to include mild and moderate mental health problems in addition to diagnosable mental 
disorders.  NMHS-2 will also include issues that were not part of NMHS-1, e.g. homeless 
persons, children and adolescents, geriatric population, prenatal women, effect of climate change 
on mental health, disaster related mental health morbidity, prisoners, other institutionalised 
persons, effect of COVID 19 on mental health etc. so as to get a comprehensive picture of the 
mental health problems in the country. 
 
1.3 Effect of Covid-19 on Mental Health 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
1.3.1 The Committee notes that the COVID-19 pandemic increased risks to mental health and 
psycho-social well-being and accentuated stress factors for all, especially children, 
adolescents, and caregivers. During the pandemic, people from all age groups, including 
children, experienced grief, uncertainty, and isolation, affecting their mental health and 
psycho-social well-being. The Committee, therefore, believes that the devastating impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic on mental health in India necessitates an immediate and comprehensive 
countrywide mental health survey. A post-COVID-19 mental health survey is crucial to assess 
the prevalence and severity of mental health disorders among the Indian population. Such a 
survey will provide valuable insights into the demographic groups and regions most affected by 
the pandemic's mental health consequences. The Committee is of the firm opinion that the 
findings from the Survey will serve as crucial evidence for policymakers to take informed 
decisions related to mental health funding, infrastructure development, and evidence-based 
interventions. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the National Mental Health Survey -
2, which is scheduled to be completed in 2025, should be expedited so that the impact of Covid-
19 may be accurately ascertained.  
(Para 1.24 of the Report) 
 

3 
 
Action Taken: 
1.3.2 Yes, the NMHS-2 is underway and will include questions to cover effects of COVID 19 
on mental health of all groups and sub-groups of the population. 
 
1.4 Mental Health Issues in Children and Youth 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.4.1 The Committee further recommends that a dedicated cadre of school counsellors in all 
schools under the "Manodarpan" initiative should be developed for this purpose. School 
management committees should be encouraged to have inclusive learning spaces focusing on 
students' social and emotional learning.  
 
(Para 1.30 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.4.2 This can be taken up with the Ministry of Education to all States and UTs to expand to all 
schools.  The new NEP also highlights the role of school counsellors for mental health and well-
being of children in school settings. It recommends recruiting trained school counsellors where 
these are not available within the school. The NEP also recommends inclusive learning as one of 
the important components of the curriculum and this is included in the National Curriculum 
Framework. 
 
1.5 Rising Trends of Suicides in India 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.5.1 The Committee also acknowledges the National Suicide Prevention Strategy (NSPS), 
which is a comprehensive plan that aims to reduce suicide mortality in the country by 10% by 
2030. Through NSPS, the Committee recommends the Ministry to strengthen surveillance 
mechanisms to track factors causing suicides and trends and thus devise mitigation strategies. 
The Committee further recommends that short-term training courses should be formulated to 
strengthen the number of mental health workers and also further the capacity of existing mental 
health service providers.  
(Para 1.39 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.5.2 The Ministry will initiate steps for establishing surveillance mechanisms as provisioned 
in the National Suicide Prevention Strategies. Suicide prevention is already included as one of 
the targeted interventions under the NMHP/DMHP. The NSPS outlines the steps for suicide 
prevention among adolescents. The Ayushman Bharat revised School Health Curriculum has a 
component on self-harm prevention among children and adolescents. The Janani Suraksha 
Yojana has a component of mental health care of pregnant mothers which in turn will have 
important consequences for neonatal health and development. Mission Poshan also focuses on 

4 
 
maternal nutrition during pregnancy. Thaayi cards in some states have incorporated questions on 
maternal mental health. Short term courses for suicide prevention are being conducted by 
agencies like NIMHANS for various cadres of non-specialists including lay volunteers. Such 
interventions have specifically focused on institutions like the Indian Army, Indian Airforce, 
Central Armed Paramilitary Forces. 
 
1.6 Increased awareness of trained human resource 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.6.1 The Committee further believes that the policy should be evaluated and reviewed 
periodically due to the constantly evolving landscape of mental health issues and the subsequent 
difficulty in implementing an all-encompassing policy like the NMHP. This would result in 
incorporating evolving mental health issues in the NMHP, making the policy-relevant.  
(Para 2.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.6.2 An Observation 
1.7 Analysis of Key Features of the Act 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.7.1 The Committee understands the need to establish mental health facilities in prison and 
ensure well-trained staff in such facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry 
to provide adequate training to the prison staff regarding mental healthcare and to ensure that 
adequate mental healthcare staff is stationed in the prison establishment to address the needs of 
the prison inmates. 
(Para 2.22 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.7.2 The Ministry of Home Affairs has issued an advisory vide their letter dated 24.6.2021 to 
all States and UTs on addressing mental health issues of inmates and staff in Prisons and 
correction facilities. This includes two handbooks, prepared in collaboration with NIMHANS, 
Bengaluru, titled 'Dealing with Mental Health Issues in Prisoners during COVID-19: A 
HANDBOOK’ and ‘Dealing with Mental Health Issues in Prison Staff during COVID-19: A 
HANDBOOK’. The Handbooks are forwarded to all State Prison authorities, who may 
disseminate the guidance contained therein to all Prisons in the States and UTs.  
1.7.3 The NIMHANS Digital Academy offers a Hybrid course termed ‘Diploma in Prison and 
Correctional Psychiatry’ for medical officers working in prisons. Medical Officers working in 
prisons of Bihar have undergone this course and post-training, they have been able to identify 
and treat mental health issues inside prisons. This has scope for upscaling at a national level. 
Through SAMVAD, WCD has implemented training of over 1 lakh correctional staff of 
childcare institutions across the country using standard training modules. 

5 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.7.4 The Committee also recommends the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to 
expedite the establishment of halfway homes/community-based establishments, particularly in 
states having high mental morbidities like Kerala, Manipur, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Bihar etc. 
Concerted efforts should be put in to establish vocational training centres in all districts for 
persons with mental illness; similarly, special employment exchange should be started so that 
people who are now fit can secure livelihood and dignity. The Ministry should also work 
towards developing a portal for real-time display of halfway homes established in all states and 
UTs, their capacity and occupancy, the facilities provided and the mental healthcare 
professionals available.  
(Para 2.31 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.7.5 Guidelines for discharge of mentally cured patients from Mental Health Institutions have 
been prepared by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Additionally, the Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disability, Ministry of Social Justice &Empowerment, Govt. of 
India has issued Guidelines for the State Governments for setting up of Rehabilitation Homes 
(RH) for persons living with mental illness (who have been cured and do not need further 
hospitalization but are homeless or are not accepted by their families). 
 
1.7.6 Department of Disability Affairs has developed a dashboard viz. "MANOASHRAYA: 
Dashboard on Rehabilitation Homes (RH)/ Half-way Homes (HH) in 
https://halfrvryhomes.disebilityaffairs.gov.in/ for maintaining the data of RH/HH in the States 
throughout the Country. The dashboard has information regarding the intake capacity and 
occupancy in these RH/HH. The dashboard also displays the number of persons overstaying in 
Mental Health Institutions. 
 
1.8 Mental Health Program and Mental Health Infrastructure 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.8.1 The Committee notes the remark of the NHRC that almost all the 47 Government mental 
health institutions functioning in the country have failed to adhere to the MHCA guidelines. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to put concerted efforts to strengthen the 
infrastructure, capacity, and facilities and upgrade these institutions to generate more human 
resources. Furthermore, the Ministry should take measures to enable these institutions to 
become centres of academic research and also participate in the public healthcare system. 
(Para 3.5 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.8.2 The Ministry is working to increase the output of specialist human resources for mental 
health. It is certainly possible and important to enable these institutions to become academic 

6 
 
centres which will not only improve care, but also ensure a network of services extending into 
primary care. 
 
1.8.3 Ministry has approved the proposal of NIMHANS in collaboration with the WHO to 
address multi-morbidity in patients in these institutions. 
 
1.9 Training to Healthcare Professionals 
 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
1.9.1 The Committee acknowledges that with the launch of the Ayushman Bharat Health and 
Wellness Centres (HWCs) scheme, Care for Mental, Neurological and Substance Use (MNS) 
Disorders has witnessed an augmentation at PHCs and CHCs under the District Mental Health 
Program. To further leverage the network of HWCs, the Committee recommends the Ministry to 
ensure quality training is imparted to Community Health Officers and Medical Officers so that 
they are being able to provide first-line mental health counselling and care either in person or by 
tele-consultation/telemedicine by leveraging the ICT tools. 
(Para 3.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.9.2 Work has already started to leverage the HWCs for MNS care. Training Manuals have 
been developed for imparting training for Community Health Officers (CHOs) and Medical 
Officer (MOs) for Mental, Neurological, and Substance Use (MNS) Disorders as a part of an 
expanded package under the Ayushman Bharat – HWC Programme. These trainings are being 
provided in a cascade manner and the same is also being monitored through a special portal 
(SASHAKT) developed for this purpose. 
 
1.10 Availability of Medicines 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.10.1 Furthermore, the Committee notes that 17 psychotropic and substance use medications 
are currently included in the National List of Essential Medicines, 2022; 13 are to be made 
available at the Primary level i.e. at HWCs for treatment of fundamental mental health issues. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure essential medicines are 
available concerning mental health issues like depression and anxiety at HWCs. 
(Para 3.16 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.10.2 Noted. 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
1.11 Awareness Generation Programmes regarding Mental Health 
 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
1.11.1 The Committee is happy to note the district-centric approach of the Government in 
spreading awareness of mental health. The Committee believes that spreading awareness 
amongst the masses is the easiest yet most effective way to reduce mental morbidity in the 
country. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the awareness of mental health issues did receive 
public attention and positive messages also got around and became visible. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to reach out, in a very big way, through all the 
interpersonal channels, electronic channels, social media, print media, meetings, all those 
community processes, and community congregations. The Ministry, on the lines of the "Polio 
Campaign", may rope in popular personalities who have battled mental issues to spread 
awareness amongst the masses and encourage people to come out and seek help and treatment. 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry to devise social media-specific campaigns, 
particularly for adolescents on social media platforms like, Facebook and Twitter as these 
platforms though a potential source of mental health concerns, are also pathways of solutions to 
work with youngsters. 
(Para 3.24 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.11.2 Ministry through its social media handles keeps spreading positive mental health 
messages.  Celebrities are being roped in to spread mental health messages. For Tele MANAS, 
this is being attempted locally and can be subsequently expanded throughout the country. 
 
1.12 Nimhans (National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences) 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.12.1 The Committee commends NIMHANS, Bengaluru, for its exceptional services as a 
leading tertiary care hospital, teaching, and research institute in mental health and 
neurosciences. The Institute's unwavering commitment to providing comprehensive healthcare 
services, nurturing future professionals through robust teaching programs, and making ground 
breaking contributions to research deserves utmost appreciation. 
(Para 3.28 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.12.2 Observation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
1.13 Offshore Institute Campuses 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.13.1 The Committee also recommends NIMHANS to explore the possibility of establishing 
offshore institute campuses, potentially in SAARC or BIMSTEC countries, as a strategic move to 
enhance its international image and expand its global presence. By establishing such campuses, 
NIMHANS can further foster international collaborations, promote knowledge exchange, and 
contribute to advancing mental health and neurosciences in the region. By seizing this 
opportunity to create offshore institute campuses, NIMHANS can showcase India's leadership in 
mental health and neurosciences on a global stage, attract top-notch faculty and researchers 
from diverse backgrounds, and elevate the Institute's reputation as a centre of excellence in the 
international community. This initiative will enrich NIMHANS' academic and research 
endeavours and contribute significantly to improving mental healthcare in neighbouring 
regions.  
(Para 3.30 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.13.2 This recommendation is well-received and NIMHANS will work with the Ministry and 
WHO SEARO to explore how this can be taken forward. 
 
1.14 Integrative Medicine 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.14.1 The Committee commends NIMHANS for its efforts in establishing the Department of 
Integrative Medicine. It also wholeheartedly recommends adopting the NIMHANS model to 
foster seamless integration between modern medicine and traditional systems like Ayurveda and 
Yoga. By having Psychiatrists and physicians of traditional systems collaboratively consult a 
patient, treatment plans can be optimized and tailored to the patient's needs. The Committee 
notes that Yoga and Ayurveda can be used as a standalone therapy for treating moderate 
depression. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Government to explore the concept of 
collaborative consultation as this approach ensures holistic care. Integrating these systems not 
only benefits the patients through different systems of treatment simultaneously but also 
capitalises on the strengths of each discipline, thereby advancing comprehensive healthcare 
practices. We encourage the Government to champion this model, promoting greater harmony 
and efficiency in our healthcare system while embracing the richness of our traditional healing 
practices. 
(Para 3.35 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.14.2 The Ministry has begun acting on this recommendation and working to establish 
Integrative Medicine/Ayush departments in all INIs. A meeting/workshop was convened in 
NIMHANS in October 2023 where all Executive Directors of AIIMS met and deliberated means 
of taking this initiative forward. The objective of the meeting was to adopt the NIMHANS model 

9 
 
of Integrative Medicine Department in other Medical Institutes of National Importance across the 
country. 
 
1.15 Expansion of Yuva Spandana 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.15.1 The Committee notes the rising trend of mental health issues, particularly in the country's 
youth population. It thus acknowledges the wonderful initiative "Yuva Spandana" of the 
Department of Epidemiology, NIMHANS. The Committee recommends the Government to 
expand the "Yuva Spandana" scheme throughout the country. By training 20-30 dedicated 
individuals in each District, this transformative program will empower them to address the 
pressing mental health challenges our nation's youth face. Under the scheme, these trained 
individuals can identify and respond to mental health concerns at their nascent stages through 
early intervention strategies, preventing potential crises and promoting timely, compassionate 
support. Furthermore, the replication will ensure a youth-centric approach, recognising the 
unique needs and circumstances of young minds from diverse backgrounds. 
(Para 3.37 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.15.2 Such programs are best carried out by the Department of Youth Affairs.  The ministry 
will work with that Department for upscaling of ‘Yuva Spandana’ across the country. 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.15.3 The Committee hopes the program's effectiveness will extend to remote and underserved 
regions of the country by integrating telemedicine services, breaking geographical barriers and 
fostering a robust mental health support network. Collaboration with local health centres, 
educational institutions, NGOs, and other stakeholders will create a web of care, ensuring a 
seamless continuum of support for youth in need. 
(Para 3.38 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.15.4 The primary objective of the NDA is leveraging digital technology to reach the 
unreached, by breaking geographical barriers and fostering a robust mental health support 
network. 
 
1.16 Budgetary Allocation for Mental Health  
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.16.1 The Committee expresses its concern regarding the insufficient budgetary allocation for 
the development of primary, secondary, and tertiary mental health infrastructure and mental 
healthcare services. The Committee notes that a decrease in funding of tertiary care programs 
raises concerns about its potential impact on the tertiary components of the National Mental 

10 
 
Health Programme (NMHP). The Committee fears that the reduced budgetary allocation would 
hamper the state of tertiary-level mental health institutions in the country. The Committee, after 
analysing the budget numbers, is of the consensus that the budgetary allocation falls woefully 
short of meeting the escalating demand for mental health care, and it hinders the improvement 
of the existing infrastructure. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommends the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare to conduct an in-depth assessment of the current mental health 
infrastructure, identifying the gaps and deficiencies that need urgent attention. The Committee 
recommends the Government to allocate funds to establish and enhance regional mental health 
centres, ensuring accessibility and adequate services in remote areas. Further additional 
funding should be provided to upgrade and equip existing mental health facilities with modern 
technologies and skilled personnel. 
(Para 3.47 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
1.16.2 Under the systems evaluation of the National Mental Health Survey, there is going to be 
an in-depth assessment of the current mental health infrastructure, identifying the gaps and 
deficiencies that need urgent attention. 
 
1.17       Budgetary Allocation for Telemanas (T-Manas) Scheme 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
1.17.1 The Committee notes that T-MANAS initiative is a promising step towards enhancing 
access to mental health services, especially in light of the shortage of trained mental health 
professionals and limited availability of primary mental healthcare services in the country. The 
program holds the potential to extend mental healthcare to remote regions. The Committee, 
however, recommends the Government to take adequate measures to address the concerns 
regarding the security, privacy, and management ofpersonal and sensitive data, considering the 
absence of robust data privacy regulatory frameworks in the country. 
(Para 3.50 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
1.17.2 Data security, privacy, and management have been taken up very carefully in the Tele 
MANAS. This is being further pursued and all measures within theprovisions of the Personal 
Data Protection Act and its extant rules are being ensured. 
1.18 Sustainable Development Goals (Sdgs) and Mental Health 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
1.18.1 The Committee notes that mental health is a crucial element of human well-being and 
sustainable development, and it is increasingly gaining recognition as an essential component of 
the development agenda in India. The Committee believes that by including mental health 
parameters in the SDG India index, India can track its progress in this area and identify areas 
where more work needs to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to 
include mental health parameters in future iterations of the SDG India Index. 
(Para 3.55 of the Report) 

11 
 
Action Taken: 
 
1.18.2 The Ministry would explore mental health indicators that could be included in future 
iterations of the SDG India Index. 
 
1.19 Way Forward 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
1.19.1 The Committee is of the consensus that promoting mental health and ensuring accessible 
and effective mental health care is crucial for the overall well-being of individuals and society. 
Considering the burden amongst the population and children and adolescents in India, there are 
several steps that the Government and society can take to address mental health challenges and 
improve mental health care. Below are a few significant measures that can be taken at the 
Government and individual levels to strengthen mental healthcare delivery in India.  
1.  Need to Increase funding: The Government should allocate more resources towards 
mental health, including funding for infrastructure, research, training programs, and 
awareness campaigns.  
2.  Integration of mental health into primary healthcare: Mental health services should 
be integrated into primary healthcare centres to ensure accessibility and early 
intervention.  
3.  Policy Development: Develop and implement comprehensive mental health policies 
that address prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and destigmatization.  
4.  Mental health legislation: Effective enforcement of MHCA, 2017 and other laws that 
protect the rights of individuals with mental health conditions and ensure access to 
quality care.  
5.  Human resource development: Invest in training and capacity building for mental 
health professionals to meet the growing demand for services.  
6.  Awareness and Education: Launch massive nationwide campaigns to raise awareness 
about mental health, reduce stigma, and promote help-seeking behaviours. School and 
college programs should be launched to incorporate mental health education into the 
curriculum to enhance understanding, early identification, and emotional well-being. 
Also, community outreach programs should be devised to provide information, support, 
and resources related to mental health.  
7.  Telemedicine and Technology: Expand the use of telemedicine and Tele-Manas 
schemes to reach underserved areas and increase access to mental health 
professionals.  
8.  Research and Collaboration: Allocate resources for research on mental health, 
including epidemiology, intervention strategies, and the development of culturally 
appropriate approaches.  
9.  Collaboration with NGOs and private sector: Foster partnerships between the 
Government, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and the private sector to 
enhance mental health services and support. 
(Para 3.57 of the Report) 

12 
 
Action Taken: 
1.19.2 Various steps are being taken to address recommendations 1-9. These include: 
 Focus on IEC campaigns, particularly during the G 20 meetings to increase 
awareness on mental health issues. 
 Introduction of mental health component into national programs relating to NCDs, 
TB, HIV, drug abuse etc. 
 Proposal to address the physical health of persons with mental illness in 
institutional settings. 
 Anti-stigma campaigns. 
 Steps for implementation of the MHCA, 2017. 
 HR resource development and Capacity building and training both through 
increasing training and accreditation and through digital means, as well as 
encouraging continuing professional education. 
 Through the digital initiatives, a fillip would be provided for tele-mental health 
training and service delivery. 
 Institutes like NIMHANS are involved in quality research on epidemiology, 
intervention, and culturally appropriate approaches. Such institutions can also 
provide training to develop trained resources in mental health and neurosciences 
throughout the country. Already training programs in a wide set of areas from 
biostatistics to integrative medicine are being conducted. They can be expanded 
through digital initiatives. 
 In addition to the above, Mental health services have been added in the package of 
services under Comprehensive Primary Health Care under Ayushman Bharat – 
HWC Scheme. Operational guidelines on Mental, Neurological, and substance use 
disorders (MNS) at Health and Wellness Centres (HWC) have been released under 
the ambit of Ayushman Bharat. 
 “National Tele Mental Health Program” (NTMHP) was launched on 10th October 
2022, to improve access to quality mental health counselling and care services in 
the country. As on 22.11.2023, 34 States/ UTs have set up 46 Tele MANAS Cells 
and have started tele mental health services. More than 4,50,000 calls have been 
handled on the helpline number. 
The observations made in the report have been noted and will be considered in the 
implementation of Mental Health Care Policies in the Ministry.  

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY’S REPLIES 
 
2.1 Global Comparison 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.1.1 The Committee has noted India's unsatisfactory status in terms of mental well-being, life 
satisfaction and happiness across the globe. The Committee believes that it is crucial to 
recognise that the ultimate goal of development should be to improve people's lives and enhance 
their overall satisfaction and happiness. Therefore, for India's sustainable socio-economic 
growth, it is necessary to give the citizens a sense of equality, inclusiveness, justice, social 
security and participation. 
(Para 1.16 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.1.2 This requires inter-sectoral collaborations looking at socio-economic growth, social 
security, justice, and inclusiveness. It comes in the ambit of several other Ministries. Under the 
MOHFW, through the Health and Wellness Clinics, mental health is being integrated. There is 
also an effort to integrate Yoga and Ayush for mental health promotion. 
2.2 Mental Health Issues in Children and Youth 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.2.1 Furthermore, the Committee is of the view that the mental health care services, surveys 
and programs should be designed to have a dedicated section for children, adolescents and 
young people and also mental service providers need to be exclusively trained in understanding 
the developmental needs as well as vulnerabilities of the young age population. There is also a 
lack of comparable data and evidence on the mental health problems affecting children, 
adolescents and young people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in the NMHS-2, 
specific provisions should be made to generate evidence and data on mental health and psycho-
social well-being of children, adolescents, youth and caregivers to understand the magnitude, 
trends, patterns and the prevalence of mental health and psycho-social problems among 
children, adolescents, youth and caregivers in India. 
(Para 1.29 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.2.2 The Government has made sure to include specific provisions to generate evidence and 
data on the mental health and psycho-social well-being of children, adolescents, youth, and 
caregivers to understand the magnitude, trends, patterns, and prevalence of mental health and 
psycho-social problems among children, adolescents, youth and caregivers in India. 
 

14 
 
2.3 Rising Trends of Suicides in India 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
2.3.1 The Committee takes note the continuously rising number of suicides in the country. The 
Committee believes that feeling hopeless and low self-esteem pushes a person to take extreme 
steps to end life. The Committee is pained to observe that students and unemployed youth 
accounted for the highest number of suicides in India. The Committee notes that while more 
students committed suicide than farmers, the latter's suicides were termed a national crisis. 
However, suicides by students hardly caught anyone's attention and were dealt with on a case-
to-case basis. 
(Para 1.37 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.3.2 Particularly during Covid-19, the psycho-social helpline set up at NIMHANS, answered 
several calls related to distress and suicide risk from both adults and youth. Presently, Tele 
MANAS also receives calls related to suicide risk and links persons with serious risk for suicide 
to mental health services in the locality. 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.3.3 The Committee recommends the Ministry to make provision under its 24/7 helpline to 
telephonically connect with youths who fail to qualify for competitive exams like UPSC- CSE, 
NEET, SSC, JEE, etc., by few marks and counsel them against committing suicides. 
Furthermore, the Government should prioritise mental health awareness and education 
campaigns to eliminate the stigma surrounding mental health issues by conducting awareness 
programs in schools and colleges, providing information on available mental health resources, 
and promoting open discussions on mental well-being. 
 
(Para 1.38 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.3.4 In some of the States, it has been found useful to increase awareness about helplines 
particularly before competitive examinations. Many newspapers are also carrying helpline 
numbers when they report any suicides and norms have also been developed for the media 
reporting of suicides. Programs like Parkiksha Pe Charcha have been initiated by the Hon. Prime 
Minister to address students’ academic stress before board examinations. Institutes like 
NIMHANS are working to bring out guidelines to manage such instances that are commonly 
seen in educational institutions (such as those in Kota, and Rajasthan). These guidelines will be 
widely shared across India. The Ministry of Education has taken up a proactive initiative, named, 
‘Manodarpan’, covering a wide range of activities to provide psychosocial support to students, 
teachers and families for Mental Health and Emotional well-being. Under the Manodarpan 
initiative, a Web page (URL: http://manodarpan.education.gov.in) has been created carrying 
advisory guidelines, Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs), Practical tips, posters, videos, do’s 
and don’ts for students, teachers/faculty and families for psycho-social support have been 
uploaded on the Web-page. A National Toll-free Helpline (8448440632) for a country-wide 

15 
 
outreach to students from schools, colleges and universities to provide them with tele-
counselling to address their mental health and psycho-social issues during and after the COVID-
19 situation has been set up. 
 
2.4 Increased Awareness of Trained Human Resource 
 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
2.4.1 The Committee, after analysing the implementation of the National Mental Health Policy 
(NMHP), is of the consensus that strategic objectives identified in the NMHP are yet to be 
translated into full action by responsible authorities and those in charge of implementation. To 
address this issue, the Committee recommends formulating national and state-level action plan 
(s) to actualise the recommendations given in the NMHP.  
(Para 2.9 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.4.2 State Action Plan/Policy on mental health are in place for a couple of states such as 
Karnataka and Meghalaya. The Ministry would work with other states and UTs so that every 
state and UT will have its own action plans/policies. 
 
2.5 Analysis of Key Features of the Act 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.5.1 The Committee believes that the key challenge with implementing of advance directives 
is the need for more awareness and understanding among healthcare professionals and the 
general public. Individuals may need to be made aware of the provision or help understand how 
to create an advance directive effectively. Therefore, the Committee recommends the 
Government to put in adequate efforts to educate and raise awareness about advance directives 
to ensure their meaningful utilisation. Furthermore, the Committee believes that mental health 
conditions and circumstances may change over time, leading to alterations in an individual's 
preferences for treatment. The Act does not explicitly address the issue of periodic review and 
updating of advance directives. The Committee, therefore, recommends that regular review and 
the provision for modifying advance directives in response to evolving preferences and 
conditions should be considered to ensure their relevance and applicability. 
(Para 2.15 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.5.2 The public and key stakeholders require sensitization on all aspects of the Mental Health 
Care Act, including advance directives.  A recent program conducted by the NHRC with the 
participation of the Government has focused on issues related to both the implementation and 
awareness about the Mental Health Act. 
2.5.3 The concept of the Advance Directive and how it can be implemented in different 
contexts requires re-examination, in consultation with the respective stakeholders. 
 
 

16 
 
2.6 Role of CMHA 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.6.1 The Committee acknowledges establishing the Central Mental Health Authority 
(CMHA). However, the Committee takes note of the largely inconspicuous presence and 
functioning of CMHA. The Committee observes that despite CMHA being a statutory body and 
almost five years after its establishment, there needs to be more public presence about its 
functioning and work done. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to develop 
a dedicated website for the authority and recommends the authority to release its annual report 
comprising of its vision, objectives, programmes implemented, achievements etc. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the present status and the budgetary allocation to the 
CMHA fund, which the Central Government primarily funds. 
(Para 2.17 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.6.2 The setting up of Central Mental Health Authority (CMHA) Secretariat is under process. 
As per BE 2023-24, the budgetary allocation for CMHA is Rs. 2.29 crore. Non-official Members 
of CMHA were notified on 04.12.2018 for a term of 3 years. For the next term of three years 
Non-official Members of CMHA have been notified on 11.11.2022. The 5th meeting of CMHA 
was also held under the chairpersonship of the Chairperson, CMHA on 28.3.2023. The website 
of CMHA is ready and will be launched soon. A training Manual for imparting training to 
Mental Health Professionals, Legal Aid Providers and caregivers with respect to the Mental 
Health Care Act, 2017 have been prepared. 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
2.6.3 The Committee notes that, like CMHA, SMHA is crucial for implementing the National 
Mental Health Programme across all states. The Committee further notes that though most of 
the States have established SMHAs, efforts related to the appointment of ex-officio and non-
official, the appointment of CEOs, officers and other staff, development of mechanisms for 
complaints redressal and establishment of SMHA funds need further push in most of the States. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to expedite the work-related completion of 
the aforementioned issues along with establishment of Mental Health Review Boards (MHRB), 
which still remain unconstituted in the majority of states. The Committee further recommends 
developing a tracker to track the implementation status of the establishment of SMHAs, MHRBs 
and other determinants governing the development of mental health infrastructure and human 
resources.  
(Para 2.19 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.6.4 In order to expedite this work, a ‘Manoraksha Cell’ has been established in NIMHANS 
for better coordination between the Union Health Ministry and the States and the Union 
Territories. Apart from 8 States/UTs, rules from others are being processed.  
Through expanded support to the Nimhans Digital Academy, the following are envisioned: 

17 
 
 To conduct accredited course for law enforcers, doctors and mental health stakeholders to 
increase awareness about MHCA 
 To continue finalizing drafts of the various states (rules and regulations) 
 To expedite the process by conducting regular meetings with focal nodal officers and 
resolving any practical issues.  
The formation/establishment of SMHAs/MHRBs in all States/UTs is being pursued actively by 
the Ministry. As on date, the updated status of SMHAs / MHRBs / SMHRs are as follows: 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Particulars Status 
1 SMHA Established - 26 
2 MHRB Established - 20 
3 State Mental Healthcare Rules Notified - 5 
Approved by MoHFW and to be notified by State - 5 
 
2.7 Insurance in Mental Healthcare 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
2.7.1 The Committee notes the provision in the Mental Healthcare Act for medical insurance 
for treating mental illness on the same lines as is available for treating physical illness. The 
Committee feels that the IRDAI’s action to make it mandatory for the insurance companies will 
pave the way for significant improvement in the insurance scenario for mental illness. The 
Committee, however, recommends the Ministry to work in tandem with IRDAI and encourage the 
insurance providers to include more and more mental health issues in the insurance policies as 
the Committee feels that insurance policies traditionally are designed to cater to the in-patient 
procedures. Thus insurance providers might not be willing to include mental health procedures 
primarily out-patient, viz. counselling sessions. 
(Para 2.25 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.7.2 The IRDAI has set up a committee of experts in mental health and insurance to make 
recommendations regarding insurance related to mental illness. The same will be examined by 
the Ministry for further action. 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.7.3 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to develop a mechanism for monitoring 
the insurance delivery for mental health issues; the Government should ascertain data on 
policies covering mental health issues, total claims received for mental issues, total claims 
cleared, rejection of policies and reasons for rejection. The Committee further recommends the 
Ministry to actively pursue IRDAI to discourage the insurance providers from excluding 

18 
 
treatment for attempted suicide or self-injury as both of these may require treatment or 
hospitalisation. 
(Para 2.26 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.7.4 Under the Ayushman Bharat, the Government has been providing financial cover during 
hospitalization for a range of mental health disorders.  The recommendations of the IRDAI 
committee are awaited for further action. 
 
2.8 Halfway Homes 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
2.8.1 The Committee acknowledges the efforts put in by the Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities for establishing community-based establishments, including half-way 
homes, for persons who no longer require treatment in mental health establishments. The 
Committee, however, recommends the Ministry to make concerted efforts to ensure that such 
patients who are treated and don’t require to stay in mental health establishments are not re-
designated to old age or beggar homes.  
(Para 2.30 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.8.2 The recommendation is well received.   It may kindly be noted that the Health Ministry’s 
ambit is the acute treatment of mental health conditions. Setting up community-based 
establishments including half-way homes for persons who no longer require treatment in mental 
health establishments will come under the ambit of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. It is proposed to work along with the concerned Ministries to address this 
recommendation. 
 
2.9 Mental Health Program and Mental Health Infrastructure 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
2.9.1 The committee acknowledges the measures taken under NMHP and DMHP to integrate 
mental health services with Primary and Secondary health services. The Committee believes 
that quality mental health services if provided at the Primary and Secondary levels, will result 
in fewer cases requiring treatment at the tertiary level. Also, the capital expenditure for 
augmenting the primary and secondary mental health facilities is far lower than the budgetary 
requirements for developing tertiary mental healthcare infrastructure. Also, the expenditure 
(public and out-of-pocket) for treating mental illnesses is comparatively lower if mental issues 
can be screened early at the PHC and CHC levels (as shown in the pyramid below under 3.12). 
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to take appropriate measures and allocate 
sufficient funds to strengthen primary and secondary mental health services. For this, the 
Ministry should develop improved monitoring systems to oversee the functioning of the DMHP 
and to generate reliable data on the functioning of the DMHP.  The data generated can be used 
to update/ upgrade the DMHP for better functioning. 
 (Para 3.10 of the Report) 

19 
 
Action Taken: 
2.9.2 To strengthen mental health service delivery at the primary care level, mental health care 
is now included as one of the components of the ‘Comprehensive Primary Mental Healthcare’ 
Packages of the Ayushman Bharat. Mental health is one of the 12 packages.  
2.9.3 The guidelines to manage mental, neurological, and substance use disorders at the Health 
and Wellness Centres are made available for States and UTs.  
2.9.4 The functioning of DMHP and footfall is also monitored as a part of the Output Outcome 
Monitoring Framework (OOMF) of NITI Aayog, besides internal monitoring through review 
mechanisms in the Ministry such as during National Programme Co-ordinating Committees 
(NPCC) Meetings held with States/UTs and Common Review Missions (CRM) of National 
Health Mission. 
Recommendations/Observations: 
2.9.5 Furthermore, the Committee believes that at the primary level i.e. at in DMHP, along 
with the existing biomedical approach, equal focus, if not more, should be given to community-
based care. The Committee believes that community-based care offers a person-centered and 
community-oriented approach to mental health, promoting accessibility, early intervention, 
holistic care, integration, reduced stigma, and continuity of support. It recognises the 
importance of addressing mental health within the broader social fabric and promoting well-
being at the community level. Therefore, the Committee recommends that under DMHP, the 
Ministry devise treatment/ rehabilitation/ counselling measures rooted in community-based care. 
The DMHP should work beyond the clinical services and also focus on awareness of mental 
health issues, mitigate stigma through its outreach activities, improve intersectoral action and 
build linkages with other health initiatives, viz. TB elimination programme to strengthen overall 
well-being. 
(Para 3.11 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.9.6 The Ministry has developed guidelines for treating mental health issues for non-
specialists including medical officers, psychologists, social workers, and nurses. 
 
2.9.7 Institutes such as NIMHANS, have come up with simpler tools for (a) doctors (Clinical 
Schedules of Primary Care Psychiatry) and (b) Community Health Workers (the MERIT 
screening tool for screening commonly prevalent mental health issues in communities). These 
are already being used in States such as Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Uttarakhand, etc. Efforts will 
be made to ensure these measures reach the country. Efforts are also on to link up other national 
programs (viz the Leprosy Eradication Program and the TB elimination Program) with mental 
health aspects. 
 
2.10 Human Resources on Mental Health 
 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
2.10.1 The Committee notes that the average of 0.75 mental health professionals for every 
100,000 people is meagre and the lack of numbers is reflected on the ground where millions of 

20 
 
people battling the range of mental health issues continue to suffer – not only because of stigma 
and ignorance but also because there are insufficiently trained mental health professionals. The 
Committee feels that if even the target is three Psychiatrists (per 100,000 population) as the 
desired number, India needs 36,000 psychiatrists to reach that goal. So, currently, India is short 
of 27,000 psychiatrists. Not considering attrition and other factors, at the rate of 1000 new 
psychiatrists, it may take India another 27 years to achieve the target. The scenario is more or 
less the same for other mental health professionals viz. psychologists, psychiatric social workers 
and nurses. 
(Para 3.20 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.10.2 Under the tertiary care component of NMHP, 25 Centres of Excellence have been 
sanctioned to increase the intake of students in PG departments in mental health specialties as 
well as to provide tertiary-level treatment facilities.  Further, the Government has also 
supported 19 Government medical colleges/institutions to strengthen 47 PG Departments in 
mental health specialties. Mental Health Services are also provisioned for 22 AIIMS. These 
services are also available under PMJAY. 
 
2.11 Manpower Development 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.11.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry not to terminate the Manpower 
Development Scheme in 2024 and continue it beyond, as it is vital to augment the availability of 
mental health professionals to achieve the set target within a decade. The Committee 
recommends the NMC (National Medical Commission) through the Ministry to actively explore 
the feasibility of augmenting the MD Psychiatry seats in the medical colleges. The Committee 
also suggests the Ministry to examine the possibility of 3 year DNB degree in Psychiatry and 
other mental health specialisation in private hospitals, Railway hospitals, PSU hospitals etc, 
through the National Board of Examinations. 
(Para 3.21 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.11.2 The proposal for the continuation of the Manpower Development Scheme under NMHP 
beyond 2024 is under consideration in the Ministry. The feasibility will be examined in the 
Ministry in consultation with other stakeholders. 
 
2.12 Discontinuance of M.Phil. Courses 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
2.12.1 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to expedite the solution of the problem 
which has emanated due to the discontinuation of the M. Phil courses as per the New Education 
Policy. The Committee believes that Clinical Psychologist is an essential mental health resource 
and thus suggests that the Ministry may explore re-naming the course or any other alternative 
and thus relieve the candidates who have already joined for the course. 
(Para 3.22 of the Report) 

21 
 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.12.2 This has been examined by the Niti Aayog and the Ministry has constituted a committee 
of all stakeholders in this regard. A recommendation has been proposed in line with the NEP. 
 
2.13 Nimhans (National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences) 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.13.1 To further enhance its impact and fulfil its visionary goals, the Committee recommends 
NIMHANS to focus on expanding outreach programs to underserved communities, fostering 
collaborative research initiatives with national and international institutions, and advocating 
for mental health awareness at the national level. The Committee believes that strengthening the 
training programs for mental health professionals and embracing technological advancements 
in the field will also be instrumental in advancing patient care and research capabilities. 
(Para 3.29 of the Report) 
 
Action Taken: 
 
2.13.2 NIMHANS is constantly taking up new outreach programs in collaboration with State 
Governments, international agencies and NGOs. For research in mental health, one example is 
the establishment of the Centre for Brain and Mind with support from RNK foundation. Another 
is collaboration for dual-PHDs with the University of Liverpool and Maastricht. Nurses from the 
University of Oslo are receiving training at NIMHANS. 
2.13.3 In the area of psycho-social interventions for disaster mitigation, NIMHANS is providing 
the psycho-social care component for the National Disaster Management Authority. Training is 
also being provided to countries like Fiji. 
2.13.4 Human resource capacity building for primary care has been facilitated for Bangladesh 
and Bhutan. Psychiatrists from Nepal have been provided training in child psychiatry. 
 
2.14 NIMHANS Digital Academy (NDA) 
 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
2.14.1 The Committee strongly recommends the Government to take significant steps towards 
expanding the NIMHANS Digital Academy (NDA) nationwide, as it presents a remarkable 
opportunity to revolutionise mental health education and training nationwide.  By leveraging 
the digital platform, NDA can bridge the gap in mental health services and ensure that quality 
training is accessible to mental health professionals in Primary Health Centers (PHCs), 
Community Health Centers (CHCs), and district hospitals. To achieve this, the Government 
should allocate adequate resources to scale up NDA's infrastructure and content creation, 
ensuring seamless access to courses for mental health professionals in remote and rural areas. 
Additionally, mental health professionals should be given incentives and encouragement to take 

22 
 
courses through NDA, much like Government officials participate in capacity-building courses 
under the Karmyogi Bharat program. 
(Para 3.32 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.14.2 A proposal to expand the activities of the NIMHANS Digital Academy has been 
submitted to the Ministry and is under examination. Under the expanded NDA there is scope to 
train at least 6500 each of doctors, psychologists, nurses and 10,000 other individuals annually.  
There is scope to convert the NDA into a Digital University to increase human resources for all 
aspects of mental health care in the country. 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.14.3 The Committee further recommends the Government to collaborate with state 
Governments, medical institutions, and NGOs to enhance the reach and impact of NDA further. 
This partnership will enable a wider dissemination of knowledge and expertise, empowering 
mental health professionals with evidence-based practices and the latest advancements in the 
field. Furthermore, the Government should focus on the localisation of content to cater to 
diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds, making the courses more inclusive and relevant for 
mental health professionals working in different regions of the country. By fostering a culture of 
continuous learning and professional development through NDA, mental health professionals in 
PHCs, CHCs, and district hospitals will be equipped with the necessary skills and knowledge to 
address the growing mental health needs of the population effectively. 
(Para 3.33 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.14.4 NDA’s aim is to collaborate with State Governments, medical institutions and NGOs to 
enhance the reach and to enable a wider dissemination of knowledge and expertise. 
2.14.5 Many state Govts are working in collaboration with NDA including Karnataka, 
Maharashtra, Jammu and Kashmir, Gujarat, Odisha, Bihar, Uttarakhand, Punjab, Haryana, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, etc. 
2.14.6 Through NDA, mental health professionals in PHCs, CHCs, and district hospitals are 
being equipped with the necessary skills and knowledge to address the growing mental health 
needs of the population effectively. 
 
2.15 Hub and Spoke Model for Mental Health 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.15.1 The Committee takes note of the "Hub and Spoke Model" suggested by NIMHANS and 
understands its importance in strengthening mental healthcare services in all regions of the 
country. The Committee recommends the Government to adopt and expand the Hub and Spoke 
model for mental health care across the entire country, following the successful implementation 
of a similar model employed in cancer care by Tata Memorial Hospital. This approach can 

23 
 
potentially revolutionise mental health infrastructure and expertise, particularly in peripheral 
centres, and ensure better accessibility and quality of care.  
(Para 3.40 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.15.2 NIMHANS, in collaboration with the ECHO program has already initiated a hub and 
spoke model, initially for substance use and subsequently for various areas in mental health. 
NIMHANS is committed to delivering this through the NDA. 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
2.15.3 These hubs at prominent institutions with specialised expertise, resources, and state-of-
the-art facilities can serve as centres of excellence, offering mental health professionals 
comprehensive diagnostic, treatment, and training services. In North India, IHBAS, New Delhi 
can be brought under Central Government and set up as a hub; similarly, LGBRIMH, Tezpur 
can be set up as a hub for East India, CIP, Ranchi for Central India and NIMHANS, Bengaluru 
South India. Furthermore, the Government should develop a network of spoke centres in rural 
and remote areas strategically connected to the hubs. These centres would act as primary care 
providers and offer essential mental health services while being supported and guided by the 
expertise available at the hubs. The Committee also recommends the Government to grant the 
status of “Institute of National Importance” to LGBRIMH, Tezpur and CIP, Ranchi. 
 (Para 3.41 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
2.15.4 Yes, as mentioned in this recommendation, IHBAS, CIP and LGB are functioning as the 
Regional Coordinating Centres (RCCs) for Tele MANAS and are assisting the Govt in the 
implementation of Tele MANAS. The same model will be adopted for overall mental healthcare 
and training as well, across the country. The Karnataka Brain Health Initiative seeks to train 
primary and secondary healthcare professionals in the identification, management, and referral of 
common neurological disorders. It is subsequently expected that a common framework of 
managing Mental, Neurological, and substance use disorders would be developed in consonance 
with WHO recommendations. To create a comprehensive care model, it is envisaged to develop 
a hub and spoke for acute stroke and head injuries and such a proposal has been made to the 
Govt of Karnataka, to develop 6 spokes for acute stroke and neurotrauma care with NIMHANS 
as the hub. This will work complementarily with the Karnataka Brain Health Initiative, which 
has been presently approved for rollout in all districts. 
 
2.16 Budgetary Allocation for Telemanas (T-Manas) Scheme 
Recommendations/Observations:  
 
2.16.1 The Committee further believes that while T-MANAS is a valuable initiative, it cannot be 
viewed as a comprehensive solution for long-term mental health improvement, nor should it be 
the sole focus of the Government's efforts. Instead, investing in and enhancing community-based 
mental healthcare services is essential. Strengthening the District Mental Health Programme 

24 
 
(DMHP) at the community level, as directed by the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, and developing 
other community-based models of mental health is of utmost importance and should continue to 
receive appropriate budgetary allocations. T-MANAS can complement community-based 
approaches and help establish a more comprehensive and sustainable mental health support 
system for the people of the country. 
(Para 3.51 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
2.16.2 Tele MANAS is functioning as the digital arm of the National Mental Health Program, 
and its objective is exactly as is mentioned in the recommendation: to compliment the 
community-based approaches and referral system to higher institutions and help establish a more 
comprehensive and sustainable mental health support system for the people of the country. 
2.16.3 As regards developing community-based models, already piloting of the Taluk Mental 
Health Program has started in Karnataka. NIMHANS has also started NAMAN (NIMHANS-
Ashraya Hasta Trust Mental Health Action Program for Rural Communities), the objective of 
which is the implementation and evaluation of a comprehensive and holistic mental health 
program in rural talukas in vastly different geographies of the country. The results of NAMAN 
will help us expand the initiative across the country. 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
3.1 Mental Health Issues in Children and Youth 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
3.1.1 The Committee notes the findings of "World Mental Health Report- Transforming 
Mental Health for All" and believes that childhood experiences significantly affect behavioural 
aspects. The Committee understands that behavioural aspects play a crucial role in mental 
health as they can significantly influence an individual's well-being, coping mechanisms, and 
overall mental state. The Committee, therefore, urges the Government to adopt a multi-faceted 
approach that involves collaboration between the Government, healthcare providers, 
educational institutions, and the community to address the behavioural aspects of mental 
health. The Government can invest in public awareness campaigns to educate citizens about the 
importance of mental health and the role of behavioural aspects. These campaigns can promote 
healthy habits, coping skills, and ways to seek help when needed. The Committee further 
suggests that the Government work with employers to implement workplace wellness programs 
focusing on mental health. These initiatives can include stress management workshops, 
counselling services, and flexible work arrangements to reduce stress. Similarly, the 
implementation of mental health education in schools can teach young individuals about 
behavioural aspects that contribute to mental well-being. This can equip them with the tools 
they need to manage their emotions and cope with challenges effectively. The Government 
should also invest in research to better understand the behavioural aspects that impact mental 
health and the effectiveness of different interventions. 
(Para 1.28 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
3.1.2 School mental health is made part of the National Mental Health Program as one of the 
targeted interventions. Collaboration with the Education Ministry at the centre and the state level 
is imperative to achieve this objective. Teaching life skills to children and adolescents are one of 
the most important aspects of these initiatives. A separate budget of 4 lakhs per district per 
annum is earmarked for IEC activities under the DMHP.In addition, the mental health is now 
being made part of the Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram and the Rashtriya Kishore Swasthya 
Karyakram. The Ayushman Bharat revised School Health Program includes a component of 
child mental health. Recognizing the importance of workplace mental health, States/UTs will be 
encouraged to include workplace interventions as part of NMHP/DMHP.As regards research, the 
Indian Council of Medical Research and other funding agencies are dedicating funds for 
effectiveness and implementation research in mental health. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.1.3 The Committee notes that despite its nearly decade-long existence the 
implementation of Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) launched in 2014 to 
focus solely on addressing adolescent health concerns has progressed at a very slow pace. 
The Committee notes that RKSK has not disclosed data concerning crucial components 

26 
 
such as mental health, violence, injuries, and substance misuse. Similarly, other initiatives, 
such as the Sarva Shiksha Yojana (focused on learning disabilities), the National Youth 
Policy (addressing substance abuse), the National Mental Health Policy, and the Yuva 
Spandana Yojana (implemented only in Karnataka) targeting adolescents have failed to 
treat mental health as a primary issue. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to make concerted efforts in spreading the awareness of RKSK among school-
going adolescents, parents, and teachers in both the rural and the urban areas, as well as 
in slums of urban centres like Mumbai. The Ministry should also work towards promoting 
and popularising its digital interventions like mobile app called ‘Saathiya Salah’.  
 
3.2 Increased Awareness of Trained Human Resource: 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
3.2.1 Furthermore, the Committee believes there is still scope for policy and programmatic 
interventions to effectively prioritise and address the underlying factors, viz., vulnerable groups, 
unemployed youth, women, and others contributing to mental health issues. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to integrate psycho- social interventions targeted at specific 
vulnerable groups into schemes and programs, such as those related to social justice, women's 
empowerment, and child development. The Committee further recommends enhancing inter 
sectoral collaborations and establishing synergy among different ministries, departments, and 
agencies while implementing NMHP. 
(Para 2.10 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
3.2.2 The Ministry will initiate steps to integrate mental health into policies and programmatic 
interventions of other sectors. 
 One such example is the SAMVAD that is led by the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development and is in force since the past couple of years. SAMVAD, a unique national 
initiative and integrated resource for child protection, mental health and psycho-social 
care named ‘Support Advocacy and Mental health interventions for children in 
Vulnerable Circumstances and Distress’ (SAMVAD) has developed standardized training 
modules for capacity building of all key stakeholders working in the area of child and 
adolescent mental health in child protection, policy and laws. More than 3 million 
stakeholders across the country have been reached through SAMVAD.  
 Several life skills programmes have been initiated to empower adolescents.  
 Mission Vatsalya from the WCD which focuses on children in difficult circumstances has 
issued guidelines for implementation of psychosocial support for children as per Juvenile 
Justice Care and Protect Act 2015. 
 To ensure women’s mental health, one-stop centres have been initiated by the WCD. 
These programmes have scope for expansion.  
 
Further Recommendation: 
 
3.2.3 The Committee further recommends that to integrate mental health into policies 
the policymakers should endeavour to strive towards transitioning from the prevailing 

27 
 
"medical model" of mental health to the convergent model. This approach acknowledges 
the intricate interaction among behavioural, environmental, biological, and genetic 
elements across an individual's lifespan, particularly during pivotal stages like childhood 
and adolescence. In pursuit of this objective, initiatives such as RKSK can learn from the 
practices of other nations like United States where the successful implementation of the 
‘Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child’ model embraces a holistic approach to 
children’s well-being by considering factors such as nutrition, physical activity, and 
emotional health within the school environment. The Committee further believes that 
initiatives like establishing peer support groups in schools and colleges and community-
based interventions leveraging technology can also encourage help-seeking behaviour. 
 
3.3 Analysis of Key Features of the Act 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
3.3.1 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to conduct periodic training programs 
through CMHA and SMHAs for police personnel, people associated with the judiciary and also 
general health practitioners to sensitise them about their responsibilities and about the different 
provisions and issues concerning mental health of the MHCA.  
(Para 2.23 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
3.3.2 In some states, training initiatives are being undertaken by the Judicial Academies and 
psychiatry departments in medical colleges. 
 
Further Recommendation: 
 
3.3.3 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to take more concrete measures 
to address the training needs for various stakeholders concerning mental health provisions. 
The Committee suggests the Ministry to establish a nationwide mandatory training 
program specifically designed for police personnel, judiciary members, and general health 
practitioners. This program should be comprehensive, ensuring that participants are 
sensitized to their responsibilities under the Mental Health Care Act (MHCA) and 
equipped with the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively address mental health 
issues in their respective roles. Additionally, the Ministry should allocate adequate 
resources to facilitate the implementation of these training programs, ensuring their 
accessibility and effectiveness across all states and regions. 
 
3.4 Budgetary Allocation to Premier Mental Health Institutions 
 
Recommendations/Observations: 
 
3.4.1 The Committee notes that NIMHANS is India's premier mental health and neurosciences 
research institute. However, compared to NIMH in the United States, NIMHANS receives 
relatively limited funding from the Indian Government. While the Indian Government does 
allocate funds to NIMHANS, it might not be sufficient to meet the growing demand for mental 

28 
 
health services in the country. The Committee further notes that substantial funding allows 
NIMH to conduct cutting-edge research on mental health disorders, develop innovative 
treatments, and support various research projects nationwide. Additionally, NIMH collaborates 
with numerous academic and medical institutions, fostering a robust mental health research 
ecosystem. On the other hand, NIMHANS, despite having an excellent reputation and expertise, 
faces challenges due to limited resources. While it strives to provide quality mental health 
services and research, the constraints on funding can hinder its ability to reach a broader 
population and invest in advanced research endeavours. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
the Government to significantly increase budgetary allocations to mental health institutions like 
NIMHANS and LGBRIMH, Tezpur, as adequate funding is crucial for research, infrastructure 
development, and expanding mental health services to underserved areas. 
 (Para 3.48 of the Report) 
Action Taken: 
 
3.4.2 Expanding quality care and comprehensive care at affordable or subsidized costs to 
patients is critical. In this connection, NIMHANS has submitted two proposals, one for a new 
outpatient block to substitute its outdated outpatient facility that was built in the mid- 1980s and 
a state of art polytrauma facility in its northern campus in Kyalasanahalli. 
3.4.3 For improved mental health and neuroscience care service delivery, human resources are 
a critical component. Under the 12th 5 year plan, NIMHANS had put in a proposal for 1680 
posts. Of this some posts were sanctioned but there were 1380 pending posts. In discussion with 
the Ministry, in 2020, this was first reduced to 780, then reduced to 457. Of these the DOE has 
only sanctioned 106 posts. The remaining posts as well as posts requested from the 7to 10GB 
still remain to be sanctioned. 
3.4.4 The Budgetary allocation of NIMHANS is Rs. 721.15 crores, as per BE 2023-24. 
However, inadvertently, the amount of 1500 and 2000 crores is shown in Figure 9 under point 
3.48 F on page 34 of the Report. 
Further Recommendation: 
3.4.5 The Committee believes that from the action taken by the Ministry it is evident that 
there remains a significant gap in addressing the funding and resource challenges faced by 
premier mental health institutions like NIMHANS. Therefore, the Committee further 
recommends the following measures to be taken: 
1. Urgent allocation of adequate funding: The Government should prioritise and 
substantially increase budgetary allocations to mental health institutions such as 
NIMHANS and LGBRIMH, Tezpur. Adequate funding is crucial not only for 
sustaining existing services but also for enhancing infrastructure, research 
capabilities, and expanding mental health services to underserved areas. 
2. Expedite Human Resource Sanctions: Addressing the pending posts and expediting 
the sanctioning process for requested positions is paramount. Human resources are 
a critical component in delivering quality mental health care, and the delay in 
sanctioning posts hampers the institution's ability to meet the growing demand for 
services. 

29 
 
3. Clarification and Transparency in Budgetary Reporting: The Government should 
ensure accuracy and transparency in reporting budgetary allocations for mental 
health institutions. Inadvertent discrepancies, such as those noted in the reported 
figures, should be rectified promptly to provide clarity and facilitate effective 
resource planning. 
4. Long-term Strategic Planning: Develop a comprehensive long-term strategic plan 
for mental health care, research, and infrastructure development. This plan should 
outline clear goals, timelines, and resource allocation strategies to address the 
evolving needs of the mental health sector and ensure sustainable growth and 
excellence in service delivery. 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
4.1 Nimhans (National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences) 
 
4.1.1 Recommendation/Observation: 
The Committee further recommends the Government to invest in advanced training 
programs for healthcare staff at the spoke centres to facilitate the successful implementation of 
the Hub and Spoke model. This can be achieved through collaboration with hub institutions and 
other mental health organisations to conduct specialised workshops, skill-building sessions, and 
telemedicine consultations, enhancing the expertise of healthcare professionals at peripheral 
centres. 
(Para 3.42 of the Report) 
  

31 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  - AT   A  GLANCE 
 
Mental Health Issues in Children and Youth 
 
 The Committee notes that despite its nearly decade-long existence the 
implementation of Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK) launched in 2014 to 
focus solely on addressing adolescent health concerns has progressed at a very slow pace. 
The Committee notes that RKSK has not disclosed data concerning crucial components 
such as mental health, violence, injuries, and substance misuse. Similarly, other initiatives, 
such as the Sarva Shiksha Yojana (focused on learning disabilities), the National Youth 
Policy (addressing substance abuse), the National Mental Health Policy, and the Yuva 
Spandana Yojana (implemented only in Karnataka) targeting adolescents have failed to 
treat mental health as a primary issue. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Ministry to make concerted efforts in spreading the awareness of RKSK among school-
going adolescents, parents, and teachers in both the rural and the urban areas, as well as 
in slums of urban centres like Mumbai. The Ministry should also work towards promoting 
and popularising its digital interventions like mobile app called ‘Saathiya Salah’.  
 
(Para 3.1.3 of the ATR) 
 
Increased Awareness of Trained Human Resource 
 
 The Committee further recommends that to integrate mental health into policies 
the policymakers should endeavour to strive towards transitioning from the prevailing 
"medical model" of mental health to the convergent model. This approach acknowledges 
the intricate interaction among behavioural, environmental, biological, and genetic 
elements across an individual's lifespan, particularly during pivotal stages like childhood 
and adolescence. In pursuit of this objective, initiatives such as RKSK can learn from the 
practices of other nations like United States where the successful implementation of the 
‘Whole School, Whole Community, Whole Child’ model embraces a holistic approach to 
children’s well-being by considering factors such as nutrition, physical activity, and 
emotional health within the school environment. The Committee further believes that 
initiatives like establishing peer support groups in schools and colleges and community-
based interventions leveraging technology can also encourage help-seeking behaviour. 
 
(Para 3.2.3 of the ATR) 
 
Analysis of Key Features of the Act 
 
 The Committee further recommends the Ministry to take more concrete measures 
to address the training needs for various stakeholders concerning mental health provisions. 
The Committee suggests the Ministry to establish a nationwide mandatory training 
program specifically designed for police personnel, judiciary members, and general health 
practitioners. This program should be comprehensive, ensuring that participants are 

32 
 
sensitized to their responsibilities under the Mental Health Care Act (MHCA) and 
equipped with the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively address mental health 
issues in their respective roles. Additionally, the Ministry should allocate adequate 
resources to facilitate the implementation of these training programs, ensuring their 
accessibility and effectiveness across all states and regions. 
 
(Para 3.3.3 of the ATR) 
 
Budgetary Allocation to Premier Mental Health Institutions 
 
 The Committee believes that from the action taken by the Ministry it is evident that 
there remains a significant gap in addressing the funding and resource challenges faced by 
premier mental health institutions like NIMHANS. Therefore, the Committee further 
recommends the following measures to be taken: 
1. Urgent allocation of adequate funding: The Government should prioritise and 
substantially increase budgetary allocations to mental health institutions such as 
NIMHANS and LGBRIMH, Tezpur. Adequate funding is crucial not only for 
sustaining existing services but also for enhancing infrastructure, research 
capabilities, and expanding mental health services to underserved areas. 
2. Expedite Human Resource Sanctions: Addressing the pending posts and expediting 
the sanctioning process for requested positions is paramount. Human resources are 
a critical component in delivering quality mental health care, and the delay in 
sanctioning posts hampers the institution's ability to meet the growing demand for 
services. 
3. Clarification and Transparency in Budgetary Reporting: The Government should 
ensure accuracy and transparency in reporting budgetary allocations for mental 
health institutions. Inadvertent discrepancies, such as those noted in the reported 
figures, should be rectified promptly to provide clarity and facilitate effective 
resource planning. 
4. Long-term Strategic Planning: Develop a comprehensive long-term strategic plan 
for mental health care, research, and infrastructure development. This plan should 
outline clear goals, timelines, and resource allocation strategies to address the 
evolving needs of the mental health sector and ensure sustainable growth and 
excellence in service delivery. 
(Para 3.4.5 of the ATR) 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
A pie-chart depicting the status of action taken by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare on the 148th Report has been given hereunder: 
 
  
******* 
 
 
45%8%2%45%Status of action taken by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in respect of 148th  Report of the CommitteeRecommendations/Observations accepted by the GovernmentCommittee does not desire to pursue in view of Government's repliesCommittee has made further recommendationsFinal replies of the Government's have not been received