    
       
                                                                                       
 
 
 
 
                              
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (SAKA) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
On 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR                       
GRANTS 2020-21 (DEMAND NO. 42) OF THE DEPARTMENT 
OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2021) 
   REPORT NO. 
   125 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail : rs-chfw@sansad.nic.in 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (SAKA) 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
On 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR                       
GRANTS 2020-21 (DEMAND NO. 42) OF THE DEPARTMENT 
OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 (Ministry of Health and Family Welfare) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th March, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th March, 2021) 
  
 

CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) 
2. PREFACE 
 
(ii)-(iii) 
3. ACRONYMS (NHM SECTOR & HEALTH SECTOR) 
 
(iv)-(vi) 
4. REPORT 
 
 
  
PART A – NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION (NHM) 
 
 
1-37 
 Chapter–I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Ministry 
 
2 - 13 
 Chapter–II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Ministry's replies 
 
14 -  23 
 Chapter–III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
24 - 36 
 Chapter–IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received 
 
 
37 
  
PART B -  HEALTH SECTOR (HR) 
 
38-78 
 Chapter–I  
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Ministry 
 
39 - 44 
 Chapter–II 
Recommendations/Observations on which the Committee does not desire 
to pursue in view of the Ministry's replies 
 
45 -50 
 Chapter–III 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
51 - 76 
 Chapter–IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received 
 
 
77 - 78 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS   - AT   A  GLANCE-- 
(PART- A AND B) 
 
 
79-89 
 
6. 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
90-92 
 
 
7. 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
93-109 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2020-21) 
  
1. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri A.K. Antony     
3. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
4. Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah 
5. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
6. Dr. Santanu Sen 
7. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh  
8. Shri K. Somaprasad 
9. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
10. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Ms. Bhavana Gawali (Patil) 
12. Ms. Ramya Haridas 
13. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
14. Shrimati Maloth Kavitha 
15. Dr. Amol Ramsing Kolhe 
16. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
17. Shri Arjunlal Meena 
18. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
19. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
20. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
21. Shri K. Navaskani 
22. Dr. Bharati Pravin Pawar 
23. Adv. Adoor Prakash 
24. Shri Haji Fazlur Rehman 
25. Dr. Rajdeep Roy 
26. Dr. Subhas Sarkar 
27. Dr. DNV Senthilkumar. S 
28. Shri Anurag Sharma 
29. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
30. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
31. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. P.P.K. Ramacharyulu         Secretary 
2. Shri J. Sundriyal    Joint Secretary  
3. Shri V.S.P Singh    Director 
4. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar                       Additional Director 
5. Smt. Harshita Shankar       Under Secretary 
6. Shri Rajesh Kumar Sharma   Assistant Committee Officer 
7. Ms. Monika Garbyal    Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 (i) 

PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health 
and Family Welfare, having been authorized by the Committ ee to present the Report on its 
behalf, present this One Hundred Twenty F ifth Report of the Committee on Action Taken by 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations contained in the One Hundred Eighteenth 
Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Demand No . 4 2) of the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare (Ministry of Health & Family Welfare).  
 
2.  The One Hundred Eighteenth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Health and Family Welfare was presented to Rajya Sabha and lai d on the Table of 
Lok Sabha on 3rd March, 2020. Action Taken Note of the Ministry on the recommendations 
contained in the Report was received from the Ministry on 12th November, 2020. 
 
3.  The Committee notes that the statement containing the status of imp lementation of the 
recommendations contained in the 118th Report of the Committee has not been laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha in pursuance to the direction of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. 
 
4.  The Report is divided into two parts. Part- A deals with National Health Mission and Part 
– B with Health Sector containing observations/recommendations made by the Committee in its 
118th Report and action taken by the Government thereon.  
 
5.  The Committee made a total of 48 recommendations relating to National Health Mission 
of 118th Report, out of which 17 recommendations have been accepted by the Ministry and  have 
been enumerated under Chapter I . Chapter II contains 16 recommendations, which the 
Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry’s replies. In Chapter III there are 14 
recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made further recommendations thereon . 
While a total number of 1 recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Ministry have not been received, has been categorized under Chapter IV. 
 
(ii) 

6.  The Committee made a total of 41 recommendations in Part B pertaining to Health Sector 
of 118th Report. Out of th e 41 recommendations, a total number of 7 recommendations have 
been accepted by the Ministry, has been categorized under Chapter I .  Chapter II contains a total 
number of 7 recommendations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of the 
Ministry’s replies. A total number of 25 recommendations/ observations in respect of which 
replies of the Ministry have not been accepted by the Committee and the Committee has made 
further recommendations thereon, has been categorized under Chapter III. while a total number 
of 2 recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry have not 
been received, has been categorized under Chapter IV. 
 
7.  The Committee, in its meeting held on the 2nd March, 2021, considered and adopted the 
draft Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
2nd March , 2021  
Phalguna 5, 1942 (Saka) 
PROF. RAM GOPAL YADAV 
 CHAIRMAN 
Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

ACRONYMS (NHM SECTOR) 
 
AB-NHPM - Ayushman Bharat – National Health Protection Mission 
ANM  -  Auxiliary Nurse Midwife 
CHCs  - Community Health Centres 
eVIN  - Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network 
HWCs  - Health and Wellness Centres 
INCHIS - Integrated Child Health and Immunization Survey 
JSSK  -  Janani Shishu Suraksha Karyakaram 
JSY  -  Janani Suraksha Yojana 
MoHFW - Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MR  - Measles-Rubella 
NCCMIS - National Cold Chain Management Information System 
NCDs  - Non Communicable Diseases 
NFHS  - National Family Health Survey 
NHM  - National Health Mission 
NHP  - National Health Policy 
NHPM  - National Health Protection Mission 
NHPS  - National Health Protection Scheme 
NIHFW - National Institute of Health and Family Welfare  
NRHM - National Rural Health Mission 
NUHM - National Urban Health Mission 
NSS  - National Service Scheme 
OOP  - Out of Pocket Expenses 
PCV  - Pneumococcal Vaccine 
PFMS  - Public Financial Management System 
PHCs  - Primary Healthcare Centres 
PIPs  - Programme Implementation Plans 
PMMVY - Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana 
RCH  - Reproductive and Child Health 
RE  - Revised Estimate 
RNTCP - Revised National TB Control Programme 
RSBY  - Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
RVV  - Rotavirus Vaccine 
SBA  -  Skilled Birth Attendance 
SDG  - Sustainable Development Goals 
SHS  - State Health Society 
SIPV  - Sabin Strains Inactivated Polio Vaccine 
SRS  - Sample Registration System 
TOT  - Training of Trainers 
ULBs  - Urban Local Bodies 
UTs  - Union Territories 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
ACRONYMS (HEALTH SECTOR) 
 
AIIMS  -  All India Institute of Medical Sciences 
BE   -  Budget Estimate 
BJMC  -  B.J. Medical College 
BIS  -  Bureau of Indian Standard 
CDSCO   -  Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
C-DAC            - Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CE  -   Conformité Européene 
CGHS  -   Central Government Health Scheme 
CHS   -  Central Health Service 
CMO               -   Chief Medical Officer 
CPWD  -  Central Public Work Department 
CTVS   -  Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgeons 
DG  -  Director General  
DGHS   -  Director General of Health Services 
DUSIB -  Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board 
EA   -  Executing Agencies 
FSSAI             - Food Safety and Standards Authority of India      
FY   -  Financial Year 
GDP   -  Gross Domestic Product 
GDMO -  General Duty Medical Officer 
GMC               -                       Government Medical Colleges/Institutions 
GIA   -  Grants In Aid 
GFR   -  General Financial Rules 
HEFA   -  Higher Education Financing Agency 
HITES  -  HLL Infra Tech Services Ltd. 
HLL   -  Hindustan Latex Limited  
HSCC   -  M/S Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation 
ICU   -  Intensive Care Unit 
IIFCL              -  India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
IVF   -  In Vitro Fertilization 
JICA   -  Japan International Cooperation Agency 
JR   -  Junior Resident 
L&T  -  Larsen & Toubro Limited 
LDC   -  Lower Division Clerk 
 MOA  -   Memorandum of Agreement 
MOH&FW -  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoHRD -   Ministry of Human Resource and Development 
MOU  -  Memorandum of Undertaking 
NACO  -  National Aids Control Organization  
NBCC             -   National Buildings Construction Corporation 
NCT  -  National Capital Territory 
NDMC -  New Delhi Municipal Council 
NEIGRHIMS  - North-Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and 
Medical Sciences , Shillong 
 
(v) 

 
 
NER   -  North-Eastern Region 
OBC   -  Other Backward Classes 
OPD   -  Out Patient Department 
OT   -  Operation Theatre 
PG   -  Post Graduate 
PGIMER         -  Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research 
PMSSY           -  Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana 
PORB   -  Pension and Other Retirement Benefits  
PSA   -  Procurement Support Agency 
RDTL   -  Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory  
RE   -  Revised Estimates 
RIMS              - Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal 
RISE               - Revitalising Infrastructure and Systems in Education   
RML   -  DR. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital 
SACS              -  State Aids Prevention and Control Societies 
SFC  -  Standing Finance Committee 
SR   -  Senior Resident 
SSC   -  Standing Selection Committee  
UC  -  Utilization Certificate 
UG   -  Undergraduate 
UPSC   -  Union Public Service Commission 
USFDA -   U S Food and Drug Administration 
VMMC  -  Vardhaman Mahavir Medical College 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(vi)

REPORT 
 
PART -A (NHM) 
The Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Eighteenth Report of the Committee on 
Demand for Grants (Demand No 42) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the 
year 2020-21. 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 118th Report. They have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have bee n accepted by the Ministry : 4.11, 4.12, 
4.13, 4.15, 5.7, 5.8, 5.20, 5.25, 5.32, 5.35, 5.37, 6.2, 7.9, 9.6, 10.7, 10.8 and 10.9 
        Total - 17  (Chapter I)  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view 
of the Ministry’s replies:  4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 5.2, 5.3, 5.10, 5.11, 5.15, 5.19, 5.23, 8.5, 9.4, 
9.5, 10.5 and 10.6 
        Total- 16  (Chapter II) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 3.5, 3.6, 3.8, 3.9, 3.12, 3.15, 3.17, 3.18, 4.10, 5.14, 5.28, 
7.6, 7.8 and 8.3 
        Total - 14  (Chapter III) 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: 8.4  
        Total-  1  (Chapter IV) 
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 

2 
 
PART – A 
 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION (NHM) 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.1 The Committee has been gi ven to understand that for most of the States and UTs with 
Legislature (Delhi & Puducherry), the NHM fund sharing pattern is 60:40 between the Central 
Government and the States whereas for Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand 
and North -Eastern St ates including Sikkim the sharing pattern is 90:10. For UTs without 
Legislature, the funding pattern is 100% Central Share. In such a scenario where the Central 
allocation makes for the major budget under NHM, the assumption that the States/UTs, should 
compensate for the reduction in the Central allocation for health is not the right approach. The 
Committee feels that both the Central and State Governments should come forward to share the 
fiscal burden for successful implementation of the Scheme. The Commit tee, however, is also of 
the view that considering the amount of expenditure on health reported by all the States, there is 
a strong need for all the States to increase their health budgets. 
 (Para 4.11 of the 118th Report) 
Action Taken 
 
1.2 As envisaged in the National Health Policy (NHP), 2017, both Centre and States should 
strive towards raising government health expenditure to 2.5 % of GDP in a time bound manner. 
Further, as envisaged in NHP 2017 , States should increase their health spending to atleast  8 % 
of their budget and two thirds of such expenditure should be on primary care. While allocation of 
central assistance to States is linked to their development indicators, absorptive capacity, health 
lag and performance in the delivery of health service s, States are also encouraged to mobilize 
their own resources for enhanced Health Budget. As per the Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) under NHM, States are required to increase their State’s Health Budget by atleast 10% 
annually. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.3 The Committee, at the same time, recommends the Department to hand -hold the laggard 
States and find out the underlying reasons for marginal or negative increase in their State 
Health Budgets and take remedial measures accordingly so that the desir ed outcomes on health 
parameters are achieved and the desired level of flow of funds to the different Health Schemes 
especially NHM is ensured. The Committee also recommends the Department to track the health 
expenditure in States on a real time basis. The  Committee hopes that such instances of non -
clearance of pending State share under NHM, as in States of Kerala, Telangana and Arunachal 
Pradesh, are not repeated.  
(Para 4.12) 

3 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.4 The National Health Accounts Estimates produced every year sin ce 2013-14 describe the 
health expenditures and flow of funds by the State and Union Governments.  The actual 
expenditure figures, are however available after a lag of two years. 
 
1.5 Further, the States/UTs are being regularly monitored and all efforts are  made to expedite 
concerned States/UTs for clearance of pending State share. It is also submitted that funds are 
released under NHM to States only on clearance of state share against previous central releases. 
The Ministry has suggested 15th Finance Commission for a Composite Health Index for incentive 
based devolution of funds to States in order to encourage the States to demonstrate performance 
on year on year basis. The 'State Health Budget as a percentage of the total State Budget' (with a 
weightage of 15%) was one of the 11 indicators suggested in the Composite Health Index. In 
addition to above, while releasing the final tranche of release, it is insisted that the State Health 
budget has increased by 10% over last year or the average of last three years. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.6 The Committee strongly feels that unless all States increase their health budget 
commensurate with the Central transfers, it would be difficult to ensure affordable and equitable 
healthcare in the country. 
(Para 4.13) 
Action Taken 
 
1.7 As envisaged in the National Health Policy (NHP),2017, both Centre and States should 
strive towards raising government health expenditure to 2.5 % of GDP in a time bound manner. 
Further, as envisaged in NHP 2017 , States should increase th eir health spending to atleast 8 % 
of their budget and two thirds of such expenditure should be on primary care. While allocation of 
central assistance to States is linked to their development indicators, absorptive capacity, health 
lag and performance in the delivery of health services, States are also encouraged to mobilize 
their own resources for enhanced Health Budget. As per the Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) under NHM, States are required to increase their State’s Health Budget by atleast 10% 
annually. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
1.8 The Committee, taking note of the areas of concern in implementation of this important 
scheme, is of the view that these concerns could be addressed by concerted efforts supported by 
increase in budgetary allocation and adequate human resources. 
  
(Para 4.15) 
Action Taken 
 
1.9 The concerns expressed by the Committee are noted. Regular efforts are being 
made by the Ministry with the Ministry of Finance to increase budgetary allocation for 
health sector. Further, initia tives have been taken to ensure adequate human resources 

4 
 
for efficient implementation of programmes under NHM for providing affordable and 
equitable healthcare.  
UNIVERSAL IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMME (UIP) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
1.10 The Committee appreciates the fact that Universal Immunization Programme i.e. Mission 
Indradhanush has proved to be quite successful. It however, expresses its concern that, as per 
National Family Health Survey -4 data, nearly 47% of India’s poorest children were not fully 
immunised. The Committee notes that the statistics with regard to immunization may improve in 
the NFHS-5 data. The Committee impresses upon the Department not to be complacent over the 
success and recommends that the Department should continue to make all out efforts to make the 
immunization programme hundred percent successful. The Committee hopes that the Department 
would be able to make full utilisation of the budgetary provisions made in 2019 -20 at RE Stage 
as it could utilise only 81.6 percent so far.  
(Para 5.7) 
Action Taken 
 
1.11 The Department appreciates the comments of the Committee and has also noted the 
concerns expressed. Under routine immunization, efforts, are made to vaccinate all children . 
Special immunization drive i.e. Mission Indradhanush  was launched in 2014 with the aim to 
cover partially immunized and left out children and vaccination for pregnant women. The efforts 
are continuing to strengthen routine immunization. Further, Intensified Mission Indradhanush 2.0 
has been undertaken from Dec ember, 2019 to March, 2020 to give boost to the program. The 
Department would further continue to sustain the coverage achieved under Mission 
Indradhanush, by strengthening immunization health system which includes capacity building of 
frontline health wor kers for providing quality services, improving their interpersonal skills to 
address all apprehensions of the parents about vaccines, inter-sectoral convergence for improving 
access and creating awareness, improved micro planning of vaccination sessions, e nsuring 
uninterrupted availability of vaccines and related logistics to the states by real time stock 
management through Electronic Vaccine Intelligence Network (Evin). The utilization of funds of 
Immunization Division for FY 2019-20as on 31.03.2020 was 99.39%of RE (Revised Estimates). 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.12 The Committee also takes note that one of the main reasons for not achieving 100 percent 
immunization particularly in rural areas are apprehensions attached with immunization owing 
to lack of awareness. The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the Ministry should have 
awareness generation programs regarding the importance of vaccines and develop 
communication toolkits to educate people, especially in the rural areas.  
 
(Para 5.8) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13 Following steps have been taken to create awareness among Beneficiaries about 
importance    of vaccination and other related communication activities: 
 

5 
 
 Awareness generation through electronic and print media like radio spots, television, pos ter, 
hoardings etc.  
 Working on improving inter -personal communication skills and knowledge of frontline 
health workers like Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (ANM) and Accredited Social Health Activists 
(ASHAs).  
 Utilizing social media platforms like Twitter, WhatsApp. 
  Utilizing of My Gov platform for IMI 2.0 for creating awareness on the importance of 
immunization.  
 Engaging the Field publicity units of Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC) under 
M/o Information & Broadcasting (I&B) for reaching the communiti es and spreading 
information on Mission Indradhanush using folk music and dance, Nukkad Nattak, etc.  
 Social mobilization by Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs) and other community 
workers. 
 Incentives to ASHAs for mobilizing the children to the sess ion site and for ensuring full 
immunization to the child at 1,2 and 5 years of age. 
 Delivering free, audio messages bout immunization directly to mobile phones of the 
caregivers from the second trimester of pregnancy until the child is one-year-old.  
 Delivering periodic text messages to caregivers regarding immunization.  
 Advocacy with key political and religious leaders and influencers on the importance of 
vaccination.  
 Advocacy with media to cover positive immunization stories for building trust in 
immunization and vaccines. 
 Mobilizing the private practitioners through advocacy with Indian Academy of Paediatrics 
(IAP)/ Indian Medical Association (IMA) to give out messages on importance of vaccination 
and on the safety and efficacy of the vaccines. 
 Inter sectoral convergence for creation of rumours, myths and misinformation through social 
media including Twitter, Facebook and WhatsApp. 
 
HEALTH SYSTEM STRENGTHENING UNDER NRHM (SUPPORT FROM 
NATIONAL INVESTMENT FUNDS) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.14 The Comm ittee also recommends that the Department must hold deliberations with 
those States having weakened/poorer health parameters so that they are provided 'additional 
support' for strengthening Health system under NRHM.  
(Para 5.20) 
Action Taken 
 
1.15 Under NHM, the resource envelope of any State/UT is based on socio economic factors, 
health lag and health parameters. The States having weak/poorer health parameters such as 
EAG States, hilly and NE States have been given additional weightage in allocation of 
fun ds in comparison to other States for strengthening healthcare system.  
 
1.16 The Ministry holds regular consultation/interaction with the States at different levels 
and extends both financial and technical support to strengthen health infrastructure and 

6 
 
imp rove delivery of health services. The Ministry has taken several measures in 
consultation with the States to prevent, control and mitigate the impact of COVID -
19pandemic, Additional release  of Rs.1113.21 crore over and above the approved resource 
envelope were made to the States/UTs during 2019 -20 for containment and management of 
COVID -19. Further. funds to the tune of Rs. 4276.68 crore have been released to the 
States/UTs during 2020 -21 under the India COVID -19 Emergency Response and Health 
Systems Pre paredness Package as on 21.09.2020.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.17 The Committee is of the view that the scheme of Health and Wellness Centres which aims 
at taking comprehensive Primary Health Care close to the community is a step taken in the right 
direction. It, therefore, recommends that the targets set for transforming these centres must be 
achieved. The Committee also understands that availability of adequate and trained human 
resources at these HWCs is fundamental to effective functioning of the H WCs. The Department 
should also, therefore, lay greater emphasis on integrating Machine Language (ML) and 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) at such centres to provide better screening and diagnosis. 
(Para 5.25) 
Action Taken 
 
1.18 On use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and integrating Machine Language (ML), it may 
be mentioned that AI solutions in Radiology will be implemented in Health and Wellness 
Centres. Further, NHA/PM -JAY is planning to deploy AI/ML technologies for the following 
fields: - 
  
(i)  Disease Di agnosis: AI/ML based standard treatment workflow systems to ensure 
proper treatment and Clinical decision support system with AI/ML based triggers.  
 
(ii) Fraud Prevention: Developing machine learning & artificial intelligence -based 
models for fraud detection and prevention. 
 
REVISED NATIONAL TB CONTROL PROGRAMME (RNTCP) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.19 The Committee applauds the Government at the launch of the end TB by 2025 – TB 
Harega Desh Jitega initiative but without an increase in the budgetary allocation, the Committee 
apprehends that the program may not achieve the envisaged goal of elimination of TB by 2025. 
The Committee is of the view that since India shares the highest burden of tuberculosis (TB) and 
multidrug-resistant (MDR), there is an urgen t need to intensify the initiatives in this regard. The 
Committee calls upon the Department to ensure that adequate primary healthcare infrastructure 
and trained human resource is available so that the high levels of disease transmission and 
increase in in cidence of drug resistant TB is tackled. The Committee recommends that the 
Department must not let budgetary constraints come in the way of the implementation of this 
programme. The Committee also recommends the Department to take necessary initiatives to 
remove the stigma attached with TB and carry out a National campaign in this regard.  
(Para 5.32) 
 

7 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.20 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has taken following initiatives:- 
 
1. India’s TB Program continues to be one of the largest such pu blic health programmes 
in the world. Introduction of newer drugs, diagnostics and initiatives such as private 
sector engagement and Nikshay Poshan Yojana (Rs 500/ - DBT for nutritional 
support) have been taken to scale. The incidence of TB per 1,00,000 popu lation has 
reduced from 234 in 2012 to 199 in 2018. The mortality due to TB per 1,00,000 
population for India has reduced from 43 in 2012 to 33 in 2018. The Country has 
notified 24.04 lakhs cases during the year 2019, thus reducing the gap in missing 
cases to 2.4 lakhs only. The TB notified cases increased by 12% in the year 2019 
from 21.55 lakhs in the year 2018. 
2. To ensure adequate primary health infrastructure and trained manpower is available, 
the Programme has achieved integration with the general healt h system at all levels. 
TB services have been integrated with Ayushman Bharat’s network of Health and 
Wellness Centres (HWC) as part of Comprehensive Primary Healthcare Services 
(CPHC). The nearly 1.5 lakhs sub centres that will be transformed into HWCs wo uld 
serve as the most peripheral health facility and will be the first point of contact for the 
community to access healthcare. The Community Health Officers are being 
specifically trained on Tuberculosis and performance based incentives have been 
introduced for the HWC. 
3. To address the high transmission of TB in the community, NTEP is expanding TB 
Preventive Therapy (TPT). Effective implementation of TB preventive therapy (TPT) 
would hasten the decline in TB incidence from the present rate of approx. 3% ann ual 
decline in TB incidence to 11%, which is independent of other background 
interventions. Door to door Active Case Finding (ACF) is being conducted for early 
identification of TB cases and initiate them on treatment to break the chain of 
transmission in the community.  
4. For tackling drug resistant TB, the programme has introduced drug susceptibility 
testing for all TB patients at the time of diagnosis itself. With this intervention, in 
2019, 66,255 drug resistant TB patients were detected which is a 14% in crease as 
compared to 2018 (66,255 in 2019 & 58,347 in 2018). Molecular diagnostics have 
been decentralized and a total of 1,264 Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification 
Test (CBNAAT) machines and 2,206 indigenously developed Truenat machines are 
operational at district level across the country and the programme is transitioning to 
replace sputum microscopy with upfront molecular diagnostics for the diagnosis of 
TB. In 2019, 35.30 lakh molecular tests have been performed which is a 5 times 
increase as compared to 7.48 lakh during 2017. 
5. Under the TB Harega Desh Jeetega Campaign, launched in September 2019, the 
States are increasingly committing themselves to End TB by 2025. The Hon'ble 
Minister of Health & Family Welfare wrote to the Governors/ Lt. Governors of all the 
States/UTs for implementation of TB Harega Desh Jeetega campaign. Till September 
2020, total 26 meetings to review TB programme were held in 16 States/UTs under 
the Chairpersonship of Governors/ Lt. Governors, Chief Ministers/Dy. CMs and 
Health Ministers. Already 11 State/UTs have formed State/UT specific action plan to 
End TB by 2025. The programme is implementing targeted advocacy, communication 

8 
 
and social mobilization activities with the support of State/UT governments and all 
governmental /  non-governmental stakeholders. Stigma reduction activities are 
specifically planned with local self bodies and community engagement activities 
through the involvement of TB champions . 
6.  To ensure smooth operationalization of all these activities, the TB p rogram has 
requested for an increase of 16.7% in the budget allocation for TB in the FY 2021 -22 
(Rs. 3628.85 crores) over the amount allocated for the current financial year (Rs. 
3109.93 crores). 
 
FLEXIBLE POOL FOR NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, INJURY AND TRAUMA 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.21 The Department during presentation on Demands for Grants has stated that the 
shortfall of funds under the Flexible Pool for non -communicable Diseases would affect the 
implementation of certain programs. The Committee,  however, finds that out of the total 
allocation of Rs. 708 crore in 2019 -20, only Rs. 380.86 crore has been utilized leading to 
underutilization of 46.20% of funds. The Committee, therefore, finds that the demand of the 
Department for additional funds is not at all tenable. The Department should try to make full 
utilization of allocated resources and only then they can claim for more funds. The Committee, 
however, recommends that the Department must approach the Ministry of Finance and seek 
enhanced allocation at RE stage with adequate justification, if required. 
 
(Para 5.35) 
Action Taken 
 
1.22 During FY 2019 -20, funds to the tune of Rs. 670.92 crore have been released to 
States/UTs under Flexible Pool for Non -Communicable Disease Control Programme as per t he 
available RE. 
 
1.23 Further, as per the recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry will raise the 
additional demands to the Ministry of Finance at RE stage, based on the expenditure pattern 
under the NCD Pool.  
 
JANASANKHYA STHIRTHA KOSH (JSK) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.24 The Committee observes that JSK was aimed at carrying out initiatives that would 
facilitate population stabilization at levels consistent with the needs of sustainable growth. 
However, with the closing of JSK, the Committee fee ls that the Department would be able to 
carry forward the functioning of JSK in an effective manner. The Committee is of the view that 
the Department must take initiatives for promoting population stabilization and meet the desired 
target. 
(Para 5.37) 
 
 

9 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.25 As per the decision of the Cabinet, Janasankhya Sthirtha Kosh (JSK) has been closed as 
an Autonomous Body w.e.f. 08.02.2019. Subsequently, the programmes covered under JSK have 
been subsumed in the scheme implemented by the Department of H ealth & Family Welfare. 
Major initiatives undertaken to promote population stabilization include, Mission Parivar Vikas, 
new contraceptive choices, improved demand generation activities through a comprehensive 360 
degree media campaign and involvement of c ommunity health workers viz ASHAs for door to 
door distribution of contraceptives and promoting healthy spacing of births. Further, States/UTs 
can accredit reputed agencies and private health providers to enhance uptake of Family Planning 
Services. 
 
NATIONAL URBAN HEALTH MISSION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.26 Keeping in view the various components and activities, the Committee is of the 
considered view that NUHM is a vital component for meeting healthcare needs of the urban 
population with focus on urba n poor and is oriented towards making available primary 
healthcare services and reducing their out -of-pocket expenditure on health. However, the 
Committee notes with concern that the budgetary allocation under NUHM is Rs. 950 crore in BE 
2020-21 which is the same as in RE 2019-20. The Committee is of the view that the allocation for 
NUHM should have been increased considering the range of outreach services that the program 
aims to conduct. The Committee recommends that the Department should track the status  of 
activities and programmes carried out in different States under NUHM and assess its impact on 
the lives of the beneficiaries. The Central Government must act as a facilitator and guide so that 
the funds allocated to the States under the programme are utilised optimally. 
(Para 6.2) 
Action Taken 
 
1.27 Since the launch of NUHM in May, 2013, the total allocation is of Rs.7837.48 crores.  
However, according to RE figures the allocated amount comes to Rs.6194.33 crore against which 
funds to the tune of Rs.571 4.58 crore has been released to the States/UTs and total expenditure 
of Rs.6245 crores including State’s share has been reported by States/UTs upto 31st December, 
2019.  The expenditure pattern shows a gradual increase in the absorptive capacity of States.   
Initially, it was 1% in FY 2013 -14, which have increased to 17% in 2014 -15, 31% in 2015 -16, 
51% in 2016 -17, 66% in 2017 -18, 74% in 2018 -19 and 73% in 2019 -20 (upto 3 rd quarter). The 
States have reported more than 70% expenditure against the funds includi ng proportionate state  
share contribution.  Against the allocation of Rs.950 crores in BE 2019-20, total amount has been 
released to States/UTs for the activities approved for implementation of NUHM and there were 
no savings.  The expenditure under Nationa l Urban Health Mission has improved over the years 
due to improved service delivery infrastructure and streamlining of the programme activities.  
HMIS which is a facility based service delivery monitoring mechanism shows an increase in the 
rise in services  delivery in respect of OPD, ANC, full immunisation, UHND/outreach/Special 
outreach, institutional delivery etc. 
 

10 
 
1.28 Keeping in view the allocation under NHM including both submissions of NUHM and 
NRHM, the allocation of funds would not be a constraint w ith regard to implementation of the 
Mission.  The overall expenditure reflects the complete expenditure booked in terms of drugs 
and diagnostics, availability of JSY & JSSK benefits to the beneficiaries etc.   It may be evident 
from the HMIS data that the number of beneficiaries has been increasing consecutively in urban 
areas. 
 
1.29 The physical progress is tracked and monitored by the Ministry through the Quarterly 
Progress Report (QPR) under NUHM.  QPR from the States indicate that the 75% of clinical an d 
paramedical staff is in place at the urban health facilities.  Initially, there were no health facilities 
catering to the Primary Health Care in larger downs/districts for more than 50,000 populations.  
However, as of now more than 4500 urban health faci lities have been made functional in more 
than 1000 cities under NUHM upto FY 2019 -20.  Infrastructure strengthening has expanded 
under NUHM in terms of number of services provided by the national health programs. 
 
1.30 The Ministry has continuously support ing the States/UTs for increasing the pace of 
activities and improving the utilisation of funds by holding VCs, training, orientation workshops 
and regular team visits.  The Ministry is committed and is constantly monitoring the progress of 
activities unde r NUHM including Service Delivery Infrastructure, Community Processes, 
engagement of HR etc.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.31 Keeping in view the fact that cases of supply of spurious, substandard and adulterated 
drugs in the market are reported often i n the Media , t he Committee is of the view that the 
Department, in active cooperation with States, must put in place a vibrant, dynamic and effective 
regulatory regime so that the public could be safeguarded from substandard, spurious or unsafe 
drugs. 
(Para 7.9) 
Action Taken 
 
1.32 The Department is committed to ensuring that the quality, safety and efficacy of 
drugs are not compromised. With this in view, a series of measures have been taken, 
including strengthening of legal provisions, workshops and trainin g programmes for 
manufacturers and regulatory officials and measures such as risk based inspections.  
 
1.33  Further, based on regular review of Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organization (CDSCO) and its functioning, a number of measures have been taken whi ch 
include strengthening of infrastructure and manpower of CDSCO; framing of Medical 
Devices Rules, 2017; New Drugs and Clinical T ri a l s R ules ,  20 1 9;  on li n e 
s u bm is si o n  and  p ro ces si n g o f v ari ou s  applications under SUGAM portal; 
evaluation of applications of clinical trials, new drugs and Investigat ional New 
Drug (IND) including DNA derived products and vaccines, and new medical 
devices in consultation with Subject Experts Committees; amendments in Drugs and 
Cosmetics Rules including prohibition of advertiseme nt of Schedule H, H1 & X drugs 
and provision to address issues related to similar brands, etc.  

11 
 
 
1.34  In addition to the above, the issue of creation of monitoring cells in the 
States / UTs to ensure that no new drugs are licensed without prior approval of 
the Central Licensing Authority was deliberated in the meeting of Drugs Consultative 
Committee (DCC), a statutory body wherein the. States / UTs are rep res en t ed . 
Th e DC C recom m en d ed  creat io n  o f monitoring cells in each State / UT and 
the States / UTs have been advised accordingly.  
 
HUMAN RESOURCE FOR HEALTH AND MEDICAL EDUCATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
1.35 The Committee acknowledges that combining the strengths of Public and private sector 
to overhaul the healthcare infrastructure is a novel approach but at the same time, the 
Committee believes that such a model should in no way compromise the quality and access to 
healthcare services for the poor. The Committee strongly emphasizes that the first and foremost 
goal for establishment of Medical Colleges and Hospitals should be universal health coverage 
rather than profit maximization. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department 
that while formulating its health policy; the Department should assign the highest priority to the 
commitments of a welfare state. 
(Para 9.6) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.36 The regulations of Medical Council of India (MCI) allow establishment of a medical 
college under Public Private Partnership (PPP) model. Clause 2(5) of MCI’s Establishment of 
Medical College regulations, 19 99 prescribes that the appropriate Government may allow the 
utilization of the facilities of a hospital owned and managed by it for establishing a Medical 
College by a person/agency/trust/society/company by entering into a memorandum of 
Understanding for this purpose. The hospital to be transferred should be minimum 300 beds with 
necessary infrastructural facilities capable of being developed into teaching institutions for the 
proposed medical college. It has also been prescribed that while transferring the  Government  
Hospital facility, the State Government may safeguard the interest of State particularly in respect 
of admission of students under Government Quota in the medical college, patient care and 
implementation of all government health programmes in affiliated Hospital of the medical 
college. 
AYUSHMAN BHARAT – PMJAY 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
1.37 The Committee believes that there are administrative and implementation related 
loopholes in the Scheme which need to be plugged to make the scheme succes sful. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to develop a fool proof monitoring 
mechanism to ensure no eligible person is denied health care services under the Scheme. There 
is also a need to increase awareness regarding AB -PMJAY among all the  stakeholders, 
especially, the beneficiaries and the empanelled hospitals. 
(Para 10.7) 

12 
 
 
Action Taken 
1.38 (i) A real time monitoring dashboard is available and implementing states provide  therein 
the details of utilization in all districts. Also, periodica l review is held wherever there is apparent 
underutilization or over utilization.   This dashboard provides district level details of various 
indicators such as number of beneficiaries verified, number of hospitals empanelled, number of 
authorised hospital admissions, and number of claims/package wise received and paid.  
(ii) To ensure that no beneficiary is denied healthcare services under AB -PMJAY, a grievance 
redressal mechanism has been developed, according to  which any complaint regarding denial of 
treatment by an empanelled hospital received either through national call center 14555 or on 
grievance redressal portal https://grievance.pmjay.gov.in or https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in/ or 
through any other medium are immediately assigned to respective State Griev ance Nodal Officer 
designated at each State Health Agency for necessary action. 
(iii) Beneficiary Awareness: A comprehensive media and outreach strategy has been followed to 
spread awareness and empowering the beneficiaries about their entitlements and rig hts under the 
scheme.  This includes use of media vehicles such as outdoor media, digital display at ticket 
counters across various railway stations, announcements at major bus stations, passenger train 
branding, national and regional press coverage, op -eds and advertorials in print media, radio 
campaign, telecast of beneficiary testimonials via Doordarshan, mass messaging through SMS, 
traditional media etc.  Social media platforms such as Twitter, YouTube and Facebook are also 
being utilised. Outreach prog ramme like school contact program, activation programs at village 
level, van campaigns etc. are also being developed. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.39 The Committee also recommends the Department to evolve a mechanism to address the 
complaints of chargin g fees by the empanelled hospitals despite being entitled under  AB-
PMJAY. 
(Para 10.8) 
 
Action Taken 
1.40 (i) A Central Grievance Redressal Management System (CGRMS) has been developed to 
register, monitor and dispose of grievances under AB-PMJAY transparently and effectively. Any 
aggrieved person can register a grievance on the portal https://grievance.pmjay.gov.in or 
https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in/. Also, an aggrieved person can register a grievance by calling AB -
PMJAY national call centre 14555. 
(ii) Grievanc e Redressal under AB -PMJAY has a three -tier system at District, State, and 
National Level. District Grievance Redressal Committee is the nodal authority at the district 
level, State Grievance Redressal Committee at the state level and National Grievance Re dressal 
Committee at national level. At each level, there is a dedicated nodal officer. 
 (iii) The AB -PMJAY call centre also make at least two outbound calls to beneficiaries, after 
discharge, who have undertaken treatment. In case, any complaints are raised by the beneficiaries 
related to charging of money or any other issue, the same is considered as Suo moto complaint 
and is registered on grievance portal for further action by the concerned officer. 

13 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.41 Attention of the Com mittee has also been drawn to suspicious cases where hospitals 
empanelled under AB-PMJAY have carried out fraudulent transactions. The Committee strongly 
recommends the Department to suspend and blacklist such hospitals and take strict action 
against the Hospitals involved in such fraudulent practices. The Committee also feels that there 
is a strong need to monitor the transactions under the Scheme on a  real time basis. The 
Department must also conduct periodic audits and inspections so that the subsidy und er the 
Scheme reaches the needy people. 
(Para 10.9) 
Action Taken 
1.42 (i) For prevention, detection, and deterrence of different kinds of fraud that could occur 
in PMJAY at different stages of its implementation, proactive action has been taken to 
implement comprehensive framework at policy, system and operational levels. 
(ii) Some of the key actions are listed below: 
 All packages prone to fraud are reserved for public hospitals or need mandatory pre -
authorization and require detailed documentation before claims are paid.  
 National Anti-Fraud Unit (NAFU) has been created at National Level. NAFU is supported 
by State Anti-Fraud Units.  
 Beneficiary empowerment is done by system generated messages to each beneficiary at the 
time of – ecard creation, hospitalization and discharge.  
 Feedback is collected through outbound calls and letter after treatment  
 Utilization data is analysed on different triggers and results are shared with States for 
carrying out due diligence 
 Medical audits and Joint medical audits of ho spitals are conducted to identify any 
wrongdoing. 
1.43 In-built checks and balances have been incorporated for preventing fraud and for 
detecting suspect e-cards and transactions based on algorithms. 

14 
 
Chapter–II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
2.1 The Committee observes that approximately 50% of the Health budget has been 
allocated to different components under the Nationa l Health Mission. The Committee notes that 
in BE 2020 -21, a total fund of Rs. 33400.00 crore has been provided against Rs. 33,789 
allocation at RE 2019 -20 which is a decrease of 1.15% as compared to RE 2019 -20 in the 
budgetary allocation. When adjusted for inflation, there will be a further decline in allocation. 
 
(Para 4.3) 
Action Taken 
 
2.2 It would be fair if comparison is made with B.E. of current year with B.E. of previous 
year with the R.E. of the current year. Though the allocation for NHM in B.E. 20 20-21  is lower 
than 2019-20, it is 1.23 % more than B.E. 2019 -20. Efforts are on for provision of additional 
allocation to NHM at the RE stage. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.3 The Committee further notes that in 2018 -19 under NHM, Rs. 25,154.61 crore wa s 
allocated at BE stage which was increased to Rs. 26,118.05 crore at RE stage in view of 
potential utilisation. The Committee, however, finds that the Ministry was not able to fully utilise 
the enhanced budgetary allocation, leaving almost Rs. 90.43 lakhs  unutilised. Similarly, out of 
the RE allocation of Rs. 28783.00 crores for the year 2019 -20, only Rs. 24,403.77 crores could 
be utilised by 31st January, 2020. Though the Ministry has assured that the entire outlay could 
be utilised before closure of the financial year, the Committee finds it to be unlikely because 
absorption of almost Rs. 4,379.23 crore is to be done within a span of two months. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must aim at hundred percent utilization of 
allocated resources in future and only by full utilisation of funds, they can make a rightful claim 
for additional funds. 
(Para 4.4) 
Action Taken 
  
2.4 Under NHM against the RE allocation of Rs. 28783.00 crores, funds to the tune of Rs. 
29,288.00 crore have been releas ed to all States/UTs during FY 2019 -20. Additional releases of 
Rs.1113.21 Crore over and above the approved resource envelope were made to States/UTs for 
containment and management of COVID -19 from the savings of Other schemes of the Ministry. 

15 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.5 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that as against the projected 
demand of Rs. 64,011.50 crore for 2020 -21 under NRHM and NUHM, the total allocation in BE 
2020-21 is only Rs. 27989 crore thus leaving a shortfal l of Rs. 35022.5 crore. The Committee 
also notes that under NRHM, RE 2019 -20 stood at Rs. 27833.60 crore which was Rs. 794.6 
crore higher than the Rs. 27039.00 crore allocated at the BE 2019 -20 stage but the budget 
allocation under BE 2020 -21 under NRHM ha s been kept stagnant at Rs. 27039.00 crore. The 
budget allocation, under NUHM, has been Rs. 950 crore that remained constant as budget 
allocated at BE 2019-20 and RE 2019-20 stage. 
(Para 4.5) 
 
2.6 Analyzing the shortfall in allocations for NHM vis-a-vis its projected demand for funds, 
the Committee concludes that the Department may face difficulty in upscaling of the vital health 
schemes viz Ayushman Bharat –Health & Wellness Centres, Strengthening free drugs, free 
diagnostics, improvements in Healthcare Del ivery System, development of Health Infrastructure 
as per patient care norm, Poshan Abhiyan, HBYC, SUMAN, LaQshya etc. and delay in payment 
of committed liabilities under Infrastructure Maintenance. 
(Para 4.6) 
 
Action Taken 
  
2.7 Additional fund to the tune of Rs. 3000.00 crore has been released to States/UTs towards 
COVID-19 under Phase 1 (January 2020 to June 2020) of the Emergency Response and Health 
Systems Preparedness Package as part of 100% centrally funding package. Further, the Ministry 
have alread y sought additional funds for NRHM and NUHM for FY 2020 -21 in the first 
supplementary demand. 
 
NATIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION  
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.8 The Committee observes that a net amount of Rs. 5253.46 crore was allocated at BE 
2019-20 which was increased to Rs. 7660.95 crore at the RE stage. The same has however been 
reduced to Rs. 5703.02 crore at BE 2020 -21. The Department, in its written submission, has not 
specified the reasons for the considerable increase in the funds allocated at the RE stage and the 
subsequent reduction at BE 2020-21.  
(Para 5.2) 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.9 The Committee also observes that the fund allocation for RCH flexible pool shows an 
overall decrease of 25% at BE 2020 -21 in comparison to RE 2019 -20. The Commit tee is of the 
view that since RCH is a critical area of intervention for the maternal and child health, the 
Department needs to make efforts to use the allocated budget gainfully and optimally and if 
required may approach Ministry of Finance for supplementary demands at RE stage. 
(Para 5.3) 
 

16 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.10 The budgetary outlay under RCH Flexible Pool (including Routine Immunization, 
Pulse Polio Immunization, National Iodine Deficiency Disorder Control Programme) is Rs. 
5703.52 crore for FY 2020-21 which is same as that of BE 2019 -20 and RE 2019-20. Therefore, 
there is no such decrease in the budgetary outlay of RCH Flexible Pool. As recommended by the 
Committee, the Ministry will raise its demands to M/o Finance for additional funds under RCH 
flexible pool during supplementary demands as well as at RE stage, if required. 
 
NATIONAL RURAL HEALTH MISSION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
2.11 The Committee welcomes the Intensified Mission Indradhanush 2.0 that aims to 
immunize children under 2 years of age and pregnant women against eight vaccine -preventable 
diseases, viz, tuberculosis, meningitis, measles, Hepatitis B, tetanus, whooping cough, 
poliomyelitis and diphtheria. The Committee also observes that the vaccines for two other 
diseases- Hemophilus influenz a and Japanese encephalitis will also be provided under the 
programme in certain select areas. The Committee notes that the country has made considerable 
improvement in immunization through the Universal Immunization Programme.  
 
(Para 5.10) 
Action Taken 
 
2.12 Currently, under Universal Immunization Programme (including intensified Mission 
Indradhanush), vaccines are being administered against 12 vaccine preventable dieses. 
Nationally against 10 dieses - (1) Tuberculosis, (2) Polio, (3) Hepatitis B, (4) Diph theria, (5) 
Pertussis, (6) Tetanus, (7) Measles, (8) Rubella, (9) Rota virus, (10) Haemophilus influenza 
Type-b and sub -nationally against 2 dieses: (11) Japanese Encephalitis and (12) Pneumococcal 
Pneumonia. Pregnant women are being vaccinated with Td vaccine. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.13 However, the Committee notes that the Department has not increased its budgetary 
allocation under the Reproductive Child Health (RCH) programs, even though the Department 
has included five more vaccines in the progr am and launched Intensified Mission Indradhanush 
(IMI) 2.0. The Committee, therefore, is apprehensive that with the number of vaccines 
increasing, the allocated funds may not be adequate for carrying out the smooth implementation 
of the program. The Commit tee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department to ensure that 
financial constraints do not pose a roadblock in achieving the objectives of IMI 2.0. 
(Para 5.11) 
  
Action Taken 
 
2.14 Noted. The allocation for the Immunization programme has been increasin g over the last 
4 years (2016-17 to 2019-20) which is evident from the table below. 
 

17 
 
 
Name of the 
Scheme 
Years 
2016-17 
(RE) 
2017-18 
(RE) 
2018-18 
(RE) 
2019-20 
(RE) 
2020-21 
(BE) 
Routine 
Immunisation & 
Pulse Polio 
Immunization under 
DBS 
1299.94 1777.04 2560.09 2240.97 2103.44 
 
2.15 There is no need for any additional allocation of funds over and above the BE/RE 
already allocated to immunization programme.  
 
PULSE POLIO IMMUNIZATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.16 The Committee also recommends that the G overnment should keep a close watch on the 
immunization programme to ensure that Polio does not resurface due to shortage of bulk 
ingredient required to produce the vaccine.  
(Para 5.15) 
Action Taken 
 
2.17 The Department takes note of the recommendation an d states that Pulse Polio campaign 
is conducted with bivalent Oral Polio Vaccine (bOPV). Inactivated Polio vaccine is not used in 
the Pulse Polio Programme. In routine immunization, IPV is used along with bivalent OPV. At 
present, there is no shortage of b OPV and IPV in the country and uninterrupted supply of bOPV 
and IPV are maintained.  
 
HEALTH SYSTEM STRENGTHENING UNDER NRHM 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
2.18 The Committee observes that as on 30.01.2020, funds to the tune of Rs.9,738.58 crore has 
been utilised out of Rs.10,532.20 crore. The Committee hopes that the remaining amount of Rs. 
793.62 crore could be utilised by the Department before the fiscal year closes. The Committee 
appreciates that ASHA workers have been allocated a separate benefit packa ge of Rs. 836.98 
crore. The Committee hopes that special emphasis on the Medical Mobile Units and ASHAs as 
community health educators and promoters will help to ensure 'last mile connectivity' in health 
and wellness and take the quality healthcare closer t o people. The Committee observes that the 
honorarium for ASHA workers is quite low and therefore, is of the view that it needs to be 
suitably enhanced. The Committee also recommends that delay in the payment of honorarium 
should be avoided. 
(Para 5.19) 
 
 
 

18 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.19 1. Under the National Health Mission, Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs) are 
envisaged to be community health volunteers and are entitled to task/activity based incentives. 
The incentives to ASHAs finalized at the national level are regularly reviewed and activities for 
which ASHAs would get incentives are expanded from time to time. In financial year 2018 -19, 
the Union Cabinet approved the revised amount of routine recurrent incentive for ASHAs from 
Rs 1000 per month to Rs. 2000 per month. 
 
2. Health is a State subject, however, under NHM, financial support is provided to States, for 
strengthening their healthcare systems. The decisions on staff recruitment, remuneration and 
work allocation are within the purview of states and as such, many States/UTs have introduced 
fixed monthly honorarium for ASHAs from their respective State budget. Further, 8 States are 
also providing additional social security benefits for ASHAs (viz. Chhattisgarh, File No.Z -
18015/3/2020-NHM-II Assam, Jharkhand, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Odisha and West 
Bengal). 
 
3. Against an outlay of Rs. 11882.21 Crore (for Health System Strengthening under NRHM) for 
financial year 2019-20, Rs. 12972.22 Crore is the expenditure booked by PAO as on 31 
March 2020. T he expenditure booked is more due to the additional releases over and above the 
budgetary outlay, on account of savings made by other Programme Divisions of Department of 
Health and Family Welfare. Thus, the complete amount for ASHA Benefit Package has bee n 
released by Central Government. 
 
4. Further, in order to ensure that the payment to ASHAs is made without any delay, the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare has written to States and the same is also ensured during various 
review meetings, held from time to time. 
 
 
AYUSHMAN BHARAT – HEALTH AND WELLNESS CENTRE 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.20 The Committee notes that under AB -HWC, funds to the tune of Rs. 1350.01 crore were 
allocated at RE stage in 2019-20 which has been kept constant at Rs. 1350.00 cror e at BE 2020-
21. The Committee is apprehensive that with the target of transforming more HWCs in 2020 -21 
as compared to year 2019 -20, the allocation of Rs. 1350.00 crore may not be sufficient to 
achieve the desired objective. 
(Para 5.23) 
  
Action Taken 
 
2.21 Against the target of 40,000 AB-HWCs to be achieved by FY 2019-20, despite the efforts 
requested by the States towards COVID -19 public health challenge, States/UTs (except Delhi, 
which is not implementing the scheme) have operationalized 38,595 function al AB-HWCs as on 
31.3.2020.  Similarly, against the cumulative target of 70,000 AB -HWCs by March 2021, more 
than 43,300 functional AB-HWCs are operationalized by States/UTs (except Delhi, which is not 

19 
 
implementing the scheme) as on 29th July 2020. All effo rts are being made to achieve the target 
of 1.5 lakhs AB-HWCs across the country by December 2022.  
 
2.22 Details of central release and expenditure for the FY 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 2020 -21 for 
CPHC under NHM (NRHM + NUHM), as on 28.07.2020, is given at Annexure I. Besides the 
exclusive budget for AB -HWCs through CPHC component, various components of AB -HWCs 
like other Human Resource, Free Drugs, Diagnostics etc. are supported under regular National 
Health Mission (NHM) Budget.  
 
TERTIARY CARE PROGRAMME 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
2.23 Under National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, 
Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke (NPCDS), Rs. 175 crore were allocated in BE 2019 -20 
which was reduced to Rs. 160 crore at RE stage. For the FY BE 2020 -21, Rs. 175 crore has been 
allocated under the program. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that despite the 
launch of NPCDS, there is poor awareness amongst the people regarding cancer, diabetes and 
Cardiovascular diseases. There is lack of access to screening, diagnostic and treatment centres 
at Primary, Secondary and tertiary levels which is a major cause for poor survival rate. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends, the Department to make more concerted efforts to 
tackle the growing burden of these diseases. 
(Para 8.5) 
Action Taken 
  
2.24 In order to prevent and control major Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs), the National 
Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Diseases and Stroke 
(NPCDCS) is bei ng implemented by Central Government under the National Health Mission 
(NHM) with focus on strengthening infrastructure, human resource development, and referral. 
Under the programme, NCD Clinics and are being set up at District and CHC levels, to provide 
services for common NCDs. In identified districts, Cardiac Care Units (CCU) and Day Care 
Centres are also being set up for providing facilities for emergency Cardiac Care and Cancer 
Chemotherapy respectively. Till March, 2020, 637 NCD Clinics at District l evel and 4,472 NCD 
Clinics at Community Health Centre level, 181 CCUs and 218 Day Care Centres at district level 
have been set up across the country under NPCDCS. 
 
2.25 The objectives of NPCDCS includes awareness generation for cancer prevention, 
screening, early detection and referral to an appropriate level institution for treatment. A 
population level initiative for prevention, control and screening for common Non-Communicable 
diseases (NCDs) i.e. diabetes, hypertension and common cancers viz. oral, brea st and cervical 
cancer, has been rolled out in over 215 districts of the country, as a part of comprehensive 
primary healthcare. Screening of common NCDs including three common cancers i.e. oral, 
breast and cervical is also an integral part of service delivery under Ayushman Bharat-Health and 
Wellness Centres. Population based screening helps in mass awareness generation about risk 
factors and early detection of NCDs including common cancers. 
 
2.26 Under NHM, financial support is provided to the States/UTs under NCD Flexi -Pool 
through State PIPs, with the Centre to Stat4e share in ratio of 60:40 (except for NE and Hilly 

20 
 
States, where the share is 90:10) to provide free essential medicines and diagnostic services for 
primary and secondary health care needs. 
 
2.27 Strengthening of Tertiary Care Cancer facilities scheme is being implemented under the 
NPCDCS to enhance the facilities for tertiary care cancer. Under the scheme, the State Cancer 
Institute (SCI)/Tertiary Care Cancer Centre (TCCCs) will provide compr ehensive cancer 
diagnosis, treatment and care services. SCI will provide outreach services, diagnosis and referral 
treatments, develop treatment protocols, undertake research and enhance the capacity of 
personnel in the State in the field. TCCC will undert ake similar activities, though at a lower 
scale. So far, setting up of 19 State Cancer Institutes and 20 Tertiary Care Cancer Centres have 
been approved. The scheme has been continued till 2020 with the continued support to already 
approved projects. 
 
2.28 Further, Oncology is also one of the focus areas in case of new AIIMS and many 
upgraded institutions under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY). Setting up of 
National Cancer Institute at Jhajjar in Haryana and strengthening of Chittaranjan Nat ional 
Cancer Institute, Kolkata, are also steps in the same direction. 
 
2.29 Cancer is diagnosed and treated at various levels in the health care system. In 
Government hospitals, treatment I either free or highly subsidized. Treatment of cancers is also 
available under Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (PMJAY).  Besides this, 
Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment (AMRIT) Deendayal outlets have 
been opened at 203 Institutions/Hospitals with an objective to make available d rugs and implants 
at discounted prices to the patients. Under the umbrella scheme of Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi, 
financial assistance is provided to families living below threshold poverty line for their 
treatment, including treatment of cancer, in Government hospitals. 
 
2.30 For undertaking IEC activities on NCDs including cancers, support is provide to 
States/UTs @ 50 -70 lakh at the State level and @ Rs. 3 to 5 lakh per District. Awareness 
campaigns on common risk factors for NCDs, including cancer, and for p romotion of healthy 
lifestyle are also carried out through print, electronic and social media. Camps for awareness 
generation and screening for common NCDs including common cancers are organized at Pragati 
Maidan, New Delhi, during the India International Trade Fair each year. Special campaigns are 
organized on the occasion of National Cancer Awareness Day and World Cancer Day. Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) - National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research 
(NICPR), Noida, has launched www.cancerindia.org with the theme “India Against Cancer”, a 
portal that provides information on the leading cancers in India with a major focus on awareness, 
prevention and treatment of these cancers. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
2.31 The Committee observes that as per the status of funds released under PG Phase II, out 
of a total of Rs. 1104.5 crore, the Centre has only released Rs 620 crore till date. Under the 
Scheme for up gradation of existing State Government/Cent ral Government medical Colleges to 
increase MBBS seats in the country, the Centre has released Rs. 2171.19 out of Rs. 2451.6 
crores. The Committee notes that these schemes were conceptualized to address the shortage of 
qualified doctors and improve the hea lth infrastructure in the country. However, the show 

21 
 
progress of the Scheme is a matter of grave concern. The Committee also understands that the 
States with their limited resources and finances need a major boost from Centre to bridge the 
existing gaps in medical education. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Centre to sort out 
all the pending issues with states so that the transfer of funds could be made to them within a 
specified time-frame. The Centre should also urge the States to release their sh are of funds and 
closely monitor the timely execution of each project in the States. 
(Para 9.4) 
Action Taken 
  
2.32 Fund utilization has been held up since Budget provision for augmentation of seats has 
been proposed to be re -appropriated for new medical c olleges, because a third phase with 75 
medical colleges has been sanctioned after passage of B.E. 2019 -20. The issues relating to 
reporting of work progress on the approved projects, submission of Utilisation Certificates are 
taken up regularly with State Health Secretaries/Director of Medical Education of States/UTs 
and medical colleges during various meetings. In addition all possible efforts are being made for 
sorting out the problems, if any, faced by the concerned States/UTs in the execution of approve d 
projects. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCES FOR HEALTH AND MEDICAL EDUCATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
2.33 The Committee also notes that the budgetary allocation for three different schemes under 
HRH&ME that deals with the Up gradation of district/ referral hospitals  into New Medical 
College, Increase of UG seats and Increase of PG seats have been merged in B.E.2020 -21. 
Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the proposal of converting existing district 
hospitals to medical colleges through PPP mode to addre ss the shortage of medical 
professionals. The Committee is of the view that human resource augmentation is fundamental 
to improving the quality of healthcare delivery but such a model must not result in the 
vulnerable population especially the poor becoming low priorities for the healthcare system. 
 
(Para 9.5) 
Action Taken 
 
2.34 One of the main objective of these schemes is to provide affordable medical facilities to 
the poor population of this country. The implementing agencies of these schemes are concerne d 
States/UTs. Therefore, all possible steps are taken to ensure that providing health care facilities 
to poor population may not become low priority, while establishment of a Government Medical 
College under the schemes through PPP mode. 
 
AYUSHMAN BHARAT - PMJAY 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
2.35 The Committee observes that under AB -PMJAY funds to the tune of Rs. 6400 crore were 
allotted in BE 2019-20 which was reduced to Rs. 3200 crore at the RE stage. In BE 2020 -21, the 
funds have been retained at Rs. 6 400 crore. The Committee notes with concern the gross 

22 
 
underutilisation of funds under the Scheme, however, the Committee also takes cognizance of the 
States joining the Scheme at a later stage that may have resulted in the funds remaining 
unutilised. The C ommittee observes that AB -PMJAY has witnessed a significant increase in 
allocation as compared to the allocation of the previous year. The Committee recommends the 
Department to periodically track the progress of the Scheme in the States and ensure that th e 
funds earmarked for the Scheme are optimally utilised. 
(Para 10.5) 
Action Taken 
2.36 (i)  The budget allocation of Rs. 6400 Crore for FY 2019 -20 was done on the basis of 
national ceiling of Rs 1052 per family for around 10.74 Crore entitled beneficiary 
families with the presumption that all the States/UTs would be implementing the scheme.  
(ii)  However, the utilisation of fund has been low due to following reasons: 
 West Bengal, Telangana, Odisha and Delhi, which in total account for 20% 
of the eligible beneficiary population are not implementing AB-PMJAY. 
 Punjab & Rajasthan joined AB-PMJAY only in late 2019. 
 In 3 large States (UP, MP and Bihar) which account for 30% of the 
beneficiary population, demand is still picking up.  
 The experience so far shows th at the average premium amounts to Rs. 800. 
However, this had been estimated at Rs. 1052 at the time of the inception of 
PMJAY 
(iii)  The reasons for increase in allocation for the coming year are as follows: 
a. There is a clear trend of increase in the premiu m quoted by insurance 
companies in the states implementing the scheme in insurance/Mixed mode. 
b. States like Punjab & Rajasthan started implementation of the scheme from 
the end of second quarter of 2019 -20. Their fund utilization is expected to 
increase.  
c. There is a trend of uptake across country especially in States like Bihar, Uttar 
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.  
d. Non-implementing States may also join the scheme. 
Observation/Recommendation  
2.37 Attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the instances of non-inclusion of a 
large number of eligible people under the Scheme as they have not been issued e -card so far. 
The Committee has been informed that e -card is not a prerequisite for availing healthcare 
services under the Scheme and the entitled individu al can avail the benefits if he/she is included 
in the SECC census 2011. However, the Committee has been given to understand that patients 
have been refused treatment in the empanelled hospitals because they did not have the cards. 
(Para 10.6) 
 
 

23 
 
Action Taken 
  
2.38 Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) is an entitlement -
based scheme and no registration or enrolment of entitled beneficiaries is required for availing 
the benefits. However, in order to create awareness and facilitate easy  availing of benefits, after 
verifying the identity of beneficiaries under the scheme, e -cards have been issued to the 
beneficiaries. Also, no beneficiary is denied the benefits of the scheme due to unavailability of e -
cards. So far more than 12.5 crore e -cards have been issued under the scheme and  States/UTs 
have been advised to undertake beneficiary identification process in mission mode. 
2.39 Further, in order to ensure that no beneficiary is denied healthcare services under AB -
PMJAY, a robust grievance redressal mechanism has been developed, according to  which any 
complaint regarding denial of treatment by an empanelled hospital received either through 
national call centre 14555 or on grievance redressal portal https://grievance.pmjay.gov.in or 
https://cgrms.pmjay.gov.in/ or through any other medium are immediately assigned to respective 
State Grievance Nodal Officer designated at each State Health Agency for necessary action. 
These grievances are continuously monitored. 

24 
 
Chapter–III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.1 The Committee notes that to achieve the set target of 2.5% of GDP at the current health 
expenditure rate, t he total expenditure on Health for the year 2020 -21 should have been 3.67 
lakh crore out of which 1.28 lakh crore should have been contributed by the Central 
Government. A closer look at the past and present health budget allocation clearly defies the 
envisioned health finance objective in National Health Policy 2017. The Committee, therefore, is 
of the view that to ensure that the health spending targets as envisaged in NHP 2017 are 
achieved, the Government has to make consistent efforts to increase its in vestments in public 
health services.  
(Para 3.5) 
 
3.2 At the time when global spending on health is increasing, India has to scale up its 
efforts so that the Indian health sector expands at a much higher rate. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly believes th at the allocations provided for 2020 -21 is not in line with the ambitious 
vision set in NHP 2017. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department 
should approach the Ministry of Finance to provide enhanced allocations for NHM and Health 
Sector in right proportion which would help actualize the objectives of health schemes and also 
facilitate the achievement of targets of expenditure upto 2.5% of GDP by 2025. The Committee 
also recommends the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to expand its pool of resources and 
ensure adequate allocation and optimum utilization of the funds available. 
(Para 3.6) 
 
3.3 The Committee observes that most of the developed economies of the world spend a 
considerable part of their budget in Healthcare. The Commi ttee recognizes the importance of 
human resources in the economic growth and development of a nation and strongly believes that 
improvement in healthcare delivery infrastructure affect income by making human capital more 
productive. The Committee, therefor e, has time and again advocated the increase in the 
Healthcare expenditure of the country. 
(Para 3.8) 
Action Taken 
 
3.4 The Department of Health & Family Welfare has been making efforts to tap other 
resources for increasing public health spending. The budg etary allocation of DoHFW has 
increased from Rs.62,659.12 Cr in 2019 -20 (RE) to Rs.65,011.80 Cr in 2020 -21(BE). In 2018 -
19, Government announced 4% Health & Education Cess in place of 3% Education Cess on 
personal Income Tax and Corporation Tax, to cater t o the education and health needs of the poor 
and rural families.  
 

25 
 
3.5 In addition to the budgetary resources, health education and research has access to Higher 
Education Funding Agency (HEFA). In the General Budget 2020 -21, Government announced 
that the additional 5% cess on import of medical devices will be utilized for financing health 
infrastructure and services in inspirational districts. The Department of Health and Family 
Welfare has also made a proposal to the 15th Finance Commission, for requireme nt of funds for 
strengthening primary healthcare (which includes bridging gap in public healthcare 
infrastructure, addressing healthcare workforce shortage, supporting National Ambulance 
services, support for IT infrastructure and support for essential med icines & diagnostic 
infrastructure), opening new medical  colleges, training of allied health workforce, super 
speciality blocks under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana, etc. An additional outlay of 
Rs. 15,000.00 crore has been received towards COVID -19 Emergency Response and Health 
Systems Preparedness Package for three years 2020 -24. Further, the Ministry has demanded 
additional funds under Prime Minister’s Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojna (PM -ASBY) for 
supporting all States/UTs for further augmentin g treatment capacities for critical care for 
emergency response, strengthening of public health infrastructure for pandemic preparedness by 
setting up of infectious disease hospital blocks in all Districts, developing  comprehensive 
diagnostics and treatme nt capacities, strengthening of institutions to deliver Comprehensive 
Primary Health Care and public health interventions in rural and urban areas, to establish state -
of-the-art digital health systems for managing the core digital health data, to support f or research 
on COVID-19 and other infectious diseases, including biomedical research to generate evidence 
to inform short -term and medium term response to COVID -19 like pandemics. However, in 
order to broaden the fiscal space the Ministry will seek additio nal funds during supplementary 
demands as well as RE stage. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.6 The Committee observes that although the budgetary allocation made to Health 
Sector of Department of Health and Family Welfare has been enhanced from Rs.62,659.12 
Crore in 2019-20 (RE) to Rs.65,011.80 Crore in 2020-21(BE), however, the increment is not 
in consonance with the Health Finance goals and objectives under the Health System 
strengthening component as outlined in the National Health Policy 2017. As per the tar get 
set in the National Health Policy 2017 the Central Government has to increase health 
expenditure from the existing 1.15 per cent of GDP to 2.5 per cent by 2025. Keeping in view 
the envisioned expenditure pattern of 35 per cent by the Central Government  and the 65 
per cent by the States, the total expenditure on health for the financial year should have 
been 3.67 lakh crore out of which 1.28 lakh crore should have been allocated to the health 
sector under the Department of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, therefore, is 
of the considered view that unless and until the enhanced allocation to the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare is not in proportion to the financial targets of the National 
Health Policy 2017, the physical targets and objectiv es of NHM and Health Schemes could 
not be actualised. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation for 
adequate investment on Healthcare Delivery Infrastructure. 
 
3.7 The Committee would also like to be apprised of appropriation Plan of  Rs. 15000.00 
Crore received towards COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness 
Package for the year 2020 -24. The Committee further desires to be apprised of the 

26 
 
projected demand of the Department under PM’s Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojna 
(PM-ASBY). 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.8 The Committee also takes cognizance of the financial hardships caused by catastrophic 
health illness that drives the population especially the marginalized section to poverty. The 
Committee also believes that India being a welfare state has to make constant efforts to promote 
the economic and social well being of its citizens and make every effort to reduce OOPE. The 
Committee is of the strong view that the aim of the Government must be to provide healthcare 
services as a public good and the State must protect its citizens especially the poor from the 
significant financial hardship caused due to high OOPE. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the Government to play a major role of facilitator by increasin g the Government 
expenditure on Health. 
(Para 3.9) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.9 To provide affordable health care, Government has taken many steps under the National 
Health Mission (NHM), by supplementing efforts of the States by providing a host of free 
services re lated to mental health, child health, adolescent health, family planning, universal 
immunization, and for major diseases like Tuberculosis, Vector borne Diseases, Non -
communicable diseases, mental health care etc. A few major initiatives are the Free Drugs  and 
Diagnostics Services Initiative, Prime Minister National Dialysis Programme, etc. The National 
Health Policy envisages increasing the health expenditure to 2.5% of GDP by 2025.  The steps 
taken in this regard are highlighted at Para 3.5 and 3.6 above.   To help in mitigating the financial 
hardships caused by high OOPE, the Government launched Ayushman Bharat, with its two 
components – Ayushman Bharat Health & Wellness Centers (AB -HWC) which provides 
comprehensive primary health care and Pradhan Mantri J an Arogya Yojana (PM-JAY) that aims 
to provide health coverage of Rs. 5.00 lakh per family per year to around 10.74 Core poor and 
vulnerable families for secondary and tertiary hospitalization. As on 1 st July, 2020, 41,652 AB -
HWCs are operational. Total sc reenings conducted for Hypertension (468.49 lakhs), Diabetes 
(391.19 lakhs), Oral Cancer (242.10 lakhs), Breast Cancer (136.86 lakhs) and Cervical Cancer 
(90.96 lakhs) till 17 th July, 2020.  As on 1 st July, 2020, under PM -JAY, 99,04,776 
hospitalizations have been registered.  
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.10 The Committee takes note of Governments interventions to provide affordable 
healthcare to the common masses in the form of free services relating to mental health, 
child birth, adolescent health, family p lanning, universal immunisation, free drugs and 
diagnostic services initiatives , however, these steps have not yielded the desired results on 
ground level and the common masses run from pillar to post to get better healthcare 
services. The out of pocket ex penditure is still as high as 62.4 per cent and India ranks 15 
out of 186 countries in OOPE as percentage of Central Health Expenditure. Although the 
launching of AB-PMJAY is a forward looking programme, however, the programme itself 
is languishing due to its inherent shortcomings viz constricted category of beneficiaries, 

27 
 
reduction of allocation both at BE and RE stage in 2019-20, non acceptance/late acceptance 
of the scheme by major States, slow pace of its implementation etc. The Committee, 
therefore, re iterates its recommendation for the increased Government Expenditure on 
Health so as to reduce OOPE of weaker section of the society.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.11 The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the fact that even after its persistent 
recommendations in its previous Reports, the budget allocated to the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare has not been as per its projected demand. The funds allocated to the Department 
is approximately half of its projected demand registering a shortfall of Rs. 52180.02 crore. The 
Committee notes that the total allocated budget of Rs. 65011.80 crore is a mere 3.75 percent 
increase from the RE 2019-20 of Rs. 62,659 crore which is quite meagre, if inflation is taken into 
account. The Committee is d isappointed to note that the availability of lesser budget against the 
projected requirements may lead to difficulty in up scaling of various healthcare 
services/Schemes and delay in payment of committed liabilities under Infrastructure 
Maintenance. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that there is a dire need to broaden the 
fiscal space for the Department of Health and Family Welfare by increasing the budgetary 
allocation to health. 
(Para 3.12) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.12 The Department of Health & Family Welfare  has been making efforts to tap other 
resources for increasing public health spending.  The budgetary allocation of DoHFW has 
increased from Rs.62,659.12 Cr in 2019 -20 (RE) to Rs.65,011.80 Cr in 2020 -21(BE). In 2018 -
19, Government announced 4% Health & Edu cation Cess in place of 3% Education Cess on 
personal Income Tax and Corporation Tax, to cater to the education and health needs of the poor 
and rural families. In addition to the budgetary resources, health education and research has 
access to Higher Educ ation Funding Agency (HEFA). In the General Budget 2020 -21, 
Government announced that the additional 5% cess on import of medical devices will be utilized 
for financing health infrastructure and services in aspirational districts. 
 
3.13. The Department of Health and Family Welfare has also made a proposal to the 15th 
Finance Commission, for requirement of funds for strengthening primary healthcare (which 
includes bridging gap in public healthcare infrastructure, addressing healthcare workforce 
shortage, supporting National Ambulance services, support for IT infrastructure and support for 
essential medicines & diagnostic infrastructure), opening new medical  colleges, training of 
allied health workforce, super speciality blocks under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya S uraksha 
Yojana, etc.  
 
3.14 An additional outlay of Rs. 15,000.00 crore has been received towards COVID -19 
Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness Package for three years 2020 -24. 
Further, the Ministry has demanded additional funds under Prime M inister’s Atmanirbhar 
Swasth Bharat Yojna (PM -ASBY) for supporting all States/UTs for further augmenting 
treatment capacities for critical care for emergency response, strengthening of public health 
infrastructure for pandemic preparedness by setting up of infectious disease hospital blocks in all 

28 
 
Districts, developing  comprehensive diagnostics and treatment capacities, strengthening of 
institutions to deliver Comprehensive Primary Health Care and public health interventions in 
rural and urban areas, to es tablish state-of-the-art digital health systems for managing the core 
digital health data, to support for research on COVID -19 and other infectious diseases, including 
biomedical research to generate evidence to inform short -term and medium term response t o 
COVID-19 like pandemics.  However, in order to broaden the fiscal space the Ministry will seek 
additional funds during supplementary demands as well as RE stage. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.15 The Committee is anguished to note a marginal 3.75 per cent h ike in the budgetary 
allocation from Rs. 65,011.80 crore in BE 2020 -21 to Rs. 62,659 crore in RE 2019 -20. The 
Department will have to manage Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) i.e. imposition of 4 per 
cent Health and Education Cess or 5 per cent cess on impor t of medical devices to be 
utilized for financing health infrastructure and services in aspirational districts. Besides 
that requisite fund would be sought from Higher Education Funding Agency (HEFA). The 
Committee feels that the ad-hoc and piecemeal arran gements to meet financial 
requirement would not do any long-term good to Health Sector and therefore, recommends 
that Government should evolve a system of planning /arranging seamless and sustainable 
resources.  
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR UMBRELLA NHM  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.16 The Committee is dismayed at the drastic reduction in budgetary allocation as against 
the projected demand for the Umbrella NHM sector which consists of such important Schemes as 
NRHM, NUHM, PMJAY etc. Such a huge reduction o f more than 50 percent is bound to affect 
the Schemes adversely. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Finance should 
sympathetically consider the demand for additional funds of the Department at RE Stage. 
 
(Para 3.15) 
  
Action Taken 
  
3.17 The directions/ observations of the Committee have been duly noted. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.18 The Committee would like to be appraised of demand for additional funds under 
umbrella National Health Mission (NHM) at RE Stage 2020 -21 and the actual alloc ation 
made under the said head. The Committee also desires the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare to make assessment of overall impact of lower allocation i.e. Rs. 39839.00 
crore against the projected demand of Rs. 85158.62 Crore in BE 2020 -21 under u mbrella 
NHM programme. 
 
 

29 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
3.19 The Committee is disappointed at the gross underutilization of allocated resources under 
AB-PMJAY where only half of the funds could be utilised. The Committee feels that AB -PMJAY, 
one of the world’s largest health assurance schemes, should help achieve its envisioned objective 
of providing access to quality health and medication and for this it is imperative that the 
resources earmarked are optimally utilised. The Committee also notes that AB -PMJAY which 
was started in September, 2018 faces many challenges in its smooth implementation. The 
Committee would like the Department to take note of the ground realities and address the issues 
related to beneficiary identification system, empanelment of healt hcare providers, hospital 
transaction system etc. The Committee also recommends the Department to establish a 
monitoring system for proper assessment of the Scheme and removal of the problems so that the 
rate of utilisation of funds under AB-PMJAY is improved. 
(Para 3.17) 
Action Taken 
 
3.20 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has taken following steps:- 
i. AB-PMJAY was launched in September 2018. Since then, expenditure has shown an 
upward trend. From September 2018 until the end of F.Y. 2018 -19, an amou nt of  Rs. 
1849.55 crore was disbursed to States. During 2019 -20, an amount of Rs. 2992.94 crore 
was released to States and during 2020-21, Rs.336.90 crore have already been released to 
States/UTs.  
ii. A rigorous oversight procedure is being followed in the re lease and utilisation of funds. 
This has ensured appropriate utilisation of resources and prevented unjustified parking of 
funds at the State level.  
iii. The reasons for relatively slower than estimated pace of expenditure are as under:  
 West Bengal, Telangana , Odisha and Delhi, which in total account for 20% of the 
eligible beneficiary population are not implementing AB-PMJAY. 
 Punjab & Rajasthan have joined AB-PMJAY only in late 2019. 
 In 3 large States (UP, MP and Bihar) which account for 30% of the beneficiar y 
population, demand is still picking up.  
 The experience so far shows that the average premium amounts to Rs. 800. 
However, this had been estimated at Rs. 1052 at the time of the inception of 
PMJAY.  
(iv)  Regarding beneficiary identification, AB -PMJAY is  an entitlement-based scheme and no 
registration or enrolment of entitled beneficiaries is required for availing the benefits. 
However, in order to create awareness and facilitate easy availing of benefits, after 
verifying the identity of beneficiaries und er the scheme, e -cards are issued to the 
beneficiaries. The States/UTs have been advised to undertake beneficiary identification 
process in mission mode.  
(v)   A real time dashboard is active under the scheme where all the implementing states provide 
details of    utilization of scheme in empanelled hospitals in all districts. This dashboard 

30 
 
provides district level details of various indicators such as number of beneficiaries verified, 
hospitals empanelled, authorised hospital admission, claims received and claims paid etc. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.21 The Committee recommends the Ministry to assess the performance of the hospitals 
and States empanelled under the Scheme. The Committee feels that the details of utilization 
of Scheme in all empanelled hospit als in the States must be freely accessible to the general 
public. The Grievance redressal mechanism should also be strengthened so that the 
concerns of the general public are addressed at the earliest. The Committee also urges the 
Ministry to note the gro ss underutilisation under the Scheme and chalk out a realistic 
roadmap for the Scheme. The Ministry should also take up the matter of appropriate 
utilisation of resources with the States.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.22 The Committee also observes that  the Ministry has not submitted the requisite details 
with respect to utilization certificates under various Schemes. The Committee, therefore, would 
like the Ministry to submit the details of pending utilization certificates and the amount involved 
therein under the various schemes/programmes for the last five years including 2019-20. 
 
(Para 3.18) 
Action Taken 
 
3.23 As per Rule 238 (1) of the General Financial Rules 2017, the Utilization Certificate 
should be submitted within twelve months of the closure o f the financial year by the Institution 
or Organisation concerned. Hence, details of pending utilization certificates under NRHM 
Flexible Pool and NUHM Flexible Pool and the amount involved therein under the various 
schemes/programmes for the last five years including 2018-19 is given at Annexure–II.  
 
Further Recommendation  
3.24 The Committee notes with concern  the gross violation of the provision under Rule 
238 (1) of the General Financial Rules 2017 requiring the submission of utilization 
certificate wi thin 12 months of the closure of the financial year by the institution s/ 
organizations concerned. There are  289 pending utilization certificates under NRHM 
flexible pool and NUHM flexible pool involving an amount of Rs. 3362.77 Crores which is 
to be settle d in the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry  
needs to evolve a mechanism to ensure that the utilization  certificates are received within 
the stipulated period and also that all out efforts be made to dispose/settle all the pen ding 
utilization certificates at the earliest. 

31 
 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.25 The Committee finds that States like Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Rajasthan registered a 
very marginal increase of 1.55%, 0.51%, 1.76% respectively in the fund allocation for the 
Financial Year 2019-20 in comparison to allocation made in Financial Year 2018-19. Moreover, 
States like Kerala, Telangana and Tripura have noted a negative increase of 0.24% , 27.6 % and 
0.69 % respectively. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and the 
UT of Puducherry have registered only single digit increase in percentage terms for FY 2018 -19 
as compared to 2017 -18. Mizoram and Sikkim have shown a negative increase in budget 
allocation for the health sector for the same year. 
(Para 4.10) 
 
Action Taken 
  
3.26 The size of the health budget in a state is dependent upon several factors such as 
quantum of central assistance, contribution of matching share by States, overall resources 
position of the State a nd priority accorded to health sector by the States. It is seen that the 
average increase in state’s health budget during last three financial years i.e. 20178 -18 to 2019-
20 for the states of Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Kerala, Telangana and Tripur a ranges 
from 7% to 14 %. In respect of Telangana, there was an increase of Rs. 1500 crore (approx.) in 
the health budget at R.E. 2019 -20. It is true that health budget in the States of Arunanchal 
Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Mizora m and Sikkim have registered 
single digit increase in percentage terms in FY 2018-19. 
Further Recommendation 
3.27 The Committee expresses its concern that Health Budget in the St ates of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Mizoram , Sikkim have registered 
only single digit increase in percentage terms for Financial Year 2018 -19 as compared to 
2017-18  that must have a bearing on creation of fresh Health Infrastructure and delivery 
of healthcare facilities in these states. The Commit tee, t herefore, recommends the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare to urge upon the State Government  to enhance 
Budgetary Allocation on the Health Sector so that objective s of the National Health 
Mission are achieved.  
 
PULSE POLIO IMMUNIZATION  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.28 The Committee notes that India has been declared as Polio free by WHO in March 2014 
and has since maintained the status. However, the Committee believes that to prevent the 
possibilities of disruption of the supplies on accoun t of an unforeseen crisis, the Department 
must take all necessary precautions. The Committee, in its 106th Report on Demands for Grants 
2018-19 of the Department, had noted that all IPV manufacturers licensed in the country are 

32 
 
from the private sector. The  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had requested WHO for 
transfer of technology of Sabrin stains (SIPV) to public sector vaccine producers (PSUs) in 
India. Consequently, WHO had approved technology transfer for one PSU, however, the 
Committee observes that SIPV production is yet to start by any PSU in the country. The 
Committee expresses its displeasure over the casual approach of the Department as it has not 
paid heed to the recommendations of the Committee made in its 106th Report. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendations to expedite the process of identifying the PSU and fast 
track the production of SIPV by PSU. 
(Para 5.14) 
Action Taken 
 
3.29 World Health Organization (WHO) was requested to support Public Sector Units (PSUs) 
in technology transfer for production of SIPV (Sabrin Inactivated Polio Vaccine). However , at 
present no PSU is pursuing the technology transfer for production of SIPV. 
 
3.30 “Salk inactivated Polio vaccine” also called IPV is supplied under the National 
Immunization programme. This vaccine was earlier supplied to the Immunization programme by 
UNICEF under Gavi commodity assistance support. Now, this vaccine is procured by M/o 
Health and Family welfare and supplied to programme under domestic procurement from M/s 
Santha Biotech. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.31 The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons behind non-transferring 
of technology of Sabrin Inactivated Polio Vaccine (SIPV) to any public sector vaccine 
producer in India by WHO despite in principle approval of WHO for transferring of 
technology to one PSU in the country. The Committee  desires that the Ministry must go 
into the details of non -transfer of SIPV technology to one  Public Sector Undertaking and 
apprise the Committee of the steps taken by the Government in the matter.   
 
 
FLEXIBLE POOL FOR COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.32 The Committee fails to understand as to why insufficient funds have been allocated under 
this pool which would affect the smooth implementation of certain programs. The Committee 
takes note of the submission of the Department that shortage of funds will affect the procurement 
of Long -lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs) and the elimination of Vector borne diseases (VBD). 
Considering the important role t hat LLINs play in reducing malaria burden globally, the 
Committee recommends the Department to approach the Ministry of Finance to increase the 
budget allocation at RE stage so that the increasing burden of communicable diseases is curbed. 
(Para 5.28) 
Action Taken 
 
3.33 As per National Strategic Plan(NSP) for malaria elimination in India, 2017 -2022 
(launched by Hon’ble HFM) in June 2017, total requirement of 6.5 crore LLINs in the country 

33 
 
was estimated. Of the total requirement during 2016 -18, total of 4.95  crore LLINs (1 crore with 
domestic budgetary support +3.95 crore with GFATM support) have already been supplied to 
high endemic states; and 2.4 crore LLINs (1.58 crore for DBS states + 0.66 crore for GRATM 
supported states-as replacement) are under procurement /supply through CMSS. 
 
3.34 LLINs need to be replaced after every 3 years 9effective life of LLINs is taken as 3 years 
and 20 washes.) Therefore, from next financial year onwards funds for replacing LLINs in high 
endemic states would be required. Wit h the introduction in the year 2016, LLINs have played a 
key role in the decline in malaria burden in India. For example, there is 81% decline in malaria 
cases and 93% decline in deaths (93%) between 2015 -2019 in NE states. Similarly, Odisha has 
observed a decline of 91% in malaria cases, as well as, deaths between 2016 to 2019. In addition 
to this, more funds would also be required to implement various strategies; so as to achieve 
targeted malaria elimination by 2030 has laid down in National Malaria Elimi nation Framework 
in India, 2016 -2030 and NSP. Besides additional funding would be required for achieving 
elimination of kala –azar and Lymphatic Filariasis; and for effective control of three other VBDs 
i.e. Dengue, Chikungunya and JE. 
 
3.35 The details of Budget allocation under the subhead supplies and Material (the then 4210 
Non Plan) for the period 2015-16 to 2020-21 are as under. 
 
     
 Sr 
No 
 
Year  Budget allocation 
for procurement 
(Supplies and 
Material) 
Plan 
(DBS+EAC) 
Total 
(Figures in Crores) 
1 2015-16 366.00 139.65 550.65 
2 2016-17 320.58 185.07 550.65 
3 2017-18 378.48 505.65 884.13 
4 2018-19 1351.20 529.59 1880.79 
5 2019-20 720.00 (BE) 
675.00 (RE) 
482.45 1157.45 
6 2020-21 384.00* 497.28 881.28 
 
 The amount projected in BE 2020 -21 is exclusi ve of committed liability for the financial 
year 2019-20 amounting to Rs 408.58 Crores towards procurement of LLINs.  
 From the above, it may be seen that budget allocation in respect of NVBDCP for 
Procurement /Supplies and Material will not be able to meet the above committed liability. 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.36 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the allocation of insufficient funds 
for various programmes covered under Flexible Pool for Communicable Diseases Control 
Programme. The Ministry has already conceded that the lower allocation would affect the 
speedy implementation of kala –azar and Lymphatic Filariasis; and effective control of 
three other VBDs i.e. Dengue, Chikungunya and JE. The Committee understand s that the 
Ministry would requ ire more funds for procurement/replacement/repairing of Long 
Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLI Ns) besides the committed liability amounting to Rs. 408.58 
Crore for financial year 2019 -20 towards procurement of LLINs. Additional funds will be 

34 
 
required to implement various strategies of National Strategic Plan for Malaria elimination 
in India by 2030 as laid down in National Malaria Elimination Framework in India 2016 -
2030 and NSP. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of 
Finance must be considerate to the financial requirement of Department of Health and 
Family Welfare for effective and efficient implementation of various schemes  and 
programmes under Flexible Pool for Communicable Diseases.  
 
 
UPGRADING AND STRENGTHENING STATES’ DRUG REGULATORY SYSTEM 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.37 The Committee is dismayed at the slow pace of implementation of the Scheme. The 
Committee observes that the Scheme for upgrading and strengthening the States Drug 
Regulatory structures was started in 2015 and was scheduled to be implemented during the three 
financial years viz, 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18. However, even till FY 2019-20, less than half 
of the funds allocated under the Scheme could be released and as admitted by the Department, 
completion of the desired objectives of the Schemes by the end of the extended period of FY 
2019-20 is not practically possible. The Committee observes that the time frame for achieving 
the objectives of the Scheme has already been extended by two years. The Committe e, therefore, 
is of the view that the Department should shed its lackadaisical approach towards the Scheme 
and work seriously to avoid any inordinate delays in releasing the funds to the States. The 
Department should ensure that the desired objective of up grading and strengthening the States’ 
Drug Regulatory system is achieved at the earliest and in any case within the extended deadline. 
 
(Para 7.6) 
  
Action Taken 
 
3.38 The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (C EA) had, in its meeting held on 12th 
August 2015, approved the proposal inter alia to strengthen the States Drug Regulatory System 
in the country at an outlay of Rs. 850 crore. The scheme was approved for three years viz. 2015 -
16, 2016-17 & 2017 -18. However, after appraisal and approval of - the competent authority, the 
Scheme was continued for a period of two years i.e. FY 2018-19 to FY 2019-20. The scheme has 
further been extended upto March, 2021. An amount of Rs. 175 crore has been allocated under 
BE-2020-21 for the scheme. The proposals received from various States/UTs are examined and 
grants-in-aid released to them. The States are required to follow all the financial management 
systems and submit Audit Reports, Utilization Certificates, when due. 
 
3.39 It may be stated that no funds were allocate d during 2015 -16 due to which no funds 
could be released to States. During FY 2016 -17, only Rs. 29.01 crore could be released due to 
non-availability of funds despite projection of requirement. Similarly, during FY -2017-18, only 
Rs.52.35 crore was made ava ilable against a projection of Rs.250 crore and the entire allocated 
amount of Rs. 52.35 crore was released to States/UTs. 
 
 
 

35 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.40 The Committee finds as clear cut inconsistency in the statement of the Ministry as 
far as the extend ed period for this scheme is convened. Whenever the Ministry has now 
considered that this scheme has been extended upto March, 2021 , it  had, during the 
examination of Demand for Grants (2020 -21), submitted that an amount to the tune of Rs. 
175.00 Crore was earmarked for financial year 2020-21 and an amount of Rs. 188.00 Crore 
could be proposed in the financial year 2021 -22. The Committee would like to know as to 
which of the statement is true. The Committee feels that the set objective of upgrading and 
strengthening of the State Drug Regulatory System must be achieved through efficient and 
effective implementation of the scheme  for the large r public good . The Department, 
therefore, must strive to take appropriate steps in order to achieve the set goals. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.41 The Committee desires that the evaluation of the Scheme should be conducted/ completed 
within the given time frame. and strongly advocates carrying out such assessment study for other 
Schemes as well. The Committee would als o like to be apprised of the results of the evaluation 
conducted by NIHFW. If the assessment indicates that the Scheme has acted as a catalyst in 
strengthening the State Drug Regulatory infrastructure, the Department must consider to take 
this Scheme further. 
(Para 7.8) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.42 With the approval of competent authority, the National Institute of Health and Family 
Welfare (NIHFW) was selected as the agency to conduct third party evaluation of the scheme of 
"Strengthening the States' drug regulator y system". NIHFW was requested to undertake the 
evaluation ot the said scheme as per the terms of reference (ToR) supplied to them. NIHFW has 
submitted its first report in July, 2020. The report has stated that the Drugs Testing 
laboratories in the States are functioning well in most of the States surveyed by the team of 
NIHFW. For example, the States of Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Sikkim, etc. had weir -
functioning laboratories with adequate infrastructure (in terms of building facilities, 
basic labora tory equipment). The evaluation team has inter -alia recommended that 
budget allocation from Central Government should continue for the procurement of high -
end equipment and the scheme should be continued and strengthened in terms of 
infrastructure, human resources, training, budget, etc.  
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.43 The Committee is happy to note that in pursuance of its recommendations, the 
Ministry has got a third party evalu ation of the scheme  conducted. However, it express its 
displeasure over the fac t that the Ministry has not responded to its 
recommendations/suggestions to take this scheme further. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that the Department must pay special attention to the States where the Drug 
Regulatory System is faltering and not working at desired level through this scheme.  
 

36 
 
TERTIARY CARE PROGRAMME 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.44    The Committee finds that the BE allocation of Rs 550 crore for the year 2019 -20 has been 
reduced to Rs. 250 crore at the RE level. The Committee ta kes a serious view of the fact that 
except for the Tobacco Control and Drug De -addiction programme, the BE allocation has been 
reduced at RE stage for all the other programs. The Committee also notes that under the 
National Mental Health Programme, Rs. 40 crore was allotted which was reduced to Rs. 5.00 at 
RE stage. A WHO Report has cited Depression as the single largest contributor to global 
disability and a major contributor to suicide deaths. India is also reported to be one of the 
depressed countries in  the world, leaving USA and China behind. Considering the burden and 
stigma attached with mental health in the country, the need of the hour is to lay greater emphasis 
on strengthening and promoting mental healthcare. The Committee, in fact finds that all the 
components of tertiary care are vital for a healthy and productive nation and feels that only token 
allocations for these programs would not suffice. The Department must conduct these programs 
with full vigour by allocating adequate funds for them. 
(Para 8.3) 
 
Action Taken 
  
3.45 The approval for continuation of tertiary care programmes during 2017 -20 provided 
that further release of Central assistance to States/UTs will be on reimbursement basis. Funds 
allocated under the tertiary care component of NMH P could not be utilized due to lack of 
proposals from States/UTs for release of funds on reimbursement basis, despite regular follow 
up. It may however be mentioned here that for interventions upto district level, the Government 
is implementing District Me ntal health Programme(DMHP) under the National Health Mission, 
for early detection and management of mental disorders/illness. DMHP has been approved for 
implementation in 655 districts. The activities covered under the DMHP also include targeted 
interventions like work place stress management , suicide prevention activities, life skill training, 
counselling in schools and colleges, community awareness generation activities and imparting 
short term training to various categories of healthcare workers. 
 
Further Recommendation  
  
3.46 The Committee takes note of approval for implementation of District Mental 
Health Programme (DMHP) in 655 districts of the country. The Committee desires that the 
targeted interventions covered under the DMHP must be implemented at the ground level 
so that the observable outcome is reflected. The Committee further upholds that the 
Department should give equitable impetus to all the components of Tertiary Healthcare 
Programmes and accordingly allocate sufficient budgetary funds to each component of the 
programme. The Committee also recommends the department to continue to take 
proactive steps as follow -up action to motivate the State Government to formulate 
proposals/scheme/ strategy on each component of Tertiary Healthcare in order  to lay down 
a better healthcare infrastructure in the country so as to ensure global standard healthcare 
delivery at the grass root level.  

37 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
TERTIARY CARE PROGRAMMES  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
4.1 The Committee also notes that the Department has failed to fully utilise the funds 
allocated under the Capacity Building for Trauma Centres, National Programme for Health 
Care for the Elderly, Na tional Programme for Control of Blindness and Telemedicine. Looking 
at the past trends of poor utilisation, the Committee recommends that the trend must not get 
repeated in 2020 -21 and all out efforts should be made to optimally utilise the funds allocated  
under the afore mentioned National Programs. 
(Para 8.4) 
Action Taken 
  
4.2 Continuation of tertiary healthcare programmes was approved in February, 2019. As 
per this approval, after release of first installment as advance, further release of central assis tance 
to States/UTs is to be on reimbursement basis. The decision was accordingly conveyed to all the 
States/UTs and thereafter they were repeatedly requested to submit proposals for release of funds 
on reimbursement basis. However, due to lack of proposal s from States/UTs, allocated budget 
under the programme could not be utilized. The matter will be followed up vigorously again with 
States/UTs so that amount allocated in BE 2020 -21 is utilized on activities envisaged under the 
programme. 
 

PART – B  
 
HEALTH SECTOR (HR) 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Eighteenth Report of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (Demand No. 42) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the 
year 2020-21. 
 
2. Action Taken Notes (ATNs) have been received from the Government in respect of the 
recommendations contained in the 118th Report.  They have been categorized as follows: 
 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry : 2.4, 
3.3, 3.6, 8.6, 9.3, 10.3 and 11.8 
        Total - 7  (Chapter I) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Ministry’s replies:  2.5, 2.9, 7.3, 7.5, 7.13, 16.2 and 18.3 
        Total- 7  (Chapter II) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee:  2.3, 2.14, 3.9, 3.10, 3.11, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, 5.3, 
5.6, 6.3, 6.4, 7.8, 7.9, 7.11, 11.2, 12.3, 12.6, 12.9, 12.10, 13.3, 14.3, 15.3, 16.5 and 
17.5 
        Total - 25       (Chapter III)  
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited:  2.15 and 7.15  
        Total-  2  (Chapter IV)  
 
 
3. The details of the ATNs are discussed in various Chapters in the succeeding pages. 

39 
 
CHAPTER–I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.1 The Committee would also like to emphasi ze that substantial budgetary allocation in the 
public health is important to achieve the goal of universal health coverage. The Committee is 
convinced that people across the country deserve quality health services without suffering any 
financial hardship. The Committee is of the view that good health supports economic growth and 
investments in the health sector not only reduces out of pocket expenditure but also create jobs 
and stimulate economic growth. Such investments would not push families below the p overty. 
The Committee, therefore strongly believes that the objectives of National Health Policy, 2017 
needs to encompass all components to ensure affordable and universal access to good quality 
healthcare services available to all. 
(Para 2.4) 
  
Action Taken 
 
1.2 The concerns of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT HEALTH SCHEME (CGHS) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.3 The Committee observes that 93.81% of the total 2018 -19 (BE) allocation had been 
utilized under CGHS. The Committee notes that the actual capital expenditure for years 2018 -19 
and 2019-20 is Rs. 23.73 crore and Rs. 7.95 crore against the allocation of Rs. 55.17 crore and 
Rs. 50.00 crore respectively which amounts to only 44.63% and 15.90% of the BE as on 
10.02.2020. The Committee is unhappy that majority of the funds allocated to the Department 
under the capital head remained unutilized. The Capital expenditure is earmarked for 
procurement or maintaining fixed assets, such as land, buildings, and equipment. The Committee 
observes that lower utilization of the allocated fund hampers the developmental activities at 
various CGHS centres. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to ensure 
optimum and judicious utilization of allocated funds with focus on deve lopment of infrastructure 
mandating incurring of capital expenditure. Further, the procurement of equipment should be 
made on time so that services provided by the CGHS do not get hindered. 
 
(Para 3.3) 
Action Taken 
 
1.4 The recommendations of Hon'ble Commi ttee shall be implemented to ensure optimum 
and timely utilization of the funds under Capital Head.  
 

40 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.5 The Committee has been given to understand that the CGHS scheme covers around 32.16 
lakh beneficiaries with the network spread across 72 cities in the country. The Committee, 
recommends that more efforts are required to make CGHS centres operational in other parts of 
the country for a wider coverage. The Committee would like the progress of the development 
projects at the C GHS wellness centres monitored closely by the Department so as to avoid any 
time and cost overruns. The Committee believes that more CGHS centres would facilitate the 
beneficiaries across the country. It however feels that apart from expanding its coverage , 
emphasis must be providing quality health care services to its beneficiaries. The Committee 
would like the Department to apprise the progress made under CGHS wellness centre at Kannur 
and Kozhikode. 
(Para 3.6) 
Action Taken 
 
1.6 The observations and recom mendations of Hon'ble Committee shall be implemented. A 
proposal for opening of   16 new Wellness Centres in existing cities and at new locations 
( Gahziabad region (2) , Narela (1) ,Chandigarh (1)  , Panchkula (1) , Nasik(1) , Aurangabad (1), 
Ichhapur(1), Wadi (1) in Nagpur , Mysuru (1) , Coimbatore(1) and Chandrapur(1) and 
regularization of Wellness Centres at Sonipat (1) , Gwalior (1), Kannur (1) and Kozhikode (1). 
  
Kannur and Kozhikode  
 
1.7 Staff has been identified; Accommodation has been identified. The buildings required 
civil and electrical renovation to make them suitable to run a Wellness Centres. However, the 
work was halted during Lock -down conditions due to COVID -19 Pandemic. The funds are re 
allotted to CPWD  in the present Financial year and t he renovation work is in final stages. The 
Wellness Centres shall be made operational as soon as the renovation works are completed.  
 
NATIONAL AIDS AND STD CONTROL PROGRAMME 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
1.8 The Committee expresses its displeasure over t he status of utilization of funds i.e. in the 
year 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 during which Rs. 153.29 crore and Rs. 121.80 crore respectively 
remained unspent. In the year 2019 -20, Rs 1936.90 crore has been utilized by the Department 
upto 17.01.2020, out of the R E of Rs. 2956.00 crore, balance Rs. 1019.10 crore is to be spent by 
31st March, 2020. Under NER head, the allocated funds have remained unutilized. The 
Committee has been apprised about the objectives of the NACP IV extension plan. However, in 
spite of suc h a wide range of objectives, the allocated fund has remained unutilized. The 
Committee believes that these objectives can be fulfilled up only with concerted efforts and 
optimum utilization of allocated funds. The Committee recommends that the Department must 
make action plan for utilisation of allocated funds within stipulated period and also monitor the 
same so that funds allocated are optimally utilised to fulfill the very objectives of the programme. 
(Para 8.6) 
 

41 
 
Action Taken 
  
1.9 Budgetary allocation for the year 2019 -20 was Rs.2500 crore.  The increase in allocation 
of Rs.456 crore (which includes Rs.156 crore through re -appropriation) in the RE of 2019 -20 
was done to meet the outstanding liability of pending bills of medicines and kits of procurement  
Division of NACO.   Thus, the total allocation of NACO at RE stage was Rs.2956.00 crore. 
NACO had spent Rs.2813.14 crore out of total allocation of Rs.2956.00 crore during 2019 -20, 
thus utilizing 95.16% of the total allocation.  Remaining amount could not be utilized due to 
outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic. The NACO has noted the recommendations of the Committee 
for making action plan for utilization of allocated funds and also monitoring the same so that 
funds allocated are utilized optimally to fulfill the very objectives of the programme 
 
 
FAMILY WELFARE SCHEME 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
1.10 The Committee is unhappy that the Department has not been able to utilize the allocated 
budget meant for the family welfare schemes in the past years, which were ea rmarked cover the 
under-privileged sections of society and help them with maternity, post and neo -natal healthcare 
and family planning. The Committee is also surprised to note that the projected demand for the 
scheme was Rs.1138.09 crore in 2018 -19 and Rs. 1077.97 crore in 2019 -20. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Department must enhance the absorption capacity of 
scheme and monitor the progress of projects for speedy implementation. The Committee also 
recommends the Department to prior itize and monitor the activities and utilize the available 
resources efficiently to accomplish the targets set so as to project justified case for enhanced 
funds at RE stage. 
(Para 9.3) 
Action Taken  
 
1.11 Noted for Compliance. 
 
 
NATIONAL ORGAN TRANSPLANT PROGRAMME 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
1.12 The Committee observes that actual expenditure on NOTP during 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 
was just 21% and 32.56% with respect to RE of Rs. 9 crore and Rs. 24.70 crore. During the year 
2019-2020, an amount of Rs. 9.72 crore out of Rs. 28.95 crore has been utilized upto 17.01.20 
leaving thereby an unspent balance of Rs. 19.23 crore. The Committee takes a serious note of the 
under-utilization of funds under the scheme. The Committee is of the view that Department must 
evaluate the financial requirement of scheme and its scope of expansion to utilize the available 
financial resources to avoid under -utilization of funds. The Committee finds its strange that 
funds allocated for such  an important scheme is not being utilized.  Such poor utilization trends 
are indicative or lack of awareness about the scheme amongst the people. The Committee 

42 
 
therefore recommends that the said scheme needs to be popularized so that needy people make 
use of the same and the funds allocated are put to good use. 
(Para 10.3) 
Action Taken 
 
1.13 (1) To improve infrastructure for human organ and tissue retrieval, storage and 
transplantation in all parts of the country, following provisions have been made under National 
Organ Transplant Programme (NOTP): 
 
 Setting up of State Org an and Tissue Transplant Organiz ation (SOTTOs) in each 
State/UT. 
 Setting up of National/ Regional/State Bio-material centres; 
 Financial support for establishing new Organ Transplant/retrieval facilities and 
strengthening of existing Organ Transplant/retrieval facilities. 
 Training to transplant experts including surgeons, physicians, transplant coordinators, etc. 
 Financial support for provision of Transplant Coordinators to medical colleges and 
trauma centres. 
 Financial Assistance to BPL patients for post transplant immunosuppressant therapy.  
(2). It is submitted here that States/UTs have continuously been approached requesting to 
send the proposal under the programme. During 2018 -19 three SOTTOs were sanctioned. 
However, during 2019-20 funds have been released to nine States for establishment of SOTTOs. 
Further, during 2019 -20 funds have been also been released to State of Bihar and Maharashtra 
for establishment of Bio -material Centre (tissue bank). It is also submitted that funds hav e also 
been released to State of Punjab and Bihar for establishing new Organ Transplant/retrieval 
facilities and strengthening of existing Organ Transplant/retrieval facilities. 
 
(3). Provisions were made for IEC activities through ROTTOs/SOTTOs. However, less 
demand was received from ROTTOs and since the SOTTOs are under establishment stage, the 
activities can only be started after their completion.  
 
(4). Activities undertaken to popularize the Programme among the general public:  
  
(a) Awareness activities to promote Organ and Tissue Donation by Deceased Donors are as 
under: IEC Activities such as celebration of Indian organ donation day every year, 
seminars, workshops, debates, sports events, Walkathons, sending SMSes, walkathons, 
organ donation pledging, display boards for request for organ donation outside ICUs and 
other strategic locations at the transplant/retrieval hospitals, nukkadnatak, etc. are also 
organized at different places in the country to disseminate information and increase 
awareness. Audio and audio-visual messages are broadcast/telecast through various radio 
channels and Doordarshan. Newspaper Advertisements in print media are also published 
from time to time. Other activities include distributing Awareness pamphlets, undertaking 
Organ D onation pledging campaigns, disseminating information through India 
international Trade Fair kiosk, Various Awareness Talks during BSF function, CISF, 
Schools, Delhi Medical Association, IMA, Corporates offices, various Ministries are 
being organized.  
 

43 
 
(b) Website:  A dedicated website ( www.notto.gov.in) is functional for providing 
information on organ and tissue donation, organ and tissue pledging, networking of 
hospitals and establishing National registry of organ an d tissue transplantation and 
Donation. The work is being done through NIC. 
 
(c) Helpline/Call centre: A 24x7 days call centre has been made operational with provision 
of a toll free helpline (No. 1800114770) since 1 -7-2015. Tele-callers are on duty round 
the clock. 
 
 
FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARD AUTHORITY OF INDIA (FSSAI) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
1.14 The Committee feels that policies and the existing laws to prevent adulteration of milk 
are not only inadequate but enforced weakly too. This poor implementa tion of the law has 
resulted in rampant milk adulteration and substandard quality of milk reaching the market 
putting thereby the lives of people in danger. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to evolve a robust monitoring framework to prev ent adulteration of milk. The 
Committee believes that until and unless the conviction rate goes up for such cases it would not 
serve as a deterrent for others. The Committee, therefore, strongly believes that stringent and 
swift action needs to be taken in  such cases and the Department should issue direction to the 
States to act promptly and take necessary action as soon as possible. 
(Para 11.8) 
Action Taken 
  
1.15 FSSAI has conducted a survey on quality of milk. It initiated a Nationwide Qualitative 
Screening of milk samples for on -spot qualitative and quantitative analysis of milk. The survey 
was initiated in May, 2018 with a sample size    of   6432 samples taken from 1100 towns with a 
population of over 50,000 across all 29 States and 7 Union Territories for qualitative and 
quantitative analysis. Scope of NMSQS 2018 covered 3 quality parameters (Fat, SNF and water), 
13 common adulterants (vegetable oil/fat, detergents/caustic soda, hydrogen peroxide, sugar, 
glucose, urea, starch, Maltodextrin, boric acid, ammonium sulphate, nitrates, cellulose, and 
neutralizer; and 3 contaminants (antibiotics, pesticides, aflatoxin M1,).   All the 6432 samples 
were collected and analysed qualitatively immediately onsite in mobile vans and nearly 30% of 
those samples that te sted positive for any of the adulterants and/or contaminants were tested 
quantitatively in laboratory to ascertain whether the samples were compliant or non -compliant to 
limits set.    
 
1.16 As per NMSQS final report released in October, 2019 -   
 
- About 7%    samples were found to be unsafe for consumption due to presence of 
harmful contaminants in excess of specified limits coming mainly from poor quality of 
feed, irresponsible use of antibiotics and poor farm practices 
- Only 12 out of total 6432 samples had adulterants that affect the quality of milk 

44 
 
- About 41% of milk samples of the total were, however, non-compliant with reference to 
one or the other quality parameters [fat, Solid not -fat (SNF), sugar and maltodextrin] but 
were without any safety issues.   
 
1.17 Details of survey are  available at   https://www.fssai.gov.in/home.  Thus, the survey 
results indicate clearly that milk being sold in India is largely safe for consumption.   This is 
contrary to the popular perception carried by the consumers owing to misrepresented information 
for various reasons including deceitful campaigns and unsubstantiated reports.  
   
1.18 By regular surveillance, sampling and inspections which are being   monitored through 
Quarterly meeting of Central Advisory Committee, weekly Video Conference with State/UT and 
periodical interactions between Officers of  FSSAI and State/UTs at highest level, FSSAI aims to 
ensure a balance between ensuring punishment for unethical business operators and preventing 
the misuse of the FSS Act. 

45 
 
CHAPTER–II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS ON WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE MINISTRY'S REPLIES 
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.1 The Committee underlines the social obligation of the Government to im prove efficiency 
in the delivery of health services within the country and devise innovative ways to expand 
primary healthcare facilities for marginalized sections but the budget allocated to health sector 
is highly inadequate. The Committee, therefore, re commends the Department to persuade the 
Ministry of Finance for the higher allocation of the funds so that inadequacy of funds does not 
restrict development of health infrastructure of the country. This will also help in reducing the 
burden of huge out of pocket expenditure of the people belonging to poor strata especially in the 
rural areas from where patients suffering from life threatening diseases run from pillar to post in 
search of better healthcare and treatment. 
(Para 2.5) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.2 The dep artment have been making sincere efforts to have allocation of adequate fund 
through projection of consolidated estimates of expenditure for the year 2020 -21. However, 
allocation is finally made by the Ministry of Finance, depending on availability of reso urces 
however, additional funds are sought through supplementary demands for grants and also 
through projection in RE 2020-21.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
2.3 The Committee observes that both under the Central Sector Scheme (C S) and Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme (CSS), the actual expenditure for the year 2019 -20 has been Rs. 6425.37 
crore and Rs. 31566.60 crore respectively i.e upto 09.02.2020 which is far below the allocated 
amount. The Committee is apprehensive as to how the Department would be able to s pend 
around Rs. 2000 crore in Central Sector Scheme and Rs. 5537 crore  under CSS in remaining 50 
days of the financial year 2019 -20. The Committee is of the firm view that the implementing 
agency need to enhance its absorption capacity for optimum utilization of allocated budget. 
 
(Para 2.9) 
Action Taken 
 
2.4 Against the approved RE of Rs. 37103.60 Crore for Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) 
and Rs. 8465.26 crore for Central Sector Scheme (CS), an expenditure of Rs.36366.66 crore 
(prov.) (98.01 %) and Rs. 828 2.30 (prov.) crore (97.84 %) have been made respectively. The 
concerns of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
 

46 
 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.5 The Committee finds PMSSY scheme an exceptional cas e where the allocated budget i.e. 
Rs. 6020.00 crore for the year 2020 -21 is more than the projected demand of Rs. 5733.35 crore, 
which an addition fund of Rs. 286.65 crores. The scheme got an increase of Rs. 1286.60 crore in 
BE 2020-21from RE 2019 -20. However, Committee notes that an amount of Rs. 3740.35 core 
has been utilized upto 17.02.2020 out of Rs. 4733.40 crores allocated during the RE stage. The 
Committee would exhort the Department that the Scheme is being accorded utmost priority and 
now, it is th eir responsibility to utilize the funds optimally and judiciously. The Department 
needs to do proper financial planning and make full use of the funds allocated to complete all the 
pending work under the Scheme and achieve the physical target within the specified timeline. 
(Para 7.3) 
Action Taken  
 
2.6 Out of total allocation of Rs. 4733.40 cr the expenditure as on 31.3.2020 is Rs. 4683.49 cr 
with a savings of Rs. 31.29 cr.  
 
Budget Estimates 
(BE) 
Revised  Estimates 
(RE) 
Actual Expenditure 
31.3.2020 
Balance as on  31.3.2020 
4000.00 4733.40 4683.49 31.29 
 
2.7 Utilization is around 98.94% indicating high degree of financial planning and execution 
of works.   
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.8 The Committee notes that at six  different AIIMS under phase I of th e PMSSY scheme, a 
total of 89729 surgeries i.e. both major and minor have been conducted during the year 2019. 
Whereas, in AIIMS, Delhi alone, 104850 surgeries were performed which is far more than 
combined surgeries of all the AIIMS constructed under phas e I. The Committee, further, 
observes that average daily OPD of all the AIIMS under phase I range from 1806 to 3106, 
whereas more than 10000 avail the ODP at AIIMS Delhi on daily basis. The Committee feels 
that these regional AIIMS have yet not been able t o prove their credential amongst the people 
and a lot more needs to be done. Regional AIIMS were established with the objectives of 
correcting regional imbalances in the availability of affordable/reliable tertiary healthcare 
services. However, data furnis hed by the Department reflects that the objective for which these 
Institutes were established has not been achieved fully. Obviously all these regional AIIMS need 
to augment their resources in such a manner that quality of health care services is substanti ally 
increased for the patients awaiting treatment. Further to happen concerted efforts are required 
for comprehensive infrastructure development, adequate availabilities of qualified doctors, staff 
and the beds etc. The Committee, therefore, recommends th at these Institutes must work towards 
enhancing its goodwill as facilitator of healthcare services upto global standard in particular 
region of its location. 
(Para 7.5) 

47 
 
Action Taken 
  
2.9 In the first phase of PMSSY, establishment of six AIIMS, one each a t Bhopal, 
Bhubaneswar, Jodhpur, Patna, Raipur and Rishikesh was envisaged.  All the new AIIMS are also 
committed to provide high -end patient care. In this regard, the institutes have made continuous 
efforts since inception in 2012, identifying the healthca re needs of concerned regions.   These 
new AIIMS have made substantial progress in extending healthcare services.    Various broad 
speciality departments and Super-speciality departments are functional. Total bed strength is 960 
approx. in each AIIMS.   26 – 30 Modular Operation Theatres are also available in each of the 
AIIMS. All routine and various high diagnostic facilities are available. The hospital has 
functional ICU, HDU, NICU and PICU.   All key hospital facilities and services such as 
Emergency, Traum a, COVID Block, Blood Bank, ICU, Diagnostic and Pathology are 
functioning. Medical education, Healthcare and Research are also functional substantially in 
these six AIIMS. Daily Emergency surgical procedures are being performed by the department 
of Trauma and Emergency set up in a dedicated facility with OTs. 
 
2.10 Basket of services in these six AIIMS has been expanded and presently, on an average, 
more than 16000 patients are visiting OPD daily besides more than 18000 patients getting 
treatment in IPD eve ry month. Apart from this, Emergency surgical procedures of other 
departments are also being performed in the said OTs as per requirement. Also, about 4500 
major surgeries are being performed every month in these six AIIMS. The substantial progress of 
the Institutes have been given in Annexure-III. 
 
2.11 The patient load in the new AIIMS, taken together, is of the order of 30 lakh per annum. 
These new AIIMS also handle complex cases requiring tertiary healthcare has also reflected in 
the major surgery performance. About 49000 number of major surgeries are performed in the six 
new AIIMS in the year 2019. Performing large numbers of major surgeries and advanced 
medical care in different super -specialties as indicated in the annexed statement, the above six 
(06) functional AIIMS have reduced the patient load of AIIMS Delhi. In few cases, where 
further progressive expertise/consultation is required, patients are transferred / referred to 
AIIMS, Delhi. To the extent complex cases are handled in the new AIIMS, noti onal patient load 
of AIIMS, Delhi would have come down. However, the demand for healthcare and in particular 
tertiary healthcare has been increased over the years with greater awareness and accessibility. In 
view of this, there may not have been any reduction in the patient load of AIIMS, Delhi. 
 
 2.12 Since the number of major surgeries performed has gone up manifold over past 5 years, 
which is a definite indication that these new institutes now are playing their envisaged role. 
While the patient load at A IIMS Delhi may not have got reduced due to the fact that the NCD 
cases in the country have gone up substantially. However, there is no denying that large number 
of patients is getting their healthcare needs met closer to their homes and they do not have to  
flock around AIIMS Delhi for medical treatment.     
 
2.13 It is however mentioned there that it has taken more than six decades to AIIMS, Delhi to 
attain its current Status of Excellence. The present size of AIIMS, Delhi in respect of bed 
capacity and num ber of faculty is more than three times of the size of the six new AIIMS. In 
view of this, the new Institutes may not be able to achieve the specified 50% of average of daily 
OPD footfall of AIIMS, Delhi even on attaining almost 100% capacity utilization. The need for 

48 
 
augmenting facilities and setting up of Advanced Centres to provide advance tertiary health 
care, medical education and research facilities in these new AIIMS, which are established in 
different regions of the country, would be expected to ari se sooner as the Institutes attain full 
960 bed capacity and availability of around 70-80% of faculty. 
 
2.14 All new AIIMS have also taken lead in Covid -19 pandemic management and research. A 
dedicated Hospital block with sufficient isolation beds (includi ng ICU) for  CoVID 19 patients 
created in these AIIMS are functioning as  Category-1 Hospitals and mapped with State Govt. 
CoVID Care Facilities for treatment of CoVID -19 patient. Also a CoVID -19 Lab have been 
made functional in a short span of time.  These new AIIMS have also started Plasma Therapy for 
treatment of moderate COVID Patients. Some AIIMS in collaboration with Indian Council for 
Medical Research (ICMR) started clinical trials of Corona Vaccine.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.15 The Committee n otes that status of construction of various packages in different AIIMS 
has not reached to satisfactory levels even after one and half years since the Committee gave its 
111th Report on PMSSY. The Committee is constrained to note that at AIIMS, Raipur not even a 
single package has been completed. At AIIMS, Patna package  II, II and IV have not been 
completed yet. It is a proven fact that delay in any construction activity leads to unnecessary 
additional costs and time runs. Such inordinate delays also resul t in denial of delivery of health 
care services to the people. The Committee, therefore strongly recommends that it is high time 
since these six AIIMS under Phase-1 are not only completed but also made fully operational and 
functional on the ground.  
(Para 7.13) 
  
Action Taken 
 
2.16 The updated construction status at six AIIMS is given in Annexure –IV. As may be 
observed presently all the four packages are complete at AIIMS Raipur.  At AIIMS Patna, two 
out of four packages are fully complete while the remaining two packages are 98.97% and 95.8% 
complete.  
 
2.17 It may also be brought out here that all these AIIMS are functional with all physical 
infrastructure, buildings operational and functioning. In some cases minor civil works / electrical 
works are pend ing due to which the present progress is not reflected as 100% complete.  
However, the minor pendency does not impact the functioning of these buildings.  All the MOTs 
are also functional at AIIMS Raipur and AIIMS Patna.     
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL H EALTH AND NEURO SCIENCES 
(NIMHANS), BENGALURU 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
2.18 The Committee appreciates a good track record of budget utilisation by the Institute in 
the past years. However, in the year 2019 -20, only Rs. 211.76 crore has been utilized out of Rs 
453.41 crore allocated at RE stage. The Committee is apprehensive as to how the institute will 

49 
 
spend Rs. 241.65 in the remaining past of the fiscal year. The Committee would like a monitoring 
mechanism in place to ensure that the balanced pace of  expenditure is maintained and there is 
no rush of expenditure in the last quarter so that the budgeted funds are utilized timely and the 
targeted outcomes are achieved within the prescribed timeline. 
(Para 16.2) 
Action Taken 
 
2.19 By the end of financial year 2019-20, the entire allocation of  Rs. 453.41 cr. was released 
to NIMHANS based on proposals received from them. Funds are released to the Institute on 
quarterly basis to ensure balances pace of utilization. Progress in expenditure out of allocated 
budget is monitored regularly in the Ministry at various levels. 
 
 
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
2.20 HIV screening programme and testing programme in India should be in lines with the 
globally accepted best practices and henc e the Committee strongly recommends that NACO 
should consider and adopt the latest non invasive oral saliva testing technology as it shall 
eliminate the apprehensions of social embarrassment besides providing early screening at 
affordable cost. This non in vasive technology would provide an early safer alternative as per 
globally accepted best practices. 
(Para 18.3) 
 
Action Taken 
 
2.21 National AIDS Control Programme has a standardized testing strategy with a well 
defined algorithm, wherein an HIV positive t est result is given only after three sequential 
positive results with three different technologies. This ensures that before starting the lifelong 
antiretroviral therapy, HIV positive status of individuals is confirmed. Algorithm for HIV testing 
followed under the programme is placed at Annexure- V. 
  
2.22 Also, counselling has been the backbone of the national programme. In order to eliminate 
the apprehensions of social embarrassment and stigma & discrimination besides providing early 
screening at affordab le cost, counselling of client/ attendee is undertaken before screening and 
after screening. The programme has also adopted Community based Screening and screening by 
lay providers among Targeted populations and ANC population to reach to difficult geograp hies 
and communities. As India continues to harbour a concentrated HIV epidemic among Key 
Population, prevention activities are mainly focused at Key Population, including HIV screening 
and referral for treatment.  
 
2.23 Saliva based non -invasive HIV tests  are basically preliminary screenings as per WHO 
guidelines, exhibiting the longest window periods because concentration of HIV 1 & 2 
antibodies is lower in oral fluids and always need to be followed by confirmatory blood based 
tests at health facilities. The policy of NACP is “Test and Treat” and prior to initiating treatment 

50 
 
for HIV, one needs to confirm that the individual is HIV positive, since treatment for HIV is 
lifelong.  
 
2.24 Globally, non -invasive oral saliva testing technology has not yet replac ed blood based 
HIV testing and no country has switched over to saliva based testing completely. In the past, 
NACP has always been in the forefront by adopting the latest techniques and technologies once 
they are recommended by the global agencies like WHO,  UNICEF, etc and approved for clinical 
use by domestic regulators. Once there is an adequate pool of scientific evidence; such new 
strategies, approaches and solutions are piloted to understand the acceptability and feasibility in 
local settings before they can be considered for adoption under the programme. 

51 
 
CHAPTER–III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.1 The Committee is constrained to observe that there is a significant gap in the projected 
demand and actual budget allocated to the Department of Health and Family Welfare for the 
year 2020-21. There is shortfall of Rs. 6860.40 under health sector as only Rs. 25172.80 has 
been allocated against the projected demand of Rs. 32033.20. The Committee notes with disdain 
the huge gap in the projected and allocated amount. The Committee observes that under all the 
heads except PMSSY, the allocation on budget is far less than the pro jected amount. All these 
heads constitute to be an important component of the Health services provided by the 
Government. The lower allocation of budget to the health sector that is endowed for the 
implementation of various schemes/programmes of the Govern ment, maintenance of centrally 
sponsored Hospital/Institutions/Autonomous Bodies and working of other statutory and 
regulatory bodies, will not only hamper the speedy implementation of these schemes but will also 
affect the pace of the development of health infrastructure of the country. In a nutshell, the lower 
allocation to the schemes would have an adverse impact on healthcare needs of majority of the 
population of the country. 
(Para 2.3) 
Action Taken 
  
3.2 In order to manage shortfall in allocation in B E 2020 -21, Enhanced RE has been 
projected to Rs. 37013.17 crore from Rs. 25172.80 crore.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.3 The Committee would like to be apprised of actual fund allocated to health sector  
scheme, scheme-wise and institute-wise in response to p rojected demand of Rs. 37013.17 
crore in RE 2020-21 along with actual expenditure. The Committee would also like to know 
whether the implementation pace of any scheme/programme under the health sector got 
affected for want of funds.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.4 The Committee is deeply concerned over a large number of pending UCs involving huge 
amount of funds which would adversely impact the implementation of the various schemes and 
developmental projects. Such high pendency of UCs continues to be a worrying factor for the 
Department and is fraught with risk of misappropriation/diversion of funds and fraud. The 
Committee strongly recommends the Department to evolve strategy to avoid such high pendency 
of UCs and liquidate the Pending UCs within a set time-frame. The pendency in submission of 
UCs should be urgently addressed with a view to obtain UCs from the organizations to which 

52 
 
grants were given to ensure that the allocated funds are used for the development of the Health 
sector in the country. 
(Para 2.14) 
Action Taken 
  
3.5 Total 4379 No. of UCs amounting to Rs.10106.82 crore was outstanding as on 
31.03.2020. Out of 4379 UCs, 503 UCs amounting to Rs. 2592.85 crore are received during this 
financial year. As on 18.09.2020, 3876 No. of UCs amounting t o Rs.7513.970 crore is 
outstanding.  
 
3.6 For the remaining UCs, programme division of MoHFW are regularly pursuing with 
Organizations/ Autonomous Bodies as the UCs are being monitored by the concerned 
Programme Divisions of MoHFW.  
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.7 The Committee is constrained to note that as on 18 th September, 2020 a total 
number of 3876 Utilization Certificates involving Rs. 7513.970 Crore  are pending. The 
Programme division concerned of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare must pursue 
regularly with organization/autonomous bodies for submission of UCs without further 
procrastination for early settlement of pending UCs within a set timeframe. 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.8 The Committee is constrained to note that near ly 25% out of 1992 sanctioned posts of 
medical officers are lying vacant. In Delhi alone 195 post of medical officers are lying vacant. In 
places like Jammu, Jabalpur, Agartala, Gangtok, Aizwal, Panaji, Gandhinagar, Varanasi, 
Srinagar, Silchar, Dibrugarh, Darbhanga, Siliguri  and Jalpaiguri vacancy position is alarming 
which is bound to affect the healthcare services. In Gandhinagar, not even a single medical 
officer has been working under CGHS division. 
(Para 3.9) 
 
3.9 The Committee in its 106th Report on Demand for Grants no ted that despite the 
Department's efforts in attracting more doctors to join CGHS, out of 1848 sanctioned posts of 
allopathic doctors, 436 posts were still lying vacant. The Committee finds that the vacancy 
position in CGHS has gone from bad to worse. Earl ier 436 post were lying vacant and now that 
has increased to 458 posts. The Committee, in its 106th Report, further highlighted that the 
shortage of doctors at CGHS wellness centres is a perennial problem and would continue to 
exist if concrete measures ar e not taken at the right time and therefore, the Department must 
review the strategies to attract General Duty Medical Officers (GDMOs) and specialists to join 
CGHS wellness centres and do a critical analysis to find out workable solutions for the same. 
The Committee would like the Department to take holistic assessment to understand the reasons 
for the persistent shortage of doctors at CGHS wellness centres and make all out efforts to retain 
the existing doctors and further formulate motivating scheme to e nhance the workforce under 
CGHS to ensure to the continuity in healthcare facilities to CGHS beneficiaries. 
(Para 3.10) 
 

53 
 
3.10 The Committee believe that Department has not taken the problem of shortage of doctors 
at the CGHS wellness centres seriously and despite Committee’s repeated recommendations, the 
solutions to persistent shortage of doctors at CGHS has not been worked out by the Department. 
The Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to identify the reasons for the shortage of 
workforce at the C GHS wellness centres and take the corrective measure to overcome the same 
so that these centres do not suffer from the shortage of doctors and proper healthcare facilities 
are made available to the beneficiaries without any hindrance. The Committee would l ike the 
Department to approach UPSC to conduct exams for the selection of doctors more frequently so 
that the problem of shortage of doctors can be dealt with. The Committee further believes that 
appointment of retired government doctors at these centres i s a temporary measure. The 
Department should devise some schemes to motivate young doctors to join CGHS wellness 
centres. 
(Para 3.11) 
 
Action Taken 
  
3.11 The number of GDMOs joining CGHS has increased in the last few years. The increase 
in the number of vacant posts in also partly due to the takeover of 33 postal dispensaries. General 
Duty Medical Officers (GDMOs) are recruited through the Combined Medical Services 
Examination conducted annually by Union Public Service Commission (UPSC). Thereafter, 
doctors ae posted in CGHS by the Central Health Services (CHS) Division of the Ministry. 
Similarly, recruitment of specialists doctors in different grades is done by UPSC. Thereafter, 
Specialist doctors are posted in CGHS by the Central Health Services (CHS) Div ision of the 
Ministry. To overcome the shortage of doctors under CHGS, retired doctors are being engaged 
on contract basis. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.12 The Committee finds the action taken notes, furnished by the Ministry in response 
to Committee’s recommendations contained in Para 3.9, 3.10 & 3.11 to be quite vague and 
evasive. No c onvincing reason has been adduced for posts of medical and non -medical 
officers lying vacant under CGHS. The Committee is surprised to find that on the one hand 
there is serious problem of unemployment amongst Doctors in the Country and on the 
other hand there are posts of doctors lying vacant in CGHS. Had the Ministry worked out 
well in time with UPSC for filling up of vacant posts there would have not been so many 
vacancies. It is equally painful that the Ministry is unable to direct its own division i.e. 
Central Health Services for timely posting of specialist doctors in CGHS. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendations as contained in Para 3.11 of 118 th Report 
suggesting the Ministry to identify the appropriate reasons for the shortage of workforce at 
the CGHS wellness centres and take the corrective measure to overcome the same within 
given timeframe so that these centres do not suffer from the shortage of doctors and proper 
healthcare facilities are made available to the beneficiaries. 
 

54 
 
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHAVIR MEDICAL COLLEGE 
(VMMC), NEW DELHI 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.13 The Committee believes that such a low allocation of budget to an Institute of national 
importance will not only hinder the development activities at the Institute but also adversely 
affect the health services provided by the Institute to the people visiting the hospital. The 
Committee expresses its concern that the fund s allotted to the Institute are inadequate and need 
to be enhanced. The committee is pained to note that only Rs. 30 Crore has been allocated for 
machinery and equipment as against the demand of Rs. 217.00 Crore and Rs. 21.70 Crore for 
major works against the demand Rs.251.00 crore. The Committee believes that Ministry of 
Finance, while allocating the budget to the Institute, needs to be more considerate towards the 
Institutes providing healthcare services. The Committee, would also like the Department to m ake 
prudent financial analysis and convince the Ministry of Finance on their financial needs so that 
the services provided by the Institute do not get affected due to paucity of funds. 
(Para 4.8) 
Action Taken 
  
3.14 The additional infrastructure project of  VMMC was projected for construction of 
additional Lecture Theatres, Auditorium and Hostel for students and recreational facilities. The 
cost of the project was revised with an estimate of Rs. 187.60 Crores and the said financial 
implication for the projec t was submitted to the MOHFW in July 2019 by the hospital.  
However, the project is not yet sanctioned. It is submitted that an amount of Rs. 101.00 Crores 
projected in B.E. 2020 -21 under Major Head -4210 (Major works) against which only 21.70 
crores were allocated. 
 
3.15 Machinery and Equipment: Rs. 217.00 Crores was projected in B.E. 2020 -21 for 
purchase of high value medical equipment to meet the required services of patient care and 
manifold expansion of hospital. The demand for purchase of the said equi pment were received 
from the Departments like Radiotherapy, Radiology, Pediatrics, Medicine, Urology, General 
Surgery, Neuro Surgery, CTVS and C.I.O. However, an amount of Rs. 30.00 Crores were 
allocated in B.E. 2020-21 out of Rs. 217.00 Crores and accordingly procurement of equipment & 
machinery was restricted to the allocated funds. Therefore, to operationalize the said departments 
there is requirement of funds to procure the equipment & machinery as demanded by the 
Departments keeping in view the interest of patient care. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.16 The Committee expresses its anguish over the pendency of approval of the 
additional infrastructure project of VMMC at the revised estimated cost of Rs. 187.60 
Crore since July, 2019. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare to urgently sanction the project so that adequate fund is allocated to VMMC and 
the project is executed at the earliest without incurring additional cost. 
 
3.17 The Committee finds that an amount to the tu ne of Rs. 217.00 crore was projected 
in BE 2020 -21 against which a paltry amount of Rs. 30.00 crore were allocated as a result 

55 
 
of which the procurement of equipments and machinery was restricted to the allocated 
fund. The Committee is in agreement with the  plea of the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare about the requirement of additional funds to operationalise vital 
Departments such as Radiotherapy, Radiology, Paediatrics, Medicine, Urology, General 
Surgery, Neuro Surgery by procuring the necessary eq uipments and machinery to cater 
the patient’s need and care. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its 
recommendations urging the Ministry of Finance to be more considerate in allocating the 
institute, the fund as per the actual requirement, to ena ble the institute to provide prompt 
healthcare services.  
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.18 The Committee has been given to understand that almost half of the operation theatres at 
the emergency and super specialty block have not been commissioned due to lack of technical 
manpower. The Committee is anguished to observe that even after getting operationalized in 
February, 2018, operation theatres have not become functional due to lack of technical 
manpower. The Committee believes that emergency and super sp ecialty blocks are vital for an 
Institute like Safdarjung to provide tertiary level health care and medical education. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to recruit the requisite technical manpower 
as early as possible so that the operatio n theatres can be made functional to cater the treatment 
of the people visiting the Hospital.  
(Para 4.9) 
Action Taken 
 
3.19 It is to state that that administrative and financial sanction has been conveyed by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for out sourcing of Administrative and Para -
Medic/Technician Manpower for NEB & SSB. On receipt of the sanction, the manpower has 
been hired through GeM portal and after approval of the Ministry, the manpower (Administrative 
and Para-Medic/Technician) is in place for NEB & SSB on outsourced basis w.e.f. the month of 
January- February, 2020. Besides, the Safdarjung hospital has also filled up some sanctioned 
post of technical on regular basis.  
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.20 The Committee finds that the manpower  (Administrative and Para -
Medic/Technician) has been deployed in New Emergency Block ( NEB) & Super Speciality 
Block ( SSB) on outsourced basis w.e.f. the month of January - February, 2020. The 
Committee is of the view that the Department of Health and Family Welfare should revisit 
the decision to have the Administrative and Para -Medic/Technician on the outsourced 
basis as the system adopted may not generate continuity in the management of the hospital 
due to lack of  sense of belongingness , commitment and integrity  on the part of the 
employees. The Committee, recommends the Department to fill up the sanctioned post of 
technical manpower on regular basis. 
 

56 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.21 The Committee believes that lower allocation of budget combined with non opti mal 
utilization of the existing recourses is the key concern area highlighted by the Department. 
Shortage of man power along with delay in construction is responsible for huge patient load at 
the Institute as it put more burden on the limited faculty and t he infrastructure available at the 
Institute. The Committee would like to emphasize that beside salary, recreational facilities for 
staff / faculty is a crucial motivational factor. Facilities such as auditorium, examination hall 
and playground for student s are fundamental for institution. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the Department to expedite the construction of the ongoing development projects to 
reduce the load on the existing infrastructure. The Committee also recommends the Department  
to recruit the requisite technical manpower to neutralize the huge patient load on the existing 
faculty. The Committee further recommends the Department to make available sufficient 
recreational facilities for staff / faculty that would help them to manag e stress and contribute in 
a more efficient manner. 
(Para 4.10) 
Action Taken 
 
3.22 The key observation of the Department related Parliamentary standing committee on 
demands of Grants 2020 -21 (Demand No. 42) is “lower allocation of Budget” along with delay 
in construction is responsible for huge patient load at the institution” etc. and emphasize that 
recreational facilities for staff/faculty is a crucial motivational factor. The Estate Section 
undertakes the related activity for improvement of various infra structures. The additional 
Infrastructure Project for VMMC for making Additional lecture theaters, hostel for students and 
recreational facilities to be created at the cost of Rs. 187.60 Crores is yet to be approved by the 
MoH & FW. Similarly, funds for Dw arka Residential Complex for Nurses (Under residential 
funds Head-4216) were not allocated in F.Y. 2020 -21 has been requested in the supplementary 
demand. Regarding of manpower, reply to para 4.9 may be referred to.  
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.23 The Committee has been given to understand that funds required for construction 
of Dwarka Residential Complex for Nurses was not allocated in BE 2020-21 and, therefore, 
the Ministry was forced to place its supplementary demand. The Committee would like to 
know whether the supplementary demand of the Ministry for the Construction of Dwarka 
Residential Complex was accorded and if so, whether the construction project has been 
started at the ground level. The Committee further feels that on ce the additional 
infrastructure project for VMMC at the cost of Rs. 187.60 Crores get the approval of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Ministry of Finance would allocate adequate 
fund to the said project is provisioned for construction of additional lecture theatre, hos tels 
for students and recreational facilities. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare to assess and approve the project and 
pursue with the Ministry of Finance to allocate the additional fund without further delay so 
that the proposed project is completed without time and cost overruns. 
 

57 
 
DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.24 The Committee observes that in the year 2019 -20 the actual expenditure for Dr. Ram 
Manohar Lohia Hospital  has been Rs 547.74 crore up to 17.01.2020 against allocation of Rs. 
744.88 crore at RE stage. The actual expenditure for Dr. RML PGIMER, New Delhi has been 
Rs. 58.11 crore out of allocation of Rs. 138.57 crore at RE stage. The Committee has been given 
to understand that fund allocated under the capital head has been insufficient. However, actual 
capital expenditure in the year 2019 -2020 (up to 17.01.2020) in the year has been far below the 
allocated amount. The Committee expects the Institute to have optim um utilization of earmarked 
allocation and completion of projects in time for strengthening healthcare service. The 
Committee further recommends the Department to approach the Ministry of Finance for 
adequate funds so that the Institute does not face short age of funds in building fixed assets used 
to provide tertiary level health care facilities to the people. 
(Para 5.3) 
Action Taken 
 
3.25 An amount of Rs.606.93 under BE 2019 -20 was allocated to Dr. RML. However, this 
amount was increased to Rs. 738.30 cror e in RE 2019 -20.  Out of this amount  of  Rs. 738.30 
crore,  only Rs. 35.48 crore were unutilized/unspent as this amount could not be utilized due to 
various genuine reasons viz. non filling up of various vacant posts, non -receipt of bills from 
vendor  for  payment of Bonus, late receipt of RE 2019 -20, non -placing of orders on GeM 
(Government-e- Market) due to lockdown etc. 
  
3.26 Similarly, an amount of Rs, 143.07 crore was allocated to Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute 
of Medical Sciences, New Delhi (ABVIMS) in BE 2019 -20 which was decreased to Rs.138.57 
under RE 2019 -20.  Out of this amount of Rs. 138.57 crore, only 53.70 crore was unutilized 
which were surrendered at the end of financial year due to various genuine reasons. 
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.27 The Committee expresses its concern that the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare is making lame excuses  for non -optimal utilization of allocated fund to RML 
Hospital and RML PGIMER and making untenable plea by calling them genuine reasons. 
The Committee had observed that in the year 2019 -20 the actual expenditure for Dr. Ram 
Manohar Lohia Hospital has been Rs 547.74 crore up to 17.01.2020 against allocation of 
Rs. 744.88 crore at RE stage. The actual expenditure for Dr. RML PGIMER, New Delhi 
has been Rs. 5 8.11 crore out of allocation of Rs. 138.57 crore at RE stage. The Committee 
has been given to understand that fund allocated under the capital head has been 
insufficient. However, actual capital expenditure in the year 2019 -2020 (up to 17.01.2020) 
has been far below the allocated amount. Responding to that, the Ministry took the plea of 
various genuine reasons that included non filling up of various vacant posts, non -receipt of 
bills from vendor for payment of Bonus, late receipt of RE 2019 -20, non-placing of orders 
on GeM (Government-e-Market) due to lockdown etc. in the aftermath of COVID -19. The 
Committee, understands that the said  lockdown was imposed on 25 th March, 2020 and 
hence could not be the possible reason for underutilization of allocated funds. The 

58 
 
Committee feels that the Department could have taken adequate ste ps for better co -
ordination and exercise financial prudence for ensuring optim al utiliz ation of fund 
earmarked especially under capital head which is the hallmark for developmental projects.  
 
 
VACANCY POSITION AT RML HOSPITAL 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.28 The Committee is constrained to observe that out of 4579 sanctioned posts at the 
Institute, 1457 posts are lying vacant which is more than 31% of the total sanctioned posts. The 
Committee is apprehensive of the capacity of the institute in delivering health services with such 
a huge vacancy position. The Committee had, even in its 106th Report on Demand for Grants 
(DFG), highlighted this fact, when out of 3735 sanctioned posts under  various categories, 2779 
posts were filled up and 956 posts are lying vacant". The Committee is apprehensive that for an 
overcrowded hospital, such a gap in workforce would adversely affect the smooth functioning of 
the hospital in general and health of the critical patients in particular. The situation still remains 
critical and is a matter of concern for the Committee. The Committee is anguished to observe 
that despite the repeated recommendations of the Committee, the vacancy position of the staff at 
the hospital has not improved rather deteriorated further. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommends the Department to facilitate the process of filling up the vacant posts at the earliest. 
The Committee expects the Department to make immediate concerted efforts to implement all the 
initiatives for recruitment of staff. The Committee desired that the Department should monitor 
the vacancy position closely and undertake suitable administrative action to fill up the vacant 
posts. The Committee further recomm ends the Department to explore various motivational 
scheme other than higher salary to attract individuals to join the Institute. 
 
(Para 5.6) 
 
Action Taken 
  
3.29 Recruitment of manpower is an on-going process. In the mean period, selection of regular 
Nursing Officer has been done through the competitive examination organized by AIIMS and of 
regular Lower Division Clerk through the competitive examination organized by SSC. Now, 
only 1119 posts are lying vacant.  It is further brought to the notice that vari ous Group A posts 
are to be filled on regular intervals and it is a continuous process.  Further, for filling up other 
regular posts, Dr. RML Hospital has initiated the joining of remaining more than 250 vacant 
posts of nursing officers.  For filling up of  rest of the posts continuous efforts are on. In order to 
strengthen the functioning of hospitals, efforts are on to revive around 486 posts, which are in 
abolished category. Besides above, there are proposals for conversion of 359 temporary status 
posts to regular posts are pending at higher level so as to fill the posts. 
   
3.30 Further, in order to strengthen the administrative set up in hospital, the cadre review 
proposal of administrative staff of Dr. RML Hospital which was initiated was approved by th e 
M/o H&FW and referred to the Department of Expenditure.  However, it has been returned by 
the Department of Expenditure with observation to make the revised proposal with NIL financial 
application. Accordingly, the reply of Dr. RML Hospital is being sent.   

59 
 
 
3.31 Further to smoothen the recruitment process, a dedicated Recruitment cell has been 
constituted for effective working on filling up of regular vacant posts under the supervision of 
Recruitment Committee and Question Paper Committee. Dr. RML Hospit al is also exploring 
possibilities of filling up the posts through expert agency, as there is an acute shortage of 
administrative cadre both at higher level as well as at middle level.   
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.32 The Committee is well aware  that recruitment of manpower is an ongoing process 
but it feels that had the Department adhered to the said principles of HRM and 
implemented the same on regular interval there would have not been backlog of filling up 
of 1119 posts , that are lying vacant in RML Hosp ital. The Committee cautions that all is 
not well with Dr. RML Hospital. It would not be unreasonable and inappropriate to 
conclude that plea on the part of the Department that continuous efforts were made to fill 
up the vacant posts does not hold ground. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Department to expedite the process of filling up of the 1119 vacant posts without 
further delay. The Committee desires that the proposed revival of 486 posts, which were 
kept in abolished category, may be t aken up on priority basis. The Committee also 
recommends that the cadre review proposal of administrative staff of Dr. RML Hospital 
must be finalized to streamline the administrative cadre both at higher as well as mid level. 
The Committee believes that th e constitution of recruitment cell in Dr. RML Hospital 
would smoothen the recruitment process and prove effective in filling up of regular vacant 
posts under the supervision of Recruitment Committee and Question Paper Committee.  
 
 
LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE (LHMC) & SMT. S.K. HOSPITAL 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.33 The Committee is deeply concerned about the status of vacancy position at the LHMC & 
SSKH. The Committee notes that a total of 1284 posts have been filled up against the sanctioned 
strength of 2117 and 833 posts are still lying vacant which cover to around 40% of the total 
sanctioned posts. Needless to say, such a huge gap in the workforce would have adverse impact 
on the functioning of the hospital. The Committee has been given to underst and that Recruitment 
rules (RRs) for group "A" posts have recently been notified and the proposals are being sent to 
UPSC for filling up of the vacant post. Under group "A", 23 out of 35 posts are lying vacant. The 
Committee recommends the Department to re quest the UPSC to complete recruitment process 
within a set time frame so that all the vacancies are filled up and the existing staff is not 
burdened due to heavy patient load. 
(Para 6.3) 
 
3.34 The Committee notices that under group B and C, 304 and 231 po sts are lying vacant out 
of 940 and 403 posts, respectively. The Committee has been informed that vacancies are being 
reported to SSC/AIIMS or other recruiting agencies for filling up the same on regular basis. The 
Committee is of the view that even after such a high vacancy at the Institute, the Department has 
been not been able to decide as to which recruiting agencies could be approached for 

60 
 
recruitment process. The Committee is perturbed over the large vacancy position and, therefore, 
strongly recommends the Department to expedite the process for recruitment of the staff at the 
Institute. The Department needs to set a timeline within which the entire recruitment process gets 
completed and hindrances, if any, tackled immediately. 
 
(Para 6.4) 
Action Taken 
 
3.35 Out of total strength 2117, the 71 various posts have been abolished and thus the total 
strength has been reduced to 2046 now.  However the updated vacancy position is as under:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Group No. of 
the 
post 
 
In 
position 
Vacant 
post 
Remarks 
1 A 35 12 23 - 
2 B 940 652 288 - 
 
3 C 400* 178 222 *03 temporary 
posts of Dark 
Room Assistant 
abolished. 
4 Erstwh
ile 
Group 
‘D’ 
671# 436 235 #50 posts of Lab. 
Attendant reduced 
due to cadre review 
of Lab. Cadre. 07 
temporary posts of 
Aya, 04 temporary 
posts of  Animal 
Attendant and 07 
temporary posts of 
Ward Orderly 
abolished. 
Grand Total 2046 1278 768 - 
 
  
3.36 Further it is stated that LHMC had reported 26 vacancies in the post of LDC in the year 
2017 and 25 dossiers received from SSC against these vacancies .  Subsequently, this Institution 
has reported 11 vacancies in the post of LDC in the year 2019. LHMC had reported 103 
vacancies in the post of Nursing Officer to Dte. GHS and result for 53 vacancies were received.  
Out of 53, 19 candidates were joined. Th is Institution requested Nodal Officer, RML Hospital to 
provide waiting list for 22 vacancies. This Institution had recently filled 5 vacancies in the post 
of X-Ray Technician after conducting the examination for the post. 17 vacancies in the post of 
Junior Medical Laboratory Technologist advertised in the year 2018, and 13 vacancies were 
filled against the said vacancies.   
 

61 
 
3.37 Further, this Institution had advertised the following posts and applications are received 
in this Institution and under process for conducting the examination, in this Institution.   
 
i. Medical Laboratory Technologists. (50 posts) 
ii. Pharmacists (3 posts) 
iii. Electrical Technician. (1 post) 
iv. Library Clerk. (1 post) 
v. Statistician (1 post) 
vi. Laundry Supervisor. (1 post)  
 
3.38 Apart from the above, the action is being initiated to fill up the vacant posts viz.  Gas 
Supervisor, Labour Supervisor, Steward, Havaldar, Assistant Warden, Photographer, Driver, 
Dark Room Assistant, EEG,EMG/NCV Technician (Neurology), Physiotherapis t (Neurology), 
Junior Medical Laboratory Technologists, Driver, Dark Room Assistant, EEG,EMG/NCV 
Technician (Neurology), Physioterapist (Neurology), Junior Medical Laboratory Technologists.    
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.39 The Committee is deeply anguished  to observe that the Department of Health and 
Family welfare is furnishing ambiguous and cryptic Action Taken Notes entailing its efforts 
made in the year 2017, 2018 and 2019 in response to the Committee’s recommendations 
contained in Para 6.3 and 6.4 of 1 18th Report, that was presented to the Parliament on 
3rdMarch, 2020. The Committee formulated its recommendations based on the facts 
submitted by the Department about the vacancy position in LHMC & SSKH as on 31 st 
December, 2019. On that date, 883 posts we re lying vacant against the sanctioned strength 
of 2117 posts thus the vacancy constituting 40% of total sanctioned strength. Out of total 
strength of 2117 posts, the 71 posts (03 in Group – C and 68 in Group – D) have now been 
abolished, therefore, the to tal sanctioned strength reduced to 2046. Against that total 
sanctioned strength of 2046 posts, the in-position strength remains 1278 and vacancy of 768 
posts still persists. The Committee understands that Outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19 
could have slowed dow n the recruitment process, however, the Committee feels that the 
Department could have furnished the convincing response to its recommendations. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare need to set up a definite timeframe to complete the recruitment process so 
as to fill up all the vacancies in LHMC & SSKH without much delay. That would not only 
relieve the overburdened existing staff due to heavy patient load but also help the suffering 
patient to avail better healthcare facilities.  
 
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA YOJANA (PMSSY) :- POOR FACULTY STATUS 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.40 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the poor status of faculty at various AIIMS. 
Out of total sanctioned p osts of 1830, only 1035 post are filled up i.e. only 56.56% of the total 
sanctioned posts are filled up and 795 are lying vacant. The Committee notes that AIIMS, 
Rishikesh leads in terms of faculty status where almost 83.93% posts have been filled up. The 
Committee, at the stage of its 111th Report on PMMSY, was apprised that 122 and 184 posts 

62 
 
have been filled up at AIIMS Patna and Bhubaneswar, respectively, which unfortunately has now 
gone down to 107 and 181. Vacancy position in AIIMS Jodhpur is also not very encouraging. 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons highlighted by the Institutes for such a high 
vacancy status and delay in the recruitments process. 
(Para 7.8) 
 
3.41 The Committee is apprehensive that for an AIIMS like institution, such a gap in 
workforce would adversely affect the functional capacity of the institute. The Committee is of the 
view that such poor status of teaching faculty not only adds woes to basic health infrastructure at 
the Institute but a compromise to the standard of medical education which ultimately puts a 
question mark on the functioning of the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to expedite the recruitment process and take necessary actions to fill up the vacant 
posts. The Committee, also , recommends the Department to offer better pay structure and 
incentives to attract Specialist/Super Specialist doctors from premier Institutes like 
AIIMS/JIPMER/PGI, etc. to join the Institute. 
(Para 7.9) 
Action Taken 
 
3.42 The present position of faculty posts as on 30.09.2020 against sanctioned posts in first six 
AIIMS under PMSSY is as under: 
 
AIIMS Sanctioned 
Posts 
Current On roll Position 
Post filled (%) 
Bhopal 305 179 58.68% 
Bhubaneswar 305 196 64.26% 
Jodhpur 305 174 57.04% 
Patna 305 144 47.21% 
Raipur 305 147 48.19% 
Rishikesh 305 252 82.62% 
Total 1830 1092 59.67% 
 
3.43 The incumbency position at various AIIMS is monitored regularly and vacancies are 
advertised from time to time depending on their requirement. However, as high standards have to 
be maintained in selection, keeping in view of the long term vision of developing these 
institutions as Centres of Excellence in the field of tertiary healthcare, medical education and 
research. These Institutes are envisioned to assume leadership role s and become role models in 
their respective regions.  Due to observance of high standards in the faculty selection, all the 
advertised positions could not be filled up. 
 
3.44 Various steps have been taken to improve the faculty and non -faculty posts in th ese 
AIIMS and the details are given in Annexure-VI.  
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.45 The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of recruitment process in First Six 
AIIMS under PMSSY as the status of vacancy marginally improved over a period of more 
than eight months. During the course of examination of Demand for Grants  (2020-21), the 

63 
 
Committee was apprised that against the sanctioned strength of 1830 posts, 1035 posts were 
filled up, thus indicating 56.56% of the total sanctioned strength. As on 30 th Septemeber, 
2020 against the sanctioned strength of 1830 posts, 1092 posts have been filled up thus 
reflecting in position strength of 59.67% of the total sanctioned strength. The Committee 
understands that a huge gap of 44.44 % in the workforce would certainl y hinder the 
delivery of quality healthcare as expected from a Centre of Par Excellence hospitals of 
national importance. The Committee takes into account the detailed steps/efforts made by 
the Government to improve the faculty and non -faculty posts in First Six AIIMS, however, 
the outcome is no t very encouraging. The Committee is of the considered opinion that the 
gap in the workforce in the First Six AIIMS would deter the achievement of long term 
vision of transforming these institutions as centre of exce llence in the field of tertiary 
healthcare, medical education and research leaving apart the envisioned objective of 
assuming leadership roles and projecting as role models in their respective reg ions. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendatio n to fill up the vacant posts, sooner the 
better, though, without compromising the matching standards in the faculty selection so as 
to be extolled as hospitals of national importance.  
 
PMSSY: VACANCY POSITION OF NON-FACULTY STAFF 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.46 The Committee is constrained to note that out of 22,656 non-faculty posts only 11,995 are 
filled up and 10,661 posts are still lying vacant. At AIIMS Bhopal, Bhubaneswar and Patna, 
there is less than 50% in position strength against the total s anctioned strength. The Committee 
understands that the shortage of doctors and specialist is a macro level problem resulting into 
the poor doctor: patient ratio in the country but the Committee fails to understand the reasons 
for huge number of vacancy in the non -faculty positions. In Committee’s opinion non -faculty 
staff is the backbone of any medical institution in terms of its successful and smooth functioning. 
With such a wide gap in the in -position strength against the sanctioned non faculty posts, it 
would be extremely difficult to manage the day to day functionalities of various Departments of 
the institute in an holistic manner. The Committee, therefore, recommends for expediting the 
appointment process of non -faculty staff on a regular basis so that  all the AIIMS have adequate 
man power to cater to all aspects of patient care. The Committee is of the considered opinion 
that a centralized recruitment process for filling up of non -faculty posts would address the entire 
non faculty shortage issue and also ensure a transparent recruitment process. 
(Para 7.11) 
Action Taken 
 
3.47 The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted. The current status of non -
faculty posts in various AIIMS is appended below : 
 
AIIMS Sanctioned 
Posts 
Current On roll Position 
Post filled (%) 
Bhopal 3776 1520 40.25% 
Bhubaneswar 3776 1949 51.61% 

64 
 
Jodhpur 3776 2013 53.31% 
Patna 3776 1094 28.97% 
Raipur 3776 2322 61.49% 
Rishikesh 3776 3007 79.63% 
Total 22656 11606 51.22% 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.48 The Committee exp resses its deep anguish over the snail ’s pace at which the  
recruitment process of non faculty posts in First Six AIIMS under PMSSY is going on. The 
Committee observes that against the sanctioned strength of 22,656 non -faculty posts, only 
11,606 posts remai n filled up thus indicating 51.22% of filled up posts against the total 
sanctioned strength. In view of the paramount role that non-faculty staff play in successful 
management of various Departments of the institute of national importance, the Committee 
recommends the Department of Health and Family Welfare to regularly monitor the 
recruitment process of non -faculty staff in the first six AIIMS of the country that are 
supposed to play pivotal role for laying the path for other regional AIIMS. The Committee 
believes that the envisaged uniformity in the Recruitment Rules for non -faculty posts 
across all AIIMS followed by Common Recruitment Process would accelerate the 
streamlining of Common Recruitment Process for all six AIIMS and thus filling up of all 
the non-faculty posts without further procrastination. 
 
FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (FSSAI) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.49 The Committee observes that out of the projected demand of Rs. 410.5 crore, only Rs. 
283.71 has been allocated to FSSAI which amounts to only 69.11% of the projected amount. The 
Committee is of the view that such a lower allocation of budget for FSSAI, that has been 
established for laying down science based standards for articles of food and to regulate their 
manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure availability of safe and wholesome 
food for human consumption, will certainly affect the ongoing projects/activities of the Authority 
in particular and in fulfilling the mandate of FSSAI in general. 
(Para 11.2) 
Action Taken 
 
3.50 There is no specific recommendation made by the committee. Observations made by the 
committee have been noted. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.51 The Committee takes strong exception to  the way the Action Taken Notes of the 
Ministry ha s been furnished. The Ministry is duty bound to respond not only to the 
recommendations but also  the observations of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should furnish it response as to how FSSAI managed to 

65 
 
achieve the set target pertaining to laying down science based standards for articles of food 
and to regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure 
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption, with pruned allocation 
 
 
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.52 AIIMS which is an institution of National Importance and eminence, has made 
substantial contribution towards affordable and quality tertiary healthcare, especially to the 
most deprived and vulnerable sections of our society. The Committee, therefore, believes that 
that AIIMS needs to be supported and nurtured in all possible manner and all its financial 
requirements should be met by the Government by way of budgetary support to allow it to excel 
further. The Committee is, however, constrained to observe that the budgetary requirement of 
AIIMS has been slashed by Rs. 461 crore against projected demand to the tune of Rs. 3950.00 
crore. Given the good track record of AIIMS in utiliz ing the allocated plan funds during the last 
three years, the Committee is unable to understand the rationale for the reduced quantum of plan 
funds for 2020 -21. A large number of developmental activities such as NCI, Jhajjar, Surgical 
Block, Mother and Child Block, OPD Block, Burn And Plastic Ward, Nation al Centre of Ageing 
etc. are presently underway at AIIMS, Delhi and inadequate allocation of plan funds should not 
limit the progress of such important initiatives. The Committee, therefore, strongly advoca tes for 
enhanced budgetary support to AIIMS as the budgetary constraints should not come in the way 
of speedy execution of developmental projects of AIIMS. 
(Para 12.3) 
Action Taken 
 
3.53 In regard of B.E. 2020-21 of Rs. 3489.96 Crore against projection of  Rs. 3950.00 Crore, 
it is submitted that the BE 2020 -21 of the Institute  is more that the RE 2019 -20, i.e. Rs. 3228 
crore which was viewed to be sufficient to meet the fund requirements for the year. However, 
additional requirement of funds may now be there in the wake of facilities created by the institute 
for treatment of Covid -19 patients. The Institute will raise additional requirement of funds at 
Supplementary/ RE stages based on expenditure trend to meet enhanced fund requirement. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.54 The Committee would like to be apprised of budgetary allocation made at 
RE/supplementary stage in 2020 -21 and the progress made towards completion of 
infrastructural projects/initiates taken by AIIMS, New Delhi mandated with the duties and 
responsibilites of providing affordable and quality testing healthcare services. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of proposed demand of AIIMS, New Delhi for 
creating facilities in the wake of outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19 and treatment of 
COVID patients by the Institute.  

66 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.55 The Committee observes that the essential pre-requisite for quality health care services is 
the availability of adequate manpower/specialists and other healthcare professionals. The 
Committee is disappointed to note the persistent shortage of manpower especially in the faculty 
positions. On the one hand the Institute is in expansion mode in various medical fields. The 
constraints in recruitment of even the sanctioned strength do not augur well. The  Committee, 
therefore, exhorts the Institute to streamline its recruitment policy so as to ensure that the 
sanctioned posts are filled up within a targeted timeline. The Committee also recommends that 
adequate incentives should be offered and other steps b e taken, to attract new talent and to 
motivate existing faculty to continue in the Institute. 
(Para 12.6) 
Action Taken 
 
3.56 Total no. of vacancies in Faculty position as on 01.02.2020 was 338. Out of these 338, 
appointment letter against 01 vacant post of  Principal, College of Nursing has been issued on 
29.02.2020. Out of rest 337 posts, 11 candidates, selected for the post of Asstt. Prof. in last 
selection had sought extension till 17.03.2020. Out of these 11, 09 have joined and remaining 02 
offer has been cancelled since the candidates did not join. Out of 328, 83 vacancies of Professors 
under Direct Recruitment are not being filled due to administrative reasons -ongoing Court case 
on the issue of Seniority between Direct & APS, pending in Hon’ble High Court. 
 
3.57 Remaining 245 posts include following  posts: 
Posts could not be filled in last recruitment     :    60 
due to following reasons: 
 
i) Eligible candidates did not apply as in some specialties and super specialties 
pool of eligible candidates is limited. 
ii) Non-appearance of short-listed candidates for interview. 
iii) In some specialties and super specialties, eligible   candidates applied but 
preferred not to appear for interview.  This can be because of many reasons 
like option to join other AIIMS, Govt. Ins titutions, private sector or move 
abroad or some personal reasons related to moving to Delhi. 
iv) In few instances, though eligible candidates appeared before selection 
committee but not found suitable.  This has happened even for Unreserved 
candidates. 
v) Non – joining of selected candidates etc. for various reasons e.g. -opting for 
joining in other AIIMS, Govt. Institutions, private sector, moving abroad etc. 
 
3.58 Remaining 245 posts include following  posts: 
 
1. Posts could not be filled in last recruitment     :    60 
due to following reasons: 
 
i) Eligible candidates did not apply as in some specialties 
ii) and super specialties pool of eligible candidates is   
iii) limited. 

67 
 
iv) Non-appearance of short-listed candidates for interview. 
v) In some specialties and super specialties, e ligible   candidates applied but 
preferred not to appear for interview.  This can be because of many reasons like 
option to join other AIIMS, Govt. Institutions, private sector or move abroad or 
some personal reasons related to moving to Delhi. 
vi) In few instances, though eligible candidates appeared before selection committee 
but not found suitable.  This has happened even for Unreserved candidates. 
vi) Non – joining of selected candidates etc. for various reasons e.g. -opting for 
joining in other AIIMS, Govt. Institutions, private sector, moving abroad etc. 
 
2. Posts sanctioned recently: 
Surgical Block (Building under construction)      -     39 
Expansion of JPNATC                                         -   48 
                                                            -------                                                                         
                                                                      Total:  87 
 
3. Additional posts recently  sanctioned for CTVS   -      05 
                                                                                  ------ 
                                            Total:    92     
                                    
4. Due to resignation & superannuation after last advertisement      -   17 posts 
 
5. Further, out of 245 posts , for following 31 posts of (including some posts of New Blocks), 
recruitment rules are not available & framing of Recruitment Rules for 31 posts is under 
way: 
6.  
NCI, Jhajjar                          -       11 posts 
Epidemiology                       -        01 post 
Expansion   of JPNATC      -        17 posts 
Surgical Block                      -        02 posts 
                                                      ---------- 
                                       Total:       31 posts 
 
3.59 Action to advertise 214 posts other than these 31 posts has been initiated and further it is 
intimated that 38 Assistant Professors are presently working on contract basis  and proposal of 
appointment of another 31 posts of Asstt. Prof. on contract basis has been initiated. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.60 The Committee takes into account the detailed reasons furnished by the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare for non -filling up of a total no. of 338 vacant posts as on 
01.02.2020 in AIIMS, New Delhi. However, t he Committee desires that all vacant posts 
must be filled up in time bound manner  by overcoming . The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation contained in Para 12.6 of 118th report.  
 

68 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.61 The Committee observes tha t there has been a delay in the construction of almost all 
projects and the target date of completion for most of the projects has been further extended. The 
Committee is constrained to note the lethargic pace of developmental works of the new project at 
AIIMS, Delhi. Delay in construction activities not only leads to cost overruns, but also puts 
burden on the limited resources allocated to the Institute. Such delays have impaired the 
capacity of the institute to provide the envisaged levels of treatment, h ealth care and medical 
education. The Committee desires the Department to assess the reasons for delay in the 
execution of the projects under construction and accordingly apprise the Committee of the 
reasons for delay along with the latest progress made. 
(Para 12.9) 
 
3.62 The Committee has been given to understand that AIIMS catered to 26 lakh patients 
indicating very high burden of clinical services on AIIMS. Given the fact that a considerable 
number of patients availing health care facilities at AIIMS bel ong to the poor and deprived 
sections of the society, it is all the more imperative that the ongoing health care infrastructure of 
AIIMS should be completed within the stipulated time. The Committee desires that implementing 
agencies must avoid time and co st overruns and be held accountable with penalty. The 
Committee hopes that the new deadlines for completion of Surgical Block, Burns and Plastic 
Surgery Block and New Paid Ward are strictly adhered to with no further extension of time and 
become operational for the benefit of a number of patients. The Committee also recommends to 
the Department to keep a close watch on the progress made with respect to these Blocks and 
ensure its completion as per the new deadlines outlined. 
 
(Para 12.10) 
Action Taken 
 
3.63 The Status of ongoing projects taken by Institute is as below with reason for delay: -  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Sanctioned 
Cost in 
crore  
Date of 
start  
Stipulated 
date of 
completion  
Tentative 
Completio
n Date 
Physical 
progress 
achieved 
Expenditure 
upto Aug 2020         
( Rs. In crore) 
1 NCI 
Jhajjar 
2035.00 Feb 2015 Dec 2017 Feb - 
2019         
(Phase- I)  
Complet
ed and 
functiona
l Except 
for 
Nuclear 
Medicine 
Facility.  
1435.28 
2 Surgical 
Block 
100.29 Sep 2013 April 2015 Mar -
2021 
95% 
 
complete
d 
77.70 
3 Mother 
& Child 
Block 
290.70 May 2015 May 2017 Mar -
2021 
82%  
complete
d 
245.00 
4 OPD 
Block  
573.00 May 2015 May 2017 Complete
d  
100% 
Complet
454.28 

69 
 
ed. 
Function
al since 
February 
2020 
5 New 
Paid 
Ward 
100.00 Dec 2016 Aug 2018 Mar -
2021 
83% 
complete
d 
68.12 
6 Burn & 
Plastic 
Surgery 
Block  
247.85 Jan 2017 Jan 2019 Complete
d  
100% 
Complet
ed in 
April 
2020.  
145.02 
7 Geriatric
s 
Block/N
CA  
250.00 Feb 2018 Feb 2020 March 
2021 
65% 
complete
d 
141.78 
 TOTAL 3485.11     2567.18 
 
Reasons for Delays 
 
Mother & Child Block: –  
 
3.64 Work has been delayed due to – 
 
 Additional area was planned and built at 7th & 8th floor to the tune of 12000 Sq Ft 
approx.  which are not planned in original proposal. This was done to accommodate the 
state of art facilities of the departments envisaged after start of work.  
 A common ramp with the adjoining Surgical Block was planned later as per site 
requirements and requirements of the Delhi Fire Services Department. The re planning 
and execution thereof took time for execution.  
 The project was appro ved and envisaged in 2013 and awarded in 2015. During this 
period due to advancements in the medical fields and new technologies available the 
perception of the planned facilities and planning changed which required modifications 
and alterations in the already executed/underway works. This led to some delay. 
 Construction activities were stopped by the DPCC on different dates on account of air 
pollution mitigation measures announced each year during winter season.  Odd & Even 
system in Vehicles by Delhi Govt ., construction activities ban from 6PM to 6AM by 
CPCB etc were required to be adhered to by the contractor which required stopping 
/suspension of work. The remobilization thereafter took time leading to hindrance &  
delay thereof 
 On account of the changes  and additional works the requirements an for medical 
infrastructure viz. OT’s & MOT, MGPS points, Electrical & IT points at various floors 
etc were re planned and taken up for execution thereafter.  
 One additional facility of IVF in service floor also req uired some additional and 
subsequent modification work.  
 The equipments and manpower were also revised as per the need of the modified building 
/facility requirements. The work of Gas Manifold and IT works were to be synchronized 
with the changes made requiring some lag time in execution of the civil works therafter.   

70 
 
 Work was held up on account of lockdown for COVID -19 Pandemic from 22.03.2020 
onward leading to major disruption in the work progress would entail a delay of six 
months at the minimum for rem obilization of labour which is not sufficient till date . As 
per the notification of Ministry of Finance order No. F. 18/4/2020 -PPD dated 13.05.2020 
regarding Force Majeure Clause (FMC) the said delay would have to be conceded to the 
contractors executing the work.  
3.65 Surgical Block : - The surgical block vendor has suspended the work long back and not 
responding even after the number of meeting held by AIIMS authorities. Ultimately with no 
option left , the  firm had to be  expelled from the site. The ba lance work and additional work as 
per the user department is being taken up separately. The left out work of the main vendor is 
taken up under separate tender by call of tender under risk and cost of the firm.  We are into 
Arbitration stage with the main v endor of Surgical Block that is why the work is on stand still 
mode from last 2-3 years.   
 
3.66 New Paid Ward : -  First vendors  has abandoned  the work and contract has been 
terminated due to slow pace of work and tender were recalled. Arbitration case  The New Paid 
Ward Site is adjoining to the C -II Type Flats of Faculty, therefore, the work was not allowed to 
be executed during late hours. The site is very congested having hostel on two sides and Electric 
Sub Station of one side. There was incident of l and Slide during execution of work, twice. 
Shifting of running services were also required to be carried out which also entailed certain 
delays. Ban on Construction activities by NGT/ DPCC. Hindrance on account of repairing of 
existing sewer / storm water line. Delay in finalization of Ground Floor & 9th Floor plan. In 
recent periods, the work was held up on account of lockdown in the wake of COVID -19 
Pandemic, from 22.03.2020 onward, leading to major disruption in the work progress. Migration 
of the labour  to their home -towns due to spread of COVID -19 has also been causing delays as 
the labour on the site is still not sufficient. As per the notification of Ministry of Finance order 
No. F. 18/4/2020 -PPD dated 13.05.2020 regarding Force Majeure Clause (FMC) t he said delay 
would have to be conceded to the contractors executing the work. 
 
3.67 Geriatrics Block : -  Additional work of  3 level of basement and Service Block with 
Ground Floor has been included at a latter stage to have a continuous basement in whole  of 
Masjid Moth Campus.   Other delay occurred on account of Ban on Construction activities by 
NGT/ DPCC. Work was held up on account of lockdown for COVID -19 Pandemic from 
22.03.2020 onward leading to major disruption in the work progress would entail a d elay of six 
months at the minimum for remobilization of labour which is not sufficient till date . As per the 
notification of Ministry of Finance order No. F. 18/4/2020 -PPD dated 13.05.2020 regarding 
Force Majeure Clause (FMC) the said delay would have to be conceded to the contractors 
executing the work. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.68 The Committee understands that the outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19 and 
subsequent lockdown from 25 th March, 2020 caused delay in the completion of various on -
going construction activities in AIIMS Delhi and, of course, as per the Notification of the 
Ministry of Finance dated 13th May, 2020 regarding Force Majeure Clause (FMC), the said 
delay has to be conceded to the contractor executing the work. Nevertheless, the Committee 

71 
 
is o f the considered view that the other reasons for delay viz administrative decision, 
modification in construction design, undertaking of additional work, procurement of 
equipment and manpower planning and placement, arbitration with main vendor in 
surgical block construction activities have to be tackled with administrative acumen to 
yield results in time-bound manner. The Committee finds that the re -scheduled target date 
of completion of construction activities in surgical blocks, mother and child block, new paid 
ward and geriatrics block/NCA is March, 2021. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the 
Department to keep a strict vigil on progress of construction activities to ensure that the 
remaining construction activities are completed as per the revised tar get date. The 
Committee would like to be apprised whether Nuclear Medicine Facility has been 
operationalized in NCI Jhajjar.  
 
 
POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES AND RESEARCH 
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
  
Observation/Recommendation  
 
3.69 The Committee observes that in the past years PGIMER, Chandigarh has been successful 
in utilizing maximum of the budget allocated to the Institute. The Committee, notes that against 
the projected demand of Rs. 2150.00 crore for the year 2020 -21 only Rs 1426.53 has been 
allocated to the Institute which is less than the BE of 2019 -20. The Committee is, unable to 
comprehend the reason for the lower allocation of budget to the Institute. PGIMER being the 
leading tertiary care hospital of the region and catering to patients f rom all over Punjab, J&K, 
Himachal Pradesh and Haryana shortage of funds should not affect the services provided by the 
institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends that higher allocation of budget to the Institute 
so that it is able to excel in providing healthcare services to the people. 
(Para 13.3) 
Action Taken 
 
3.70 It is informed that the Institute demand of Rs. 2150.00 Crore under BE for the financial 
year 2020 -21 was forwarded to the Budget Division. However, during the finalization of BE 
2020-21, only Rs 1426.53 crore has been allocated to the Institute. However, additional funds of 
Rs.485.00 crore for the Institute have been requested under the Supplementary Demands for 
Grants as below: - 
 
Under GIA (General) Rs.85.00 cr. 
GIA(Salary)-              Rs.100.00 cr. 
GIA(CCA)-                Rs.300.00 cr. 
Total:                         Rs.485.00 cr. 
 
3.71 With respect to recommendations of the Committee for the higher allocation of budget to 
the Institute, Budget Division may be requested to take necessary action in the matter.  
 

72 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.72 The Committee reiterates its observation that since PGIMER, Chandigarh has 
absorption/utilisation capacity of allocated fund and is engaged with mission mode to 
provide Tertiary Healthcare in the re gion. Ministry of Finance must have allocated the 
institute the budget as per projected demand so that the institute could have completed the 
desired projects as per originally conceived plan. The Committees, however, would like to 
be informed regarding th e allocation of additional fund to the tune of Rs. 485.00 crore 
under the supplement ary demand at RE Stage 2020 -21 as put forth by PGIMER, 
Chandigarh.  
 
JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST -GRADUATION MEDICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH, PUDDUCHERRY 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.73 The Committee observes that there has been consistent under utilization of funds at the 
Institute in the past years. Such trend of under utilization of budgeted funds indicates poor 
financial planning on the part of the concerned authority . The Committee expects the 
Department to take appropriate measures to utilize the entire fund allocated to the Institute and 
there should be no scope of fiscal profligacy or idle parking of funds and timely action should be 
taken for its optimal and judic ious utilization in consonance with established principles of 
financial propriety. 
(Para 14.3) 
Action Taken 
  
3.74 It is informed that saving was due to the unutilized balances left over under Grant -in-Aid 
Salaried and Grant -in-Aid Creation of Capital Asse ts. Saving under GIA Salaries was due to 
vacancy of posts arising out of superannuation, voluntary retirement, resignation, death cases etc. 
and also due to provisions made for posts to be filled by recruitment under progress. In respect of 
GIA- Creation of Capital Assets saving was due to slow pace of expenditure and availability of 
unspent balance with the Institute pertaining to previous financial years. Measures have been 
initiated by the Institute to arrive at exact expenditure forecast while formulati ng BE and RE so 
that no such saving will remain due to underutilization of funds.  
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.75 The Committee finds the action taken notes on its recommendation on 
underutilization of allocated funds by PGIMER Puducherry as vague, circuit ous and 
evasive. It is pleaded that savings under GIA salary was due to vacancy of post arising out 
of superannuation, VRS, Resignation and Death cases. While in respect of GIA creation of 
capital assets, the saving was due to slow pace of expenditure and availability of unspent 
balance of previous year. The Committee observes that the institute lacks human resource 
planning and fin ancial and planning, therefore, suffering from under -utilization of 
allocated funds. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare to keep regular vigil  on the pattern of utilization of fund by  the 
Institute.  

73 
 
 
NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH & 
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.76 The Committee observes that out of sanctioned 1823 post, 1276 posts have been   filled 
up and 547 are still lying vacant. The Committee is constrained to note that 49 faculty posts out 
of 141 have not been filled up. A total of 28, 359 and 78 post have been lying vacant under group 
A, B, C respectively. For an Institute that aims to  provide  high quality patient care, impart Post 
Graduate and Under Graduate, Basic and Advanced Medical Technology and Nursing 
Education, undertake Medical and Basic Comm unity Health Research, advice / guide / facilitate 
the North Eastern States in framing Health Policies etc and finally develop Human Resources in 
all fields related to health, such a high rate of vacancy would adversely affect the Health care 
services provided by the Institute and also affect the standards of medical education imparted at 
the Institute. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to expedite the process of 
recruitment within a set time frame. 
(Para 15.3) 
Action Taken 
 
Recruitment of Faculty: 
 
3.77 The Institute is making all efforts to fill up the vacant faculty posts. The last interview for 
faculty posts was held on 3rd & 4th October 2019. Altogether 13 (thirteen) faculty were selected 
for appointment to various faculty posts out of  which 9 (nine) have joined their posts. The 
remaining 4 (four) selected candidates have sought for extension of joining time and they will be 
joining very shortly. 
 
3.78 Recently the Institute also conducted a Walk -in interview on 24.02.2020 to fill up th e 
vacant posts of Assistant Professor in various departments on adhoc basis. 2 (two) candidates 
were selected and Appointment Order has been issued to them. They will also be joining their 
posts very shortly. The remaining vacant faculty posts are in the process of advertising. 
 
3.79 Recruitment of Nursing Faculty posts: 
 
The Institute had floated an advertisement in November-December 2019 for filling up the 
post of Professor -Cum-Principal (1 post), Professor -cum-Vice Principal (1 post) and 
Lecturer (1 post) on deputation basis. Altogether 7 (seven) applications were received in 
responses to the advertisement and screening is under process . 
 
3.80 Recruitment of Group A posts: 
 
The Institute had advertised the Group ‘A’ posts of Deputy Financial adviser, Reg ister, 
Deputy Medical Superintendent, Junior Medical Officer (Blood bank) several times but 
due to dearth to candidates the posts could not be filled up. The posts are being re -
advertised. 
 

74 
 
3.81 Recruitment of Group A posts reserved for PWDs: 
 
The Institute is also making efforts to fill up the Group ‘A’ posts reserved for Persons 
with Disabilities (PWDs) on direct recruitment, i.e. Dental Officer – 1 (HH), Statistical 
Officer – 1 (VH) & Medical Physicist – 1 (PH), but due to dearth of applicants belonging 
to the PWD category, the posts could not be filled up. The posts are being re-advertised. 
 
3.82 Recruitment of senior Resident Doctors and Junior Resident Doctors: 
 
The Institute is having a sanctioned strength of 105 (one hundred five) posts of Senior 
Resident Doctor and 84 (eighty four) posts of Junior Residents Doctors. The Institute is 
conduction walk -in interviews for recruitment of Senior Resident Doctors and Junior 
Resident Doctors at regular intervals. The last Walk -in interview for Senior Resident 
Doctor was held on 14.2.2020, wherein 12 (twelve) candidates were selected for 
appointment. Offer of appointments has been issued to the selected candidates and they 
are expected to join their posts very soon. The Walk -in interview for Junior Resident 
Doctor was held on 14.1.2020. 20 (twenty) candidates were selected for appointment and 
all of them have joined their posts. Detailed Sanctioned Strength vis -à-vis filled up posts 
and Vacancy Position as on 05.03.2020 is enclosed at Annexure-VII. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.83 The Committee is anguished to find that the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare has not apprised the Committee with updated status of sanctioned vis -a-vis in 
position strength post wise and cadre wise in NEIGRIHMS Shillong. However, the  
Committee finds that all measures taken to fill up the vacant posts were made prior to 
presentation of 118 th Report, that too, to the utter surprise to the Committee, that yielded 
reduction of vacant post from 547 to 540 only. The Committee, therefore, fi nds the 
progress in the recruitment process to be very tardy. The Committee, hence, reiterates its 
recommendation to expedite the recruitment process in NEIGRIHMS Shillong for filling 
up the vacant posts within a set timeframe and also ensuring wide circul ation of 
advertisements for filling up vacant posts so that recruitment process doesn’t suffer from 
dearth of candidates. The Committee also desires the Department to furnish updated status 
of sanctioned vis -a-vis in position strength of manpower post wise  and cadre wise so as to 
reflect actual vacant posts in the institute at specific point of time.  
 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NEUROSCIENCES 
(NIMHANS), BENGALURU 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
   
3.84 The Committee observes that 179 posts out of  1905 total sanction are lying vacant at the 
NIMHANS, Bengaluru. The Committee further has been given to understand that shortage of 
nurses has been a matter of concern. Recently, 210 posts of nurses at different levels have been 
approved and orders for th e posts creation were issued. The Committee recommends the 
Department to fill up the newly created vacancies at the earliest so as to overcome the shortage 

75 
 
of nurses as highlighted by the Institute. The Committee also recommends that vacant posts 
should al so be filled up to bridge the gap in providing outstanding healthcare services to the 
people. 
(Para 16.5) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.85 Filling up of vacant posts is a continuous process. NIMHANS, Bengaluru takes timely 
action to fill up the vacant posts in various cadres. Furthermore, out of the 210 newly created 
posts of Nurses, 207 posts have already been filled up by eligible candidates.  
 
Further Recommendation 
  
3.86 The Committee appreciates NIMHANS, Bengaluru for taking timely action for 
filling up of 207 pos ts of Nurses created recently, however, the Committee remains to be 
apprised of the status of filling up of 179 vacant posts (61 posts in Group – A, 48 posts in 
Group – B and 70 posts in Group – C). The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to apprise the Committee with latest status on filling up stated vacant posts in 
Group – A, B and C.  
 
LOKPRIYA GOPINATH BORDOLOI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL 
HEALTH (LGBRIHM), TEZPUR 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
  
3.87 The Committee notes that the budget alloc ation for FY 2020 -21 has been reduced from 
Rs. 60 crore at RE 2019 -20 stage. Undoubtedly, the reduced funds would result in problems in 
the smooth functioning of the Institute. With an increasing global burden of mental health 
illnesses, the Committee feel s there is a dire need to give more funds to the Institute. The 
Committee, recommends the Department to make every effort to establish the Institute as one of 
the pioneering mental health care institutes in the world. The Committee also recommends the 
Institute to fill up the sanctioned posts under group A as there are 25 vacancies. The Committee 
also notes the submission of the Institute and recommends the Department to identify a suitable 
institute in each State for collaboration with LGBRIHM that will fa cilitate better mental health 
care to the people. 
(Para 17.5) 
 
Action Taken 
 
3.88 Allocation of budget for the Institute is based on realistic assessment of their requirement 
at the beginning of the financial year. However, if during the course of the year , need for 
allocation of more funds for the Institute arises, the same will be considered at the time of Revise 
Estimates 2020-21. As regards filling up of vacant posts at the Institute, process has already been 
initiated by the Institute. Health Ministers  of all the NE States are members of the Board of 
Governors of LGBRIMS, Tezpur, Assam. Further, outreach extension service is one of the major 
activities provided by the Institute. For improving coverage and accessibility of mental 
healthcare, district lev el activities under the NMHP have been supported in all North Eastern 

76 
 
States. Theses district level activities are organized by a dedicated District Mental Health 
Programme team stationed at District Hospital. 
 
Further Recommendation 
 
3.89 The Committee would like to be apprised of the in -position manpower strength vis -
a-vis sanctioned strength (Post wise and Cadre wise) in LGBRIMS. The Committee would 
also like the Department to respond to Committee’s recommendation pertaining to specific 
status of filling up of 25 vacant posts and identification of a suitable institutes in each state 
for collaborating with LGBRIMS for ensuring better mental healthcare in the Country.  
 

77 
 
CHAPTER–IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN RECEIVED 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
4.1 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that till date UCs are not being 
monitored through PFMS module. It is a known fact that PFMS has in built Utilizati on 
Certification (UC) Module which can be used to track and monitor the UCs from implementing 
agencies. The Committee is hopeful that pendency of UCs would come down and funds can be 
utilized appropriately with proper monitoring of UCs with PFMS module. 
 
(Para 2.15) 
Action Taken 
 
4.2 As of now UC module of PFMS is under development in PFMS as intimated by O/o 
Controller General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure, M/o Finance. 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA SURAKSHA YOJANA (PMSSY) 
 
Observation/Recommendation  
 
4.3 The Committee has been given to understand that most of the AIIMS like Institutes other 
than the one approved under Phase I have their approved time line to be in 2020. AIIMS 
Guwahati, Bilaspur and Jharkhand are expected to get completed by April, 202 1, December, 
2021 and February, 2022 respectively. The Committee hopes that the construction work in new 
AIIMS would be completed as per schedule and the status of construction be monitored on 
regular basis so that these AIIMS do not face any delay and con sequential cost overruns. The 
Committee also recommends that all the necessary approval should be taken by the Institutes 
within specific time so the delays in approvals do not contribute to the delay in construction 
activities. 
(Para 7.15) 
 
Action Taken 
 
4.4 Subsequent to 6 AIIMS taken up under Phase -I, sixteen (16) more AIIMS have been 
sanctioned/approved by Cabinet.  Following facilities / services have been made functional in 
these institutes:  
 
 OPD services started in AIIMS Nagpur, Raebareli, Mangalagi ri, Gorakhpur, Bibinagar 
and Bathinda.    
 1st session of undergraduate MBBS course with 50 seats has been started at eight new 
AIIMS viz. Mangalagiri, Nagpur, Raebareli, Kalyani, Gorakhpur, Bhatinda, Deoghar and  
Bibinagar. 

78 
 
 Dedicated hospitals blocks for t reatment of CoVID -19 patients at AIIMS Mangalagiri, 
AIIMS Nagpur, AIIMS Gorakhpur and AIIMS Bathinda. 
 Construction is progressing in 11 AIIMS, viz. AIIMS Raebareli, Nagpur, Mangalagiri, 
Kalyani, Gorakhpur, Bathinda, Bilaspur, Guwahati, Jammu, Rajkot and Deoghar. 
4.5 The latest progress status of 16 new AIIMS is given in Annexure – VIII. 
 
 
 
*** 

79 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE - AT A GLANCE 
 
 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION (NHM) 
 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
 The Committee observes that although the budget ary allocation made to Health 
Sector of Department of Health and Family Welfare has been enhanced from Rs.62,659.12 
Crore in 2019-20 (RE) to Rs.65,011.80 Crore in 2020-21(BE), however, the increment is not 
in consonance with the Health Finance goals and ob jectives under the Health System 
strengthening component as outlined in the National Health Policy 2017. As per the target 
set in the National Health Policy 2017 the Central Government has to increase health 
expenditure from the existing 1.15 per cent of GDP to 2.5 per cent by 2025. Keeping in view 
the envisioned expenditure pattern of 35 per cent by the Central Government and the 65 
per cent by the States, the total expenditure on health for the financial year should have 
been 3.67 lakh crore out of which 1.28 lakh crore should have been allocated to the health 
sector under the Department of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee, therefore, is 
of the considered view that unless and until the enhanced allocation to the Department of 
Health and Family Welf are is not in proportion to the financial targets of the National 
Health Policy 2017, the physical targets and objectives of NHM and Health Schemes could 
not be actualised. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its recommendation for 
adequate investment on Healthcare Delivery Infrastructure. 
(Para 3.6) 
 
 The Committee would also like to be apprised of appropriation Plan of Rs. 15000.00 
Crore received towards COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness 
Package for the year 2020 -24. The  Committee further desires to be apprised of the 
projected demand of the Department under PM’s Atmanirbhar Swasth Bharat Yojna 
(PM-ASBY). 
(Para 3.7) 
 
 The Committee takes note of Governments interventions to provide affordable 
healthcare to the common ma sses in the form of free services relating to mental health, 
child birth, adolescent health, family planning, universal immunisation, free drugs and 
diagnostic services initiatives, however, these steps have not yielded the desired results on 
ground level and the common masses run from pillar to post to get better healthcare 
services. The out of pocket expenditure is still as high as 62.4 per cent and India ranks 15 
out of 186 countries in OOPE as percentage of Central Health Expenditure. Although the 
launching of AB-PMJAY is a forward looking programme, however, the programme itself 
is languishing due to its inherent shortcomings viz constricted category of beneficiaries, 
reduction of allocation both at BE and RE stage in 2019 -20, non acceptance/late acceptance 
of the scheme by major States, slow pace of its implementation etc. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation for the increased Government Expenditure on 
Health so as to reduce OOPE of weaker section of the society.  
(Para 3.10) 

80 
 
 
 
 The Committee is anguished to note a marginal 3.75 per cent hike in the budgetary 
allocation from Rs. 65,011.80 crore in BE 2020 -21 to Rs. 62,659 crore in RE 2019 -20. The 
Department will have to manage Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) i.e. imposition of 4 per 
cent Health and Education Cess or 5 per cent cess on import of medical devices to be 
utilized for financing health infrastructure and services in aspirational districts. Besides 
that requisite fund would be sought from Higher Education Funding Agency (HEFA).  The 
Committee feels that the ad -hoc and piecemeal arrangements to meet financial 
requirement would not do any long-term good to Health Sector and therefore, recommends 
that Government should evolve a system of planning/arranging seamless and sustainable 
resources.  
(Para 3.15) 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR UMBRELLA NHM  
 
 The Committee would like to be appraised of demand for additional funds under 
umbrella National Health Mission (NHM) at RE Stage 2020 -21 and the actual allocation 
made under the said head. Th e Committee also desires the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare to make assessment of overall impact of lower allocation i.e. Rs. 39839.00 
crore against the projected demand of Rs. 85158.62 Crore in BE 2020 -21 under umbrella 
NHM programme. 
(Para 3.18) 
 
 The Committee recommends the Ministry to assess the performance of the hospitals 
and States empanelled under the Scheme. The Committee feels that the details of utilization 
of Scheme in all empanelled hospitals in the States must be freely accessible to  the general 
public. The Grievance redressal mechanism should also be strengthened so that the 
concerns of the general public are addressed at the earliest. The Committee also urges the 
Ministry to note the gross underutilisation under the Scheme and chalk  out a realistic 
roadmap for the Scheme. The Ministry should also take up the matter of appropriate 
utilisation of resources with the States.  
(Para 3.21) 
 The Committee notes with concern the gross violation of the provision under Rule 
238 (1) of the Gene ral Financial Rules 2017 requiring the submission of utilization 
certificate within 12 months of the closure of the financial year by the institutions/ 
organizations concerned. There are 289 pending utilization certificates under NRHM 
flexible pool and NUH M flexible pool involving an amount of Rs. 3362.77 Crores which is 
to be settled in the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
needs to evolve a mechanism to ensure that the utilization  certificates are received within 
the stipulated period and also that all out efforts be made to dispose/settle all the pending 
utilization certificates at the earliest. 
(Para 3.24) 
 
 

81 
 
NATIONAL HEALTH MISSION  
 The Committee expresses its concern that Health Budget in the States of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Mizoram, Sikkim have registered 
only single digit increase in percentage terms for Financial Year 2018 -19 as compared to 
2017-18  that must have a bearing on creation of fresh Health Infrastructure and delivery 
of healthcare facilities in these states. The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare to urge upon the State Government to enhance 
Budgetary Allocation on the Health Sector so that objectives of the National Health 
Mission are achieved.  
(Para 3.27) 
PULSE POLIO IMMUNIZATION  
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons behind non -transferring 
of technology of Sabrin Inactivated Polio Vaccine (SIPV) to any public sector vaccine 
producer in India by WHO despite in principle approval of WHO for transferring of 
technology to one PSU in the country. The Committee desires that the Ministry must go 
into the details of non -transfer of SIPV technology to one Public Sector Undertaking and 
apprise the Committee of the steps taken by the Government in the matter.  
(Para 3.31) 
  
FLEXIBLE POOL FOR COMMUNICABLE DISEASES 
 
 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the allocation of insufficient funds 
for various programmes covered under Flexible Pool for Communicable Dis eases Control 
Programme. The Ministry has already conceded that the lower allocation would affect the 
speedy implementation of kala –azar and Lymphatic Filariasis; and effective control of 
three other VBDs i.e. Dengue, Chikungunya and JE. The Committee und erstands that the 
Ministry would require more funds for procurement/replacement/repairing of Long 
Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) besides the committed liability amounting to Rs. 408.58 
Crore for financial year 2019 -20 towards procurement of LLINs. Addit ional funds will be 
required to implement various strategies of National Strategic Plan for Malaria elimination 
in India by 2030 as laid down in National Malaria Elimination Framework in India 2016 -
2030 and NSP. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend s that the Ministry of 
Finance must be considerate to the financial requirement of Department of Health and 
Family Welfare for effective and efficient implementation of various schemes  and 
programmes under Flexible Pool for Communicable Diseases.  
(Para 3.36) 
 
UPGRADING AND STRENGTHENING STATES’ DRUG REGULATORY SYSTEM 
 
 The Committee finds as clear cut inconsistency in the statement of the Ministry as 
far as the extended period for this scheme is convened. Whenever the Ministry has now 
considered that this  scheme has been extended upto March, 2021, it had, during the 
examination of Demand for Grants (2020 -21), submitted that an amount to the tune of Rs. 
175.00 Crore was earmarked for financial year 2020-21 and an amount of Rs. 188.00 Crore 

82 
 
could be proposed  in the financial year 2021 -22. The Committee would like to know as to 
which of the statement is true. The Committee feels that the set objective of upgrading and 
strengthening of the State Drug Regulatory System must be achieved through efficient and 
effective implementation of the scheme for the larger public good. The Department, 
therefore, must strive to take appropriate steps in order to achieve the set goals. 
(Para 3.40) 
 
 The Committee is happy to note that in pursuance of its recommendations, the 
Ministry has got a third party evaluation of the scheme conducted. However, it express its 
displeasure over the fact that the Ministry has not responded to its 
recommendations/suggestions to take this scheme further. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department must pay special attention to the States where the Drug 
Regulatory System is faltering and not working at desired level through this scheme.  
(Para 3.43) 
 
TERTIARY CARE PROGRAMME 
 
 The Committee takes note of approval for implementation of District Mental 
Health Programme (DMHP) in 655 districts of the country. The Committee desires that the 
targeted interventions covered under the DMHP must be implemented at the ground level 
so that the observable outcome is reflected. The Committee further  upholds that the 
Department should give equitable impetus to all the components of Tertiary Healthcare 
Programmes and accordingly allocate sufficient budgetary funds to each component of the 
programme. The Committee also recommends the department to conti nue to take 
proactive steps as follow -up action to motivate the State Government to formulate 
proposals/scheme/ strategy on each component of Tertiary Healthcare in order to lay down 
a better healthcare infrastructure in the country so as to ensure global standard healthcare 
delivery at the grass root level. 
(Para 3.46) 
  

83 
 
HEALTH SECTOR (HR) 
  
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of actual fund allocated to health sector 
scheme, scheme -wise and institute -wise in response to project ed demand of Rs. 37013.17 
crore in RE 2020-21 along with actual expenditure. The Committee would also like to know 
whether the implementation pace of any scheme/programme under the health sector got 
affected for want of funds.  
(Para 3.3) 
 
 The Committee i s constrained to note that as on 18 th September, 2020 a total 
number of 3876 Utilization Certificates involving Rs. 7513.970 Crore are pending. The 
Programme division concerned of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare must pursue 
regularly with organizatio n/autonomous bodies for submission of UCs without further 
procrastination for early settlement of pending UCs within a set timeframe. 
(Para 3.7) 
 The Committee finds the action taken notes, furnished by the Ministry in response 
to Committee’s recommendations contained in Para 3.9, 3.10 & 3.11 to be quite vague and 
evasive. No convincing reason has been adduced for posts of medical and non -medical 
officers lying vacant under CGHS. The Committee is surprised to find that on the one hand 
there is serious probl em of unemployment amongst Doctors in the Country and on the 
other hand there are posts of doctors lying vacant in CGHS. Had the Ministry worked out 
well in time with UPSC for filling up of vacant posts there would have not been so many 
vacancies. It is eq ually painful that the Ministry is unable to direct its own division i.e. 
Central Health Services for timely posting of specialist doctors in CGHS. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendations as contained in Para 3.11 of 118 th Report 
suggesting the Ministry to identify the appropriate reasons for the shortage of workforce at 
the CGHS wellness centres and take the corrective measure to overcome the same within 
given timeframe so that these centres do not suffer from the shortage of doctors and proper 
healthcare facilities are made available to the beneficiaries. 
(Para 3.12) 
 
SAFDARJUNG HOSPITAL AND VARDHMAN MAHAVIR MEDICAL COLLEGE 
(VMMC), NEW DELHI 
 
 The Committee expresses its anguish over the pendency of approval of the 
additional infrastructur e project of VMMC at the revised estimated cost of Rs. 187.60 
Crore since July, 2019. The Committee, therefore, urges the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare to urgently sanction the project so that adequate fund is allocated to VMMC and 
the project is executed at the earliest without incurring additional cost. 
(Para 3.16) 
 
 The Committee finds that an amount to the tune of Rs. 217.00 crore was projected 
in BE 2020 -21 against which a paltry amount of Rs. 30.00 crore were allocated as a result 
of which the  procurement of equipments and machinery was restricted to the allocated 
fund. The Committee is in agreement with the plea of the Department of Health and 

84 
 
Family Welfare about the requirement of additional funds to operationalise vital 
Departments such as Radiotherapy, Radiology, Paediatrics, Medicine, Urology, General 
Surgery, Neuro Surgery by procuring the necessary equipments and machinery to cater 
the patient’s need and care. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its 
recommendations urging the M inistry of Finance to be more considerate in allocating the 
institute, the fund as per the actual requirement, to enable the institute to provide prompt 
healthcare services.  
(Para 3.17) 
 
 The Committee finds that the manpower (Administrative and Para -
Medic/Technician) has been deployed in New Emergency Block (NEB) & Super Speciality 
Block (SSB) on outsourced basis w.e.f. the month of January - February, 2020. The 
Committee is of the view that the Department of Health and Family Welfare should revisit 
the de cision to have the Administrative and Para -Medic/Technician on the outsourced 
basis as the system adopted may not generate continuity in the management of the hospital 
due to lack of sense of belongingness, commitment and integrity on the part of the 
employees. The Committee, recommends the Department to fill up the sanctioned post of 
technical manpower on regular basis. 
(Para 3.20) 
 
 The Committee has been given to understand that funds required for construction 
of Dwarka Residential Complex for Nurses was not allocated in BE 2020-21 and, therefore, 
the Ministry was forced to place its supplementary demand. The Committee would like to 
know whether the supplementary demand of the Ministry for the Construction of Dwarka 
Residential Complex was accorded and if  so, whether the construction project has been 
started at the ground level. The Committee further feels that once the additional 
infrastructure project for VMMC at the cost of Rs. 187.60 Crores get the approval of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,  the Ministry of Finance would allocate adequate 
fund to the said project is provisioned for construction of additional lecture theatre, hostels 
for students and recreational facilities. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Department of Healt h and Family Welfare to assess and approve the project and 
pursue with the Ministry of Finance to allocate the additional fund without further delay so 
that the proposed project is completed without time and cost overruns. 
(Para 3.23) 
 
DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA HOSPITAL 
 
 The Committee expresses its concern that the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare is making lame excuses for non -optimal utilization of allocated fund to RML 
Hospital and RML PGIMER and making untenable plea by calling them genuine reasons.  
The Committee had observed that in the year 2019 -20 the actual expenditure for Dr. Ram 
Manohar Lohia Hospital has been Rs 547.74 crore up to 17.01.2020 against allocation of 
Rs. 744.88 crore at RE stage. The actual expenditure for Dr. RML PGIMER, New Delh i 
has been Rs. 58.11 crore out of allocation of Rs. 138.57 crore at RE stage. The Committee 
has been given to understand that fund allocated under the capital head has been 
insufficient. However, actual capital expenditure in the year 2019 -2020 (up to 17.0 1.2020) 
has been far below the allocated amount. Responding to that, the Ministry took the plea of 

85 
 
various genuine reasons that included non filling up of various vacant posts, non -receipt of 
bills from vendor for payment of Bonus, late receipt of RE 2019 -20, non-placing of orders 
on GeM (Government-e-Market) due to lockdown etc. in the aftermath of COVID -19. The 
Committee, understands that the said  lockdown was imposed on 25 th March, 2020 and 
hence could not be the possible reason for underutilization of a llocated funds. The 
Committee feels that the Department could have taken adequate steps for better co -
ordination and exercise financial prudence for ensuring optimal utilization of fund 
earmarked especially under capital head which is the hallmark for developmental projects.  
 
(Para 3.27) 
VACANCY POSITION AT RML HOSPITAL 
 
 The Committee is well aware that recruitment of manpower is an ongoing process 
but it feels that had the Department adhered to the said principles of HRM and 
implemented the same on regul ar interval there would have not been backlog of filling up 
of 1119 posts, that are lying vacant in RML Hospital. The Committee cautions that all is 
not well with Dr. RML Hospital. It would not be unreasonable and inappropriate to 
conclude that plea on the  part of the Department that continuous efforts were made to fill 
up the vacant posts does not hold ground. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
the Department to expedite the process of filling up of the 1119 vacant posts without 
further delay. T he Committee desires that the proposed revival of 486 posts, which were 
kept in abolished category, may be taken up on priority basis. The Committee also 
recommends that the cadre review proposal of administrative staff of Dr. RML Hospital 
must be finalized to streamline the administrative cadre both at higher as well as mid level. 
The Committee believes that the constitution of recruitment cell in Dr. RML Hospital 
would smoothen the recruitment process and prove effective in filling up of regular vacant 
posts under the supervision of Recruitment Committee and Question Paper Committee.  
(Para 3.32) 
 
LADY HARDING MEDICAL COLLEGE (LHMC) & SMT. S.K. HOSPITAL 
 
 The Committee is deeply anguished to observe that the Department of Health and 
Family welfare is furnishing ambiguous and cryptic Action Taken Notes entailing its efforts 
made in the year 2017, 2018 and 2019 in response to the Committee’s recommendations 
contained in Para 6.3 and 6.4 of 118 th Report, that was presented to the Parliament on 
3rdMarch, 2020. The Committee formulated its recommendations based on the facts 
submitted by the Department about the vacancy position in LHMC & SSKH as on 31 st 
December, 2019. On that date, 883 posts were lying vacant against the sanctioned strength 
of 2117 posts thus th e vacancy constituting 40% of total sanctioned strength. Out of total 
strength of 2117 posts, the 71 posts (03 in Group – C and 68 in Group – D) have now been 
abolished, therefore, the total sanctioned strength reduced to 2046. Against that total 
sanctioned strength of 2046 posts, the in-position strength remains 1278 and vacancy of 768 
posts still persists. The Committee understands that Outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19 
could have slowed down the recruitment process, however, the Committee feels that the 
Department could have furnished the convincing response to its recommendations. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation that the Department of Health and 
Family Welfare need to set up a definite timeframe to complete the recruitment process so 

86 
 
as to fill up all the vacancies in LHMC & SSKH without much delay. That would not only 
relieve the overburdened existing staff due to heavy patient load but also help the suffering 
patient to avail better healthcare facilities.  
(Para 3.39) 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI SWASTHYA YOJANA (PMSSY) :- POOR FACULTY STATUS 
 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the pace of recruitment process in First Six 
AIIMS under PMSSY as the status of vacancy marginally improved over a period of more 
than eight months. During the course of examination of Demand for Grants (2020 -21), the 
Committee was apprised that against the sanctioned strength of 1830 posts, 1035 posts were 
filled up, thus indicating 56.56% of the total sanctioned strength. As on 30 th Septemeber, 
2020 against the sanctione d strength of 1830 posts, 1092 posts have been filled up thus 
reflecting in position strength of 59.67% of the total sanctioned strength. The Committee 
understands that a huge gap of 44.44 % in the workforce would certainly hinder the 
delivery of quality h ealthcare as expected from a Centre of Par Excellence hospitals of 
national importance. The Committee takes into account the detailed steps/efforts made by 
the Government to improve the faculty and non -faculty posts in First Six AIIMS, however, 
the outcome is not very encouraging. The Committee is of the considered opinion that the 
gap in the workforce in the First Six AIIMS would deter the achievement of long term 
vision of transforming these institutions as centre of excellence in the field of tertiary 
healthcare, medical education and research leaving apart the envisioned objective of 
assuming leadership roles and projecting as role models in their respective regions. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation to fill up the vacant posts, soo ner the 
better, though, without compromising the matching standards in the faculty selection so as 
to be extolled as hospitals of national importance.  
(Para 3.45) 
PMSSY: VACANCY POSITION OF NON-FACULTY STAFF 
 
 The Committee expresses its deep anguish over  the snail’s pace at which the 
recruitment process of non faculty posts in First Six AIIMS under PMSSY is going on. The 
Committee observes that against the sanctioned strength of 22,656 non -faculty posts, only 
11,606 posts remain filled up thus indicating 51.22% of filled up posts against the total 
sanctioned strength. In view of the paramount role that non -faculty staff play in successful 
management of various Departments of the institute of national importance, the Committee 
recommends the Department of H ealth and Family Welfare to regularly monitor the 
recruitment process of non -faculty staff in the first six AIIMS of the country that are 
supposed to play pivotal role for laying the path for other regional AIIMS. The Committee 
believes that the envisaged uniformity in the Recruitment Rules for non -faculty posts 
across all AIIMS followed by Common Recruitment Process would accelerate the 
streamlining of Common Recruitment Process for all six AIIMS and thus filling up of all 
the non-faculty posts without further procrastination. 
(Para 3.48) 
FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (FSSAI) 
 
 The Committee takes strong exception to the way the Action Taken Notes of the 
Ministry has been furnished. The Ministry is duty bound to respond not only to the 

87 
 
recommendations but also the observations of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should furnish it response as to how FSSAI managed to 
achieve the set target pertaining to laying down science based standards for articles of fo od 
and to regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure 
availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption, with pruned allocation. 
 
(Para 3.51) 
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS) 
 
 The Committee would  like to be apprised of budgetary allocation made at 
RE/supplementary stage in 2020 -21 and the progress made towards completion of 
infrastructural projects/initiates taken by AIIMS, New Delhi mandated with the duties and 
responsibilites of providing afford able and quality testing healthcare services. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of proposed demand of AIIMS, New Delhi for 
creating facilities in the wake of outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19 and treatment of 
COVID patients by the Institute.  
(Para 3.54) 
 
 The Committee takes into account the detailed reasons furnished by the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare for non -filling up of a total no. of 338 vacant posts as on 
01.02.2020 in AIIMS, New Delhi. However, the Committee desires that all vacan t posts 
must be filled up in time bound manner by overcoming. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation contained in Para 12.6 of 118th report.  
(Para 3.60) 
 
 The Committee understands that the outbreak of Pandemic COVID -19 and 
subsequent lockdown from 25 th March, 2020 caused delay in the completion of various on -
going construction activities in AIIMS Delhi and, of course, as per the Notification of the 
Ministry of Finance dated 13th May, 2020 regarding Force Majeure Clause (FMC), the said 
delay has to be conceded to the contractor executing the work. Nevertheless, the Committee 
is of the considered view that the other reasons for delay viz administrative decision, 
modification in construction design, undertaking of additional work, procurement  of 
equipment and manpower planning and placement, arbitration with main vendor in 
surgical block construction activities have to be tackled with administrative acumen to 
yield results in time-bound manner. The Committee finds that the re -scheduled target date 
of completion of construction activities in surgical blocks, mother and child block, new paid 
ward and geriatrics block/NCA is March, 2021. The Committee, therefore, urges upon the 
Department to keep a strict vigil on progress of construction activiti es to ensure that the 
remaining construction activities are completed as per the revised target date. The 
Committee would like to be apprised whether Nuclear Medicine Facility has been 
operationalized in NCI Jhajjar.  
(Para 3.68) 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
POST GRADUATE INSTITUTE O F MEDICAL SCIENCES AND RESEARCH 
(PGIMER), CHANDIGARH 
  
 The Committee reiterates its observation that since PGIMER, Chandigarh has 
absorption/utilisation capacity of allocated fund and is engaged with mission mode to 
provide Tertiary Healthcare in the regi on. Ministry of Finance must have allocated the 
institute the budget as per projected demand so that the institute could have completed the 
desired projects as per originally conceived plan. The Committees, however, would like to 
be informed regarding the allocation of additional fund to the tune of Rs. 485.00 crore 
under the supplementary demand at RE Stage 2020 -21 as put forth by PGIMER, 
Chandigarh.  
(Para 3.72) 
 
JAWAHARLAL INSTITUTE OF POST -GRADUATION MEDICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH, PUDDUCHERRY 
 
 The Com mittee finds the action taken notes on its recommendation on 
underutilization of allocated funds by PGIMER Puducherry as vague, circuitous and 
evasive. It is pleaded that savings under GIA salary was due to vacancy of post arising out 
of superannuation, VRS, Resignation and Death cases. While in respect of GIA creation of 
capital assets, the saving was due to slow pace of expenditure and availability of unspent 
balance of previous year. The Committee observes that the institute lacks human resource 
planning and financial and planning, therefore, suffering from under -utilization of 
allocated funds. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare to keep regular vigil on the pattern of utilization of fund by the 
Institute.  
(Para 3.75) 
 
NORTH EASTERN INDIRA GANDHI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF HEALTH & 
MEDICAL SCIENCES (NEIGRIHMS), SHILLONG 
 
 The Committee is anguished to find that the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare has not apprised the Committee with updated status of  sanctioned vis -a-vis in 
position strength post wise and cadre wise in NEIGRIHMS Shillong. However, the 
Committee finds that all measures taken to fill up the vacant posts were made prior to 
presentation of 118 th Report, that too, to the utter surprise to the Committee, that yielded 
reduction of vacant post from 547 to 540 only. The Committee, therefore, finds the 
progress in the recruitment process to be very tardy. The Committee, hence, reiterates its 
recommendation to expedite the recruitment process in NEIGRIHMS Shillong for filling 
up the vacant posts within a set timeframe and also ensuring wide circulation of 
advertisements for filling up vacant posts so that recruitment process doesn’t suffer from 
dearth of candidates. The Committee also desires the Department to furnish updated status 
of sanctioned vis -a-vis in position strength of manpower post wise and cadre wise so as to 
reflect actual vacant posts in the institute at specific point of time.  
(Para 3.83) 
 

89 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH AND NE UROSCIENCES 
(NIMHANS), BENGALURU 
 
 The Committee appreciates NIMHANS, Bengaluru for taking timely action for 
filling up of 207 posts of Nurses created recently, however, the Committee remains to be 
apprised of the status of filling up of 179 vacant posts ( 61 posts in Group – A, 48 posts in 
Group – B and 70 posts in Group – C). The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
Department to apprise the Committee with latest status on filling up stated vacant posts in 
Group – A, B and C.  
(Para 3.86) 
 
LOKPRIYA GOPINAT H BORDOLOI REGIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL 
HEALTH (LGBRIHM), TEZPUR 
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the in -position manpower strength vis -
a-vis sanctioned strength (Post wise and Cadre wise) in LGBRIMS. The Committee would 
also like the Department to respond to Committee’s recommendation pertaining to specific 
status of filling up of 25 vacant posts and identification of a suitable institutes in each state 
for collaborating with LGBRIMS for ensuring better mental healthcare in the Country.  
(Para 3.89) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MINUTES 

91 
 
X 
 
TENTH MEETING 
 
 The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 2 nd March, 2021 in Committee Room-A, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
 
1.  Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav   - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri A.K. Antony     
3. Dr. L Hanumanthaiah 
4. Shri Suresh Prabhu 
5. Dr. Subramanian Swamy 
6. Shrimati Sampatiya Uikey 
 
LOK SABHA 
7. Dr. Chandra Sen Jadon 
8. Dr. Sanghamitra Maurya 
9. Shrimati Pratima Mondal 
10. Dr. Pritam Gopinath Munde 
11. Dr. Mahendrabhai Kalubhai Munjpara 
12. Shri Anurag Sharma 
13. Dr. Mahesh Sharma 
14. Dr. Sujay Radhakrishna Vikhepatil 
15. Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri J. Sundriyal   Joint Secretary 
2. Shri V.S.P. Singh   Director 
3. Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar  Additional Director 
4. Smt. Harshita Shankar                Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that 
the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt the (i) draft 125 th Report on Action Taken 
by Government on the Recommendations/ Observations containe d in its 118 th Report on 
Demands for Grants 2020-21 (Demand No. 42) of the Department of Health and Family Welfare  

92 
 
(ii) ***  (iii) ***.  He further added that the draft reports had already been circulated to the 
Members and they must have gone through the m. He invited views/suggestions/modifications, 
if any, from the Members in the draft reports. 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the draft 125 th Report and *** of the 
Committee.  After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted both the Reports. 
 
4. ***.   
 
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Reports may be presented to the Rajya Sabha 
and simultaneously laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Monday, the 8 th March, 2021. The 
Committee authorized its Chairman Prof. Ram Gopal Yada v, MP, Rajya Sabha  and in his 
absence Dr. L. Hanumanthaiah , MP, Rajya Sabha  and in the absence of both members, Smt. 
Sampatiya Uikey, MP, Rajya Sabha to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. The Committee also 
authorized Dr. Mahesh Sharma MP, Lok Sabha and i n his absence Dr. Krishna Pal Singh Yadav 
MP, Lok Sabha to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
 
6. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to carry out any typographical/factual 
errors in the 125th Report, *** Reports, if necessary. 
 
7. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matter 
 
 

93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 

Central Release & Expenditure for Health & Wellness Centres under NHM for the F.Y. 2018-19 
Rs. in crore 
NRHM NUHM NHM 
S.N States Release Release Pelease Ex 
2.00 I Andaman&Nicobr lslends 2.0 
eeskpee 
1115 12 0 43.5 11.15 Andhra Prasesh 31 
7 86 .79 0.29 3.75 
Arunachai Pracesh
O16 124 
3.33 B8.50 27.25 
Chandigarh 30 04 0.71 
Chattisgr 2.6 4 234 
&Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.68 0.70 .05 
043 9 smar & Du 
10 eiti 
0.7 .10 1 o 
35.62 44.64 23.b2 ujarat 
14 06 2707 18 45 7.10 13 Haryana 
3 
16.0 3. 40 14imanai Pradesh 93 
3102 70 B4 32 66 22 70 15 Jamnu&kashmir 
26.02 19.67 
27.57 10,27 24 47 98 2781 .71 17 Karnataks 
6.14 4. 18.43 18 erala 
0.18 0.18 1 Lakshadweep 87.74 16.95 
20 Madhya Pradesh 91 24 
Mahat asttra 
443 0.68 12 5.44 
72 Maripur 0.66 
23 egtvaiaya 03 
5.01 
24 0.28 24 zarem 2.29 
23.66 
0.14 
3,4 25 Nagaland 48.34 443 22.59 3.61 .07 
neoeoswenwowbr 
26 Orissa 1446 onwnonrIAG 
12X 0.14 2.46 
27 Puducheny 19.69 8.06 A39 
5.3028 Puna 0.44 83.7 23.44 
300 6.70 77,00 
29 Rajasthar 216 0.321 0.55 
30SAkim 1.61 
Q.0U 56.41 $9 S1 
37.18 51 19.23 
31 Tami Nadu 0.30 10.18 0.75 6.87 045 3.33 
32 Tripur 176.10 42 18.74 
33 Uttar Pradesh 157.36 
34 19.62 .921 18.28 2.91 34 Uttarakhand 
11.91 59.43 2311 
5West. Benga 47 56 231 
18.25| 46.34 331 3.31 36 elanganä 2.7 8 
37 Ladak 

Total 993.11 486.95 198.41 5.58 1,191.52 492.52 
1 fFhe above releases relate to Centrat Govt Grants & de not ncude State share cont ution 2 xpenditxe inctudes expenditure agat1st Cerntral Release, State fele ase & uinspent baiances at the begaing of tie year xpendtuate for the FY. 2018-19 (upto 31 03 201 as per FMR) are psrovisiornu 

Central Release & Expenditure for Health & Wellness Centres under NHM for the F.Y. 2019-20 
Rs. In crore 
NRHM NUHM NHM 
S.N. States 
Releas Exp Release Exp Release Exp 
Andanan &Nicabr stands O83 C.66 DC2 0.85 Q.66 
Andhra Pradesh 43.14 178.45 116.90 52.44 295.35 
Arurachal Pradesh 8.59 9.15 .59 9.15 
Assam &8.04 13.82 9.56 6.63 97.60 20.45 
6ihar 80.30 109 38 7.34 0.19 87.64 109.57 
6 Chandigarh U.46 0.38 O.84 
7Chattisgarb 1.5 65.66 61.0 43 423 
8Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.92 004 0.96 0.26 0.26 
9aman &Diu 0.68 O.02 G.68 O.02 
0.00 10 Deihi 0.00 
0.26 0.Uo 1.26 0,26 1.2U 
49.98 65.89 11,39 
7.36 
12 1Guarat 38.59 62.55 
13 Haryana 15.67 5.30 0.08 24.03 5.38 
11.91 0.12 27.21 11.91 14 Himachal Pradesh 27.09 
36.71 19.26 17 0.52 38.88 19.78 15 lammu & Kashmir 
27.18 75.81 27.22 16 harkhand 70.82 4.99 0.05 
17 Karnataka 41.55 69.38 13.15 18.17 S4 .70 87.55 
18 Kerala 15.21 118.43 6,44 0.21 21.65 118.64 
19 Lakshadweep 0.26 0.26 
87.82 
97.64 
81.84 
76.53 81.84 1.29 20 Madhya Pradesh 
166.51 
Maharashtra 67.68 166.22 29.96 0.29 
3.04 9.22 
12.46 
5.19 
8.31 2.90 0.91 0.14 
Meghalaya 10.58 4.64 1.88 32 4.96 
1.94 I.60 3.25 1.50 
24 Mizor am 
3.78 1.56 5.34 4.59 4.59 
25 Nagaland 
26 Orissa 
27 Puduchery
87.95 2. 7.54 2.21 95.49 65.16 
1.11 0.14 0.27 0.22 1.38 0.08 
3.39 0.81 20.39 22.89 
28 Punjab 17.00 22.08 
5.13 0.89 68.64 S.S6 
63.51 
1.61 
4.57 
29 Rajasthen 
0.35 O.01 1.62 O.32 30 SIKkim 
31 Tamil Nadu 73.73 76.90 15.39 0.03 89.12 76.93 
32 Tripura 10,26 4.08 3.31| 0.00 13.57 4,08 
3.64 
0.00 
O32 
33 Uttar Pradesh 298.00 38.98 330.85 301.64 291.87 
34 Uttarakhand 28,68 30.88 1.63 30.31 30.88 
27.13 14.51| 61.55 35 West Bengal 
36 Telengan
47.04 27.45 
24.14 0.53 9.56 13.93 33.70 14.45 
37 Ladak 

Total 1,348.49 1,476.04 223.68 170.43 1,572.17 1,646.46 
Note 
1 he above releases relate to Central Govt Grants & do not inchude State share contribution 2 Fxpenditure indiudes expenditure against Centrai Release, State release & unspent baiances at the begirning of the year Expenditure for the FY, 2019-20 (upto 31 03 2020 as per FMR) are provisionat 

Allecation, Centrai Release & txpenditure for Health & Wettess Centres uridee tuM for the F.Y. 202021 
AN 
e ie ate AEt Aati Esg 
58.78 
Armahal rates 1451 
3 
233 
43 
34.23 
3 ahadeesp 1 31 
wwwww.ww.
www.37onti 
237 
mwwwwww 
33 e 
22uab 
F3.33 
243101 
4.72 
i4We: Benga 443 
189,00 

List of Pendency of Utilization Cenificates since inception till 2018_19 under malor pools of :', n !,:
NRHM-RcH Fl€xible Pool
ASHA aenefit P..kage
5lrenttheoing under
NRHM / Misrion Fl€ribleRCH Flexibl.Pootincludins
Rl, PPI and NIDDCP
39 12 l8) st _92839.72B har
9 62.054 2t a61 t.9321_064chattisgarh
12_5312.53 040 0Himachal Pradesh
15 212.474 5854 25.893 114.884 5.85Jammu & Kashmir
11 61.0124.23 18.3918.39 0Jharkhand
128.5628.61 1611.34 40 84 28.61Madhya Pradesh
24.18024.1800Orissa
3.6s 9 149.4261.96 180.16 61 3.65 1Rajasthan
1Aa2_1451 40.19 01.O42_45Uttar Pradesh
9 15.374.51t5.40 04l.Jttarakhand
2537.1225
5.40
128.68 100330.8416 L944.9212a.68sub-total
61_12t42a.52 4619.60 0Andh.a Pradesh
0.6202 0.6200Goa
79.97 11 61.8321.89 4379.91 04Gujarat
10_44960 103.511 48.13 14 9.60Haryana
10 55.0318 252 18.5304 18.25Karnataka
11.30 22.60011.30 04Kerala
97.154 21 09 113 42_97027 _49Maharashtra
t0 25.171.35 4 91829.18 04Punjab
17.7299.2611.23 0TamilNadu
8 27 _724
1.23
13 86004 13.86Telangana
95.3013 )4 1S44_42125-24 04West Bengal
108 s36.2440 155.3227 177.4748.131S5.32sub-total
082t.a6 213 16_622 0.82Arunachal Pradesh I
3 48.33048.33300
97 .980.20 t212 4.168 92_420.201Manipur
9_457.7 A5.9730.003 1.14Meghalaya
3.542 0.652_24t0.65 02Mizoram
6 5ta1163_46 2)0 (0.00)) 1.16Nagaland
o.7263 0.36003 0.36sikkim
10 10.61)_136.35 340 0.001.133Tripura 262.537.06 591616 74.97169.447.06 1116sub-total
I00-76I0Andaman & Nicobar lslands
o.l6
030)02 0.1000chandigarh )015.5110Dadra & Nagar Have i
5.60
1_3100.4123 6.900oaman & Diu 0090009100Lakshdweep 5-122.862002.862Delhi 1 12.1001521180302 0.15 31.88223.0113.45 41017.4143.014sub{otal 3367.77249294.O785600.72a12,178.9185 294.O1nd Totat
2
3
4
6
9
10
A. H!GH FOCUS
&-o-1HE&IIAIESi
11
12
13
74
15
16
l7
18
19
20
21
;, NORTH EASTERN STATES
22
23
24
2\
26
27
28
p-SrrlALlSrArESl-UI!
30
31
32
33
35
36
lz8
Ar"qonr. -r(qtrt^,",)i.):
AB-Health &Wellness
sl. No.
1a8.19651.43
0
3
4
0
7
8
19.604
)
8
4
86.12
90
0.00
0
0.09
I
4
40 1
34
29

Libt oi nendency of Utilization Certificates since inception till 2018-19
SI. No. Name of State OHSS AB - II&WC 'Iotal
Amount No. of
Ucs(r,
crores
Amount
(In
crores)
No. of Ucs
I Andaman & Nicobar Islands 0.00 0.00 0.00
2 Andhra Pradcsh t5.72 7 9.04 6 24.76
J Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 0.55 6 0.55
4 Assam r4.61 16 8.48 7 23.09
5 Bihar 24.39 3.33 27.72
6 Chandigarh 1.35 1 0.41 3 t.76
7 Chattisgarh 24.53 ,)0 3.48 8 28.0r
8 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.07 I 0.02 2 0.09
9 Daman & Diu 0.09 2 0.00 0.09
10 Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00
il Goa 0.23 1 0 11 2 0.31
t2 Gujarat
Haryana
0.00 3.6t 5 3.61
l3 4.80 5 3.25 4 8.05
t4 Ilimachal Pradesh 0.82 15 0.1 5 6 0.97
l5 Jammu & Kashrr.rir 3.27 1.53 E 4.80
l6 Jharkhand
Kamataka
23.25 6 r.7el 3 25.01
t7 48.60 17 9.71 7 58.31
l8 Kerala 0.00 4.87 6 4.87
l9 Madhya Pradesh 70.24 10 9.12 7 79.36
20 Maharashtra 188.5 I 23 29.31 9 217.82
2t Manipur 1.55 10 0.00 l.5s
22 Meghalaya 5.1 5 13 1.8s 8 7.00
L) Mizorarn 1.50 I 0.32 I 1.82
24 Nagaland 4.05 9 1.55 2
4
5.60
25 Orissa 12.84 11 2.29 15.13
26 Puducherry 0.00 2.19 ) 2.19
27 Punjab
Rajasthan
Sikkim
0.00 3.29 4 3.29
0.00 6.55 4 6.55
t.01 8 0.55 3 1.62
Tamil Nadu 26.00 6 t6.43 t2 42.43
3l Telangana 42.52 t1 0.00 42.52
32 Tripura 0.94 1 3.3 1 6 4.25
33 Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
19.07 8 0.00 19.07
)+ 5.25 8 0.00 5.25
35 West Bcngal 0.00 1 1.86 6 11.86
Tolal s40.42 234 138.95 I I4 679.37
- tbg
under NUHM Flexible Pool
10
30

Annexure-l I I
( R-b'f,6.ro,av;
8534
6otxr0
s00d)
4flno
3{XrO
2ol)00
10000
0
49002
27,596
27
s,s57
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
I
^lqs-
Figure - I : Six AIIMS - OPD and IPD census Figure - 2 : Six AIIMS - Surgeries - Maior and Minor
sl AIIMS Medical College Nursing College Hospital Trauma Centre Residential compl€x (Phase-ll
1 Bhopal completed completed completed Completed completed
2 Bhubaneswar Completed Completed Completed Completed Completed
3 lodhpur completed Completed Completed Completed Completed
4 Patna Completed Completed Completed Completed Completed
Raipu r Completed completed completed Completed Completed
Completed completed Completed Completed Completed
HOSPITAT STATUS OF SIX FUNCTIONAT AIIMS
sl AIIMS
No. of
Beds
fuoctional
{Out o,
950)
No. of MOT as per
DPR
Avg.
o?D I
Day as
on Dec.
2019
No. of
Minor
OTs
No. of
other
OTs
Total
IPD (Jan
to Dec.
lel
Maior
Surgeries
(Jan to
Dec, 19)
No. of
Specialty
tundional
(out of 18)
No. of Super
Specialty
functlonal
(out of 171
1 Bhopal 840 24 24 2248 S 7 20276 4624 18 14
2 Bhubaneswar 922 25 15 3009 6 7 25341 8086 18 L7
lodhpur 960 30 19 3106 3 L2 54525 949-7 18 74
4 820 28 28 2589 11 2 22591 1268 18 12
Raipur 800 28 1806 8 21,387 6704 18 12
6 Rishikesh 960 25 25 2470 11 8 52,742 72823 18 1_7
s302 160 139 15228 M 36 r96862 49002 108 86
IMPORTANT MEDICAT FACITITIES Of SIX fUNCTIONATAIIMS
sl AIIMS Emergency Trauma Care OPD , IPD, ICU Diatnostics/Pathology Dedicated CovlD Blocks
7 Bhopa I Available Available Functional Available Functional
2 Bhubaneswar Available Available Functional Available Fu nctiona I
3 Jodhpur Available Available Functional Available Functional
4 Patna Available Availa ble Fu nctiona I Available Functional
5 Raipur Available Ava ila ble Fu nctiona I Ava ila ble Functional
6 Rishikesh Availa ble Availa b le Available Functional Ava ila ble Functional
Details of CoVID Cases in lsolation Ward {As on 31n st 2020)
Category
Status
16685614 863349 43693543 22728891623
932977888 5847679 266074641088 889
7440930 762 /L1 41203453 190960615043 Negative cases discharged
FUNCTIONAL STATUS OF SIX AIIMS UNDER PHASE - I
STATUS OF CONSTRUCTION OF SIX FUNCTIONAT AIIMS
5.
6. Rishikesh
,Sarirtior
,l,,lll:+d al
3
Patna
5
Blood Bank
Available
Available
Available
Available
Availa ble
2014 2015 2016 20L7 2018 2019
8'){,t
11,100
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
Total
PatnaBhopal
-f-tota I admission (cu mulative)
2. ltotal covtD +ve

Annexure-ll/
Status of consttuction in Six AIIMS s on 37't Au ust 2020(, ( (d' 06,to' 1u';
Progress of
construction
t%l
V.C.C recorded on 10.05.2019. Final bill under
process.Packate- | : Medical College
1AA o/" VCC recorded, Work almost completed. EoT in
intimated to rectify the defects.process. AgenPackage- ll : Hospital Complex
Work substantially completed. (Agreement of C&S
determined at 98.25%, Balance work of L.?so/.
under progress
98.75%Package- lll : Electrical Services
substantially completed
Package- lv : Estate Services
completed100 %Package- | : Medical College
V.C.c recorded. EOT approved (except IBMS works)
completedLAO %Package- lll : Electrical Services
100 % completedPacka8e- lv : Estate Services
Final completion certificate issued on 18.09.2018Package- | : Medical College
Work completed & V.c.C recorded on 20.12.2079
BMS & HVAC works to be made functional.
Log %
Final completion certificate issued to agency on
104 o/,Package- lV i Estate Services
Completed on 24.09.20L7LAO %Package- l: Medical College
All civil works completed98.97%
completedt80 %Package- lll : Electrical Services
Slow progress due to covid 1995.80%Packate- lV : Estate Services
VCC recorded on 28.02.2020100 %Package- I : Medical Collete
EOT & Final bill not submitted by HSCC. Almost
leted. V.C.c recordedcomp100 %Package- ll : Hospital ComPlex
Work completed. VCC recorded on 28.02.2020LOQ %Package- lll : Electrical Services
Vcc recorded on 28.02.2020Package- lv : Estate Services
Work of OMAXE rescind at 91% and balance work
warded to CPWD. Work almost completeda
completed on 30.11.2019100%
99.8s%
Package- | : Medical College /
Trauma centre & Nursing College
and Auditorium Balance Electrical
work False ceiling & Fire door
99.60 %Package- ll : Hospital ComPlex
completed on 31.10.2019t00 0/.
Package- lll : Electrical Services
Work almost comPletedPackage- lV : Estate Services
Rishikesh
HSCC
-lq8-
Present Status of WorkAIIMS Package
LOo %
99.95'/"
Work to IVRCL already rescind on 10.08.16 and
balance work awarded to CPWD. Work
Bhopal
toa %Package- ll : Hospital Complex
Bhubaneswar
roa %
100 %Package- ll : Hospital Complex
Final completion certificate issued on 25.09.2018Package- lll : Electrical services
25.09.2018. Final bill & EOT under scrutiny.
Jodhpur
Package- ll : Hospital ComPlex
Patna
100 %
Raipur
99.O0%
Work almost comPleted
HVAC/BMS works in Progress
99.50Yo

Annexure\llll
?6'uo' 136)1. Strategy ll (B) ( Re6.
A patient who is clinically symptomatic and suspected to have an AIDS indicator
condition/disease is referred to the SA-ICTC for confirmation of the diagnosis. ln this case,
the same blood sample is tested twice using kits with either different antigens or principles.
The patient is declared H|V-negative if the first test is non-reactive and as H|V-positive
when both tests show reactive results. When there is discordance behveen the first two
tests (first reactive and the second non-reactive), a third test is done. When the third test is
also negative it is reported as negative. When the third test is reactive, it is reported as
indeterminate and the individual is retested after 14-28 days.
Figure 1 : Algorithm ll (B)(For diagnosis of clinically symptomatic individual)
A1 + A2+
*192-
A1 +A2-
A3
A1+A2-
A3+
A1
41 -
Report negative
A1+
A2
Report positive
with post-test
counselling
A1+42-
A3-
Report negativelndeterminate
Assay 1
lnt€rpretation
Asaay 2
.lnterpr'etation
./ Assay ? .
lnterpretation

2. Screening
Screening for HIV at an F-ICTC, private-public partnership integrated counselling and
testing centre (PPP-ICTC), mobile F-ICTC, community-based screening etc. - using a
single rapid test kit.
. lf the test is found non-reactive, the individual is considered H|V-negative and
needs to be followed, as per the guidelines.
. lf the test result is found reactive, the individual should be promptly linked to the
SA-ICTC for confirmation of the diagnosis and further necessary action.
3. Confirmation
Conftmation of HIV diagnosis in asymptomatic individuals is done at an SA-ICTC using
three rapid tests of three different antigens or principles. The individual is considered
H|V-negative if the first test is non-reactive and as H|V-positive when all three tests show
reactive results, as shown in Figure
Figure 2: Algorithm lll (For diagnosis of clinically asymptomatic patient)
A1-
Report NegativeA1 +
A2+
+
A1+ A2 -
A3-
Al+A2-
A3+
A1+A2
+A3-
AL+A2
+A3+
Low risk
consider
Negative
considerlndetermina
te
positive with
post test
lndeterminat
-ts3-
.Assay 1
lnterpretatlon
Assay 2
Assay 3
Interpretation
A1
A2
A3A3

Annexure-ly
Following steps/measures have been taken to ensure that the recruitment process becomes speedier and result-oriented
so as to address the shortage offaculty and Non-faculty posts :
A. MotIFW have issued appropriate guidelines in the matter of recruitment to various posts created for the
institutes from time to time and are applicable to all the AIIMS as below:
(i) The provision has been made in the AIIMS Act for the constitution of Standing Selection Committees.
(("!, f6.uo. 16.1
CULTY
(a) Downgrading of the posts of Additional/Associate Professor to the level of Assistant professor for a
fixed period: The individual Institutes may consider downgrading of posts with the approval ofGoverning
Body, in the eventuality of difficulties in filling up of the posts, as per decision given by CIB against Iteri
No.4/5 (Para-5) of the minutes of the meeting held on 27tt luly,Z0l9.
(b) Running advertisement with one-year validity for recruitment of faculty: In the one year running
advertisement, short advertisement or website notices may be issued several times as may be required,
depending upon actual progress of recruitment, with clear mention of cut off dates for submission of
application and eligibiliry, each rime.
(iv) Temporary diversion of posts from one Department to another Department for Contractual appointment to meet
urgent requirement of faculty ofa Department.
STf,PS TAKEN TO DRESS SHORTAGE OF FACULTY NON.T'A
(ii) A provision of combined Selection Committees and Regional Selection Committees has also been made in the
AIIMS Regulations notified vide Notification No. l4-3l69(98)/Coordination Cell PartJI dated 18.10.2019
(Regulation l2). The Combined Selection Committees and Regional Selection Committees may undertake
common selection for various faculty positions for more than one or for all AIIMS.
(iii) In case offaculty recruitment, provisions have been made for:
(v) Relaxation of essential teaching/research experience up to a period of one year to SC/ST candidates under the
guidelines issued by the DoPT.
(vi) For regular recruitment, half yearly calendar of recruitment is planned, so that sufficient time is available for
the Institute as well the candidates.
(vii) Recruitment for non-Faculty posts would be carried out by holding combined recruitment for all AIIMS by
clubbing the vacancies for each category of the posts for all AIIMS. The task may be suitably distributed
amongst the AIIMS.
B. Other measures taken earlier by the MoHFW, for increasing the faculty strength in AIIMS are as below :
i. MoHFW has approved for engagement of retired faculty members up to age of70 years on contractual basis
in new AIIMS.
ii. MoHFW has also introduced the scheme of Visiting Faculty/ Guest Faculty to new AIIMS. The new AIIMS
have been empowered to invite visiting faculty from premier institute in India and abroad up to a period of2
years.
iii. The OCI card holders have been allowed to seek appointment on Faculty positions.
iv. New AIIMS have been allowed to take Faculty from Government Medical Colleges/ lnstitutions on
deputation basis.
v. HR sub-committees of the Governing Body(GB)/ Institute Body(IB) have been constituted in all new AIIMS
for speedier approval processes without having to wait for the holding of GB/lB meetings.
C. Policy measures taken to augmetrt resource pool at National level:
In addition, the Ministry has also taken several policy initiatives for bringing about improved availability oftrained HR
at National Level, which are given in U. *l'4b -

D. Non-Faculty posts:
As per the decision taken in the CIB, Recruitment Rules (RR) of AIIMS New Delhi for non-faculty posts are being
followed in new AIIMS to bring uniformity in the RRs across all AIIMS. This would enable combined recruitment for
several AIIMS in one go. Following remedial measures are envisaged to streamline the common recruihrent process
for all non-faculty posts of all AIIMS:
For non-faculty recruitment, the RRs have been made uniform across all AIIMS. This would enable single recruitment
exercise for several AIIMS in one go. The task of carrying out recruitment exercise for different posts has been divided
by distributing posts between 7 AIIMS. Under this arrangement one AIIMS undeftakes recruitment for some posts for
all the new AIIMS. For recruitment ofother non-faculty posts, individual AIIMSwill carry out the recruitment.
E' Following measures are being taken to improve the retention rate of passing out students so that reputation of the
institute as Center of Excellence is reflected:
. Appointment of MBBS graduates of new AIIMS to the post of Junior Resident (lJon Academic) in respective
AIIMS.
o Preference to all MBBS graduates who fulfill Junior Residency (Non Academic) eligibility criteria for JR (Non-
Academics) posts.
o Merit for MBBS graduates can be made on the basis of their aggregate marks in the lst, 2nd and final
professional.
o All Junior Resident (Non Academic) posts which remain vacant after allotment to MBBS graduates of the
Institute can be offered to other candidates, subject to their eligibility.
. Appointment ofCraduates of B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing courses as Nursing Officer
o Preference to Postgraduate (MD/MS) students ofthe institute for appointment as SR in respective institutes.
E. Following systems and arrangements have been put in place for leveraging the experience of premier medical
institute like AIIMS, JIPMER, PGI, etc. by upcoming AIIMS :
i. New AIIMS are broadly following the guidelines of AIIMS New Delhi. Faculty members of AIIMS New
Delhi, PGIMER Chandigarh, JIPMER Puducherry are regularly sharing their expertise with the faculty
members of new AIIMS.
ii Many ex-Faculty of AIIMS, Delhi PGI, Chandigarh and JIPMER, Puducherry have been appointed as
Members and Presidents of the Institute Body in several new AIIMS with the hope that they will carry the
knowledge of good systems and culture with them and plant these in the new AIIMS.
iii. Expert Faculty of these premier institutes is also associated as experts in the selection committees for
recruitment of Faculff positions.
iv. The 6 new AIIMS are mentoring the other AIIMS now being established and all the support related to
Academics and Recruitment is extended.
v. In the matter of establishing the new AIIMS at Madurai, the officials of JICA which is to support the
establishment of new AllMS, was given exposure of AIIMS Delhi, AIIMS Raipur and AIIMS Jodhpur to
observe the infrastructure, laboratory, academics related works at these institutes to leam lessons from these
institutes.
vi. The Ministry has notified the 'Visiting Faculty Scheme' which can be leveraged by the Institutes to import and
imbibe klowledge, systems and culture.
vii. Other INIs such as PGIME\ JIPMER have been nominated as mentor Institutes for new AIIMS to handhold,
support and guide these new AIIMS in the process of getting established. Mentor Institute will support in early
operationalization of OPD and MBBS batch for the Mentee Institutes. The Mentor Institute will also support
the mentee institutes, in its routine administrative functioning till such time a regular administrative structure is
put in place in the Mentee Institutes.
viii. With a view to redress the issue of Faculty shortage at six new AIIMS, it had been considered that students
with higher qualifications in the field of medicine and passing out of premier institutes could be considered for
appointment on faculty posts at six new AIIMS
- lLl+ -

uRE-ul;lre as under:
kemarks
fltrun,
an d n a le dV SI ll
\'!o. t?t)
( In Position
As on 05.03.2020
Total VacancyPosts
senctioned Regular
outsourced
I
Fa(.ulty
67
141 8q
4i
9L7
.i )o ').tt
94 47-6*= 4l
42
553 36+
259 79
4L-1?.+ =29
*1+ [four] candidates wh0 tvcre s
reguiar basi; in the int(lrview hel
scught for e':tensi(,n ol loii,irrg ti
e'Lected for ,'aculty Posts on
d on 3.d &- 4th october have
nle and thcy vrill be ioining
I
I
I
I
I
f.ery shortl!.*2 (t,"vol candidatc:; gcie*':ci fo r' the posts o! Assistant
Plofessot on adhoc b:tsrs irr lhe !y'alk-jn intei'r'iew hekl on
24.02.2020 wtllbe loining vir')i shortly.
Ad.\,ertisement of the reLnalnitrg 41 vacant faculLy irlsis Is li:
the prucess of being adlcrtise
1
,L
lr DPC for promotional posts are being processed. The posts for
Dircct lecruitment are l)eing advertised'
Gi c,uE 'J
'T'he vacancy position iliLludes promo
he filled up by Dileci rei iulr-inent.
getting fi)led up and advcrttsemertts
up on dit ect rerruitlnt llt J) e beitrg iss
tional posts and P;sts to
Promotiotral Posts are
for the posts to be filled
ued.
i
I
I
I
i
l-
i Crcut C 0 Cut cf l/9 vacancieS, fl l)r):it9 is
arjycrtised and tht-' \ rri,1'el.l Te
103 posts adjusteri thr,.rugh cutsoilrcing
*i2 [twelve) candidatr's were s
5eoicr: Resident DDctr)l: if the
Vf;:rk-in interview
for pror,tctioll, 4ii posts airea'iv
sr//5r-rPenilig ls ta be aorllpleted'
L
I
1
I
I
L71
8.1
53 108 LI
Cptl
t
I
I
I
I
ctcol)
105 57 1 eiected for aPPointment as
walk-1n interr.iew held ou
14.2.;'.';J. Liitei' c: ai;purlltr,lqllis has been issued to the
selected candidates ariri they ere expected to ioin their posts
very shortly.
The rernaiiring 29 vat;trrl' pnsts will be filled up in tlte lrext
t a2 20 (tr,v entyl candidat.
Junior Resident I)oct
14.1.2020. All the sele'.
The rernaining 2 vaca
,rs r.v(.re sclected for appoin
!r rrr 1:he walk-in inte:"\''iew
:ed canCidates have joined tlie
irt post"s 0i IRD will he filled
trne
held on
ir posts.
up in the
i.r nio r
il.esident
Doctor
tsiLulerye! -
1263
-l(t -
77L
64
Total 1139 tz6
Z
next Wal
2:i posts are to be rc'-arlvet cised
CategorY
I
I
I
I
l
:
I
i
Contl act/Adhoc
Croup A
U1
558-18+=540LBZ3

DETAIIS OT NEW AIIMS [16I UNDER PMSSY
Annexure
e+, i.t$,' lu!,
Fund
released
of com on
Cabinet
approved date
etion
Cxpected
date for
Iocation of
AIIMS under
PMSSY
Date of cabinet
Approval Cr
Approved
Outlay
Medical college / Hospital
under construction
/ Progress - 80%
April,2020 Dec,20200s.02.2009 RcE
was approved by
EFC on 22.06.111
823.00 456.86
*,iiiiiiit
AllMS, Raebareli
Progresr of work:
r' Phase l - OPD Block &
Residential Complex: 88%
r' Phase ll - Hospital and
Academic Campus: 53%
/ IPD for covlD-1g
treatment with covlD Lab
functional
Sep,2020 June 21*1618.00 773.26Mangalagiri in
Andhra Pradesh
07.10.2015
2
. Progress of work:
r' Phase I - oPD Block &
Residential Complex: 97%
/ Phase ll - Hospital and
Academic Campus: 72%
r' tPo for covlD-1g
treatment with COVID Lab
functional
Dec 20*729.20 Sep,202007.10.2015 7577.00Nagpur
Maharashtra
tn
3
. Progress of work:
r' Phase I - oPD Block &
Residential Complex: 79.5%
/ Phase ll - Hospital and
Academic c-ampus: 61.5%
803.01 Sep,20201754.0007 .10.2015
4
Mode in pro ress 68.93%\
Construction in EPC621.99 April,2O2o1011.0020.07.20L6tnGorakhpur
Uttar Pradesh
Pli,i!e_!y
Mode in 65.sso/o)
Construction in EPCJune,2021.1une,2020925.00 517.5227.07.2076tnBathinda
Punjab6
. Construction in EPC
Mode in progress (27.25%)
June,2022211 .3524.0s.2017inGuwahati
Assam7
. Construction in EPC
lMode in progress. (40.5%)
Dec,2021*Dec, 2021558.34147 L.O403.01.2018inBilaspur
Himachal
Pradesh
8
. Site finalized at
Madurai.
. Pre-investment work in
progress.
. Preparatory survey by
JICA lMission commenced in Feb,
20?0.
o The Preparatory surveY
has been completed bY JICA and
the main survev is in Progress.
. As indicated bY JICA,
the loan approval Process would
be expected to be completed at
their end by lanuary, 2021
o The detailed Project
schedule and the revised
timelines will be Prepared
thereafter in consultation with
ltcA.
Sep,2022
(Depends on
JICA
collaboration
)
Sep,20227.891264.00Madurai in Tamil
Nadu
9
Approved recentlYoct,202415.08.20tn10
. Pre-investment
activities in Progress.
. Construction agencY for
the main work appointed bY
CPWD.
Jan,2023Jan,202398.33166110.01.2019Samba in Jammu
thilaer!
77
* tq9 -
5l Phase Physical Progress
1
Kalyaniin
West Bengal
June 21*
5
June,2021
1123.00 April,2021
17.72.2078
Darbhanga
Bihar
1264.00

Phase
Location of
AIIMS under
PMSSY
Date of Cabinet
Approval
Approved
outlay
(Rs cr)
Fund
releaied
(Rs cr)
Cabinet
approved date
of completion
Erpected
date for
completion
Physical Progress
Work started (0.07%)
72 Awantipura
Kashmir
ln 10.01.2019 7a2a 42.51 Jan,1025 1an,2025 . Pre-investment
activities in progress.
. Master plan finalized.
. Tender floated for
appointment of main
construction agency by CPWD.
o Bids for EPC contract
opened and are under evaluation
by CPWD.
13
rhari:vl
Deoghar
lharkhand
tn 16.0s.2018 1103 192,90 Feb,2022 Feb,2022* . Pre-investment
activities in progress.
. Master Plan finalized.
. Construction ASency
appointed.
. Work in progress- 12%.
14 Rajkot in Gujarat 10.01.2019 1195 7.20 Oct,2022 Oct,2022* . Site finalized at
Khanderi
. Pre-investment
activities in progress.
. Executing Agency for
the main work appointed.
. Design Consultant
appointed.
. Construction agency for
the main work appointed.
15 Eibinagar
Telangana
tn 17.72.2074 1028 18.11 5ep,2022 Sep,2022 o Site
BibinaBar.
finalized at
. Pre-investment work in
progress.
. Executing Agency for
the main work appointed.
. Design Consultant
appointed
76 Phase-Vll Manethi
Haryana
in 2a.02.2079 1299 0 Feb,2023 Feb,2023
(Depends
upon
getting
encumbran
ce free land
from State
Govt.)
. Encumbrance free land
yet to be handed over bY State
Govt.
*oelayed due to COVID-19 Pandemic
*lfo -
sl