PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 32
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELF ARE
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS 
(REGISTRATION AND REGULATION) BILL, 2007
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 24 OCTOBER, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 24 OCTOBER, 2008)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 24 OCTOBER, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 24 OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-hfw@sansad.nic.in

167
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS
(REGISTRATION AND REGULATION) BILL, 2007
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 24 TH OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 24 TH OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................ (ii i)-(iv)
3. R EPORT .................................................................................................................................. 1—21
4. O BSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .......................................................... 22—33
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................ 35—45
6. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 47 —166
Annexure–I (Copy of the Bill) .................................................................................. 49—79
Annexure–II (Study Notes) ....................................................................................... 81—131
Annexure–III (List of Witnesses) ............................................................................. 133—166

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2007-08)
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. P. J. Kurien
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shrimati Maya Singh
5. Shri Digvijay Singh
6. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
@7. Shri Lalhming Liana
8. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
9. Shrimati Kanimozhi
*10. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
12. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
13. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
$14. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
15. Shri Rajendra Kumar
16. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
17. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
18. Shri Rasheed Masood
19. Dr. Chinta Mohan
20. Shri Nihal Chand
21. Shri D.B. Patil
22. Shrimati K. Rani
23. Shri Pannian Ravindran
24. Dr. R. Senthil
25. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
26. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
27. Shri Uday Singh
28. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
29. Shri Vinod Khanna
30. Shri R.L. Jalappa
31. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
(@ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 18th July, 2008).
(* Nominated w.e.f. 18th February, 2008).
($ Ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd March, 2008).

(ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Prof. P. J. Kurien
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
5. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
6. Shrimati Maya Singh
7. Shri Digvijay Singh
8. Shrimati Kanimozhi
9. Dr. M.A.M. Ramaswamy
*10. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
11. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
12. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
13. Shrimati Bhavana P. Gawli
14. Shri Vinod Khanna
15. Shri Rajendra Kumar
16. Shri R.L. Jalappa
17. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
18. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
19. Shri Rasheed Masood
20. Dr. Chinta Mohan
21. Shri Nihal Chand
22. Shri D.B. Patil
23. Shrimati K. Rani
24. Shri Pannian Ravindran
25. Shrimati Yashodhara Raje Scindia
26. Dr. R. Senthil
27. Dr. Mohd. Shahabuddin
28. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
29. Shri Uday Singh
30. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
#31. Shri B. Binod Kumar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Vandana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R.B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
* Nominated w.e.f. 12th August, 2008.
# Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2008.

(iii)
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II Section 2, dated the 30th August, 2007.
** Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No. 44503, dated the 1st October, 2007.
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and
Family Welfare, after having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
present this Thirty-second Report of the Committee on ‘‘The Clinical Establishments (Registration
and Regulation) Bill, 2007.*
2. In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Council of States, relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred** ‘The Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Bill, 2007’ (Annexure-I), as introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 30th August, 2007 and
pending therein, to the Committee on the 28th September, 2007 for examination and report.
3. A Press Release inviting suggestions/comments from general public as well as stakeholders/
experts was issued in October, 2007. In response thereto, a number of memoranda were received.
4. The Committee considered the Bill in its meetings held on the 31st October, 2007,
25th January, 2008, 27th May, 2008 and 9th June, 2008. The Committee also visited Karnataka
(Bangalore), Kerala (Thiruvanthapuram), Tamil Nadu (Chennai) and Andhra Pradesh (Hyderabad)
from 7th to 14th January, 2008; Madhya Pradesh (Indore), Gujarat (Ahmedabad), Maharashtra
(Mumbai) and Goa (Panajim) from 12th to 19th February, 2008 to have first-hand interaction with
various stakeholders. Study Notes on the same were also prepare (Annexure-II).
5. The Committee held wide ranging discussions with all the stakeholders on various
provisions of the Bill. Divergent views were expressed by the representatives of the associations
of various private healthcare establishments, Government Medical Institutes, organizations, experts,
individuals, consumer fora, NGOs and State Governments. The Committee also interacted with the
officers of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Medical Council of India, Indian Medical Association, Dental Council of India, Bureau of Indian
Standards and the Quality Council of India. The Committee sought clarifications from the above
entities on the various viewpoints put forth before it on the Bill.
6. The Committee, thereafter, discussed and adopted its draft Report on the Bill in its meeting
held on the 23rd October, 2008.
7. The Committee has relied upon the following documents/information in finalizing its Report:
(i) Background Note on the Bill, Feedbacks received from various State Governments and
some existing State Acts covering clinics/healthcare establishments received from the
Department of Health and Family Welfare;
(ii) Presentation and clarification by the Secretary and other officers of the Department of
Health and Family Welfare;
(iii) Memoranda received on the Bill from various stakeholders;
(iv) Replies of the Ministry to the Questionnaires on the Bill; and
(v) Oral evidences on the Bill.

8. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the contributions
made by those who submitted their valuable suggestions on the subject matter of the Bill by way
of memoranda or deposition before the Committee.
9. For facility of reference and convenience, observations and recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.
AMAR SINGH
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 23, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary
Kartika 1, 1930 (Saka) Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare.
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 (hereinafter referred to
as the Bill), was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 30th August, 2007 and referred to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare on the 28th
September, 2007 for examination and report thereon.
2. The objective of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 is to
bring out a Central Legislation for ensuring uniform standards of the facilities and services provided
by the Clinical Establishments throughout the country. The proposed legislation will apply to all
clinical establishments, which includes both private and public establishments, under all recognised
systems of medicine including single doctor establishments. The Bill, inter-alia, provides for:—
(i) The constitution of a National Council to determine the standards for clinical
establishments to classify the clinical establishments, to develop the minimum standards
and periodic review thereof, to compile, maintain and update a national register of
clinical establishments; and
(ii) Assigning the State Governments with the function of:—
(a) registration of clinical establishments and cancellation of registration;
(b) compilation and updation of the State Register of clinical establishments for the
purpose of updation of the National Register of clinical establishments.
The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bill and reproduced below explains
the reasons warranting the need for the Bill:—
“At present, the supervision and regulation of the quality of services provided by the
health care delivery system to the people by both public and private sectors has largely
remained a contentious and therefore, unresolved issue. The current structure of the health
care delivery system does not provide enough incentives for improvement in efficiency. The
private sector health care delivery system in India has remained largely unregulated and
uncontrolled. Problems range from inadequate and inappropriate treatment, excessive use of
higher technologies, and wasting of scarce resources to serious problems of medical
malpractice and negligence.
2. Despite many State Legislatures having enacted laws for regulating health care
providers, the general perception is that current regulatory process for health care providers
in India is inadequate or not responsive to ensure health care services of acceptable quality
and prevent negligence. Concerns about how to improve health care quality have continued
to be frequently raised by the general public and a wide variety of stakeholders, including
Government, professional associations, private providers, agencies financing health care,
National Human Rights Commission and also by judiciary.
3. Accordingly, a need has long been felt for a central legislation for ensuring uniform
standards of facilities and services by the clinical establishments throughout the State where
the Legislative Assemblies have passed resolutions under article 252 of the Constitution and
the Union Territories and the States which may adopt the legislation by such resolutions.
4. The salient features of the proposed legislation, inter alia, are as follows:—
(i) the proposed legislation provides for the constitution of a National Council
consisting of representatives of the Dental Council of India, the Nursing Council of India,

2
the Pharmacy Council of India, the Indian Medicines representing the Ayurveda, Siddha,
Unani and Homoeopathy systems, the Indian Medical Associations, the Bureau of Indian
Standards, the Zonal Councils set up under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the North
Eastern Council, etc.;
(ii) the function of the National Council shall be to determine the standards for clinical
establishments, classify the clinical establishment into different categories, develop the
minimum standards and their periodic review, compile, maintain and update a national
register of clinical establishments, perform any other function determined by the Central
Government, from time to time;
(iii) the concerned State Government shall designate the Director of Health Services or any
other officer subordinate to him as the Registrar of clinical establishments. The State
Registrar of clinical establishments shall compile and update the State register of clinical
establishments and further send the same in digital format for updating the national register;
(iv) the concerned State Government shall, by notification, designate the District Health
Officer or the Chief Medical Officer as district registering authority for registration of
clinical establishments;
(v) no person shall carry on a clinical establishment unless it has been registered in
accordance with the provisions of the proposed Bill. The legislation would not apply to the
clinical establishments of the Armed Forces;
(vi) it is proposed that clinical est ablishments already in existence may be allowed for
provisional registration to carry out their business. There shall be no prior enquiry for
provisional registration. But the Authority shall have power to make enquiry in accordance
with such rules as may be prescribed;
(vii) the clinical establishment having provisional registration shall fulfil the standards which
may be notified for the purpose. The provisional certificate shall not be granted or renewed
beyond a period of three years from the date of notification of standards;
(viii) any clinical establishment may apply for permanent registration in such form and shall
pay such fee as may be prescribed by the State Government. A detailed procedure for
permanent registration is being provided in the proposed legislation;
(ix) the authority shall have power to cancel the registration of the clinical establishment
which fails to comply with the conditions prescribed by the Central Government. The
authority shall have power to inspect a registered clinical establishment. Any person aggrieved
by an order of the registering authority shall prefer an appeal to the State Government;
(x) there shall be register of clinical establishments at the district level, State level and the
National level;
(xi) if any person contravenes any provisions of the proposed legislation or any rules made
thereunder, he shall be punished with fine. The maximum penalty being provided is rupees
five lakh.
5. Legislation in respect of “Public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries” are
relatable to Entry 6 of List II-State List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and
Parliament has no power to make a law in the State (apart from the provisions of articles
249, 250 and 252 of the Constitution) under article 252 of the Constitution where the
legislatures of two or more States pass resolutions in pursuance of article 252 of the
Constitution empowering Parliament to pass the necessary legislation on the subject, a Bill

3
may be introduced in Parliament. The legislatures of the States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Sikkim have passed such resolutions. The Bill is intended
to give effect to the resolutions passed by the legislatures of the aforesaid States and to
make also provisions in respect to Union territories.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.’’
3. Appearing before the Committee on the 31st October, 2007, representatives of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare elaborated on the background and circumstances that led to the
introduction of this Bill. Speaking of the global experience, the Joint Secretary of the Department
while giving a presentation before the Committee stated that one of the first challenges countries
have faced in planning for regulation and accreditation systems is to gain consensus on the
definitions of various forms of regulation and evaluation. The elements of any regulatory process
include establishment of rules, its application to specific cases, detection or monitoring violations
and imposition of penalties on violators. Elaborating on the issue, he stated that at present there
are no uniform regulatory requirements for hospitals, nursing homes, diagnostic centres etc. in
India. Though laws in some States do exist but they are more on paper. Some are archaic and in
some cases implementation dates have not been notified. In some cases either rules or the minimum
standards have not been notified. Some States have drafted the regulatory legislations but have not
been able to get them tabled and considered by their respective Legislative Assemblies. He stated
that there has been resistance from service providers. The existing laws do not have provisions to
regulate functioning of laboratories and diagnostic centres of private healthcare service providers,
despite the emergence of a considerable number of such facilities in India. Concerns have been
raised frequently by general public and a wide variety of stakeholders including Government
professional associations, private providers, agencies financing healthcare, National Human Rights
Commission (NHRC) and even High Courts in various States. In a case of medical negligence in
1996, the NHRC directed the Government of India, Medical, Council of India and the Delhi
Government to examine–Registration of private hospitals after ensuring availability of minimum
facilities; Monitoring to ensure availability of facilities; Framing of regulations; Violation to be made
a cognizable offence and shifting of non-conforming hospitals that are health hazards from non-
conforming areas.
4. The Committee was apprised that a need for a central legislation has often been raised in
Parliament. The Joint Secretary further stated that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has
faced several bottlenecks in bringing a central legislation since 1997. The subject of standards for
clinical establishments is related to the State List under Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and
only States are competent to frame laws in this respect. However, Parliament can make laws on
a State subject if Rajya Sabha passes resolution in national interest (Article 249) or if legislatures
of at least three States pass a resolution authorizing Parliament to legislate on a State subject.
Further, Central law would apply only to those States that have passed the resolution and the Union
Territories. In order to have a central legislation, the Ministry has been lobbying with the States
to authorise Parliament to legislate on the subject.
5. The Sixth Conference of Central Council for Health and Family Welfare (CCH) held on
8-10 April, 1999 resolved—
“The Central Government may frame norms and standards for ensuring proper healthcare
for different categories of institutions in consultation with the State Government for private
hospitals/nursing homes/clinical establishments to be followed by all States. These norms
shall prescribe the minimum standards of staff and infrastructure for all such institutions”.
6. The legislatures of the States of Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim
have passed resolutions under Article 252 that the clinical establishments in these States should be

4
regulated by Parliament by law. A Central Legislation on the subject can now be enacted for these
States and all Union Territories and can later be adopted by other States. A model Bill was
circulated to all States in 1999. Based on the comments received, a revised draft Bill was again
prepared in 2000. This Bill provided for Regulation and accreditation; Regulatory Councils/Boards
at National and State level; inspection, raids, punishments etc.
7. The Ministry drafted a Bill, namely, the Clinical Establishments Registration and Regulation
Bill, 2006 inter-alia covering several modifications like—making the proposed legislation user
friendly and IT enabled; provision for covering the clinical establishments in Government sector;
existing units to be registered on as-is-where-is basis and time to be allowed for complying with
the norms; no harsh penal provisions and registration on the basis of self certification without
inspection. This Bill was circulated to the Ministries of Home Affairs, Panchayati Raj, Defence,
Labour and Employment; Railway Board and to all the State Governments. Based on the feedbacks,
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in consultation with the Legislative Department, Ministry
of Law and Justice finalized the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 and
the same was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2007.
8. In view of the objectives behind the proposed legislation and its far reaching implications
on the healthcare delivery system in India, the Committee decided to acquaint itself with all shades
of opinion on the Bill. Through a Press Release, the Committee gave wide publicity to the Bill and
invited views/suggestions from all the stakeholders and general public with respect to the various
provisions of the Bill. The Committee received an overwhelming response in the form of a large
number of memoranda containing views from various organizations/experts/individuals/associations/
consumer fora/NGOs etc. After going through the memoranda, it was decided to have first-hand
information in the form of personal interaction with some of the stakeholders and some of
the State-Governments. Accordingly, the Committee undertook a study visit to Bangaluru,
Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and Hyderabad from 7th to 14th January, 2008 in the first phase and
to Indore, Ahemdabad, Mumbai and Goa from 12th to 19th February, 2008 in the second phase
and interacted with various entities like representatives of Private/Government Healthcare
Establishments, experts, NGOs, Consumer Fora and representatives of the State Governments etc.
9. The Committee would like to acknowledge the valuable and enriching contributions of
various stakeholders which has proved to be of enormous help in formulating its views on the
various provisions of the Bill.
10. The clauses where the amendments have been suggested by the Committee are given
in the succeeding paragraphs:—
11. Clause 1
11.1 This clause provides for the short title of the proposed legislation, its extent and
commencement. The proposed legislation shall first come into force at once in the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Sikkim which have already passed resolutions
under Article 252 of the Constitution and the Union Territories and also in any other State which may
adopt the Act by a resolution as aforesaid. Different dates maybe appointed for different categories
of clinical establishments and for different recognized systems of medicine to come into force.
11.2 Serious objections concerning the word “clinical” occuring in the title of the Bill, were put
forth before the Committee. It was pointed out that the word ‘clinic’ is normally taken for a
miniature hospital; normally run by a single Doctor. However, the definition of ‘clinical
establishment’ as given in the Bill clearly indicates that all categories of clinical establishments from
a single doctor establishment to multi-speciality hospital are proposed to be brought under it. Not
only this, the Bill also includes all types of laboratories. The term ‘Clinical Establishment’ used in
the title does not reflect the inclusion of all such establishments. Suggestions made were either

5
replacing the word ‘Clinical’ with ‘Clinical Laboratories and Healthcare’ or adding the words
‘Diagnostic Laboratories’ in the title.
11.3 The Committee, after going through the objections and suggestions, observes that
contrary to some of similar existing State laws, this is a comprehensive Central Legislation
aimed at not only covering all categories of healthcare establishments but also practising all
the recognized systems of medicine. Therefore, its title should be such which covers all the
desired entities or reflects them through some common term. The word clinical, though it
means related to medical, appears to be restrictive to allopathic clinics only.
11.4 In the opinion of the Committee, the word ‘healthcare’ takes care of most of the
objections. Healthcare means related to health and it may be through any system of
medicine and includes laboratory and diagnostic services also. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the title of the Bill may suitably be changed as “The Healthcare
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2007” and the consequential changes be
made in the Bill as well.
11.5 As per clause 1 (2), the proposed Act, at the first instance, is going to come into force
in four States and the Union territories; other States can adopt it under Article 252(1) of the
Constitution. On a specific query, the Committee was given to understand that at present ten
States/UTs have enacted their own laws regulating healthcare establishments. They, however, did
not cover all the systems of medicine and the Public Health Institutions. Not only this, the
effectiveness of their implementation continued to be under question. The Committee notes that the
present Bill, in contrast, is a compact and comprehensive one. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should make all out efforts in persuading all the States
to adopt the Central Legislation so that uniformity in health standards is maintained across
the length and breadth of the country. For this, financial as well as other infrastructural
support, as and when required, may also be provided to the States to motivate them in
adopting the same.
12. Clause 2
12.1 This clause seeks to define certain terms used in the Bill. Clause 2(c) gives a detailed
definition of the term’ ‘clinical establishment’ enumerating all the categories of clinical
establishments including laboratories, also giving a clear idea about the agencies owning/controlling/
managing such establishments. The Committee notes that this term is the most crucial one as it
gives a clear picture of the entity which is mandated to be registered and regulated through this
enactment. The Committee is, however, surprised to find the maximum number of objections/
reservations being raised and suggestions being given in this regard by different stakeholders. The
Committee takes note of the following main objections raised/suggestions made—
– Dispensaries, clinics etc. without beds, i.e., those dealing only with out-patients,
appear to be excluded.
– Clinical Establishment should also include Medical Research Establishment.
– The definition excludes status of establishments which offer only advice like
Counseling Centres, dietician/nutritionist clinics.
– Status of Establishments offering preventive care is not known.
– “biochemical, microbiological and clinical laboratory technological investigation”
services should also be included, as these are the most widely performed services.
– “Single doctor establishment” may be removed from the purview of the Act.

6
– It was also argued that more vigil was required for registering single doctor
establishments.
– Status of establishments established by partnership, run by societies (other than co-
operative), Charity/Missionary, mobile units is also not clear.
– The healthcare establishments owned, controlled or managed by the Armed Forces may
be included.
– There are objections for and against inclusion of Public Health Institutions and
autonomous institutions within the purview of the Act.
12.2 A very glaring deficiency pointed out to the Committee by a number of witnesses was the
lack of clarity in the definition of ‘clinical establishment’ as given in clause 2(c) (i). It appeared
to be restricted to only those clinical establishments having the facilities of beds. The Committee
agrees with these apprehensions. The Committee also takes note of the ‘Explanation’ given in
clause 11 relating to ‘Registration for clinical establishments’. Clause 11 lays down that no person
shall carry on a clinical establishment unless it has been duly registered. The expression ‘carry -
on’ has been specifically clarified as admitting patients in a clinical establishment for providing
treatment, diagnosis or nursing care. Thus, definition of ‘clinical establishment’ when interpreted
along with the explanation given in clause 11 seems to be applicable only with those clinical
establishments attending to outdoor patients. The Ministry in reply to a specific question in this
regard has claimed that the Act would also apply to establishments providing OPD services. The
Committee is, however, of the opinion that lack of categorical provision, further made
ambiguous by another contradictory provision on this count does not substantiate the
Ministry’s claim. The Committee would like to point out that the very purpose of the
legislation would be diluted and defeated if the OPD services are not brought within its
ambit. One must also not forget that with the significant advancements made in medical
sciences and health care, even many surgical interventions do not require patient’s stay in
the hospital/nursing home. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the definition of
‘clinical establishment’ under Clause 2(c)(i) and also the explanation given in clause 11 need
to be suitably modified to remove the ambiguity.
12.3 The Committee observes that many Healthcare Establishments are nowadays also
involved in independent Research and Development activities specially in the context of
research in new drugs/drug combinations followed by their clinical trial on patients. The Bill
in its present form does not categorically provide for inclusion of these establishments
under the definition of clinical establishments. The Committee strongly feels that their
exclusion would be detrimental to the rights of the patients who form part of the
experiments/research studies undertaken by such establishments. In view of this, the
Committee recommends inclusion of R&D establishments in the definition of Health care
Establishments.
12.4 V ery strong reservations were expressed by various associations/organizations representing
medical fraternity on the inclusion of ‘single doctor establishment’ as indicated in clause 2(c)(5)
under the definition of the term ‘clinical establishment’. The main arguments put forth were
unnecessary harassment, paperwork and escalation in cost of treatment. It was also pointed out
that doctors were already registered as mandated by the IMC Act, 1956. Clinics being run by
doctors from their residences cannot be, strictly speaking, considered as clinical establishments.
The Committee is, however, not convinced by this line of thinking. Ground realities existing
in our country in the context of healthcare facilities for general public need to be taken
into account. A very high percentage of our population is dependent on the services provided
by ‘single doctor establishments’ whether run from residences or other places. The

7
implication of not bringing such establishments under the proposed legislation will prove to
be detrimental to the interest of common man, the most vulnerable segment of our society.
The registration is a one time activity and it will be renewable after a sufficient gap. The
Committee would also like to point out that such a move would also prove beneficial in the
context of collecting vital and complete data regarding health scenario in the country and
the statistics could be utilized in National level Planning. The Committee, therefore, is of
the firm opinion that single doctor establishments need to be covered under this Act.
12.5 The Committee also finds no valid reasons for keeping establishments set up by
partnerships, run by societies (other than co-operative), Charity/Missionary, mobile units
out of the ambit of the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
establishments may also be included in the definition of ‘Healthcare Establishments’.
12.6 The Committee finds that under Clause 2(d) “National Council” is a very general
nomenclature for the proposed Council and does not reflect the entire spectrum of the
issues covered under the Bill. In consonance with its suggestions regarding the title in
Clause 1, the Committee recommends that the National Council referred to in clause 2(d)
and subsequently in other provisions, be changed as “National Council for Healthcare
Establishments”.
12.7 As regards appropriateness or otherwise of the applicability of the Bill to Defence
Forces Establishments, the Committee respects the security concerns arising out of their
inclusion under the ambit of the Bill. The Committee fully understands that parting with
the details related to Army Health Establishments could be detrimental to nation’s security.
The Committee is also aware that military medical establishments and the medicare
provided by them is subjected to internal checks and inspections by administrative and
technical experts on a regular basis. The Committee, however, strongly feels that a feasible
mechanism can be easily worked out whereunder all the armed forces medical
establishments can be registered by maintaining secrecy/confidentiality aspect also. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Act should invariably be applied to all the
Army Health Establishments except those based in the forward/combat areas.
12.8 Another viewpoint strongly advocated by some of the stakeholders was exclusion of the
Public Health Institutions (PHIs) from the purview of the Act. Reasons advanced were that they
had been established under certain norms and were following Indian Public Health Standards.
Further, they are also participating in National Health Programmes and provide services as per
constitutional obligations without any discrimination to all sections of society free of cost or on
very nominal rates. Similarly, representatives of an autonomous institute—Sree Chitra Tirunal
Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology (SCTIMT), stated that the Bill proposed to include
the establishments owned, controlled or managed by Government, Public trust or a corporation
registered under the Central Act. It, however, did not specifically mention about the Institutes of
national importance established by an Act of Parliament. Citing the example of exclusion of
establishments under Armed Forces, they demanded that Institutes of the stature like Sree Chitra
Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology (SCTIMT), All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS) New Delhi and PGI Chandigarh may be exempted from the purview of this Act.
12.9 The Committee does not find any substance in exclusion of Government/Public
Health Institutions/Autonomous Institutions from the purview of the Act as put forth before
it through some representations. The Committee has taken note of the fact that several of
the existing laws in various States do not cover such institutions, thereby inviting criticisms
for giving undue advantage to them. The Committee fully understands that the Public
Health Institutions have some social obligations. They are also doing commendable job by
handling tremendous patient load under very demanding ground realities. It, however, does

8
not favour their exclusion simply because such a move will lead to depriving the majority
of the people having access to such establishments only, of the benefits of this Act to which
they are rightfully entitled. The Committee would also like to emphasise that element of
accountability which is not visible so far needs to be made applicable to all categories of
medical establishments—whether Government or private. One must not forget that ultimate
goal is ‘Health for all’.
12.10 There is a drafting slippage in Clause 2(f) which may be modified as:—
“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central
Government or, as the case may be, by the State Government;
12.11 Clause 2(g) gives the definition of ‘recognised system of medicine’. It includes all the
Indian systems of Medicine as well as Homoeopathy and Naturopathy along with Allopathy.
Inclusion of Yoga and Naturopathy not having a statutory council to regulate them was objected
to by IMA and some of its State branches. They, accordingly, sought their exclusion from
clause 2(g). The Committee, however, is not convinced by this line of thinking. The
Committee would like to point out that the mere fact of there being no statutory regulatory
authority at present does not mean that a well-established system having a wide
acceptability increasing day-by-day among the masses cannot be considered a recognized
system of medicine. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the definition of
recognised system of medicine, may remain unchanged.
13. Clause 3
13.1 This clause provides for establishment of a Council to be called the National Council
consisting of the Director General of Health Services who shall be the Chairperson and one
representative duly elected by (i) Dental Council of India, (ii) Medical Council of India, (iii) Nursing
Council of India, (iv) Pharmacy Council of India, (v) Ayurveda, (vi) Siddha, (vii) Unani,
(viii) Homoeopathy, (ix) Indian Medical Association, (x) Bureau of the Indian Standards, (xi) Line
of paramedical and two representatives each of the (i) Zonal Councils and (ii) North Eastern
Council. A number of suggestions were received from various stakeholders about the composition
of the National Council.
13.2 Clause 3(2) (a) —  The Bill provides for the Director General of Health Services to be the
ex-officio Chairperson of the proposed National Council. The Committee notes that the National
Council has to perform very crucial functions which include determination of standards of
health care to be provided by the healthcare establishments and classification thereof. Not
only this, the Council is also entrusted with the routine work of compilation, maintenance
and updation of the national register of such establishments and collection of statistics
likely to be used for future planning and corrective measures. The Committee strongly feels
that the DGHS in his capacity as the Chairperson of the National Council would not be in
a position to carry out its mandate. Reason being that as the Director General of Health
Services, he has to take care of entire country in all the conceivable health related matters.
The Committee is, accordingly, not in favour of a part-time Chairperson for the proposed
National Council because the work relating to the National Council would be very
demanding, especially at the initial stage of determining and developing minimum
standards. The Committee is of the firm view that DGHS, who is already overburdened with
official work, would not be able to do justice with this dual responsibility. Further, the
Committee would also like to point out that such an arrangement is also likely to impinge
upon the autonomy of the Council. Taking the above factors into consideration, the
Committee recommends appointment of a full time Chairperson, who has the required

9
experience specially of hospital administration and has the rank and qualification equivalent
to that of DGHS.
13.3 Att ention of the Committee was drawn to the fact that the National Council cannot be
considered as a representative body in the real spirit. As this body is primarily meant for taking
care of health care of general masses, there was a need for inclusion of their representatives also
in the Council. The Committee also feels that presence of representatives of reputed NGOs
and consumer protection associations working in the health sector is very much required in
such a body. The Committee, therefore, recommends that composition of the National
Council may be modified accordingly.
13.4 Committee also takes note of the role of private sector in providing health care in
the country. The Committee is well aware about the increasing involvement of hospitals/
institutions run by private management across the country. Nobody can deny the fact that
with the limited resources available with the Government, in the enormous task of
providing health care to the general public, contribution of private sector is bound to
become more visible with passage of time. In such a scenario, with all the stakeholders
being part of the National Council, representation from eminent medical professionals from
the private sector, preferably from the associations/bodies of private hospitals/nursing
homes is very much required. The Committee, accordingly, recommends representation
from the private sector.
13.5 The Committee was informed that the Quality Council of India (QCI) is mandated to carry
out National Quality campaign to promote quality in all walks of life including health sector. Two
of its Boards, i.e. National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers (NABH) and
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) put together provide
accreditation to the Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Diagnostic Centres and Medical Laboratories. The
Committee feels that the National Council can draw useful inputs from QCI as it has a
number of health professionals including assessors and experts on developing standards.
Therefore, the QCI deserves to be represented in the proposed Council. Composition of the
National Council may be modified so as to include one representative from the Quality
Council of India.
13.6 Clause 3(2)(e) — The Committee notes that the sub-clause suffers from a factual
deficiency under clause 3 which specifies the representation from the Central Council of the
Indian Medical Association constituted under MCI Act, 1956. As is well known, IMA is a
private association of allopathic doctors and not a statutory body created by legislation. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the sub-clause may, accordingly, be modified. The
Committee would also recommend inclusion of at least one representative from similar
Association representing Indian systems of medicine on a rotational basis.
13.7 Clause 3(2)(i)  — This sub-clause provides for one representative from the line of
paramedical systems. In view of one representative each from Nursing Council of India and
Pharmacy Council of India given representation vide clause 3(2)(b), it should be suitably
modified to exclude representation from these two paramedical fields. The Committee is
also surprised to note that with all categories of laboratories being covered under the
proposed legislation, their representative not finding a place in the National Council cannot
be considered a justifiable move. The Committee can only emphasise that instead of there
being a general provision, specific nomination from medical lab fraternity may be included
under clause 3(2)(j).
13.8 Clause 3(2)(j) —  The Committee notes that under Clause 2(g) Yoga and Naturopathy
have been recognized as systems of medicine. However, there is no specific clause providing

10
for their representation in the National Council under Clause 3, Keeping in view the fact
that Y oga and Naturopathy providing efficacious, promotive, preventive and curative
interventions are getting wider popularity among all classes of the society, the Committee
finds absence of any clear mention of their representation in the proposed National Council
untenable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 3(j) be amended to
categorically mention that out of the three representatives proposed, one each from Yoga
and Naturopathy shall find place in the Council.
13.9 Clause 3(3) and (4) — As per clause 3(3) and (4), the nominated members have been
provided a term of one year against a three year term for elected members. The Committee is
not in agreement with providing a shorter term of one year for the nominated members as
against three years for elected members. The Committee is of the view that there should
be uniform term for both the categories of members so as to enable them to have greater
co-ordination and also to give adequate time to the nominated members to understand the
nitty-gritty of the working of the Council and make meaningful contribution. The
Committee, therefore, recommends a term of three years for the nominated members as
well.
13.10 Clause 3(6) —  The Committee favours giving full functional autonomy to the
National Council. The Committee, therefore, recommends deletion of the words “subject to
the previous approval of the Central Government” from this clause. The Committee also
feels that quorum for the meetings of the National Council should be spelt out in
unambiguous terms in the Act itself to strengthen the autonomy of the proposed Council
The Committee, therefore, recommends Clause 3(6) be amended to incorporate the quorum
required for the meetings of the Council.
14. Clause 5
14.1 The Committee notes that the two main functions of the Council are to determine
the standards for ensuring proper healthcare by the clinical establishments and also to
develop the minimum standards and their periodic review. The Committee also takes note
of the fact that minimum standards of the facilities and services are to be prescribed for
registration and continuation of clinical establishments. The Committee is, however,
surprised to note the absence of any time-span for accomplishment of this crucial mandate
in the Bill. The Committee can well imagine the situation emerging after the enactment of
this Bill. The Committee can only conclude that fulfillment of the mandate of this Bill will
continue to remain on paper for quite some time. The Committee would have appreciated
if some basic minimum standards had been specified in the Bill itself which would have
evolved and expanded as per the demand of the time. The Committee understands that
some of the State Acts have such a provision of minimum standards. The Committee fails
to understand the reason for not adopting the same. The Committee can only emphasise
that this was very much required in such a legislation which was expected to be adopted by
other State Governments also. The Committee would also like to draw the attention of the
Ministry to the pioneering work accomplished by the two Boards of the Quality Council of
India and the Bureau of Indian Standards. Norms and guidelines prescribed for healthcare
by these bodies can easily become the base for laying down of minimum standards for
healthcare. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department may take
necessary action in this regard by prescribing the minimum standards for healthcare.
15. Clause 8
15.1 This clause provides that every State shall designate the Director of Health Services (by
whatever name called) or any other officer subordinate to him as the Registrar of clinical

11
establishments. The main objections/suggestions received in respect of this clause from various
stakeholders are:—
(i) There will be conflict of interest as the DHS or any other officer subordinate to him
on being the registrar of clinical establishment.
(ii) Some stakeholders have suggested an independent regulator/autonomous body.
(iii) DHS is drawn from allopathic system of medicine and therefore it is not justifiable to
put him in charge of other systems of medicine.
15.2 The Committee fully agrees with the objections that appointing the DHS or an officer
subordinate to him as the registrar will create a conflict of interest in view of the fact that
Public Health Institutions are also required to be registered and regulated under the
proposed legislation. This legislation is aimed at having far reaching consequences in the
healthcare delivery system in India. A person can not be a judge of his own case. Therefore,
there is justified apprehension that the Registrar might be biased while exercising his
authority in respect of the Public Health Institutions. Further, it will not be proper to vest
the sole power into a single member authority. The Committee, therefore, recommends
constitution of a multi-member autonomous authority with a lean structure, consisting of
representatives drawn from all recognized systems of medicine from the State services. This
authority can be set up on the pattern of TRAI, Pollution Control Board and similar bodies.
The authority may be headed by an officer of the rank and qualification of DHS drawn from
any recognized system of medicine. Further, two representatives each of reputed State level
consumer for a working in the field of health care for at least five years and registered
association of private healthcare establishments may be included in the authority to have
transparency. Such authority may be provided functional autonomy, staff and infrastructural
requirement and can also be entrusted with appellate powers. The tenure of the members
of the Authority may be for a period of five years.
16. Clause 10
16.1 This clause provides that every State shall designate the District Health Officer or the Chief
Medical Officer (by whatever name called) as the District Registering Authority for each district
for registration of clinical establishments.
16.2 Several entities have cited that the clause will lead to conflict of interest as cited in
Clause 8. Further, representation has been sought for IMA and private practitioners. It has also
been pointed out that such a provision indirectly may be somewhat unfavourable for other systems
of medicine. Reason being that everywhere the District Health Officer of the Chief Medical Officer
represents the allopathic system. The Committee is also inclined to agree with this contention. The
Committee, therefore, recommends replication of the model of Authority under clause 8 at
the District level also.
17. Clause 11
17.1 This clause provides that no person shall carry on a healthcare establishment unless it has
been duly registered in accordance with the provisions of this Act. As per the Explanation to this
clause, the term ‘carry on’ means to admit patients in a clinical establishment for providing
treatment, diagnosis or nursing care.
17.2 Committee’s attention was drawn to the inherent ambiguity in the clause due to the
Explanation by a number of stakeholders. By virtue of this Explanation, only clinical establishments
having the facility of indoor treatment seemed to be covered by the proposed Act. The main
objection of various stakeholders under this clause is on the explanation appended to it. The

12
explanation is resulting in ambiguity that only establishments with facility of admission are referred
to here. On a specific query in this regard, the Ministry clarified that the legislation covered all the
clinical establishments as defined under clause 2(c) including those providing OPD services only.
17.3 The Committee is of the opinion that clause 11 requires redrafting in the following
manner  :
“No person shall run a clinical establishment unless it has been duly registered in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.”
With the redrafted clause 11, there is no need for adding an Explanation to it which
was resulting in unnecessary complications and apprehensions.
18. Clause 12
18.1 This clause provides that every clinical establishment shall fulfil the minimum standards of
facilities and services; minimum qualifications for the personnel; provisions for maintenance of
records and reporting and such other conditions as may be prescribed.
18.2 Apprehensions were expressed by quite a few stakeholders with regard to viability of
fulfillment of minimum conditions by every clinical establishment as enumerated in clause 12. It
was pointed out that non-availability of required qualified para-medical staff, specially in rural and
remote areas will prove to be a great hurdle in the running of a large number of clinical
establishments after the enactment of the Bill. It was, accordingly, suggested that some
consideration needed to be there for such personnel. The Committee accepts the need for
adherence to the minimum standards by the clinical establishments as prescribed by the
National Council. The main objective of the legislation is to have a regulatory body so as
to make available quality health care to the people. The Committee would, however, like
to point out that the task of prescribing minimum standards has to be accomplished in a
time-bound manner. Secondly, the Committee fails to comprehend the need for prescribing
the minimum qualifications for the personnel working in the clinical establishments. The
Committee would like to point out that minimum qualifications for both medical and para-
medical personnel are already duly prescribed by the concerned regulatory bodies and
authorities. Clause 12 may be modified accordingly.
19. Clause 13
19.1 This clause provides for classification of clinical establishments into different categories and
provides that different standards may be prescribed to the establishments as per local conditions.
19.2 On a specific query regarding introduction of the concept of ‘local conditions’ under clause
13(2), the Department replied that this is an enabling provision and depending upon deliberations in
the National Council, local conditions such as geographical conditions, availability of doctors/nurses
etc. can be taken into consideration while finalizing minimum standards. While accepting the need
for taking care of local conditions while prescribing standards for clinical establishments, the
Committee has a word of caution. The Committee strongly feels that this prerogative needs
to be in the hands of the National Council only. Otherwise there is every chance of standards
getting diluted, thus defeating the very objective of bringing this legislation. Once the initial
action as enumerated in clause 5 has been completed by the National Council in a time-bound
manner, the power for periodic r eview ana resultant modifications should continue to be
vested with the National Council. Element of any change in the context of local conditions
should also be the responsibility of the National Council only.
20. Clause 14
20.1 Clause 14 lays down the procedure for giving of applications for provisional certificate of
registration. The Committee believes that the purpose of this provision is to provide

13
sufficient time to the existing healthcare establishments, which mayor may not be
registered under other State legislations, to comply with the new standards under this new
legislation, The Committee welcomes the same and suggests that the procedure/application
proforma should be made simple along with nominal fees in order to encourage/motivate
healthcare establishments to get them registered.
20.2 The Committee also apprehends the misuse of the facility of provisional registration.
Implementation of clause 16(1), would mean that no preliminary enquiry is required to be
conducted by the authority for granting of provisional registration and thereby legally
enabling an establishment to run without any check and accountability. Thus the offenders
can take advantage of this by shifting their base after every three years and avoid a
permanent registration altogether. Clause 16 when interpreted along with clause 17
regarding validity of provisional registrations and clause 23 relating to time-limit for
provisional registration would literally mean that any clinical establishment can continue to
function without any enquiry whatsoever on the basis of provisional registration for years
together. The Committee can well imagine the time likely to be taken for the clinical
standards to be notified. A clinical establishment continuing to function for three years after
notification of standards without undergoing any kind of verification can not be considered
justifiable from any quarter. The Committee is of the firm view that provisional registration
should be a one time affair given for the minimum possible time, maximum for one year
with no facility for further extension of time. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
provisional registration should be allowed till the standards are made and once these
standards are fixed; no provisional registration should be allowed. The facility of provisional
registration should be aimed at/confined to the existing establishments in order to enable
them to adhere to the new standards. Any new establishment that comes up subsequent to
fixing and notification of standards should not be subjected to the process of provisional
registration. Therefore, Clause 14(1) should categorically state that provisional registration
is meant for establishments at the time of enactment of the legislation and till the
standards are notified, whichever is later. Similar facility may be given to all the
establishments of a State which adopts this legislation on a later date.
20.3 Several stakeholders advocated for a compulsory online procedure for registration,
which, in the opinion of the Committee, is not practical due to ground realities like non-
availability of infrastructural support etc. across the length and breadth of the country.
20.4 Some entities have called for a review of sub-clause 14(5) in view of some existing
State laws which will lead to duplication. The Committee after carefully examining the
matter concludes that the very purpose of legislation is to have uniform health standards
throughout the country. Moreover, it is up to the State Governments to align with the
proposed legislation. The Committee, accordingly, recommends no change in clause 14(5).
However, the Committee has some reservations about clause 14(4) as per which any clinical
establishment in existence at the time of the commencement of the Act, shall have to apply
for registration within one year. The Committee strongly feels that giving of one year’s
time for simply filing an application is not justified. It would have been appropriate if it had
been made mandatory for clinical establishment to apply for registration within the
minimum required period; one month of commencement of the Act. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that clause 14(4) may be modified accordingly.
21. Clause 20
21.1 Clause 20 lays down that certificate of registration shall be non-transferable and in the event
of change of ownership/change of category/change of management/ceasing to function as a clinical
establishment, fresh application for grant of certificate of registration shall be required. Objections

14
have been raised regarding the need for applying afresh in the event of change of ownership or
management of a health care establishment due to unnecessary paperwork and procedural delays.
The Committee is fully inclined to agree with the view that there should be no requirement
for applying afresh in case of a mere change of ownership or management. However, there
should be a provision whereunder prior intimation may be made mandatory for such a
change. With regard to the change of category, location of clinical establishment or ceasing
of its functioning, the matter has to be dealt with on a different footing. The Committee
feels that such structural changes are required to be looked into afresh. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that clause 20 may be modified so as to provide for surrender of
the certificate of registration followed by grant of fresh certificate in case of change of
category of clinical establishment or on its ceasing to function as such an establishment.
22. Clause 21
22.1 The Committee notes that the Clause provides for the publication of healthcare
establishments whose registration would be expiring within the next forty-five days. The
Committee feels that the expression “within next 45 days” is difficult to comply with as it
means the list would be updated on a daily basis and therefore complying with such a
provision is not practicable unless the list is published on the Net through a computer
programme. The Committee feels that the provision, needs further elaboration for the sake
of clarity.
23. Clause 22 and 23
23.1 These clauses provide for application for renewal of certificate of provisional registration
and procedure therefor and time-limit for provisional registration.
23.2 In view of Committee’s observations with regard to clauses 14, 16 and 17, Clauses
22 and 23 need to be deleted.
24. Clauses 25 and 26
24.1 Clause 25 prescribes for submission of evidence regarding compliance of prescribed
minimum standards by the clinical establishments. Clause 26 provides for display of information as
submitted by the clinical establishments for permanent registration for filing objections, if any, by
the public, within a stipulated time. Following objections/suggestions were received by the
Committee in respect of the same:
• Bill pushes onto the “public at large” the entire responsibility for verifying compliance
with minimum standards while public authorities have no obligation to inspect the
establishments.
• The provisions of this clause may be misused by business rivals or vested interests
to raise false and fictitious objections and utilizing the same towards ‘bargaining and
blackmailing’ purposes. Therefore this clause needs to be deleted.
• A penalty clause may be incorporated against those persons who file frivolous,
motivated and baseless complaints.
24.2 The Committee, after wide range of deliberations with various stakeholders, has come to
the conclusion that though some objections/suggestions hold ground, the voice raised by various
stakeholders for deletion of this clause entirely, is not convincing. The requirement is to have
sufficient mechanism to prevent misuse. Further, the responsibility of the Authority regarding
compulsory inspection needs to be framed. The issue of probable misuse of this clause by business
rivals or vested interests was taken up with the Ministry which stated that the provision has been
made to have transparency in the system. As inspection of the clinical establishments is not being

15
made mandatory before grant of registration, it is felt that such objections from public will be a
good idea to keep a check on the standards of the clinical establishments.
24.3 The Committee is of the view that there is no harm in displaying the information
pertaining to the healthcare establishments; on the contrary in this era of transparency and
accountability, it is the need of the hour. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
information pertaining to the establishments should be displayed on a dedicated website.
Further, after registration also, such details may be kept updated on net regarding all
establishments for public display to ensure transparency.
24.4 The Committee, however, does not agree with the view of not having any obligation
on the part of the Authority to conduct any inspection prior to grant of permanent
registration. The Authority can not shy away from its responsibility. Further, in the opinion
of the Committee, it may lead to corrupt practices. The Committee, accordingly, favours and
strongly recommends that no permanent registration should be granted unless inspection
has been carried out by the Authority. Moreover, the inspection report should be made
public through the Internet alongwith the details of the inspecting personnel. The status
related to the follow up action should also be made available on the Internet alongwith
usual procedure. This would allay fears of the private medical practitioners that the
inspection clause would lead to corruption and bias. It would further strengthen their
accountability.
24.5 A point of view placed before the Committee to check frivolous, motivated and
baseless complaints was to have a penalty clause against those who file such complaints. The
Committee fully supports the apprehensions raised. However, the Committee is of the view
that such cases might be covered under other provisions of IPC Act or Cr PC. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to take up the case with the Law
Ministry and explore possibility of a penalty clause in the Act.
25. Clause 27
25.1 This clause provides for communication of objections received by the authority to the
clinical establishments. In this clause it has been stated that objections shall be communicated
to the clinical establishment for response within a period, as may be prescribed. The
Ministry is of the view that such period shall be provided in the rules. The Committee
recommends that in order to have clarity and for leaving no scope for ambiguity or
manipulation, such details should be provided for in the Act itself. Consequential changes
in other clauses maybe made accordingly.
26. Clause 30
26.1 T his clause provides for issuing certificate of permanent registration if the application for
registration of clinical establishment is allowed.
26.2 The Committee recommends that as given under various clauses for provisional
registration, clauses or sub-clauses on similar lines relating to validity of the permanent
registration certificate, display of registration certificate, its non-transferability and
publication of expiry of registration should be provided in the Act itself.
26.3 During its interaction with various stakeholders one unanimous view which emerged was
that certificate of registration even being permanent has to be renewed, keeping in view the crucial
aspect of healthcare of general masses involved. The Committee also strongly feels that no
registration can be for an indefinite period. Mechanism for renewal of certificate of
registration has to be incorporated specially in the Act itself. On a specific query in this
regard, the Ministry clarified that such a mechanism would be included in the Rules. The

16
Committee is not inclined to agree with the view of the Ministry in this regard. The
Committee is of the view that such a provision should be part of the Act itself. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that a provision regarding period of five years for
renewal of the permanent registration certificate may be inserted at the relevant place in
the Bill.
27. Clause 32
27.1 This clause provides for issuing a show cause notice, and subsequent cancellation of
registration under certain conditions.
27.2 The Committee has received several representations regarding possible misuse of
“reasonable opportunity” under clause 32(2) and have requested for its proper definition.  The
Committee is of the view that no single time limit can be fixed for all types of cases where
the establishments are required to respond to the show cause notice of the Authority, which
can vary from 2-3 days to say a month. The Committee, accordingly, recommends insertion
of suitable timeframe in the rules to be made in this regard alongwith safeguard from its
possible misuse by the habitual offenders.
27.3 The Committee also finds an important omission in the clause. The present provision
of the clause calls for action only after a due process is followed. There may be a situation
when the situation demands immediate action on the part of the Authority even before
following the due procedure. Therefore, some kind of enabling provision should be there for
temporary suspension which can be applied under grave situations in Public Interest.
27.4 In view of the above, the Committee recommends inclusion of provisions for
immediate temporary suspension which can be applied by the appropriate authority under
grave situations in Public Interest, without following the due procedure.
28. Clause 33
28.1 This clause provides for inspection of registered clinical establishments by the registering
authority or an officer authorised by it and intimating the inspection report to the clinical
establishment.
28.2 Apprehensions were expressed by a number of stakeholders about vesting of power of
inspection in an authority or officer, specially in view of the complex area of healthcare with its
variety of specialties/super-specialties. Even otherwise there were chances of misuse of this power
entrusted to a single person. It was, accordingly, suggested that an inspection team instead of an
individual authority may be involved in this exercise. The Department on a specific query in this
regard clarified that the registering authority will be provided with sufficient staff and other
infrastructure. Also in the long run, the system will become self-sustaining and all expenditure will
be got recovered in the form of fees.
28.3 The Committee is of the opinion that instead of a single person/authority, an
inspection team comprising of experts well-versed with all aspects of healthcare needs to be
involved in the task of inspection of clinical establishments. The Committee understands
that for inspection of medical colleges, inspection teams are sent. Position must be the
same in respect of other similar areas also. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
clause 33(1) may be modified accordingly. If need be, appropriate provision in the rules may
also be made.
28.4 The matter of absence of time-limits at various stages like communication of inspection
report, follow-up action and final directions etc. was also taken up and it was stated that these
details will be provided for in the rules to be framed under the legislation. Also the periodicity of

17
inspection is not mentioned anywhere. As the Act does not put liability on the Authority to
carry out inspections, the Committee favours introduction of a sub-clause to incorporate a
provision for some periodic inspection by the authority being made mandatory. This will help
in keeping a check on the establishments. The Committee, accordingly, recommends
inspection of all healthcare establishments prior to giving permanent registration and
subsequently at least once in a period of two years.
28.5 Under clause 33(4), it is not mentioned that in what time-frame the establishment
is required to comply with the directions of the Authority. Therefore at the end of this para
of the sub-clause “within such time as indicated in the direction” may be added. This would
remove any ambiguity in this regard.
29. Clause 34
29.1 This clause provides that the registering authority or an officer authorized by it may enter
and search any clinical establishment suspected of not being registered under the provisions of this
Act.
29.2 The Committee has received several representations wherein it has been stated that no
notice may be given for inspection. However, contrary views have also been received from various
other stakeholders like this clause is undesirable and may be reconsidered and a notice period of
at least two days may be given.
29.3 The Committee after careful deliberations is of the view that this clause is necessary
to have a check on the establishments running without proper registration certificate.
Therefore, the Authority needs to be provided with power to enter and search such
establishments which are suspected to be running without registration. As regards provision
of notice, it is necessary in order to allay fears among genuine healthcare establishments
of any misuse of power by the Authority. The Committee also recommends to include the
various powers like that of search, seizure etc. in the Act itself so as to make the powers
comprehensive and effective and not subject to litigations and interpretations.
30. Clause 35
30.1 This clause provides for fees to be charged from the healthcare establishments by the
registering authority and remittance of its two per cent to the National Council. The Committee has
received several suggestions regarding the figure of two per cent remittance to the National Council
to be on the lower side; fees could escalate the cost of treatment and there have been suggestions
like variation in fees structure according to grading or classification of establishments on the basis
of beds and facilities.
30.2 The Committee opines that it is for the National Council to examine the issue of
classification of different healthcare establishments with due care for the local conditions.
However, the Committee is aware that the Department might have carefully arrived at the
figure of two per cent for remittance to the National Council. Therefore, there is no need
to comment on its appropriateness. The Committee also feels that the issue of fees should
be taken care of in the right earnest so that the cost of treatment does not escalate,
especially in case of small establishments which are catering to the healthcare requirements
of the masses in rural and remote areas. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
feasibility of suitable fee relaxation to be given to the establishments being set up by the
charitable institutions, establishments providing free treatment to poor patients and
establishments being run in rural and remote areas, may be examined by the Department
and necessary modifications be carried out accordingly.
30.3 The Committee notes that under clause 35(3) it is written that “it shall.......on time.”
The word “on time” means that fees should be remitted to the National Council on a

18
specific day; the clause however aims at remittance of fees within due time. Therefore, the
sub-clause may be modified as – “It.....that the amount referred to in sub-section (2), is
remitted to the National Council, in time.’’
31. Clause 36
31.1 This clause provides for an appeal to the State Government by any person aggrieved by an
order of the registering authority.
31.2 After a close scrutiny, the Committee finds that the clause needs drastic
modifications. The Committee observes that there is no logic in making the State
Government as the appellate authority when there is next higher authority in the form of
State Registrar. Further, the important omission is timeline for preferring an appeal.
Besides, the provision for appeal under clause 36(1) does not cover other powers of the
authority like for enquiry, inspection etc. and also does not cover any other entity like
patients, NGOs etc. other than aggrieved by the order of Registering Authority. Moreover,
Committee notes that no appeal mechanism in respect of these penalties arising out of the
provisions from clause 40 to 46 has been provided.
31.3 The Committee strongly recommends that in view of its recommendation that the
State Registrar should be a multi-member body having Appellate powers; all the appeals
should be made to the State Registrar in place of the State Government. The Committee
recommends that besides cases pertaining to persons aggrieved by the order of Registering
Authority regarding refusal to grant or renewal or revoking of the certificate of
registration, the clause should be suitably modified to include provision of appeal from the
NGOs/Public/Local residents etc. who have filed their objections under clause 26. The
Committee would also like to point out that patients/their care takers may also be allowed
to have the right to appeal in case of medical negligence on the part of clinical
establishment. Necessary modification in clause 36 may, accordingly, be made.
31.4 The Committee also recommends that the procedure for appeal should also be
available for penalties arising out of the provisions under clause 40 to 46. In order to have
transparency in the system, the Committee also recommends that the period of preferring
an appeal should be one month from the date of order of refusal to grant, renew or revoke
certificate of registration to a healthcare establishment or, in case of patients or NGOs etc.
the verdict of the Registering Authority. Further, the appeals filed with the State Registrar
should be disposed of within a period of two months from the date of such filing.
32. Clause 38
32.1 This clause provides that every State shall maintain register of clinical establishments in
digital or in such other form and supply of information to the Central Government.
32.2 Sub-clause 38(2) states that “Every State......and shall inform the Central Government
without delay of all additions to and other amendments in such register made, from time to time.”
In the opinion of the Committee ‘without delay’ leaves scope for personal interpretation. It
should be specific. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the sub-clause should be
modified suitably as under—
“(2) Every State shall supply in digital format to the Central Government, a copy of
the State register of healthcare establishments and shall inform the Central
Government, all additions to and other amendments in such register made for a
particular month, by the 15th day of the following month.
This will ensure timely updation of the National Register and proper compliance by
the State Registrars.

19
33. Clause 39
33.1 This clause provides for maintenance of national register for clinical establishments in digital
format by the Central Government.
33.2 The Committee recommends that the National Register of the entire healthcare
establishments should be displayed on the dedicated website for the purpose, State-wise.
This would enable the general public to have an idea about the genuine establishments in
their area.
34. Clause 40
34.1 The clauses 40-46 deal with the penalties. These are dealt with under the chapter V-
“Register of Clinical Establishments”. In the opinion of the Committee, penalties should be
dealt with under a separate chapter.
34.2 Clause 40 provides for penalty for contravention of any of the provisions of this Act. The
Committee received divergent views of stakeholders on the penalty provisions. Many stakeholders
were of the view that the provisions need to have more teeth by having provision of imprisonment
so as to have a deterrent effect on habitual offenders. Others were of the view that the penalties
were exorbitant and the same would be out of reach of the paying capacity of the smaller
establishments.
34.3 The Committee during its course of deliberations with various stakeholders had
discussed the issue threadbare and has reached to the conclusion that the purpose of
penalties should be to ensure strict compliance of various health standards along with other
provisions of the Act. At the same time, the Committee also aligns with the apprehensions
of various stakeholders that the penalties cannot be made applicable on a uniform basis in
respect of all categories of clinical establishments. Accordingly, the Committee recommends
that the Ministry while framing rules in regard to penalties, should come up with detailed
provisions varying the monetary penalties according to size, type and local conditions of the
area in which the healthcare establishments are situated.
34.4 The Committee is of the opinion that sufficient provisions have been incorporated
under Clauses 32 and 33 for providing appropriate opportunity to the health care
establishments to rectify their shortcomings. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
the penalty provisions should be invoked only after giving them the appropriate opportunity
to rectify in case of registered healthcare establishments.
34.5 On a specific query on not having penalty of imprisonment, the Department
responded that this has been done to assure the medical fraternity that this Bill will not
be having an Inspector-Raj and will not be an impediment to their functioning. However, in
view of the aforesaid fact that the penalties would be applied only after giving sufficient
opportunity for rectification, the Committee differs with the view of the Department.
Suitable penalties are must in the form of imprisonment for habitual offenders in order to
instill sense of adherence to the provision of the Act. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends enhancement of penalty for second offence as “upto 1 Lakh rupees” and for
the third offence “upto 3 Lakh rupees alongwith imprisonment upto six months” and for
subsequent offence, “upto Rs. 6 Lakh alongwith upto two years of imprisonment” .
35. Clause 41
35.1 Clause 41 (1) is about penalty for non-registration. It provides that conviction for first
offence would invite a fine up to fifty thousand rupees, for second offence with fine which may
extend to two lakh rupees and for any subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five lakh

20
rupees. Clause 41 (2) provides that whoever knowingly serves in a establishment which is not duly
registered under this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand
rupees.
35.2 In the opinion of the Committee, the clause only provides for penalty that too
monetary in nature. It does not have any provision so as to ensure registration subsequent
to the detection of an unregistered establishment. The Committee accordingly recommends
that alongwith penalty of fifty thousand rupees at first conviction, a time limit of one
fortnight may be provided to the establishment to apply for registration under the Act. If
the establishment does not apply for registration during the said period and still continues
to function, it may be subjected to penalty for second offence which may include “upto two
lakh rupees alongwith seizure of equipments and machinery etc. and upto six months of
imprisonment” and for subsequent offence, “upto five lakh rupees alongwith seizure of
equipments and machinery etc. and imprisonment upto two years”. The Committee’s
recommendation under clause 40 regarding varying the monetary penalties according to
size, type and local conditions of the area in which the healthcare establishments are
situated and the imprisonment according to the gravity of the offence, may also be applied
here.
35.3 In the opinion of the Committee clause 41 (2), in its present form, would also be
applicable to the supporting staff like peons, sweepers and other staff providing non-
technical services that are generally illiterate or comparatively less educated. Therefore, in
order to save such staff from harassment, the Committee recommends exclusion of such
staff from the purview of this sub-clause. Further, the amount of penalties may be varied
according to the responsibility/position held by the staff in the healthcare establishment.
36. Clause 46
36.1 This clause provi des for recovery of fines imposed under the Act as an arrear of land
revenue. The Committee is of the opinion that recovery of fine as arrears of land revenue
would be a long process. This would provide sufficient time to the establishment to shift its
base to some other place and start its activities afresh, thereby defeating the purpose of
immediate results. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that recovery may also include
forfeiture of assets of such Healthcare Establishment.
37. Clause 52
37.1 This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of the proposed legislation. The Committee observes that several State laws on health care
subject were enacted but their relevant rules were framed after quite some time. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Ministry to frame the requisite rules pertaining
to the Act, within a period of six months from the date of its enactment.
37.2 The National Council is entrusted with the responsibility of determining the standards for
healthcare establishments; classification of the establishments into different categories; develop the
minimum standards and their periodic review; compile, maintain and update a national register of
clinical establishments; collect the statistics in respect of clinical establishments and perform any
other function determined by the Central Government, from time to time. In view of the role of
the National Council, it is recommended that all the rules to be framed by the Government
should be in consonance with the functions carried out by the National Council.
38. MISCELLANEOUS RECOMMENDATIONS MADE BY THE COMMITTEE
38.1 The Committee, during its interaction with various stakeholders has received a lot

21
of positive feedbacks. After extensive deliberations, the Committee is of the view that the
under mentioned provisions need to be examined in depth by the Department and wherever
feasible, included in the Act and Rules thereunder:—
• A chapter on provision for patients’ rights and duties of health care
establishments should be there.
• The information acquired in the course of enforcing this Act may be privileged
and confidential. Hence, in order to protect the interests of the patients and the
establishments, a confidentiality clause needs to be incorporated in the Act. Any
information which has been obtained from any hospital, medical clinic, clinical
laboratory or healthcare establishment in the course of carrying out any
investigation or performing any duty or function under this Act should not be
disclosed unless required to do so in case of a prosecution for an offence under
this Act or any regulations made thereunder.
• All the procedure with respect to application for registration, inspection and its
follow-up, complaint mechanism and its follow-up, National Register etc. may be
put on a dedicated website. This would make the entire process of registration,
inspection and complaint transparent.
• Committee notes that many tax exemptions are being provided to corporate and
business entities that are setting up their business establishments under Special
Economic Zones (SEZs). Similarly, in order to make health reach across the
length and breadth of this vast country, motivation in the form of tax
exemptions may be provided to healthcare establishments being opened in
remote, backward and rural areas. The matter may, therefore be taken up with
the Finance Ministry.
• Maximum charges regarding the facilities available in the healthcare
establishment alongwith contact details of the authority members to which any
complaint may be made regarding non-adherence of the provisions of the Act,
may be made mandatory to be displayed prominently at a conspicuous place
preferably at the entrance of the establishment. Further, provision should be
made to supply receipts of payments received alongwith the treatment/diagnosis
details to the patients.

22
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS—AT A GLANCE
The clauses where the amendments have been suggested by the Committee are given
in the succeeding paragraphs:—  (Para 10)
The Committee, after going through the objections and suggestions, observes that
contrary to some of similar existing State laws, this is a comprehensive Central Legislation
aimed at not only covering all categories of healthcare establishments but also practising all
the recognized systems of medicine. Therefore, its title should be such which covers all the
desired entities or reflects them through some common term. The word clinical, though it
means related to medical, appears to be restrictive to allopathic clinics only. (Para 11.3)
In the opinion of the Committee, the word ‘healthcare’ takes care of most of the
objections. Healthcare means related to health and it may be through any system of
medicine and includes laboratory and diagnostic services also. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that the title of the Bill may suitably be changed as “The Healthcare
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2007” and the consequential changes be
made in the Bill as well. (Para 11.4)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should make all out
efforts in persuading all the States to adopt the Central Legislation so that uniformity in
health standards is maintained across the length and breadth of the country. For this,
financial as well as other infrastrnctural support, as and when required, may also be
provided to the States to motivate them in adopting the same. (Para 11.5)
The Committee is, however, of the opinion that lack of categorical provision, further
made ambiguous by another contradictory provision on this count does not substantiate the
Ministry’s claim. The Committee would like to point out that the very purpose of the
legislation would be diluted and defeated if the OPD services are not brought within its
ambit. One must also not forget that with the significant advancements made in medical
sciences and health care, even many surgical interventions do not require patient's stay in
the hospital/nursing home. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the definition of
'clinical establishment' under Clause 2(c)(i) and also the explanation given in clause, 11
need to be suitably modified to remove the ambiguity. (Para 12.2)
The Committee observes that many Healthcare Establishments are nowadays also
involved in independent Research and Development activities specially context of research
in new drugs/drug combinations followed by their clinical trial on patients. The Bill in its
present form does not categorically provide for inclusion of these establishments under the
definition of clinical establishments. The Committee strongly feels that their exclusion
would be detrimental to the rights of the patients who form part of the experiments/
research studies undertaken by such establishments. In view of this, the Committee
recommends inclusion of R&D establishments in the definition of Healthcare
Establishments. (Para 12.3)
The Committee is, however, not convinced by this line of thinking. Ground realities
existing in our country in the context of health care facilities for general public need to be
taken into account. A very high percentage of our population is dependent on the services
provided by ‘single doctor establishments’ whether run from residences or other places. The
22

23
implication of not bringing such establishments under the proposed legislation will prove to
be detrimental to the interest of common man, the most vulnerable segment of our society.
The registration is a one time activity and it will be renewable after a sufficient gap. The
Committee would also like to point out that such a move would also prove beneficial in the
context of collecting vital and complete data regarding health scenario in the country and
the statistics could be utilized in National level Planning. The Committee, therefore, is of
the firm opinion that single doctor establishments need to be covered under this Act.
(Para 12.4)
The Committee also finds no valid reasons for keeping establishments set up by
partnerships, run by societies (other than co-operative), Charity/Missionary, mobile units
out of the ambit of the Bill. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
establishments may also be included in the definition of ‘Healthcare Establishments’.
(Para 12.5)
The Committee finds that under Clause 2(d) “National Council” is a very general
nomenclature for the proposed Council and does not reflect the entire spectrum of the
issues covered under the Bill. In consonance with its suggestions regarding the title in
Clause 1, the Committee recommends that the National Council referred to in clause 2(d)
and subsequently in other provisions, be changed as “National Council for Healthcare
Establishments”. (Para 12.6)
As regards appropriateness or otherwise of the applicability of the Bill to Defence
Forces Establishments, the Committee respects the security concerns arising out of their
inclusion under the ambit of the Bill. The Committee fully understands that parting with
the details related to Army Health Establishments could be detrimental to nation’s security.
The Committee is also aware that military medical establishments and the medicare
provided by them is subjected to internal checks and inspections by administrative and
technical experts on a regular basis. The Committee, however, strongly feels that a feasible
mechanism can be easily worked out whereunder all the armed forces medical
establishments can be registered by maintaining secrecy/confidentiality aspect also. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Act should invariably be applied to all the
Army Health Establishments except those based in the forward/ combat areas. (Para 12.7)
The Committee does not find any substance in exclusion of Government/Public
Health Institutions/Autonomous Institutions from the purview of the Act as put forth before
it through some representations. The Committee has taken note of the fact that several of
the existing laws in various States do not cover such institutions, thereby inviting criticisms
for giving undue advantage to them. The Committee fully understands that the Public
Health Institutions have some social obligations. They are also doing commendable job by
handling tremendous patient load under very demanding ground realities. It, however, does
not favour their exclusion simply because such a move will lead to depriving the majority
of the people having access to such establishments only, of the benefits of this Act to which
they are rightfully entitled. The Committee would also like to emphasise that element of
accountability which is not visible so far needs to be made applicable to all categories of
medical establishments-whether Government or private. One must not forget that ultimate
goal is ‘Health for all’. (Para 12.9)
There is a drafting slippage in Clause 2(f) which may be modified as:—
“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central
Government or, as the case may be, by the State Government; (Para 12.10)
The Committee, however, is not convinced by this line of thinking. The Committee
would like to point out that the mere fact of there being no statutory regulatory authority

24
at present does not mean that a well-established system having a wide acceptability
increasing day-by-day among the masses cannot be considered a recognized system of
medicine. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the definition of ‘recognised
system of medicine' may remain unchanged. (Para 12.11)
The Committee notes that the National Council has to perform very crucial functions
which include determination of standards of health care to be provided by the healthcare
establishments and classification thereof. Not only this, the Council is also entrusted with
the routine work of compilation, maintenance and updation of the national register of such
establishments and collection of statistics likely to be used for future planning and
corrective measures. The Committee strongly feels that the DGHS in his capacity as the
Chairperson of the National Council would not be in a position to carry out its mandate.
Reason being that as the Director General of Health Services, he has to take care of entire
country in all the conceivable health related matters. The Committee is, accordingly, not in
favour of a part-time Chairperson for the proposed National Council because the work
relating to the National Council would be very demanding, especially at the initial stage of
determining and developing minimum standards. The Committee is of the firm view that
DGHS, who is already overburdened with official work, would not be able to do justice with
this dual responsibility. Further, the Committee would also like to point out that such an
arrangement is also likely to impinge upon the autonomy of the Council. Taking the above
factors into consideration, the Committee recommends appointment of a full time
Chairperson, who has the required experience specially of hospital administration and has
the rank and qualification equivalent to that of DGHS. (Para 13.2)
The Committee also feels that presence of representatives of reputed NGOs and
consumer protection associations working in the health sector is very much required in such
a body. The Committee, therefore, recommends that composition of the National Council
may be modified accordingly. (Para 13.3)
The Committee also takes note of the role of private sector in providing health care
in the country. The Committee is well aware about the increasing involvement of hospitals/
institutions run by private management across the country. Nobody can deny the fact that
with the limited resources available with the Government, in the enormous task of
providing health care to the general public, contribution of private sector is bound to
become more visible with passage of time. In such a scenario, with all the stakeholders
being part of the National Council, representation from eminent medical professionals from
the Private sector, preferably from the associations/bodies of private hospitals/nursing
homes is very much required. The Committee, accordingly, recommends representation
from the private sector. (Para 13.4)
The Committee feels that the National Council can draw useful inputs from QCI as
it has a number of health professionals including assessors and experts on developing
standards. Therefore, the QCI deserves to be represented in the proposed Council.
Composition of the National Council may be modified so as to include one representative
from the Quality Council of India. (Para 13.5)
Clause 3(2)(e) — The Committee notes that the sub-clause suffers from a factual
deficiency under clause 3 which specifies the representation from the Central Council of the
Indian Medical Association constituted under MCI Act, 1956. As is well known, IMA is a
private association of allopathic doctors and not a statutory body created by legislation. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the sub-clause may, accordingly, be modified. The
Committee would also recommend inclusion of at least one representative from similar
Association representing Indian Systems of Medicine on a rotational basis. (Para 13.6)

25
In view of one representative each from Nursing Council of India and Pharmacy
Council of India given representation vide clause 3(2)(b), it should be suitably modified to
exclude representation from these two paramedical fields. The Committee is also surprised
to note that with all categories of laboratories being covered under the proposed legislation,
their representative not finding a place in the National Council cannot be considered a
justifiable move. The Committee can only emphasise that instead of there being a general
provision, specific nomination from medical lab fraternity may be included under clause
3(2)(j). (Para 13.7)
Clause 3(2)(j) — The Committee notes that under Clause 2(g) Yoga and Naturopathy
have been recognized as systems of medicine. However, there is no specific clause providing
for their representation in the National Council under Clause 3. Keeping in view the fact
that Yoga and Naturopathy providing efficacious, promotive, preventive and curative
interventions are getting wider popularity among all classes of the society, the Committee
finds absence of any clear mention of their representation in the proposed National Council
untenable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Clause 3(j) be amended to
categorically mention that out of the three representatives proposed, one each from Yoga
and Naturopathy shall find place in the Council. (Para 13.8)
The Committee is not in agreement with providing a shorter term of one year for
the nominated members as against three years for elected members. The Committee is of
the view that there should be uniform term for both the categories of members so as to
enable them to have greater co-ordination and also to give adequate time to the nominated
members to understand the nitty-gritty of the working of the Council and make meaningful
contribution. The Committee, therefore, recommends a term of three years for the
nominated members as well. (Para 13.9)
Clause 3(6) — The Committee favours giving full functional autonomy to the
National Council. The Committee, therefore, recommends deletion of the words “subject to
the previous approval of the Central Government” from this clause. The Committee also
feels that quorum for the meetings of the National Council should be spelt out in
unambiguous terms in the Act itself to strengthen the autonomy of the proposed Council.
The Committee, therefore, recommends Clause 3(6) be amended to incorporate the quorum
required for the meetings of the Council. (Para 13.10)
The Committee notes that the two main functions of the Council are to determine
the standards for ensuring proper healthcare by the clinical establishments and also to
develop the minimum standards and their periodic review. The Committee also takes note
of the fact that minimum standards of the facilities and services are to be prescribed for
registration and continuation of clinical establishments. The Committee is, however,
surprised to note the absence of any time-span for accomplishment of this crucial mandate
in the Bill. The Committee can well imagine the situation emerging after the enactment of
this Bill. The Committee can only conclude that fulfilment of the mandate of this Bill will
continue to remain on paper for quite some time. The Committee would have appreciated
if some basic minimum standards had been specified in the Bill itself which would have
evolved and expanded as per the demand of the time. The Committee understands that
some of the State Acts have such a provision of minimum standards. The Committee fails
to understand the reason for not adopting the same. The Committee can only emphasise
that this was very much required in such a legislation which was expected to be adopted by
other State Governments also. The Committee would also like to draw the attention of the
Ministry to the pioneering work accomplished by the two Boards of the Quality Council of

26
India and the Bureau of Indian Standards. Norms and guidelines prescribed for health care
by these bodies can easily become the base for laying down of minimum standards for
health care. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department may take
necessary action in this regard by prescribing the minimum standards for health care.
(Para 14.1)
The Committee fully agrees with the objections that appointing the DHS or an officer
subordinate to him as the registrar will create a conflict of interest in view of the fact that
Public Health Institutions are also required to be registered and regulated under the
proposed legislation. This legislation is aimed at having far reaching consequences in the
healthcare delivery system in India. A person can not be a judge of his own case. Therefore,
there is justified apprehension that the Registrar might be biased while exercising his
authority in respect of the Public Health Institutions. Further, it will not be proper to vest
the sole power into a single member authority. The Committee, therefore, recommends
constitution of a multi-member autonomous authority with a lean structure, consisting of
representatives drawn from all recognized systems of medicine from the state services. This
authority can be set up on the pattern of TRAI, Pollution Control Board and similar bodies.
The authority may be headed by an officer of the rank and qualification of DHS drawn from
any recognized system of medicine. Further, two representatives each of reputed state level
consumer fora working in the field of healthcare for at least five years and registered
association of private healthcare establishments may be included in the authority to have
transparency. Such authority may be provided functional autonomy, staff and infrastructural
requirement and can also be entrusted with appellate powers. The tenure of the members
of the Authority may be for a period of five years. (Para 15.2)
The Committee, therefore, recommends replication of the model of Authority under
clause 8 at the District level also. (Para 16.2)
The Committee is of the opinion that clause 11 requires redrafting in the following
manner
 :
“No person shall run a clinical establishment unless it has been duly registered in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.”
With the redrafted clause 11, there is no need for adding an Explanation to it which
was resulting in unnecessary complications and apprehensions. (Para 17.3)
The Committee accepts the need for adherence to the minimum standards by the
clinical establishments as prescribed by the National Council. The main objective of the
legislation is to have a regulatory body so as to make available quality health care to the
people. The Committee would, however, like to point out that the task of prescribing
minimum standards has to be accomplished in a time-bound manner. Secondly, the
Committee fails to comprehend the need for prescribing the minimum qualifications for the
personnel working in the clinical establishments. The Committee would like to point out
that minimum qualifications for both medical and para-medical personnel are already duly
prescribed by the concerned regulatory bodies and authorities. Clause 12 may be modified
accordingly. (Para 18.2)
While accepting the need for taking care of local conditions while prescribing
standards for clinical establishments, the Committee has a word of caution. The Committee
strongly feels that this prerogative needs to be in the hands of the National Council only.
Otherwise there is every chance of standards getting diluted, thus defeating the very
objective of bringing this legislation. Once the initial action as enumerated in clause 5 has

27
been completed by the National Council in a time-bound manner, the power for periodic
review and resultant modifications should continue to be vested with the National Council.
Element of any change in the context of local conditions should also be the responsibility
of the National Council only. (Para 19.2)
The Committee believes that the purpose of this provision is to provide sufficient
time to the existing healthcare establishments, which may or may not be registered under
other state legislations, to comply with the new standards under this new legislation. The
Committee welcomes the same and suggests that the procedure/application proforma should
be made simple along with nominal fees in order to encourage/motivate healthcare
establishments to get them registered. (Para 20.1)
The Committee also apprehends the misuse of the facility of provisional registration.
Implementation of clause 16(1), would mean that no preliminary enquiry is required to be
conducted by the authority for granting of provisional registration and thereby legally
enabling an establishment to run without any check and accountability. Thus the offenders
can take advantage of this by shifting their base after every three years and avoid a
permanent registration altogether. Clause 16 when interpreted along with clause 17
regarding validity of provisional registrations and clause 23 relating to time-limit for
provisional registration would literally mean that any clinical establishment can continue to
function without any enquiry whatsoever on the basis of provisional registration for years
together. The Committee can well imagine the time likely to be taken for the clinical
standards to be notified. A clinical establishment continuing to function for three years after
notification of standards without undergoing any kind of verification can not be considered
justifiable from any quarter. The Committee is of the firm view that provisional registration
should be a one time affair given for the minimum possible time, maximum for one year
with no facility for further extension of time. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
provisional registration should be allowed till the standards are made and once these
standards are fixed; no provisional registration should be allowed. The facility of provisional
registration should be aimed at/confined to the existing establishments in order to enable
them to adhere to the new standards. Any new establishment that comes up subsequent to
fixing and notification of standards should not be subjected to the process of provisional
registration. Therefore, Clause 14(1) should categorically state that provisional registration
is meant for establishments at the time of enactment of the legislation and till the
standards are notified, whichever is later. Similar facility may be given to all the
establishments of a State which adopts this legislation on a later date. (Para 20.2)
Several stakeholders advocated for a compulsory online procedure for registration,
which, in the opinion of the Committee, is not practical due to ground realities like non-
availability of infrastructural support etc. across the length and breadth of the country.
(Para 20.3)
The Committee after carefully examining the matter concludes that the very purpose
of legislation is to have uniform health standards throughout the country. Moreover, it is
up to the State Governments to align with the proposed legislation. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends no change in clause 14(5). However, the Committee has some
reservations about clause 14(4) as per which any clinical establishment in existence at the
time of the commencement of the Act, shall have to apply for registration within one year.
The Committee strongly feels that giving of one year’s time for simply filing an application
is not justified. It would have been appropriate if it had been made mandatory for clinical
establishment to apply for registration within the minimum required period; one month of
commencement of the Act. The Committee, therefore, recommends that clause 14(4) may
be modified accordingly. (Para 20.4)

28
The Committee is fully inclined to agree with the view that there should be no
requirement for applying afresh in case of a mere change of ownership or management.
However, there should be a provision whereunder prior intimation may be made mandatory
for such a change. With regard to the change of category, location of clinical establishment
or ceasing of its functioning, the matter has to be dealt with on a different footing. The
Committee feels that such structural changes are required to be looked into afresh. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that clause 20 may be modified so as to provide for
surrender of the certificate of registration followed by grant of fresh certificate in case of
change of category of clinical establishment or on its ceasing to function as such an
establishment. (Para 21.1)
The Committee feels that the expression “within next 45 days” is difficult to comply
with as it means the list would be updated on a daily basis and therefore complying with
such a provision is not practicable unless the list is published on the Net through a
computer programme. The Committee feels that the provision needs further elaboration for
the sake of clarity. (Para 22.1)
In view of Committee’s observations with regard to clauses 14, 16 and 17, Clauses
22 and 23 need to be deleted. (Para 23.2)
The Committee is of the view that there is no harm in displaying the information
pertaining to the healthcare establishments; on the contrary in this era of transparency and
accountability, it is the need of the hour. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
information pertaining to the establishments should be displayed on a dedicated website.
Further, after registration also, such details may be kept updated on net regarding all
establishments for public display to ensure transparency. (Para 24.3)
The Committee, however, does not agree with the view of not having any obligation on
the part of the Authority to conduct any inspection prior to grant of permanent registration.
The Authority can not shy away from its responsibility. Further, in the opinion of the
Committee, it may lead to corrupt practices. The Committee, accordingly, favours and
strongly recommends that no permanent registration should be granted unless inspection has
been carried out by the Authority. Moreover, the inspection report should be made public
through the Internet alongwith the details of the inspecting personnel. The status related to
the follow up action should also be made available on the Internet alongwith usual procedure.
This would allay fears of the private medical practitioners that the inspection clause would
lead to corruption and bias. It would further strengthen their accountability. (Para 24.4)
A point of view placed before the Committee to check frivolous, motivated and
baseless complaints was to have a penalty clause against those who file such complaints. The
Committee fully supports the apprehensions raised. However, the Committee is of the view
that such cases might be covered under other provisions of IPC Act or Cr PC. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to take up the case with the Law
Ministry and explore possibility of a penalty clause in the Act. (Para 24.5)
In this clause it has been stated that objections shall be communicated to the clinical
establishment for response within a period, as may be prescribed. The Ministry is of the
view that such period shall be provided in the rules. The Committee recommends that in
order to have clarity and for leaving no scope for ambiguity or manipulation, such details
should be provided for in the Act itself. Consequential changes in other clauses may be
made accordingly. (Para 25.1)
The Committee recommends that as given under various clauses for provisional
registration, clauses or sub-clauses on similar lines relating to validity of the permanent

29
registration certificate, display of registration certificate, its non-transferability and
publication of expiry of registration should be provided in the Act itself. (Para 26.2)
The Committee also strongly feels that no registration can be for an indefinite
period. Mechanism for renewal of certificate of registration has to be incorporated specially
in the Act itself. On a specific query in this regard, the Ministry clarified that such a
mechanism would be included in the Rules. The Committee is not inclined to agree with the
view of the Ministry in this regard. The Committee is of the view that such a provision
should be part of the Act itself. The Committee, therefore, recommends that a provision
regarding period of five years for renewal of the permanent registration certificate may be
inserted at the relevant place in the Bill. (Para 26.3)
The Committee is of the view that no single time limit can be fixed for all types of
cases where the establishments are required to respond to the show cause notice of the
Authority, which can vary from 2-3 days to say a month. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends insertion of suitable timeframe in the rules to be made in this regard
alongwith safeguard from its possible misuse by the habitual offenders. (Para 27.2)
The Committee also finds an important omission in the clause. The present provision
of the clause calls for action only after a due process is followed. There may be a situation
when the situation demands immediate action on the part of the Authority even before
following the due procedure. Therefore, some kind of enabling provision should be there for
temporary suspension which can be applied under grave situations in Public Interest.
(Para 27.3)
In view of the above, the Committee recommends inclusion of provisions for
immediate temporary suspension which can be applied by the appropriate authority under
grave situations in Public Interest, without following the due procedure. (Para 27.4)
The Committee is of the opinion that instead of a single person/authority, an
inspection team comprising of experts well-versed with all aspects of healthcare needs to be
involved in the task of inspection of clinical establishments. The Committee understands
that for inspection of medical colleges, inspection teams are sent. Position must be the
same in respect of other similar areas also. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
clause 33(1) may be modified accordingly. If need be, appropriate provision in the rules may
also be made. (Para 28.3)
As the Act does not put liability on the Authority to carry out inspections, the
Committee favours introduction of a sub-clause to incorporate a provision for some periodic
inspection by the authority being made mandatory. This will help in keeping a check on the
establishments. The Committee, accordingly, recommends inspection of all healthcare
establishments prior to giving permanent registration and subsequently at least once in a
period of two years. (Para 28.4)
Under clause 33(4), it is not mentioned that in what time-frame the establishment
is required to comply with the directions of the Authority. Therefore at the end of this para
of the sub-clause “within such time as indicated in the direction” may be added. This would
remove any ambiguity in this regard. (Para 28.5)
The Committee after careful deliberations is of the view that this clause is necessary
to have a check on the establishments running without proper registration certificate.
Therefore, the Authority needs to be provided with power to enter and search such
establishments which are suspected to be running without registration. As regards provision
of notice, it is necessary in order to allay fears among genuine healthcare establishments

30
of any misuse of power by the Authority. The Committee also recommends to include the
various powers like that of search, seizure etc. in the Act itself so as to make the powers
comprehensive and effective and not subject to litigations and interpretations. (Para 29.3)
The Committee opines that it is for the National Council to examine the issue of
classification of different healthcare establishments with due care for the local conditions.
However, the Committee is aware that the Department might have carefully arrived at the
figure of two per cent for remittance to the National Council. Therefore, there is no need
to comment on its appropriateness. The Committee also feels that the issue of fees should
be taken care of in the right earnest so that the cost of treatment does not escalate,
especially in case of small establishments which are catering to the healthcare requirements
of the masses in rural and remote areas. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that
feasibility of suitable fee relaxation to be given to the establishments being set up by the
charitable institutions, establishments providing free treatment to poor patients and
establishments being run in rural and remote areas, may be examined by the Department
and necessary modifications be carried out accordingly. (Para 30.2)
The Committee notes that under clause 35(3) it is written that “it shall...on time.”
The word “on time” means that fees should be remitted to the National Council on a
specific day; the clause however aims at remittance of fees within due time. Therefore, the
sub-clause may be modified as – “It...that the amount referred to in sub-section (2), is
remitted to the National Council, in time.” (Para 30.3)
After a close scrutiny, the Committee finds that the clause needs drastic
modifications. The Committee observes that there is no logic in making the State
Government as the appellate authority when there is next higher authority in the form of
State Registrar. Further, the important omission is timeline for preferring an appeal.
Besides, the provision for appeal under clause 36(1) does not cover other powers of the
authority like for enquiry, inspection etc. and also does not cover any other entity like
patients, NGOs etc. other than aggrieved by the order of Registering Authority. Moreover,
Committee notes that no appeal mechanism in respect of these penalties arising out of the
provisions from clause 40 to 46 has been provided. (Para 31.2)
The Committee strongly recommends that in view of its recommendation that the
State Registrar should be a multi-member body having Appellate powers; all the appeals
should be made to the State Registrar in place of the State Government. The Committee
recommends that besides cases pertaining to persons aggrieved by the order of Registering
Authority regarding refusal to grant or renewal or revoking of the certificate of
registration, the clause should be suitably modified to include provision of appeal from the
NGOs/Public/Local residents etc. who have filed their objections under clause 26. The
Committee would also like to point out that patients/their care takers may also be allowed
to have the right to appeal in case of medical negligence on the part of clinical
establishment. Necessary modification in clause 36 may, accordingly, be made. (Para 31.3)
The Committee also recommends that the procedure for appeal should also be
available for penalties arising out of the provisions under clause 40 to 46. In order to have
transparency in the system, the Committee also recommends that the period of preferring
an appeal should be one month from the date of order of refusal to grant, renew or revoke
certificate of registration to a healthcare establishment or, in case of patients or NGOs etc.
the verdict of the Registering Authority. Further, the appeals filed with the State Registrar
should be disposed of within a period of two months from the date of such filing.
(Para 31.4)

31
In the opinion of the Committee ‘without delay’ leaves scope for personal
interpretation. It should be specific. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the sub-
clause should be modified suitably as under—
(2) Every State shall supply in digital format to the Central Government, a copy of
the State register of healthcare establishments and shall inform the Central
Government, all additions to and other amendments in such register made for a
particular month, by the 15th day of the following month.
This will ensure timely updation of the National Register and proper compliance by
the State Registrars. (Para 32.2)
The Committee recommends that the National Register of the entire healthcare
establishments should be displayed on the dedicated website for the purpose, State-wise.
This would enable the general public to have an idea about the genuine establishments in
their area. (Para 33.2)
The clauses 40-46 deal with the penalties. These are dealt with under the chapter V-
“Register of Clinical Establishments”. In the opinion of the Committee, penalties should be
dealt with under a separate chapter. (Para 34.1)
The Committee during its course of deliberations with various stakeholders had
discussed the issue threadbare and has reached to the conclusion that the purpose of
penalties should be to ensure strict compliance of various health standards along with other
provisions of the Act. At the same time, the Committee also aligns with the apprehensions
of various stakeholders that the penalties cannot be made applicable on a uniform basis in
respect of all categories of clinical establishments. Accordingly, the Committee recommends
that the Ministry while framing rules in regard to penalties, should come up with detailed
provisions varying the monetary penalties according to size, type and local conditions of the
area in which the healthcare establishments are situated. (Para 34.3)
The Committee is of the opinion that sufficient provisions have been incorporated
under Clauses 32 and 33 for providing appropriate opportunity to the healthcare
establishments to rectify their shortcomings. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
the penalty provisions should be invoked only after giving them the appropriate opportunity
to rectify in case of registered healthcare establishments. (Para 34.4)
On a specific query on not having penalty of imprisonment, the Department
responded that this has been done to assure the medical fraternity that this Bill will not
be having an Inspector-Raj and will not be an impediment to their functioning. However, in
view of the aforesaid fact that the penalties would be applied only after giving sufficient
opportunity for rectification, the Committee differs with the view of the Department.
Suitable penalties are must in the form of imprisonment for habitual offenders in order to
instill sense of adherence to the provision of the Act. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends enhancement of penalty for second offence as “upto 1 Lakh rupees” and for
the third offence “upto 3 Lakh rupees alongwith imprisonment upto six months”  and for
subsequent offence, “upto Rs. 6 Lakh alongwith upto two years of imprisonment”.
(Para 34.5)
In the opinion of the Committee, the clause only provides for penalty that too
monetary in nature. It does not have any provision so as to ensure registration subsequent
to the detection of an unregistered establishment. The Committee accordingly recommends
that alongwith penalty of fifty thousand rupees at first conviction, a time limit of one
fortnight may be provided to the establishment to apply for registration under the Act. If

32
the establishment does not apply for registration during the said period and still continues
to function, it may be subjected to penalty for second offence which may include “upto two
lakh rupees alongwith seizure of equipments and machinery etc. and upto six months of
imprisonment” and for subsequent offence, “upto five lakh rupees alongwith seizure of
equipments and machinery etc. and imprisonment upto two years”. The Committee’s
recommendation under clause 40 regarding varying the monetary penalties according to
size, type and local conditions of the area in which the healthcare establishments are
situated and the imprisonment according to the gravity of the offence, may also be applied
here. (Para 35.2)
In the opinion of the Committee clause 41 (2), in its present form, would also be
applicable to the supporting staff like peons, sweepers and other staff providing non-
technical services that are generally illiterate or comparatively less educated. Therefore, in
order to save such staff from harassment, the Committee recommends exclusion of such
staff from the purview of this sub-clause. Further, the amount of penalties may be varied
according to the responsibility/position held by the staff in the healthcare establishment.
(Para 35.3)
The Committee is of the opinion that recovery of fine as arrears of land revenue
would be a long process. This would provide sufficient time to the establishment to shift its
base to some other place and start its activities afresh, thereby defeating the purpose of
immediate results. Accordingly, the Committee recommends that recovery may also include
forfeiture of assets of such Healthcare Establishment. (Para 36.1)
The Committee observes that several state laws on healthcare subject were enacted
but their relevant rules were framed after quite some time. The Committee, therefore,
recommends to the Ministry to frame the requisite rules pertaining to the Act, within a
period of six months from the date of its enactment. (Para 37.1)
In view of the role of the National Council, it is recommended that all the rules to
be framed by the Government should be in consonance with the functions carried out by
the National Council. (Para 37.2)
The Committee, during its interaction with various stakeholders has received a lot
of positive feedbacks. After extensive deliberations, the Committee is of the view that the
under mentioned provisions need to be examined in depth by the Department and wherever
feasible, included in the Act and Rules thereunder:—
• A chapter on provision for patients’ rights and duties of healthcare
establishments should be there.
• The information acquired in the course of enforcing this Act may be privileged
and confidential. Hence, in order to protect the interests of the patients and the
establishments, a confidentiality clause needs to be incorporated in the Act. Any
information which has been obtained from any hospital, medical clinic, clinical
laboratory or healthcare establishment in the course of carrying out any
investigation or performing any duty or function under this Act should not be
disclosed unless required to do so in case of a prosecution for an offence under
this Act or any regulations made thereunder.
• All the procedure with respect to application for registration, inspection and its
follow-up, complaint mechanism and its follow-up, National Register etc. may be
put on a dedicated website. This would make the entire process of registration,
inspection and complaint transparent.

33
• Committee notes that many tax exemptions are being provided to corporate and
business entities that are setting up their business establishments under Special
Economic Zones (SEZs). Similarly, in order to make health reach across the
length and breadth of this vast country, motivation in the form of tax
exemptions may be provided to healthcare establishments being opened in
remote, backward and rural areas. The matter may, therefore be taken up with
the Finance Ministry.
• Maximum charges regarding the facilities available in the healthcare
establishment alongwith contact details of the authority members to which any
complaint may be made regarding non-adherence of the provisions of the Act,
may be made mandatory to be displayed prominently at a conspicuous place
preferably at the entrance of the establishment. Further, provision should be
made to supply receipts of payments received alongwith the treatment/diagnosis
details to the patients. (Para 38.1)

MINUTES

37
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 31st October, 2007 in Committee Room
“E”, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
 1. Prof. P.J. Kurien — In the Chair
2. Shrimati Maya Singh
LOK SABHA
3. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
4. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
5. Shri Rajendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Dr. Chinta Mohan
10. Shri Nihal Chand
11. Dr. R Senthil
12. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
13. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
14. Shri R.L. Jalappa
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Joint Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
A. On the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007
(i) Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
(ii) Dr. R.K. Srivastava, Director-General, Health Services
(iii) Shri Vineet Chawdhry, Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
B. * * *
2. In the absence of Chairman of the Committee, Prof P.J. Kurien presided over the meeting.
3. The Committee discussed its future programme. Given the wider ramifications of the two
Bills i.e. *** and the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 under its
*** Pertains to other matters.

38
consideration, the Committee was of the opinion that there was a need to interact with a number
of stakeholders and State Governments and also undertake study visits before finalizing the Reports.
The Committee, accordingly, approved an action plan for the purpose.
4. * * *
5. Thereafter, the Committee first heard the Secretary and other representatives of the
Department of Health and Family Welfare on the Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Bill, 2007. Initially, Joint Secretary of the Department made a brief presentation
shedding light on various facets of the Bill. During the course of discussion that followed the
presentation, the Chairman and Members raised several queries, particularly on the definition of
Clinical Establishments and their registration, standards to be laid down for clinical establishments,
powers of the “National Council,” penal provisions for non compliance etc. Some of the queries
were replied to by the witnesses and in respect of the remaining queries, the Committee directed
the Secretary of the Department to furnish the same at the earliest. The Committee also directed
the Secretariat to send a set of questionnaire to the Secretary for furnishing detailed replies.
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.
*** Pertains to other matters.

39
39
*** Pertains to other matters.
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 25th January, 2008 in Committee Room
“A”, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, and New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Digvijay Singh — In the Chair
2. Prof. P.J. Kurien
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri Lalhming Liana
LOK SABHA
5. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
6. Shri Vinod Kumar
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Shri Rasheed Masood
9. Shri Nihal Chand
10. Shrimati K. Rani
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
12. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
A. * * *
B. * * *
The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007.
A. Representatives of Quality Council of India:—
1. Mr. Girdhar J. Gyani, Secretary General
2. Dr. Y . P. Bhatia,  Representative, Quality Council of India
B. Representatives of Indian Medical Association (Regd.):—
1. Dr. M. Abbas, National President, IMA
2. Dr. S.N. Misra, Hony. Secretary General, IMA

40
2. In the absence of Chairman, Shri Digvijay Singh, M.P. presided over the meeting. At the
outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about the progress
made so far with regard to examination of *** the Clinical Establishment (Registration
and Regulation) Bill-2007, including the study visit undertaken by the Committee from 7th to
14th January, 2008 to Bangaluru, Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and Hyderabad.
3. * * *
4. * The Committee reiterated its decision taken during its study visit referred to above
for undertaking another study visit to Indore, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Goa from 12th to
19th February, 2008, on both the Bills. The Committee authorized its Chairman to seek necessary
permission from Hon’ble Chairman Rajya Sabha in this regard.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Indian Medical
Association (IMA) and Quality Council of India on the Clinical Establishment (Registration and
Regulation) Bill-2007.
9. Representatives from the Indian Medical Association (IMA), inter alia , stated that the said
Bill was an unwarranted, undesirable and impracticable solution to the problem of Health. They
were also of the opinion that the proposed Bill will pave way for Inspector Ray and promote
corruption. They further stated that all the doctors and Clinical Establishments like Hospitals,
Nursing Homes were registered by different governments and statutory bodies like Medical Council
of India, State Medical Councils and Health Departments of the State through its different agencies
and that was why this Bill would lead to duplication or triplication of the registration and add to
the cost of treatment to the common man.
10. Representatives from the Quality Council of India (QCI), inter alia , pleaded for its inclusion
as one of the Members to the National Council proposed in the Bill, as the Quality Council of India
(QCI) has on its Committee a number of health professionals including assessors and experts on
developing health standards. They were also of the opinion that the role of the Government should
be limited to enacting laws, policy making etc. Independent regulators should be appointed to
oversee compliance of the Act.
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
12. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 
P.M.
*** Pertain to other matters.

41
RECORD OF DISCUSSION OF THE MEETING OF THE
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 27th May, 2008 in Committee Room No.
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Maya Singh
3. Shri Digvijay Singh
4. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Rajendra Kumar
6. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
7. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
8. Dr. Chinta Mohan
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran
10. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R B. Gupta, Director
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of the Medical Council of India
1. Lt. Col. (Retd.) Dr. A.R.N. Setalvad, Secretary, MCI
2. Dr. V ed Prakash Mishra, Member, Executive Committee, MCI
II. * * *
III. * * *
IV. * * *
V. * * *
VI. * * *
*** Pertain to other matters.
41

42
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about
the progress made so far regarding the examination of the three Bills, viz. , the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007, ***
3. The Committee heard representatives of the Medical Council of India (MCI) on the Clinical
Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007.
The Secretary of MCI made a power-point presentation. Members sought clarifications
which were replied to.
4. * * *
5. The Committee adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. for tea and after the break, in the absence of the
Chairman, Dr. Karan Singh Yadav, M.P. presided over the meeting.
6. * * *
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.03 
P.M.
*** Pertain to other matters.

43
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 9th June, 2008 in Committee Room No.
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof P.J. Kurien
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
4. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
5. Shri Rajeev Shukla
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
7. Shri Rajendra Kumar
8. Shrimati Susheela Bangaru Laxman
9. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
10. Shri Pannian Ravindran
11. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. V . K Agnihotri, Secretary-General
Shrimati V andana Garg, Joint Secretary
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of Bureau of Indian Standards
1. Shri Tilak Raj, Director Legal
2. Shri Rahul Kumar, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MHD)
3. Shri C.P. Puri, Scientist ‘E’ (MHD)
4. Shri Sanjay Arora, S.O. (Legal)
II. Representatives of Dental Council of India
1. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Dr. P.N. Awasthi, Secretary, Dental Council of India
2. Prof. Anmol Kalha, Head PG studies IDST, Modi Nagar
III. * * *
IV. * * *
43
*** Pertains to other matters.

44
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting and apprised them about
the progress made so far regarding the examination of the three Bills, viz. , the Clinical
Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007, *
3. The Committee heard representatives of the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and the
Dental Council of India (DCI) on the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Bill, 2007. Members sought clarifications which were replied to.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.
*** Pertains to other matters.

45
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 23rd October, 2008 in Committee Room
No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Amar Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Viplove Thakur
3. Shri Su. Thirunavukkarasar
LOK SABHA
4. Dr. Ram Chandra Dome
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri S. Mallikarjuniah
7. Dr. Chinta Mohan
8. Shrimati K. Rani
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran
10. Dr. R. Senthil
11. Dr. Arvind Kumar Sharma
12. Shri Uday Singh
13. Dr. Karan Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri R. B. Gupta, Director
Shrimati Arpana Mendiratta, Deputy Director
Shri Dinesh Singh, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee. The Committee then
considered the draft Report on the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007.
After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report.
3. The Committee, thereafter, decided that the Report may be presented to the Rajya Sabha
and laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Friday, the 24th October, 2008. The Committee
authorized the Chairman of the Committee and in his absence Shrimati Viplove Thakur and in her
absence Shri Digvijay Singh to present the Report in Rajya Sabha, and Dr. Karan Singh Yadav, and
in his absence Dr. Ram Chandra Dome to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.
45

ANNEXURES

AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
30 August, 2007
Bill No. 71 of 2007
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS (REGISTRATION AND
REGULATION) BILL, 2007
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, application and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
THE N ATIONAL C OUNCIL
3. Establishment of National Council.
4. Disqualifications for appointment as member.
5. Functions of National Council.
6. Power to seek advice or assistance.
7. National Council to follow consultative process.
CHAPTER III
REGISTRATION  AND STANDARDS  FOR CLINICAL  ESTABLISHMENTS
8. State Registrar of clinical establishments.
9. Providing information to National Council.
10. Authority for registration.
11. Registration for clinical establishments.
12. Conditions for registration.
13. Classification of clinical establishments.
CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE  FOR REGISTRATION
14. Application for provisional certificate of registration.
15. Provisional certificate.
16. No inquiry prior to provisional registration.
17. Validity of provisional registration.
18. Display of the certificate of registration.
19. Duplicate certificate.
49
ANNEXURE-I

50
CLAUSES
20. Certificate to be non-transferable.
21. Publication of expiry of registration.
22. Renewal of registration.
23. Time-limit for provisional registration.
24. Application for permanent registration.
25. Verification of application.
26. Display of information for filing objections.
27. Communication of objections.
28. Standards for permanent registration.
29. Allowing or disallowing of registration.
30. Certificate of permanent registration.
31. Fresh application for permanent registration.
32. Cancellation of registration.
33. Inspection of registered clinical establishments.
34. Power to enter.
35. Finance and accounts.
36. Appeal.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTER  OF CLINICAL  ESTABLISHMENT
37. Register of clinical establishments.
38. Maintenance of State register of clinical establishments.
39. Maintenance of all-India register of clinical establishments.
40. Penalty.
41. Penalty for non-registration.
42. Disobedience of order, obstruction and refusal of information.
43. Penalty for minor deficiencies.
44. Contravention by companies.
45. Offences by Government Departments.
46. Recovery of fine.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
47. Protection of action taken in good faith.
48. Furnishing of returns, etc.
49. Power to give directions.
50. Employees of the authority, etc. to be public servants.
51. Power to remove difficulties.
52. Power of Central Government to make rules.
53. Laying of rules.
54. Power of State Government to make rules.
55. Laying of rules.
56. Savings.
THE SCHEDULE.

51
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 71 of 2007
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENT (REGISTRATION AND
REGULATION) BILL, 2007
A
BILL
to provide for the registration and regulation of clinical
establishments in the country and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS , it is considered expedient to provide for the
registration and regulation of clinical establishments with a view to
prescribe minimum standards of facilities and services which may
be provided by them so that mandate of article 47 of the
Constitution for improvement in public health may be achieved;
A
ND WHEREAS, Parliament has no power to make laws for
the States with respect to any of the matters aforesaid except as
provided in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution;
A
ND WHEREAS, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of
the Constitution, resolutions have been passed by all the Houses of
the Legislatures of the States of Arunachal Pradesh Himachal
Pradesh, Mizoram and Sikkim to the effect that the matters
aforesaid should be regulated in those States by Parliament by law;
51

52
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Clinical Establishments
(Registration and Regulation) Act. 2007.
(2) It applies, in the first instance, to the whole of the States
of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Sikkim and
the Union territories; and it shall apply to such other State which
adopts this Act by resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1)
of article 252 of the Constitution.
(3) It shall come into force at once in the States of Arunachal
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Sikkim and the Union
territories, on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint and in any other State which adopts this Act
under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, on the date of
such adoption; and any reference in this Act to the commencement
of this Act shall, in relation to any State or Union territory, mean the
date on which this Act comes into force in such a State or Union
territory:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different
categories of clinical establishments and for different recognised
systems of medicine.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “authority” means the district registering authority
designated under section 10;
(b) “certificate” means certificate of registration issued
under section 30;
(c) “clinical establishment” means—
(i) a hospital, maternity home, nursing home,
dispensary, clinic, sanatorium or an institution by
whatever name called that offers services, facilities
with beds requiring diagnosis, treatment or care for
illness, injury, deformity, abnormality or pregnancy in
any recognised system of medicine established and
administered or maintained by any person or body of
persons, whether incorporated or not; or
(ii) a place established as an independent entity
or part of an establishment referred to in clause ( i), in
connection with the diagnosis or treatment of diseases
where pathological, bacteriological, genetic, radiological,
chemical, biological investigations or other diagnostic or
investigative services with the aid of laboratory or other
medical equipment, are usually carried on, established
and administered or maintained by any person or body
of persons, whether incorporated or not,
Short title,
application
and com-
mencement
Definitions.

53
and shall include a clinical establishment owned, controlled or
managed by,—
(1) the Government or a department of the Government;
(2) a Trust, whether public or private;
(3) a Corporation (including a cooperative society)
registered under a Central, Provincial or State Act, whether or
not owned by the Government;
(4) a local authority; and
(5) a single doctor establishment,
but does not include the clinical establishments owned,
controlled or managed by the Armed Forces.
Explanation .— For the purpose of this clause “Armed
Forces” means the forces constituted under the Army
Act, 1950, the Air Force Act, 1950 and the Navy 46 Act, 1957;
(d) “National Council” means the National Council for
clinical establishments established under section 3;
(e) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act by the Central Government or, as the case may be,
the State Government;
(g) “recognised system of medicine” means Allopathy,
Yoga, Naturopathy, Ayurveda, Homoeopathy, Siddha and Unani
Systems of medicines or any other system of medicine as
may be recognized by the Central Government;
(h) “register” means the register maintained by the
authority, State Registrar and the Central Government under
sections 37, 38 and 39 respectively of this Act containing the
number of clinical establishments registered and the expressions
“registered” and “registration” shall be construed accordingly;
(i) “registration” means to register under section 11 and
the expression registration or registered shall be construed
accordingly;
(j) “rules” means rules made under this Act;
(k) “Schedule” means Schedule to this Act;
(l) “standards” means conditions that the Central
Government may prescribe under section 12, for the registration
of clinical establishments; and
(m) “State Government” in relation to a Union Territory
means the Administrator thereof appointed under article 239
of the Constitution.
46 of 1950.
45 of 1950.
62 of 1957.

54
CHAPTER II
THE N ATIONAL C OUNCIL
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established
for the purposes of this Act, a Council to be called the National
Council.
(2) The National Council shall consist of—
(a) Director General of Health Services, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Central Government, ex
officio, who shall be the Chairperson;
(b) one representative each to be elected by the—
(i) Dental Council of India constituted
under section 3 of the Dentists Act, 1948;
(ii) Medical Council of India constituted
under section 3 of the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956;
(iii) Nursing Council of India constituted
under section 3 of the Indian Nursing Council
Act, 1947;
(iv) Pharmacy Council of India constituted
under section 3 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948;
(c) three representatives to be elected by the
Central Council of Indian Medicine representing the
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems of medicine
constituted under section 3 of the Indian Medicine
Central Council Act, 1970;
(d) one representative to be elected by the Central
Council constituted under section 3 of the Homoeopathy
Central Council Act, 1973;
(e) one representative to be elected by the Central
Council of the Indian Medical Association constituted
under section 3 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956;
(f) one representative of Bureau of the Indian
Standards constituted under section 3 of the Bureau of
Indian Standards Act, 1986;
(g) two representatives from the Zonal Councils set
up under section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956;
(h) two representatives from the North-Eastern
Council set up under section 3 of the North-Eastern
Council Act, 1971;
(i) one representative from the line of paramedical
systems;
Establishment
of National
Council.
16 of 1948.
102 of 1956.
48 of 1947.
8 of 1948.
48 of 1970.
59 of 1973.
102 of 1956.
63 of 1986.
37 of 1956.
84 of 1971.

55
(j) the Central Government may nominate not
more than three eminent representatives of other
recognized systems of medicine of which no statutory
regulatory authority has been set up.
(3) The nominated members of the National Council shall hold
office for one year but shall be eligible for re-nomination.
(4) The elected members of the National Council shall hold
office for three years, but shall be eligible for re-election:
Provided that the person nominated or elected, as the case
may be, shall hold office for so long as he holds appointment of the
office by virtue of which he was nominated or elected to the
National Council.
(5) The members of the National Council shall be entitled for
such allowances as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(6) The National Council may, subject to the previous
approval of the Central Government, make bye-laws fixing a quorum
and regulating its own procedure and the conduct of all business to
be transacted by it.
(7) The National Council may constitute sub-committees and
may appoint to such sub-committee, as it deems fit, consisting of
members who are not members of the Council for such periods, not
exceeding two years, for the consideration of particular matters.
(8) The functions of the National Council may be exercised
notwithstanding any vacancy therein.
(9) The Central Government shall appoint a person to be the
Secretary of the National Council and may provide the Council with
such other secretarial and other staff as the Central Government
considers necessary.
4. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a
member of the National Council if he—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment
for an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a
competent court; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of
the Government or a Corporation owned or controlled by the
Government; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such
financial or other interest in the Council as is likely to affect
prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a
member.
Disqualifica-
tions for
appointment
as member.

56
5. The National Council shall—
(a) determine the standards for ensuring proper health
care by the clinical establishments;
(b) classify the clinical establishments into different
categories;
(c) develop the minimum standards and their periodic
review;
(d) compile, maintain and update a national register of
clinical establishments;
(e) collect the statistics in respect of clinical establishments;
(f) perform any other function determined by the
Central Government, from time to time.
6. The National Council may associate with itself any person
or body whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out
any of the provisions of this Act.
7. The National Council shall follow a consultative process
for determining the standards and for classification of clinical
establishments in accordance with such procedure as may be
prescribed.
CHAPTER III
R
EGISTRATION  AND STANDARDS  FOR CLINICAL  E STABLISHMENTS
8. Every State Government shall, by notification, designate the
Director of Health Services (by whatever name called) or any other
officer subordinate to him as the Registrar of clinical establishments.
9. It shall be the responsibility of the Registrar of clinical
establishments to compile and update the State register of clinical
establishments and further to send monthly returns in digital format
for updating the national register.
10. The State Government shall, by notification, designate the
District Health Officer or the Chief Medical Officer (by whatever
name called) as an authority to be called the district registering
authority for each district for registration of clinical establishments.
11. No person shall carry on a clinical establishment unless it
has been duly registered in accordance with the provisions of this
Act.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this section, “carry on”
means to admit patients in a clinical establishment for providing
treatment, diagnosis, or nursing care.
12.  For registration and continuation, every clinical
establishment shall fulfil—
(i) the minimum standards of facilities and services as
may be prescribed;
Functions of
National
Council.
Power to seek
advice or
assistance.
National
Council to
follow
consultative
process.
State Registrar
of clinical
establishments.
Providing
information
to National
Council.
Authority for
registration.
Registration
for clinical
establishments.
Conditions for
registration.

57
(ii) the minimum qualifications for the personnel as
may be prescribed;
(iii ) provisions for maintenance of records and
reporting as may be prescribed;
(iv) such other conditions as may be prescribed.
13. ( 1) Clinical establishment of different systems shall be
classified into such categories, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, from time to time.
(2) Different standards may be prescribed for classification of
different categories referred to in sub-section ( 1):
Provided that in prescribing the standards for clinical
establishments, the Central Government shall have regard to the
local conditions.
CHAPTER IV
P
ROCEDURE  FOR REGISTRATION
14. ( 1) For the purposes of registration of the clinical
establishment under section 10, an application in the prescribed
proforma along with the prescribed fee shall be furnished to the
authority.
(2) The application shall be furnished in person or by post or
online.
(3) The application shall be made in such form and shall be
accompanied by such details as may be prescribed under this Act or
rules made thereunder.
(4) If any clinical establishment is in existence at the time of
the commencement of this Act, an application for its registration
shall be made within one year from the date of the commencement
of this Act.
(5) If any clinical establishment is already registered under
any existing law requiring registration of such establishments, even
then it shall apply for registration as referred to in sub-section ( 1).
15. The authority shall, within a period of ten days from the
date of receipt of such application, grant to the applicant a
certificate of provisional registration in such form and of containing
such particulars and such information, as may be prescribed.
16. ( 1) The authority shall not be required to conduct any
inquiry prior to the grant of provisional registration.
(2) Notwithstanding the grant of the provisional certificate of
registration, the authority shall, within a period of forty-five days
from the grant of provisional registration, cause to be published in
such manner, as may be prescribed, all particulars of the clinical
establishment proposed to be registered.
Classification
of clinical
establishments.
Provisional
certificate.
Application
for
provisional
certificate of
registration.
No inquiry
prior to
provisional
registration.

58
17. Every provisional registration shall be valid to the last day
of the twelfth month from the date of issue of the certificate of
registration and such registration shall be renewable.
18. The certificate shall be kept affixed in a conspicuous
place in the clinical establishment in such manner so as to be visible
to every one visiting such establishment.
19. In case the certificate is lost, destroyed, mutilated or
damaged, the authority shall issue a duplicate certificate on the
request of the clinical establishment and on the payment of such
fees, as may be prescribed.
20. The certificate of registration shall be non-transferable
and, in the event of change of ownership or change of category or
change of management or on ceasing to function as a clinical
establishment, the certificate of registration shall be surrendered to
the authority and the clinical establishment shall apply afresh for
grant of certificate of registration.
21. The authority shall also cause to be published in such
manner, as may be prescribed, the names of clinical establishments
whose registration would be expiring within the next forty-five
days.
22. Application for renewal of registration shall be made thirty
days before the expiry of the validity of the certificate of provisional
registration and, in case the application for renewal is made after the
expiry of the provisional registration, the authority shall allow
renewal of registration on payment of such enhanced fees, as may
be prescribed.
23.  Where clinical establishments in respect of which
standards have been notified by the Central Government, provisional
registration shall not be granted or renewed beyond a period of three
years from the date of notification of standards.
24. Application for permanent registration by a clinical
establishment shall be made to the authority in such form and be
accompanied by such fees, as may be prescribed.
25. The clinical establishment shall submit evidence of the
clinical establishment having complied with the prescribed minimum
standards in such manner, as may be prescribed.
26. As soon as the clinical establishment submits the required
evidence of the clinical estabishment having complied with the
prescribed minimum standards, the authority shall cause to be
displayed for information of the public at large and for filing
objections, if any, in such manner, as may be prescribed, all
evidence submitted by the clinical establishment of having complied
with the prescribed minimum standards for a period of thirty days
before processing for grant of permanent registration.
validity of
provisional
registration.
Publication of
expiry of
registration.
Renewal of
registration.
Time-limit
for
provisional
registration.
Application
for permanent
registration.
Display of
the certificate
of
registration.
Duplicate
certificate.
Certificate to
be non-
transferable.
Verification of
application.
Display of
information
for filing
objections.

59
27. If objections are received within the period referred to in
the preceding section, such objections shall be communicated to the
clinical establishment for response within a period, as may be
prescribed.
28. Permanent registration shall be granted only when a
clinical establishment fulfils the prescribed standards for registration
by the Central Government.
29. The authority shall pass an order immediately after the
expiry of the prescribed period and within the next thirty days
thereafter either—
(a) allowing the application for permanent registration;
or
(b) disallowing the application:
Provided that the authority shall record its reasons, if it
disallows an application for permanent registration.
30. The authority shall issue a certificate of permanent
registration in such form and containing such particulars, as may be
prescribed, if the authority allows an application.
31.  The disallowing of an application for permanent
registration shall not debar a clinical establishment from applying
afresh for permanent registration under section 24 and after
providing such evidence, as may be required, of having rectified the
deficiencies on which grounds the earlier application was disallowed.
32. ( 1) If, at any time after any clinical establishment has
been registered, the authority is satisfied that,—
(a) the conditions of the registration are not being
complied with; or
(b) the person entrusted with the management of the
clinical establishment has been convicted of an offence
punishable under this Act,
it may issue a show cause notice as to why its registration under
this Act should not be cancelled for the reasons to be mentioned in
the notice.
(2) If after giving a reasonable opportunity to the clinical
establishment, the authority is satisfied that there has been a breach
of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder,
it may, without prejudice to any other action that it may take against
such clinical establishment, cancel its registration.
(3) Every order made under sub-section ( 1) shall take
effect—
(a) where no appeal has been preferred against such
order immediately on the expiry of the period prescribed for
such appeal; and
Communication
of objections.
Standards for
permanent
registration.
Allowing or
disallowing of
registration.
Certificate of
permanent
registration.
Fresh
application
for permanent
registration.
Cancellation
of
registration.

60
(b) where such appeal has been preferred and it has
been dismissed from the date of the order of such dismissal:
Provided that the authority, after cancellation of registration
for reasons to be recorded in writing, may restrain immediately the
clinical establishment from carrying on if there is imminent danger
to the health and safety of patients.
33. ( 1) The authority or an officer authorised by it, shall have
the right to cause an inspection of, or inquiry in respect of any
clinical establishment, its building, laboratories and equipment and
also of the work conducted or done by the clinical establishment, to
be made by such person or persons as it may direct and to cause
an inquiry to be made in respect of any other matter connected with
the clinical establishment and that establishment shall be entitled to
be represented thereat.
(2) The authority shall communicate to the clinical
establishment the views of that authority with reference to the
results of such inspection or inquiry and may, after ascertaining the
opinion of the clinical establishment thereon, advise that
establishment upon the action to be taken.
(3) The clinical establishment shall report to the authority, the
action, if any, which is proposed to be taken or has been taken
upon the results of such inspection or inquiry and such report shall
be furnished within such time, as the authority may direct.
(4) Where the clinical establishment does not, within a
reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the authority, it
may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation
made by the clinical establishment, issue such directions, as that
authority deems fit, and the clinical establishment shall comply with
such directions.
34. The authority or an officer authorised by it may, if there
is any reason to suspect that anyone is carrying on a clinical
establishment without registration, enter and search in the manner
prescribed, at any reasonable time and the clinical establishment,
shall offer reasonable facilities for inspection or inquiry and be
entitled to be represented thereat:
Provided that no such person shall enter the clinical
establishment without giving notice of his intention to do so.
35. ( 1) The state Government may charge fees for different
categories of clinical establishments, as may be prescribed.
(2) The State Government shall remit two per cent. of the
fees collected from the clinical establishments for registration and
renewal to the National Council.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the Registrar of clinical
establishments to ensure that the amount referred to in sub-section
(2), is remitted to the National Council, on time.
Inspection of
registered
clinical
establish-
ments.
Power to
enter.
Finance and
accounts.

61
36. ( 1) Any person, aggrieved by an order of the registering
authority refusing to grant or renew a certificate of registration or
revoking a certificate of registration may, in such manner and within
such period as may be prescribed, prefer an appeal to the State
Government:
Provided that the State Government may entertain an appeal
preferred after the expiry of the prescribed period if it is satisfied
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring
the appeal in time.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be made in such
form and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER V
R
EGISTER  OF CLINICAL  ESTABLISHMENTS
37. (1) The authority shall maintain in digital format a register
of clinical establishments, registered by it and it shall enter the
particulars of the certificate so issued in a register to be maintained
in such form and manner, as may be prescribed by the State
Government.
(2) Each authority, including any other authority set up for
the registration of clinical establishments under any other law for
the time being in force, shall supply in digital format to the State
Registrar of clinical establishments a copy of every entry made in
the register of clinical establishments in such manner, as may be
prescribed to ensure that the State Register is constantly up-to-date
with the registers maintained by the registering authority in the
State.
38. ( 1) Every State shall maintain in digital and in such form
and containing such particulars, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, a register to be known as the State register of clinical
establishments in respect of clinical establishments of that State.
(2) Every State shall supply in digital format to the Central
Government, a copy of the State register of clinical establishments
and shall inform the Central Government without delay of all
additions to and other amendments in such register made, from time
to time.
39. The Central Government shall maintain in digital
format an all-India register to be called as the national
register of clinical establishments that shall be an amalgam of
the State register of clinical establishments maintained by the
State Governments.
40. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act shall, if no
penalty is provided elsewhere, be punishable for the first offence
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, for any second
offence with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and
for any subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
Appeal.
Register of
clinical
establish-
ments.
Maintenance
of State
register of
clinical
establishments.
Maintenance
of all-India
register of
clinical
establishments.
Penalty.

62
41. ( 1) Whoever carries on a clinical establishment without
registration shall, on conviction for first offence, be punishable with
a fine up to fifty thousand rupees, for second offence with fine
which may extend to two lakh rupees and for any subsequent
offence with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever knowingly serves in a clinical establishment
which is not duly registered under this Act, shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.
42. ( 1) Whoever willfully disobeys any direction lawfully
given by any person or authority empowered under this Act to give
such direction, or obstructs any person or of authority in the
discharge of any functions which such person or authority is
required or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever being required by or under this Act to supply
any information wilfully withholds such information or gives
information which he knows to be false or which he does not
believe to be true, shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to five lakh rupees.
43. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or any
rule made thereunder resulting in deficiencies that do not pose any
imminent danger to the health and safety of any patient and can be
rectified within a reasonable time, shall be punishable with fine
which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
44. ( 1) Where a person committing contravention of any of
the provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder is a
company, every person who, at the time the contravention was
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall
be liable to fine:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that
the contravention was committed without his knowledge or that he
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any
rule made thereunder has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that contravention and shall be liable to fine.
Explanation .— For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a
firm or other association of individuals; and
Penalty for
non-registra-
tion.
Disobedience
of order,
obstruction
and refusal of
information.
Penalty for
minor
deficiencies.
Contravention
by companies.

63
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in
the firm.
45. ( 1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by any Department of Government, the Head of the Department
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render
such Head of the Department liable to any punishment if he proves
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such
offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
Department of Government and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable
to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head of
the Department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
46. Whoever fails to pay the fine, the Registrar of clinical
establishment may prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the
fine due from such person and send it to the Collector of the
District in which such person owns any property or resides or
carries on his business and the said Collector, on receipt of such
certificate, shall proceed to recover from such person the amount
specified thereunder, as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
47. ( 1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall
lie against any authority or any member of the National Council or
any officer authorised in this behalf in respect of anything, which
is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the
provisions of of this Act or any rule made thereunder.
(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against a State
Government or the Central Government in respect of any loss or
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of
this Act or any rule made thereunder.
48. Every clinical establishment shall, within such time or
within such extended time, as may be prescribed in that behalf,
furnish to the authority or the State Registrar or the National
Council such returns or the statistics and other information in such
manner, as may be prescribed by the State Government, from time
to time.
Offences by
Government
Departments.
Furnishing of
returns, etc.
Recovery of
fine.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.

64
49. Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act,
the authority shall have the power to issue such directions, including
furnishing returns, statistics and other information for the proper
functioning of clinical establishments and such directions shall be
binding.
50. Every employee of the authority and the National Council
shall be deemed to, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance
of any of the provisions of this Act, be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
51.  ( 1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to
be necessary or expedient for removal of the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of
a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may
be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
52. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification, make
rules for carrying out all or any of the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) allowances for the members of the National Council
under sub-section (5) of section 3;
(b) the determination of standards and for classification
of clinical establishments under section 7;
(c) classification of clinical establishment under sub-
section (1) of section 13;
(d) the different standards for classification of clinical
establishments under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(e) the minimum standards for permanent registration
under section 28;
(f) the form and particulars to be contained in the
register to be maintained under section 38.
53. Every rule made by the Central Government under this
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
Power to give
directions.
Employees of
the authority,
etc., to be
public
servants.
Power of
Central
Government
to make rules.
Laying of
rules.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
45 of 1860.

65
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
54. ( 1) The State Government may, by notification, make
rules for carrying out in respect of matters which do not fall within
the purview of section 52.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the conditions for registration under section 12;
(b) the proforma and the fee to be paid for registration
under sub-section ( 1) of section 14;
(c) the form and details of application under section 14( 3);
(d) the particulars and information contained in
certificate of provisional registration under section 15;
(e) the manner of publication of all particulars of the
clinical establishment proposed to be registered under
section 16(2);
(f) the fees to be paid to issue a duplicate certificate
under section 19;
(g) the manner in which the authority shall publish the
names of the clinical establishments whose registration would
be expiring under section 21;
(h) the enhanced fees to be charged for renewal after
expiry of provisional registration under section 22;
(i) the form of the application and fees to be charged
by the State Government under section 24;
(j) the manner of submitting evidence of the clinical
establishments having complied with the minimum standards
under section 25;
(k) the manner of displaying information of the clinical
establishments having complied with the minimum standards
for filing objection under section 26;
(l) the period within which the objections to be
communicated to the clinical establishment under section 27;
(m) the expiry of period specified in section 29;
(n) the form and particulars of the certificate of
registration under section 30;
(o) the manner of entry and inspection of clinical
establishment under section 34;
Power of State
Government
to make rules.

66
(p) the fees to be charged by the State Government for
different categories of clinical establishments under sub-
section (I) of section 35;
(q) the manner and the period within which an appeal
may be preferred to the State Government under sub-
section ( 1) of section 36;
(r) the form and the fee to be paid for an appeal under
sub-section ( 2) of section 36;
(s) the form and the manner in which the register to be
maintained under sub-section ( 1) of section 37;
(t) the manner of supply to the State Registrar in digital
format the entry made in the register of clinical establishments
under sub-section (2) of section 37;
(u) the manner and the time within which the
information is to be furnished under section 48;
(v) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed by the State Government.
55. Every rule made by the State Government under this
section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each
House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
56. ( 1) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the
States in which the enactments specified in the Schedule are
applicable.
(2) The Central Government may, as and when consider
necessary, by notification amend the Schedule.
Laying of
rules.
Savings.

67
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 56)
1. The Andhra Pradesh Private Medical Care Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Act, 2002.
2. The Bombay Nursing Homes Registration Act, 1949.
3. The Madhya Pradesh Upcharya Griha Tatha Rujopchar Sambandhi
Sthapnaye (Ragistrikaran Tatha Anugyapan) Adhiniyam, 1973.
4. The Manipur Homes and Clinics Registration Act, 1992.
5. The Nagaland Health Care Establishments Act, 1997.
6. The Orissa Clinical Establishments (Control and Regulation) Act, 1990.
7. The Punjab State Nursing Home Registration Act, 1991.
8. The West Bengal Clinical Establishments Act, 1950.
67

68
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present, the supervision and regulation of the quality of services provided
by the health care delivery system to the people by both public and private sectors
has largely remained a contentious and therefore, unresolved issue. The current
structure of the health care delivery system does not provide enough incentives for
improvement in efficiency. The private sector health care delivery system in India
has remained largely unregulated and uncontrolled. Problems range from inadequate
and inappropriate treatment, excessive use of higher technologies, and wasting of
scarce resources to serious problems of medical malpractice and negligence.
2. Despite many State Legislatures having enacted laws for regulating health
care providers, the general perception is that current regulatory process for health
care providers in India is inadequate or not responsive to ensure health care
services of acceptable quality and prevent negligence. Concerns about how to
improve health care quality have continued to be frequently raised by the general
public and a wide variety of stakeholders, including Government, professional
associations, private providers, agencies financing health care, National Human
Rights Commission and also by judiciary.
3. Accordingly, a need has long been felt for a central legislation for ensuring
uniform standards of facilities and services by the clinical establishments throughout
the State Where the Legislative Assemblies have passed resolutions under article
252 of the Constitution and the Union territories and the States which may adopt
the legislation by such resolutions.
4. The salient features of the proposed legislation, inter alia,  are as follows:
(i) the proposed legislation provides for the constitution of a National
Council consisting of representatives of the Dental Council of India, the
Nursing Council of India, the Pharmacy Council of India, the Indian Medicines
representing the Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homoeopathy systems, the
Indian Medical Associations, the Bureau of Indian Standards, the Zonal
Councils set up under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the North Eastern
Council, etc.;
(ii) the function of the National Council shall be to determine the
standards for clinical establishments, classify the clinical establishment into
different categories, develop the minimum standards and their periodic
review, compile, maintain and update a national register of clinical
establishments, perform any other function determined by the Central
Government, from time to time;
(iii) the concerned State Government shall designate the Director of
Health Services or any other officer subordinate to him as the Registrar of
clinical establishments. The State Registrar of clinical establishments shall
compile and update the State register of clinical establishments and further
send the same in digital format for updating the national register;
68

69
(iv) the concerned State Government shall, by notification, designate
the District Health Officer or the Chief Medical Officer as district registering
authority for registration of clinical establishments;
(v) no person shall carry on a clinical establishment unless it has been
registered in accordance with the provisions of the proposed Bill. The
legislation would not apply to the clinical establishments of the Armed
Forces;
(vi) it is proposed that clinical establishments already in existence may
be allowed for provisional registration to carry out their business. There shall
be no prior enquiry for provisional registration. But the Authority shall have
power to make enquiry in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed;
(vii) the clinical establishment having provisional registration shall fulfil
the standards which may be notified for the purpose. The provisional
certificate shall not be granted or renewed beyond a period of three years
from the date of notification of standards;
(viii) any clinical establishment may apply for permanent registration
in such form and shall pay such fee as may be prescribed by the State
Government. A detailed procedure for permanent registration is being provided
in the proposed legislation;
(ix) the authority shall have power to cancel the registration of the
clinical establishment which fails to comply with the conditions prescribed by
the Central Government. The authority shall have power to inspect a registered
clinical establishment. Any person aggrieved by an order of the registering
authority shall prefer an appeal to the State Government;
(x) there shall be register of clinical establishments at the district level.
State level and the National level;
(xi) if any person contravenes any provisions of the proposed legislation
or any rules made thereunder, he shall be punished with fine. The maximum
penalty being provided is rupees five lakh.
5. Legislation in respect of “Public health and sanitation, hospitals and
dispensaries” relatable to Entry 6 of List II-State List in the Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution and Parliament has no power to make a law in the State (apart
from the provisions of articles 249, 250 and 252 of the Constitution) under article
252 of the Constitution where the legislatures of two or more States pass resolutions
in pursuance of article 252 of the Constitution empowering Parliament to pass the
necessary legislation on the subject a Bill may be introduced in Parliament. The
legislatures of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and
Sikkim have passed such resolutions. The Bill is intended to give effect to the
resolutions passed by the legislatures of the aforesaid States and to make also
provisions in respect to Union territories.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW D ELHI; ANBUMANI RAMADOSS.
The 7th August, 2007.

PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. Z.280l5/48/2000-H, dated the 22nd August, 2007 from
Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare to the Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed
Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 recommends to the
House the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
70

NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This clause provides for the short title of the proposed legislation,
its extent and commencement. The proposed legislation shall first come into force
at once in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Mizoram and Sikkim
which have already passed resolutions under article 252 of the Constitution and the
Union territories and also in any other State which may adopt the Act by a
resolution as aforesaid. Different dates may be appointed for different categories of
clinical establishments and for different recognised system of medicine to come
into force.
Clause 2 .—This clause seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill.
The definitions of the terms — “authority”, “certificate”, “clinical establishment”,
“National Council”, “notification”, “prescribed”, “recognised system of medicine”,
“register”, “registration”, “rules”, “Schedule”, “standards” and “State Government”
are given in the clause.
Clause 3 .—This clause provides for establishment of a Council to be called
the National Council consisting of the Director General of Health Services who
shall be the Chairperson and one representative each of the (i) Dental Council of
India, (ii) Medical Council of India, (iii) Nursing Council of India, (iv) Pharmacy
Council of India, (v) Ayurveda, (vi) Siddha, (vii) Unani, (viii) Homoeopathy,
(ix) Indian Medical Association, (x) Bureau of the Indian Standards, (xi) Line of
paramedical and two representatives each of the (i) Zonal Councils and (ii) North
Eastern Council.
Clause 4 .—This clause provides for the disqualifications for appointment of
a person as a member of the National Council if he—
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude;
or
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government
or a Corporation owned or controlled by the Government; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or
other interest in the Council as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge
by him of his functions as a member.
Clause 5 .—This clause seeks to specify the functions of the National
Council.
Clause 6 .—This clause empowers the National Council to seek advice or
assistance of any person or body while carrying out any of the provisions of this
Act.
71

72
Clause 7 .—This clause provides that the National Council shall follow a
consultative process for determining the standards and classification of clinical
establishments.
Clause 8.—This clause provides that every State shall designate the Director
of Health Services (by whatever name called) or any other officer subordinate to
him as the Registrar of clinical establishments.
Clause 9 .—This clause seeks to provide the responsibility of the Registrar
of clinical establishments to collect and update the State register of clinical
establishments.
Clause 10 .—This clause provides that every State shall designate the
District Health Officer or the Chief Medical Officer (by whatever name called) as
the District Registering Authority for each district for registration of clinical
establishments.
Clause 11 .—This clause provides that no person shall carry on a clinical
establishments unless it has been duly registered in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
Clause 12 .—This clause provides that every clinical establishment shall
fulfil—
(i) the minimum standards of facilities and services as may be prescribed;
(ii) the minimum qualifications for the personnel as may be prescribed;
(iii) provisions for maintenance of records and reporting as may be prescribed;
(iv) such other conditions as may be prescribed.
Clause 13.—This clause provides for classification of clinical establishments
into different categories and their standards.
Clause 14 .—This clause provides for application for provisional certificate
of registration for clinical establishments.
Clause 15 .—This clause provides for a time-limit within which provisional
certificate for clinical establishment is to be issued.
Clause 16 .—This clause provides for conditions for issuing provisional
registration for clinical establishment.
Clause 17 .—This clause provides for the validity of provisional registration
for clinical establishment.
Clause 18.—This clause provides that every clinical establishment should
display the certificate of registration in a conspicuous place in the clinical
establishment.
Clause 19 .—This clause seeks to provide for issuing duplicate certificate on
the request of the clinical establishments and on the payment of requisite fees if
the certificate is lost, destroyed, mutilated or damaged.
Clause 20 .—This clause provides that the certificate of registration shall be
non-transferable and in case of change of ownership, category, management or
ceasing to function as clinical establishment the certificate shall be surrendered to
the authority.

73
Clause 21 .—This clause provides for publication of expiry of registration
by the registering authority.
Clause 22.—This clause provides for application for renewal of registration
and procedure therefor.
Clause 23 .—This clause provides that a provisional certificate shall not be
granted or renewed beyond a period of three years where the clinical establishments
in respect of which standards have been notified.
Clause 24 .—This clause provides for application for permanent registration
for clinical establishments.
Clause 25.—This clause provides for verification of applications for
registration of clinical establishments.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for display of information for filing
objections, if any, within a stipulated time.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for communication of objections received
by the authority to the clinical establishments.
Clause 28.—This clause provides that registration shall be granted only
when a clinical establishment fulfils the standards for grant of permanent registration.
Clause 29.—This clause provides for time-limit of allowing or disallowing
of registration for clinical establishments.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for issuing certificate of permanent
registration if the application for registration of clinical establishment is allowed.
Clause 31.—This clause provides for applying fresh applications by clinical
establishments for permanent registration if the earlier application for permanent
registration is disallowed.
Clause 32.—This clause provides for issuing a show cause notice for
cancellation of registration if—
(a) the conditions of the registration are not being complied with; or
(b) the person entrusted with the management of the clinical
establishment has been convicted of an offence punishable under this Act.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for inspection of registered clinical
establishments by the registering authority or an officer authorised by it and
intimating the inspection report to the clinical establishment.
Clause 34.—This clause provides that the registering authority or an officer
authorised by it may enter and search any clinical establishment suspecting of not
being registered under the provisions of this Act.
Clause 35.—This Clause provides for fees to be charged from the clinical
establishments by the registering authority and remittance of its two per cent to the
National Council.
Clause 36 .—This clause provides for an appeal to the State Government by
any person aggrieved by an order of the registering authority.
Clause 37 .—This clause provides for maintenance of registers of clinical
establishments in digital formats by the registering authority.

74
Clause 38 .—This clause provides that every State shall maintain register of
clinical establishments in digital or in such other form and supply of information
to Central Government.
Clause 39 .—This clause provides for maintenance of national register for
clinical establishments in digital format by the Central Government.
Clause 40 .—This clause provides for penalty for contravention of any of
the provisions of this Act.
Clause 41 .—This clause provides for penalty for non-registration of clinical
establishments and also to any person who serves in such clinical establishment.
Clause 42 .—This clause provides for penalty for disobeying any direction
given by any person or authority empowered under this Act and any person who
withholds any information is required by or under this Act.
Clause 43 .—This clause provides for penalty for contravention of any
provision of this Act resulting in deficiencies that do not pose any imminent danger
to the health and safety of any patient and can be rectified within a reasonable time.
Clause 44 .—This clause provides for fixing responsibility for contravention
of any of the provisions of this Act by companies.
Clause 45 .—This clause provides for punishment of offences committed by
Government department.
Clause 46 .—This clause provides for recovery of fines imposed under the
Act as an arrear of land revenue.
Clause 47 .—This clause protects any authority or any member of the
National Council or any officer authorised in this behalf of having taken actions in
good faith;
Clause 48 .—This clause provides that every clinical establishment should
furnish such returns or the statistics and other information as may be prescribed
by the State Government.
Clause 49.—This clause empowers the authority to issue directions regarding
.furnishing returns, statistics and any other information for the proper functioning
of the clinical establishment.
Clause 50 .—This clause provides that every employee of the authority and
the National Council shall be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of
the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 51 .—This clause empowers the Central Government to issue orders
published in the Official Gazette making such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of the proposed legislation for removing difficulties in giving effect to
its provisions. Such orders could be issued within two years from the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation. It also provides for laying of such
orders before each House of Parliament.
Clause 52.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.

75
Clause 53 .—This clause provides that every rule made by the Central
Government under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Clause 54 .—This clause confers powers on the State Government to make
rules for carrying out any of the provisions of the proposed legislation which do
not fall within the purview of section 52.
Clause 55 .—This clause provides that every rule made by the State
Government shall be published in the Official Gazette of the State and be laid
before the State legislature.
Clause 56 .—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to
amend the Schedule to the Act as per legislative competence of Parliament.

76
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish a
National Council for clinical establishments. It provides for allowance for the
member of the National Council. It also empowers the Central Government to
appoint a person to be the Secretary of the National Council. Clause 39 of the Bill
empowers the Central Government to maintain in digital format an all-India Register
to be called the national register of clinical establishments. The expenditure on
account of procurement and maintenance of electronic equipments and setting up
of network with the State Governments will have to be borne by the Central
Government. The Bill, if enacted, could involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India which may be of both recurring and non-recurring in nature. The
estimated total expenditure per annum will be to the tune of Rs. 60 lakhs.
76

77
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 51 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue an order
for removal of any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of
the proposed legislation. Such an order will not be inconsistent with the provisions
of the legislation and would not be made after the period of two years from the
date on which the proposed legislation receives the assent of the President.
2. Clause 52 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out various provisions of the Bill and regarding—
(a) allowances for the members of the National Council under sub-
section ( 5) of section 3;
(b) the determination of standards and for classification of clinical
establishments under section 7;
(c) classification of clinical establishment under sub-section ( 1) of
section 13;
(d) the different standards for classification of clinical establishments
under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(e) the minimum standards for permanent registration under
section 28;
(f) the form and particulars to be contained in the register to be
maintained under section 38.
3. Clause 54 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to make rules
for carrying out in respect of matters which do not fall within the purview of
section 52 and regarding—
(a) the conditions for registration under section 12;
(b) the proforma and the fee to be paid for registration of clinical
establishment under sub-section (1) of section. 14;
(c) the form and details of application under sub-section (3) of section 14;
(d) the particulars and information contained in certificate of provisional
registration under section 15;
(e) the manner of publication of all particulars of the clinical
establishment proposed to be registered under sub-section ( 2) of section 16;
77

78
(f) the fees to be paid to issue a duplicate certificate under section 19;
(g) the manner in which the authority shall publish the names of
the clinical establishments whose registration would be expiring under
section 21;
(h) the enhanced fees to be charged for renewal after expiry of
provisional registration under section 22;
(i) the form of the application and fees to be charged by the State
Government under section 24;
(j) the manner of submitting evidence of the clinical establishments
having complied with the minimum standards under section 25;
(k) the manner of displaying information of the clinical establishments
having complied with the minimum standards for filing objection under
section 26;
(l) the period within which the objections to be communicated to the
clinical establishments under section 27;
(m) the expiry of period specified in section 29;
(n) the form and the particulars of the certificate of registration under
section 30;
(o) the manner of entry arid inspection of clinical establishment under
section 34;
(p) the fees to be charged by the State Government for different
categories of clinical establishments under sub-section ( 1) of section 35;
(q) the manner and the period within which an appeal may be
preferred to the State Government under sub-section ( 1) of section 36;
(r) the form and the fee to be paid for an appeal under sub-
section ( 2) of section 36;
(s) the form and the manner in which the register to be maintained
under sub-section ( 1) of section 37;
(t) the manner of supply to the State Registrar in digital format the
entry made in the register of clinical establishments under sub-section ( 2)
of section 37;
(u) the manner and the period within which the information is to be
furnished under section 48;
(v) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed by
the State Government.
4. The matters with respect to which rules may be made under the
aforesaid provisions are procedure and detail and it is not possible to provide for
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

79
79
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the registration and regulation of clinical establishment in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri Anbumani Ramadoss, Minister of Health and Family Welfare)

ANNEXURE-II
STUDY NOTE
OF
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ON ITS VISIT
TO
BANGALURU, THIRUV ANANTHAPURAM, CHENNAI AND
HYDERABAD
(7th to 14 th JANUARY, 2008)
81

INTRODUCTION
The Committee during its examination of the Clinical Establishments Registration and
Regulation) Bill, 2007, had issued a Press Release on the 16th October, 2007 and in response
thereto, the Secretariat received a lot of memoranda from various individuals/associations on the
same. Many of these individuals/institutions/organizations expressed their willingness to appear
before the Committee in person to apprise it about their views on the Bill. Accordingly, the
Committee decided and undertook a study visit to Bangaluru, Thiruvananthapuram, Chennai and
Hyderabad from 7th to 14th January, 2008, in the first phase.
During its study visit, the Committee had interacted with the representatives of State
Governments, representatives of Private and Government Hospitals, Private Clinics, Diagnostic
Centres, Labs, experts and other stakeholders including NGOs on the various provisions of the Bill.
The views and suggestions expressed by different stakeholders have been enumerated in the
succeeding pages.
83

84
BANGALURU (KARNATAKA)
Bangaluru, the capital city of Karnataka, was the first destination of Committee’s study tour.
The Committee interacted with the following entities on the Clinical Establishments (Registration
and Regulation) Bill, 2007 on the 8th January, 2008:—
➢ PRIV ATE HOSPITALS AND NURSING HOMES ASSOCIATION, BANGALORE
➢ SWAMI VIVEKANANDA YOUTH MOVEMENT
➢ KARNATAKA MEDICAL COUNCIL
➢ SRI JAYADEVA INSTITUTE OF CARDIOLOGY
➢ CONSUMER CARE SOCIETY
➢ HEALTH FOUNDATION
➢ INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, KARNATAKA STATE BRANCH
➢ NATIONAL INTEGRATED MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
➢ CONSUMER RIGHTS EDUCATION AND AW ARENESS TRUST (CREAT)
➢ KARNATAKA PRIV ATE MEDICAL ESTABLISHMENTS ASSOCIATION (Regd.) HUBLI
➢ SANJAY GANDHI INSTITUTE OF TRAUMA AND ORTHOPAEDICS
➢ GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA
(i) Ms. Usha Ganesh, Principal Secretary (H) and Addl. Secretary
(ii) Commissioner (H & FW)
(iii) Mr. Swamy, Dy. Secretary (H & FW)
(iv) Dr. Prem Lilla, Director, H&FW Services
(v) Dr. Prakash, JD
(vi) Dr. H.S. Ramesh, Dy. Director (Medical)
(vii) Dr. Prakash, Director (Ayush)
(viii) Dr. Shetty, Director (Medical Education)
(ix) Mr. Dakeshnamoorthy
(x) Mr. Kumar, Legal Officer
➢ DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE, GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA
PRIV ATE HOSPITALS AND NURSING HOMES ASSOCIATION, BANGALORE
DR. A. C. SREERAM. PRESIDENT
Citing that the State of Karnataka has already passed the Karnataka Private Medical Establishments
Act, 2007, the representatives of the Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes Association were of the
view that the present Bill is  not applicable to the State of Karnataka. However, appreciating the
initiative taken by the Government towards promoting uniformity and quality in standards of patient
care, they placed on record the following objections to the Bill:—

85
• Clause 2 (c) (5): “Single doctor establishment” may be removed from the purview of the
Act.
The reason cited for this is that single doctor establishments have a single doctor and if he is
bogged down writing up statistics, filing returns, paying fees and preparing for inspections, he will
not be treating patients with diligence, thereby the objects and intents behind introducing the Bill,
as appended thereto stand negated.
• Clause 5. Sub clauses (a) to (f):  The scope of Functions of the National Council, several
of these have already been addressed and established in the NABH Standards for ensuring
proper healthcare.
Explanation: NABH 1st Edition, 2005 Standards have been published 11 Hospitals have already
received accreditation after audit, assessment and inspection. The State of Andhra Pradesh has
already enacted legislation to define minimum standards. The provisions of these clauses can best
be described as an attempt to re-invent the wheel.
• Chapter III, clauses 8 to 13
At Clause 11, the phrase ‘carry-on’ specifically defines it as ‘admission’ of the patient.
However, at clause 2 sub clause (5) even single doctor establishments are sought to be brought
within the purview of the Act. Clarification is required whether out-patient clinics and consultation
chambers including a part of a doctors residence being used as a consultation chamber will also
have to be registered/made available for inspection under the Act.
At clause 12 read with 26, ‘minimum standards’ to be maintained has been mentioned.
However, these minimum standards have not been codified or defined anywhere in the Act. This
will lead to subjectivity of interpretation and therefore avoidable litigation in courts of law.
At clause 13, and again at clause 34, there is no definition or codification of the categories
of clinical establishments. While we agree that grading is desirable we submit that this must not
be only on the basis of bed strength.
As at clause 35, fees have to be paid. Medical treatment in the private sector is already very
expensive and this will add to various taxes already being paid by Medical professionals thereby
passing on the burden to the sick patients
Clauses 40 to 46 provide for penalty rates, which appear to be far to heavy and not
commensurate with the gravity of the offences sought to be punished. Here again the possibility
of misuse of powers arises, especially when such misuse can be claimed to have been done in
“good faith” as provided for in clause 47.
SWAMI VIVEKANANDA YOUTH MOVEMENT
DR. R. BALASUBRAMANIAM, PRESIDENT
• They were of the strong view that the private establishments in the health sector should be
registered and regulated.
• The standards that need to be prescribed should be in line with those prescribed under the
IPH Standards of NRHM.
• All attempts should be made to insulate the enforcing officials from creating another
‘license-raj’ and make the process transparent and corruption free.
• All information pertaining to the process should be put on the public domain on a separate
web portal.

86
• Apart from registration and regulation, the focus should be on ‘patient-centric care’ and an
accreditation process should be set up. Rating of hospitals and other private establishment
should be made mandatory and this should be publicly displayed.
• All the standards should first be applied to the Government Clinical establishments and they
should act as a model to private clinical establishments. They should come forward in waste
management also.
• Government should provide concessions and relief to private clinical establishments being
set up in rural and remote area.
KARNATAKA MEDICAL COUNCIL
DR. CHIKKANANJAPPA, PRESIDENT
They emphasised on the need for Public – Private Partnership in Health Care delivery system.
Further, they raised the following general points and stated that the aim of the proposed Legislation
should be:—
• Eradication of Quackery.
• Promote Ethical practice.
• Provide minimum standards.
• Prevent exploitation of the patients.
• Accountability by Doctor/Institution.
• The whole exercise should not end up with “permit and Inspector Raj” system.
• It should not breed corruption.
• Transparency in charges.
• Prevent unnecessary investigations and Surgeries.
• Social commitment to the under privileged.
• Independent State Level Statutory Authority consisting of the Councils, Associations and
Consumer Representatives and Government, to be established for each State.
• The State Medical Councils established under the Act of Legislature to be actively involved.
• National Council should have the Appellate powers.
SRI JAYADEVA INSTITUTE OF CARDIOLOGY, BANGALORE
DR. C.N. MANJUNATH, DIRECTOR
• They were strongly in favour of including the Heart Diseases as a disease of National
Importance so that the State Government Institutions get grants from the State as well as
Central Governments. The reason cited was that this disease is no more a rich man’s
disease and is prevalent among poor patients and is affecting young and middle aged group
also, thereby reducing the productive life.
• Many people do not immediately come for the rescue of accident patients for fear of being
subjected to stand witness in the police station/court, thereby resulting in a lot of accidental

87
deaths. Therefore, the existing laws should be amended in such a way that revealing of the
identity and witness by the bystander who escorts patients to emergency departments, may
be made optional.
• Many instances have come in light where death of seriously injured patients results in
manhandling of the treating specialists by relatives/public. This creates fear which might
prevent doctors from attending future emergencies on such patients to avoid inconvenience
in case of death. Such instances have to be discouraged. Strict law has to be enacted to
protect doctors in such circumstances.
CONSUMER CARE SOCIETY, BANGALORE
MR. Y .V . ASWATHANARAY ANA
Submissions of the Consumer Care Society, Bangalore are as follows:—
Chapter II:
• 3(2): After (j) add the following as (k) : two representatives from two registered
consumer protection Associations nominated by the Central Government.
• 5: Functions of National Council – After (f) add the following as:
(g) Conduct surveys to determine whether and to what extent the minimum extend
standards developed under ( C) above are actually being adhered to by the clinical
establishments.
(h) Develop training programmes including at the induction, promotion, periodic
refresher programmes and special programmes to Para medical and non medical
staff of clinics.
• 11: In this para, instead of “carry on a clinical establishment” it should read “carry on
with a clinical establishment”.
Explanation: Add at the end— “or for providing facilities for conducting
operations”.
• 13: Below (2), the para reads “provided--------to local conditions”.
This gives discretion to local authorities to indulge in corrupt practices in
prescribing low standards ostensibly taking regard to local conditions. No discretion
should be left to local authorities to prescribe any lower standards. It should be the
prerogative of the National Council only to prescribe a slightly lower Standard to
specified backward areas of the country, if they so desire.
Chapter IV:
• 31: Add the following at the end of the existing para:— provided that a fresh
application for permanent registration shall not be accepted for consideration
unless a period of 3/6 months elapses after the date the first application was
disallowed.
• 32(3): Last para says “provided that--------imminent danger to the health and safety of
patients”. This clause gives room for corrupt practices in allowing registration
cancelled establishments to continue to function ostensibly on grounds that by such
continuation there would be no imminent danger to the health or safety of patients.

88
There should be no discretion. Once, when the registration is cancelled for
whatever reasons, the establishment should cease to operate.
• 33(4): Add the following at the end of this para. ------- “within such time as directed in
the direction”.
Chapter V:
• 40: Add at the end of existing para --------- “and cancellation of registration”.
HEALTH FOUNDATION
DR. R. CHANDREASHEKHARA AND DR. K. R. KAMATH
The foundation while appreciating the efforts of the Government towards standardizing the medical
practice, placed the following views for being incorporated in the Act to strengthen it:—
• According to Chapter 2, Clause 3, sub-clause 2, there will be one representative from
Medical Council of India. Citing that the majority of clinical establishments are of
ALLOPATHY in nature they proposed a separate body to regulate the same or the
representatives from MCI to be increased to 5.
• The foundation desired that the minimum standards prescribed under Clause 12 shall also
be applicable to Government clinical establishments.
• Under Chapter 4, Clause 3, the Foundation desired to make the following available in a
dedicated WEB SITE – (a)  Act, (b) Application form, (c) Information submitted by the
applicant and (d) Reasons for rejection.
• Under Chapter 4, Clause 26, the following was sought to be clarified:—
(a) Whether a non medical person can run a clinical establishment?
(b) Can a person run a clinical establishment of a different medical system?
(c) If so,  what are the terms and conditions?
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, KARNATAKA STATE BRANCH
The following comments/suggestions were submitted by the members of the Indian Medical
Association, Karnataka Branch:—
• Health being the State subject, interference from the Central Government by way of
initiating efforts to pass the Clinical Establishment Registration Bill, 2007, would amount to
centralization resulting in hindrances to proper functioning of the Health Care Delivery
System in any given State.
• Several States have already enacted there own similar legislations, which are functioning
effectively. In a developing country like ours, where the States are in varying degrees of
development ranging from poorly developed to well developed, contemplating a bill to bring
in uniformity in the Health Care Delivery System of our country would be a futile exercise.
• As of now Quackery is the largest and most serious menace to public health, which needs
to be tackled on a war footing by enactment of the Anti-Quackery Bill.
• Further the Government should take up the responsibility of providing health insurance to
all and the health budget of our country should be enhanced significantly.

89
NATIONAL INTEGRATED MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, KARNATAKA STATE BRANCH
DR. JAYAPRAKASH NARAYAN
The National Integrated Medical Association, Karnataka State Branch (NIMA KSB) wholeheartedly
welcomed the proposed Bill for its stated objectives. Still they wished to raise the following
objections which they considered to be against the medical practitioners:—
• They demanded introduction of the new category of “Integrated system” in clause 2 (g)
to place all ISM practitioners in proper perspective. The integrated system includes conjoint
study of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani systems and modern system (allopathy). The Karnataka
Ayurvedic and Unani Practioners Board is already duly constituted by law to register and
regulate practitioners of Indian Systems of Medicine and Integrated System of Medicine.
• National Integrated Medical Association (NIMA) being largest and strongest registered
association of ISM practitioners working on national level since 1948 ( i.e. since 60 long
years), should get one representative in the National Council like one representative of
Indian Medical Association under clause 3 (2)(e).
• NIMA strongly recommends that in the interest of the masses, this “Integrated system of
medicine” should be specially incorporated, acknowledged and protected in the clause 2 (g)
of the said Bill.
• As per clause 10, the District Health Officer or the Chief Medical Officer should be
designated as a registering authority only. In fact they should be given only supervisory and
recommendatory powers but not the executive powers like imposing fine/penalties or
cancellation of registration ete.
• NIMA welcomes clause 11 making registration of the clinical establishment mandatory with
DHO or C.M.O.
• Clause 16 says that the authority shall not be required to conduct any enquiry prior to the
grant of provisional registration. This is very strange and dangerous too. Before giving even
the provisional registration, detailed enquiry must be made as regards the qualification and
registration of the concerned doctor.
• Clause 17 says that the provisional registration is renewable every year. When the process
of final registration has to be completed within three years, provisional registrations need
not be renewed every year. In fact it is recommended that the permanent registration should
be given within 6 months or a year at least instead of three years.
• In this proposed Bill extensive and unlimited executive powers are proposed to be given to
D.H.O./C.M.O. under various clauses. All this is very ridiculous and unjust for the private
medical practitioners. Vesting of such extensive executive powers into the bureaucrats like
D.H.O./C.M.O. will be an open invitation leading to chaos and anarchy in the medical field,
both in urban and rural area as well.
• NIMA str ongly opposes these provisions and strongly recommend that no such
executive powers should be given to D.H.O. or C.M.O. in this  regard. They should be given
only supervisory and recommendatory powers. For all kinds of irregularities noted, the DHO/
CMO should refer to the respective medical councils of the State and the executive powers
in this regard must only be vested in the Medical Councils of the State, which are the
statutory bodies with wide experience and skill in handling these matters. The decisions of
the medical councils should be final and binding on the concerned parties. The medical
councils should be strengthened with adequate manpower and money power to carry on this
work effectively.

90
• There is no provision of counter penalty against defaulting registering authorities. Action
against them only under Indian Penal Code or criminal Procedure Code will not be enough.
There must be a provision for heavy penalty ( i.e. Rs. 20 lakh and more) coupled with
termination of service and also the provision for imprisonment, as the case may be.
CONSUMER RIGHTS EDUCATION AND AWARENESS TRUST (CREAT)
Y.G. MURALIDHARAN
The Bill is timely and needs to be implemented in the interest of patient safety. It should
be seen in the over all context of the health of the citizens and should reflect the following:
• The National Health Policy, 2002
• The National Rural Health Mission
• Report of the Working Group on Clinical Establishments, Professional services Regulation
and Accreditation of Health Care Establishment of the Planning Commission
• Directives issued by the National Human Rights Commission in its decision in March, 1996
Applicability of the Act
The Bill states that the Act will have to be implemented by the States and the Centre has
no powers to implement the Act throughout the country. It is advisable that the Central Government
devices means, like financial incentives, through which States are indirectly made to pass and adopt
this Bill.
Meaning of Clinical Establishment
Section 2(c)(i) of the Bill defines a clinical establishment as a hospital, maternity
home....that offer services, facilities with beds.....As a result diagnostic labs, and other clinical
establishments without beds are left out. As 40 to 60 per cent of the patients who visit clinical
establishments are treated as out patients, it is suggested that the definition is suitably modified to
delete the words with beds.
Applicability in eight States
The Bill is not applicable in some of the States which have their own State Acts regulating
the nursing homes. However, these State Acts do not cover all the types of treatments or systems
of medicines like the present Bill.
Composition of National Council
The composition of the National Council has mostly Government nominees and bureaucrats.
Instead, the National Council should provide space for some public participants. A few prominent
institutions involved in health, consumer protection along with representation to women should be
provided in the Council.
Provision for State Council
Provision should be made in the Bill to include constitution of a State Council on the lines of
National Council.
Importance to Registration formalities
It is observed that the Bill gives too much importance for registration and the formalities
to be observed for registration. Instead, these provisions may be made by way of Rules.

91
Ignoring standards
The Bill does not speak of any standards for clinical establishments. It merely makes the
National Council responsible for formulating the standards. This may not be correct. The National
Board for Accreditation of Laboratories has already formulated various standards for clinical
establishments. Hence the Bill should include a chapter on standards as framed by the NABL.
Patient friendly initiatives
The Bill does not speak of any measures to protect the interests of the patients or user of
clinical establishments. Provision should be made to include the following in the Bill:
Medical/Clinical Records:
• Access to information
• Exhibition of fees for various services by clinical establishments
• Consumers Bill of Rights and Responsibilities
• Environmental protection standards
• Constitution of Patient Welfare Committees
KARNATAKA PRIVATE MEDICAL ESTABLISHMENTS ASSOCIATION (Regd.), HUBLI
A memorandum containing the following suggestions has been received for consideration of
the Committee:—
• Registration of Private Medical Establishments with maintaining minimum standards as
prescribed. To encourage the registration and maintaining minimum standards and to do
away with Inspector-Raj and punitive and corrupt attitude of the Government officials.
• Ensuring and insuring doctors, staff of the hospital and hospital property against violence
and vandalism. An ordinance for non-bailable offence to be enacted so that health care can
be freely given to the needy.
• Exorbitant and unnecessary fees not to be levied on the hospitals which will have to be
passed on to lower middle class and poor class in the peripheral areas of the country.
• Hospitals and clinical establishments to be governed by one single department instead of
many departments as on today.
• Hospital is not an industry therefore it should be removed from the industry list.
• Service tax, if applied to the hospital, will have to be passed on to the common man and
poor people of the peripheral area.
• Subsidies to be passed on to medical equipments and establishments, so that the cost of
the healthcare can be reduced.
SANJAY GANDHI INSTITUTE OF TRAUMA AND ORTHOPAEDICS
(Government of Karnataka Autonomous Institute)
The memorandum submitted by the Director of the said Institute by and large appreciates
the Bill. According to them, need for such a Bill was felt since a long time in order to protect the

92
poor and innocent people from the clutches of the unscrupulous and quack elements. The
memorandum contains the following suggestions:—
• Under Clause 26 of chapter-IV, in respect of display of information for filing objections, due
care is required to be taken so as to discourage the public from filing objections with
ulterior/oblique motives to harass any person who desires to register and establish a clinic.
In other words, all precautions should be taken to protect a genuine person who establishes
clinic from the onslaught of tyranny of unscrupulous elements. A penalty clause may be
incorporated against those persons who file frivolous, vexatious and reckless complaints.
• As regards inspection of registered clinical establishments and enquiry clauses, a genuine
person who establishes clinic should be protected from unnecessary interference by the
authorities. The standard of adducing and appreciating the evidence in respect of an enquiry
proposed to be conducted against the person who has established clinic, should be made
clear i.e. whether enquiry will be held under Indian Evidence Act or any other provisions.
An elaborate and exhaustive procedure in so far enquiry is concerned is evolved.
• Suitable insertion may be made in the Bill incorporating suitable provision to encourage
healthy competition and promote health tourism in compliance with the globalization/
liberalization of the economy and to develop it into a world standard enterprise.
GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA
MS. USHA GANESH, IAS,
ADDITIONAL CHIEF SECRETARY & PRINCIPAL SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT.
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEP ARTMENT
Additional Chief Secretary stated that the views of the State Government will be communicated
only after the elected Government assumes charge in the State and takes a view. However, she
submitted her own as well as the Department of Health and Family Welfare’s comments. It was
stated that the State Government has enacted the Karnataka Private Medical Establishments
Act, 2007 (Karnataka Act 21 of 2007) in July, 2007. Framing of rules is also in an advanced stage.
The State Act which is applicable to private medical institutions is more elaborate on many aspects
and includes certain new provisions, which are not available in the proposed Central Bill. Among
them mention may be made to the following:
• The State Act (Section 10) provides for displaying the rates for various treatments in the
clinical establishments for the information of the general public on the notice board of the
Private Medical Establishments and not to collect more than the rates so notified.
• The Act (Section 11) provides for imposition of certain obligations on Private medical
establishments which are as follows, namely:—
• For providing the necessary first aid and to take other life saving and stabilizing
emergency measure in all medico-legal or potentially medico legal cases such as
victims of road accidents, accidental or induced burns or poisoning or criminal
assaults, etc.
• Active participation of private medical establishments in implementation of
National and State Health programmes; and
• Performance of statutory duties in respect of communicable diseases and other
provisions are a new dimension provided in the State Legislation.

93
• Further, regarding maintenance of clinical records and furnishing copy of the clinical
records on payment of appropriate charges under section 12 and 13, restrictions on
furnishing information regarding clinical records in section 14 are also new provisions
available in the State Legislation, which is not available in the proposed Central Legislation.
• Government of India has been requested to consider including the Karnataka Private Medical
Establishments Act, 2007, in the Schedule of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Bill, 2007 so as to cover the State under saving clause 56.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE, GOVERNMENT OF KARNATAKA
The views of Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of Karnataka are:
Clause 1: The State has already brought in a Law “Karnataka Private Medical Establishments
Act, 2007” on the subject, in exercise of its power of Legislation under entry 6 of List II - State
list, in the 7th Schedule to the Constitution.
Clause 2 Sub Clause (c): It defines the term ‘Clinical Establishments’. The efficacy/expediency
of including establishments owned, controlled or managed by the Government/Department of the
Government/A local authority needs review. Karnataka State law does not apply to these categories.
Clause 3: The need for establishment of State Councils, for enforcing regulations at State level
may be considered, in addition to the National Council. This would ensure better attention to local
standards.
Clause 5: The functions of the National Council are rendered nugatory in the context of the
regulation of the Bill under Clauses – 12 and 13 as also the provisions of Clause 52.
The term ‘Standards’ is defined to mean ‘conditions that the Government may prescribe for
registration’.
Standards ought to mean the Standards of Public Health and Health Care within the meaning of
Article 47 of the Constitution.
In Clause 5 ‘Standards’ has been defined as standard for ensuring proper Health Care. But in
Clause 12, ‘Standards’ is related to standards of facilities and services. The provisions are mutually
inconsistent. The regulation of Standards under the Bill is ambiguous. This ambiguity needs to be
addressed properly.
Clause 7: This Clause provides for the National Council to follow a consultative process for
determining the standards etc. But, to subject the procedure for consultation to the rule making
power may not be conducive to the states of the National Council.
Clause 8: It is advisable that definition be supplied to the word ‘State Registrar’ employed in
Clause 37 (2).
Clause 11: The regulation of Registration of Clinical Establishments under the Bill is not adequate.
Clause 14 provides for provisional registration. The validity of such provisional registration is by virtue
of Clause 23, is 3 years. Clause 16 contemplates no enquiry prior to grant to provisional registration.
Clause 24 provides for permanent registration, under Clause 29 an application for permanent
registration can be rejected; yet under Clause 31 it is open to apply for permanent registration.
What will happen to the provisional registration granted, is not clear. If the regulation of Clause
14 were to apply, the whole process of registration becomes ineffective. An establishment may pull-
on without taking permanent registration, indefinitely. This would defeat the very object of the law.

94
Clause 25: Under the Clause, enquiry for granting permanent registration is reduced to;
• submitting of evidence that the establishment has complied with the minimum standards;
• allowing for objections by the public and consideration of such objections;
• whether the grant of permanent registration depends on the adduces or the objections
received is not clearly laid down. This may lead to ambiguous situations; on the other hand
it is suggestible that the process of verification after application be streamlined to the
process of inspection provided for under Clause 33.
Clause 30: same as against Clause 25.
Clause 36: It is advisable to provide for appeal to a multi member authority.
Clause 40 to 43: Clause 40 appears to be general in relation to Clauses 41, 42 and 43.
Clause 43 is in the nature of an exception to Clause 40.
If it is not so, then violations involving potential danger to the health and safety of the patients
needs to be provided for additionally.
If otherwise, Clauses 40 and 43 need to be redrafted into one Clause. The substance of offence
under Clause 41 (1) demands a graver penalty than fine. It is suggested that such case of violations
should be vested with imprisonment as minimum penalty and/or fine.
Equally so, any contravention of the provisions of the Act involving imminent danger to the health
and safety of any patient, ought to be treated on par with the offence under Clause 41 and
accordingly vested with penalty of imprisonment.
Clause 52: The specific subjects under the rule making power under this Clause seem to overlap
on the functions of the National Council. This could be made clear.
Clause 56: The Karnataka Private Medical Establishments Act, 2007 (Karnataka Act No. 21 of
2007) should be included in the Schedule to the Act.
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM (KERALA)
The Committee interacted with the following entities at Thiruvananthapuram on the 9th and
10th January, 2008:—
DEPARTMENT OF LAW, UNIVERSITY OF KERALA
ALL INDIA SIDDHA VYDIA FEDERATION
SREE CHITRA TIRUNAL INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
PROF. (DR.) RA VI M. NAIR, FORMER ADVISOR (HOMOEOPATHY), DEPT. OF AYUSH,
M/O H & FW, G .O.I.
DR. M. BALARAMAN NAIR, KERALA
SHRI UNNIKRISHNA PANICKER. M. K., SENIOR LECTURER IN HOSPITAL AND
CLINICAL PHARMACY
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, KERALA STATE BRANCH
CHELSA CLINIC (DR. K. JAY ARAM), and
ANANTHAPURI HOSPITAL.

95
TRA V ANCORE-COCHIN MEDICAL COUNCILS, REGISTRAR
STATE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
Dr. Dinesh Arora, IAS, State Mission Director, NRHM
Dr. K. Shylaja, Director of Health Services
Dr. Ramachandran, Director Medical Education
Mr. M. P. George, Drug Controller (i/c)
DEPARTMENT OF LAW, UNIVERSITY OF KERALA
DR. K. C. SUNNY, PROF. AND HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT
DR. BISMI GOPALAKRISHNAN, LECTURER,
LIFI SAMUEL, RESEARCH SCHOLAR
Dr. Sunny, on behalf of the Department of Law, University of Kerala, submitted the following
suggestions regarding the Bill:—
• Health being a subject matter that comes under the State List, the power conferred to the
Central Authority for regulating the Clinical Establishment should be confined to the
formulation of basic policy, standards, norms and Ethics.
• The State Government should be vested with the power to establish the Regulating Authority
and to prescribe the procedure for the registration of clinical establishment, by making
separate Rules.
• The Private practice of medical professionals using modern sophisticated medical
equipments may be included within the definition of clinical establishments. The list of
modern, sophisticated medical equipments should also be included in the rules.
• The power to determine the minimum standards should be vested in the National Council.
Thus Section 12 and Section 2(1) should be modified.
• Three representatives of Central Government and one representative from each State
Government should also be included on the National Council to be constituted under
Section 3 of the Bill.
• State Government should be vested with the power to constitute a body to receive
complaints regarding the malpractices committed by the Clinical establishments. This
particular authority should have the power to revoke the registration and to prosecute the
wrong doers.
• Imprisonment for a period of two months should be given in case of subsequent offence
under S. 40, 41 and 42.
ALL INDIA SIDDHA VYDIA FEDERATION
SHRI S.S. MOORTY, PRESIDENT,
SHRI JOHN STEPHEN VYDIAR, SECRETARY
• The representatives of the above federation have requested that the word “Vaidya Sala” by
definition may be included in Chapter 1 clauses 2/c (i) for protection of Gurukula Siddha
V aidyas of India.

96
• For the existence and progress of the culture of Gurukula Vaidyans, exemption has also
been sought from the Clinical Establishment (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007, equal
to the provision of “33EEC/c Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940”
Citing that the Traditional Gurukula Sidhavaidyam is a separate division, they have demanded
for their representative to be included in the councils.
• Request for the review of clause 40 for penalty of the Bill.
It is commented that the provisions may be provided for the fixation for the payment of
registration fee and penalty based on the different size of different clinics.
SREE CHITRA TIRUNAL INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
DR. K. MOHANDAS, DIRECTOR,
DR. G.S. BHUV ANESWAR, HEAD, BMT WING,
MR. S. BALRAM, SCIENTIST.
The Director of the Institute submitted the following remarks for consideration of the Committee:—
• Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology (SCTIMST) is an
Institute of National Importance established by an Act of the Indian Parliament in 1980.
This Institute is reporting its activities to the Indian Parliament from time to time. As per
the Act, Chamber III clause 10 and 11, the clinical establishment shall be registered with
the District Registering Authority (Dist. Health Officer). Bill (chapter I Clause 2) proposes
to include the clinical establishments owned, controlled or managed by Government, Public
trust or a corporation registered under the Central Act. It does not specifically mention
about the Institutes of National Importance established by Act of Parliament. It is noted that
the clinical establishment owned, controlled or managed by Armed Forces are not coming
under the purview of the Act. Under the above circumstances, it is submitted that the
Institutes of this stature like SCTIMST, AIIMS, New Delhi and PGI, Chandigarh (Institutes
of National Importance established by the Act of Parliament may be exempted from the
purview of this Act.
• It is noted that the most important activity requiring far sightedness and vision is to develop
the minimum standards for clinical establishments. The National Accreditation Board for
Hospitals and Health care Providers (NABH) has already brought out standards for Indian
hospitals. The Bill proposes to delegate this role to the National Council as per Chapter II
clause 5C. As per Chapter II Clause 7, the Bill specifies that the National Council should
follow a consultative process for determining the standards. It is felt that this step will be
very crucial considering the Indian Health Scenario and provisions for punishment and
penalties provided under this Act. Therefore, it is suggested that elaborate deliberations
should be held before framing rules with regard to the minimum standards.
• As per the Chapter III Clause 8, Director of Health Services for the State shall be
designated as the registrar of Clinical Establishments and as per Chapter III Clause 10,
District Health Officer shall be designated as the District Registering Authority. It is noted
that the authorities under the Act corresponds to the administrative health authorities in the
State and the Districts. It is felt that it would be ideal if the regulatory authorities were
autonomous bodies and were not administrative health authorities e.g. Pollution Control Board.
• Chapter IV of the Bill proposes for Provisional Registration and Permanent Registration. It
is not clear whether permanent Registration would be mandatory for clinical Establishment
after a certain period of provisional registration.

97
• Under Chapter IV , Clauses 33 of the Bill proposes for the inspection of Registered Clinical
establishments. It is stated that the authority shall have the right to enquire with respect to
any other matter connected with Clinical establishment. It is felt that this clause may be
modified considering the unlimited rights of the authority for enquiry.
• As per Chapter IV Clauses 36(1) of the Act, an appeal may be preferred to the State
Government by a person aggrieved by an order of the registering authority refusing to grant
or renew a certificate of registration or revoking a certificate of registration. It is felt that
grounds of appeal are only grant of registration and other powers of the authority for
enquiry inspection etc. are not covered under the grounds of appeal.
PROF. (DR.) RAVI M. NAIR, FORMER ADVISOR (HOMOEOPATHY), DEPT. OF AYUSH,
M/O H&FW, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Prof. Nair gave the following submission before the Committee for its consideration:—
• Chapter – I – Preliminary – Definition 2(c)(i) “Clinical Establishment”
Whether private practice of a doctor in his residence shall come under the preview of this Act?
• Chapter – II – 3(2)(i) The National Council
There is no clarity about what constitute under “paramedical systems”? As representations
have already been made for Nursing and Pharmacy being paramedical systems, it is not
known what other paramedical systems need be represented? If such representation is
necessary what basis ought to be followed and from whom?
• Clause 3(2)(j)
• The details of “other recognized systems of medicine of which no statutory
regulatory authority has been set up” may be made clear.
• A person practicing under a recognized system of medicine without any statutory
regulatory authority will be devoid of any registration for practice. Can such a
person without registration run a clinical establishment?
• Clause 8
The Director of Health Services or officer subordinate to him in all the States is a doctor
drawn from allopathic system of medicine. How can he be made justifiable for being put
in charge for other systems of medicine? Such an arrangement will not work well. What
is befitting here is to appoint an incumbent in the concerned system of medicine itself.
• Clause 10
There are District Officers/Chief Medical Officer for all systems of medicine in many
States. But here it is not clear whether District Officers referred to are confined only to
the allopathic system of medicine? If it be so, it will be an injustice being done to other
systems of medicine as pointed out under clause 8 above. It is therefore advisable to
appoint incumbents from the concerned systems of medicine alone.
DR. M. BALARAMAN NAIR, Kerala
Strongly supporting the Bill, Dr. Nair offered the following suggestions for consideration:—
Chapter–I
• Clause 2 (c). Among different categories of clinical establishments, include “Mobile Units”
for diagnosis and treatment......Kerala has such units for diagnosis and treatment of
diabetes. Also Institutions of “Biological research” should be included.

98
• Clause 2. Under definition. Sub clause ii, 4th para. Include ‘Biochemical’ also which
performs the maximum number of clinical investigations.
• Under registration, include ‘Medical Laboratory Training Courses’ run by private
institutions. Most of these are run by unqualified persons and the substandard teaching is
followed by the award of an attractive certificate. Laboratory training institutions should be
run only by qualified Medical Persons. Registration should not be given to others.
Chapter–II
• Under Clause 3 sub-clause 2 c, the term ‘Indian Medicine’ should be replaced with ‘Indian
Systems of Medicine’. ‘Indian Medicine Central Council’ should be replaced by ‘Indian
Medical Council’.
• Page 4 Constitution of the Central Council — Specify who will nominate, when members
are nominated. Also prescribe qualifications of candidates standing for election or
nomination.
• In Clause 8, under registration and standards for clinical establishments, specify notification
in Government Gazette’
• Registrar of the State councils:— In Kerala there are two arms for health services – the
Director of Medical Education (DME) and the Director of Health Services (DHS). The DME
is in charge of all the teaching Institutions including the teaching hospitals. There will be
administrative difficulties if the DME is not given a role in the Council. The suggestion is,
the DME may be the President of the Council and the DHS or representative, the Registrar.
• Under Clause 11, under explanation “carry on means to admit patients in a clinical
establishment.” This should be eliminated. The laboratories do not admit patients. This
clause will eliminate laboratories from the law.
• Clause 16. ‘The authority shall not be required to conduct an enquiry” – A preliminary
enquiry may be done before granting provisional registration. This will eliminate a lot of
quack institutions who otherwise can function for more than 3 years, since the provisional
registration may be extended.
• In more than one place it is only mentioned ‘published’. This may cause confusion. The
publication should be in the Gazette.
• Under Clause 29, it is mentioned ‘the authority shall pass an order immediately after the
expiry’ and then mentions ‘the next thirty days’. One of these should be omitted.
• Under Clause 32, last para, omit ‘if there is imminent danger to the health and safety of
patients’. These are not definable and may be used for litigations against doctors or
institutions.
Chapter–V
• Registration of clinical establishments.  This registration should be like that of the Indian
Medical Council and the State Medical Councils. The same register numbers should be given
in the State registry as well as in the National Registry, specifying the States and serial
numbers for each State. This will avoid duplicate registration numbers. The State registries
can forward the list to the National Council and the same number may be given in the
national register.
• Clause 44, sub-clause 2 b.  The statement that ‘Director’ means a partner of the firm,
will create confusion. There are Private Institutions where the Director is not necessarily
a partner and should not be held responsible for disobedience of the law.

99
• Clause 45. Regarding the responsibility. In a Government Institution who is to be held
responsible. This may be specified. The Clinical Staff are not responsible for all the faults
in Government Institution. There are a number of defects where the Government is
responsible. If this not specified, Clinical staff may be victimized.
• Page 14 Title. ‘Statements of object and reasons’.  The word object should be corrected
to “objectives”.
• Page 14. Item 4 (i). The term ‘Indian Medicines’ should be corrected as ‘Councils for
Indian systems of Medicine’. While the names of the Councils are mentioned, it is
mentioned as ‘Indian Medical Association’. It should be corrected as ‘Indian Medical
Council’. These are different. The Indian Medical Association is a private organisation at
National Level.
• Under ‘notes on clauses’ clause 3. It is again mentioned as ‘Indian Medical Association’.
This should be corrected to ‘Indian Medical Council’.
SHRI UNNIKRISHNA PANICKER. M. K.,
SENIOR LECTURER IN HOSPITAL AND CLINICAL PHARMACY
Stating that the decision to control the Hospitals and Clinics is the need of the hour, Shri Panicker
welcomed the Bill and placed the following valuable suggestions before the Committee:
Chapter I, Clause l
Change Suggested: This Act may be called the Hospital, Clinical and Diagnostic Laboratories
Act, 2007.
Reason: (1) As per definitions given under s.2, Maternity home, nursing homes, dispensaries can
be clubbed under Hospital, which is term well conceived in the minds of the public. The word
Clinic is normally taken for a miniature Hospital, normally run by an individual Doctor. Hence the
word Hospital can include right from the Multi-speciality to the smaller clinics. It would be better
to contain the smaller concept of clinic under the broader concept of Hospital. Unless this is done
those running big hospitals will try to take advantage of the word clinic and thus try to evade from
the purview of law. (2) the very purpose of the Act is understood to control the innumerable no.
of testing laboratories in the country. If that is the purpose, it is better to include the word
Diagnostic Laboratories in the Title itself (the preamble prepared for the Act may be seen).
Chapter I, Clause 2(c)(ii)
Change Suggested: In line 2, the words in connection with after the word clause (1) may be
deleted and instead the words “functioning alone or in conjunction with the Hospital/Clinic for
carrying out” may be added and cl (ii) shall be given the title “Diagnostic Laboratories”.
Reason: The concept of stand alone diagnostic laboratories is not clear under definition (ii), the
change suggested may remove the ambiguity.
Chapter I, Clause 2(c)(iii)
Change Suggested: (iii) Clinic–  an establishment owned by a single person or group of persons,
employing the service of one or more medical practitioners to carry out the diagnosis, treatment
and all such ancillary matters arising thereto or an establishment owned and run by one or more
medical practitioners to carry out the diagnosis, treatment and all such ancillary matters arising
thereto.

100
Reason: If this change is accepted, the word Clinic as given under s. c(c) (i) may be deleted.
Chapter I, Clause 2 (n)
Change Suggested: (n) Medical Practitioner- means a person registered under the Indian Medical
Council or Homoeopathic Central Council or Indian System of Medicine.
Reason: As the Act has to be specific, all the terms have to be defined.
Chapter I, Clause 2(c)(ii) 5
Change Suggested: (i) But does not include Hospital/clinic/Diagnostic laboratory attached to the
Armed Forces (ii) Armed Forces may be replaced by.
Reason: The change is suggested in line with the Title and definition proposed above.
Chapter I, Clause 2(c)(ii) 5
Change Suggested: A single medical practitioner.
Reason: As the legal term used is medical practitioner, the word doctor may be deleted. Moreover the
word Doctor is confusing as there are persons with doctorate degree (Ph.D) also called as Doctor.
Chapter II, Clause 3(1)
Change Suggested: After the words “National Council” in line 3, the following may also be
inserted “for Hospital, Clinical and Diagnostic Laboratories”.
Reasons: As there are many National Councils in our country, it would be better to add the words–
For Hospital, Clinical and Diagnostic laboratories after the words, National Council.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(i)
Change Suggested:  An eminent person nominated by Government of India who shall be a
Pathologist or Microbiologist or a Radiologist or a Medical Laboratory Technologist or Pharmacist
or Nursing staff
Reason: The words ‘from the line of paramedical system’ is vague and the change is suggested
to give specificity to the clause.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(i)
Change Suggested:  The words ‘of which no statutory regulatory authority has been set up’ may
be deleted.
Reason: When there are other systems of medicine, It is definitely under some control of
Government of India. In the context that no statutory authority has been set up, it may be taken
for granted that the power to regulate wrests with Government of India.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(k)
Suggested: Chairperson, CDRA/CDA, ex-officio.
Reason: Many things are related to drugs, Chairperson per se shall be included in the Council.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(1)
Suggested:  Drugs Controller (India), ex-officio.
Reason: The control of Drugs in hospitals, clinics is vested with Drugs Controller.

101
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(m)
Suggested: Director, National Board for Accreditation of Laboratories, ex-officio.
Reason: Diagnostic laboratories are coming under the purview, it would be better to include
Director, NABL.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(n)
Suggested: Director, Quality Council of India, ex-officio.
Reason: See above
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(0)
Suggested: President, IMA.
Reason: For giving representation to the medical fraternity.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(p)
Suggested: President, Pharmacy Council of India.
Reason: Hospitals are also teaching centres for courses like pharmacy, nursing, ete.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(q)
Suggested: Representative of Qualified Private Medical Practitioners.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(r)
Suggested: Two Medical Specialists of Government of India nominated from among reputed
Government Medical Institutions.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(s)
Suggested:  Two Medical Specialists of Government of India nominated from among reputed
Private Medical Institutions in India.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(t)
Suggested: Nominee of Nursing Council of India
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(u)
Suggested:  Nominee of Dental Council of India.
Chapter II, Clause 3(2)(v)
Suggested: A nominee of Government who shall be an expert in Bio-medical Engineering.
Reason: As hospitals are employing many medical instruments for the diagnosis, treatment, etc.
Chapter II, Clause 5(a)
Change Suggested: The National Council shall– (a) lay down standards.
Reason: Lay down is more emphatic than the word determine.
Chapter II, Clause 5(g)
Change Suggested: Shall prescribe qualification for technical staff of a hospital, Clinic or
diagnostic Laboratory.
Reason: This will bring uniformity in the performance.

102
Chapter II, Clause 5(h)
Change Suggested: Shall prescribe the minimum staff required for the efficient functioning of a
Hospital, Clinic or Diagnostic laboratory, as the case may be.
Reason: This will bring uniformity in the performance.
Chapter II, Clause 6
Change Suggested: may associate itself with any competent person.
Chapter III, Clause 8
Change Suggested: After the word, the (by whatever name called).. or any officer subordinate
or any other competent person in the service of that State Government as the Registrar.
Reason: Normally, Registrar of Medical Council, Nursing Council in many States are not officers
sub-ordinate to the Director, Health Services. To give freedom to act , it shall always be better
that the registrar be from outside the Department, but employed under Government.
Chapter III, Clause 10
Change Suggested:  May be deleted
Reason: This Act is a Central Act and it empowers the State Government to frame its own Act
for the purpose. Hence to mention as District Registering Authority in this Act may be out of place.
Moreover, it is preferable that every State may have only one Registrar for the purpose.
Chapter III, Clause 11 Explanation After the words nursing care in line 2, the following may
be added: conduct diagnostic or clinical tests for an inpatient or outpatient, on receipt of a written
request from a medical practitioner.
Reason: This will take into consideration the stand alone laboratories and also for those patients
who need not get admitted to the Hospital/clinic.
Chapter III, Clause 12(v)
Change Suggested:  Every Hospital/Clinic shall allow officers authorized by the National Council to
inspect the facilities, records, require the Hospital or Clinic to produce any documents on demand.
Reason: Enforcement will be possible only if this clause is added.
Chapter IV, Clause 14(4)
Change Suggested: In place of the words “an application for....within” may be replaced by ‘they
shall obtain Registration within one year from the date of commencement of the Act’.
Reason: One year period is more than sufficient to make an application. In fact to obtain
Registration within one year is a better measure.
Chapter IV, Clause 14(5)
Change Suggested:  A Registration under any other Act in force does not exempt Hospital/Clinical
establishment from taking out a Registration under this Act.
Chapter IV, Clause 17
Change Suggested: The words “last day of the twelfth month from the date of issue of the
certificate” may be replaced by “shall be valid till one year from the date of Issue”.
Reason: More clear and simple.

103
Chapter IV, Clause 18
Change Suggested:  (i) The word affixed may be replaced thus: shall be displayed conspicuously
in a prominent part of the ...(ii) to every one visiting the establishment may be replaced by: to the
public.
Chapter IV, Clause 20
Change Suggested:  The following may be added: within three months of such change.
Chapter IV, Clause 32(1)
Change Suggested: May be changed thus: after the word registered, it has come to the notice
of the authority that—
Reason: An authority cannot be deemed to be satisfied in case of violations of the provisions of
the Act.
Chapter IV , Clause 32 (2)
Change Suggested:  (i) After this, the following may be inserted: there is every reason to believe
for the authority...
(ii) after the word cancel the registration in line 4, the word forthwith shall be added.
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, KERALA STATE BRANCH, CHELSA CLINIC (DR. K.
JAYARAM), AND ANANTHAPURI HOSPITAL.
The representatives of IMA, Chelsa Clinic and Ananthapuri Hospital gave the following submissions
before the Committee:—
• The statement in the first paragraph of the Bill “Where as it is considered expedient to
provide for the registration and regulation of clinical establishments with a view to prescribe
minimum standards for facilities and services which may be provided by them so that
mandate of article 47 of the Constitution for improvement in public health may be achieved”
Article 47 of Constitution of India States:
“Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to
improve public Health— The State shall regard the raising of the level of nutrition and the
standard of living of its people and the improvement of public Health as among its primary
duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavor to bring about prohibition of the
consumption except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are
injurious to health.”
The Bill proposes to prescribe minimum standards of facilities and services for the
Clinical Establishments in the country. In a country like India where 80% of the Health care
expenditure is out of pocket and where a major Health crisis sends families below poverty
line, enforcing standards for clinical Establishment will lead to escalation of cost of
treatment. This will in turn seriously hamper the common citizen’ s access to Health care and
will directly result in deprivation of Health care in large tracts of Rural India. Hence the
Bill is harmful and totally against the spirit of the Article 47 of the Constitution of India.
• Report of the National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, Government of India
August, 2005 opines that centrally designed vertical Programs have impeded the country’s
ability to build a credible Health system responsive to the every day Health needs of the
people. It has strongly recommended devolution of authority to local Bodies given the
vastness and diversity of the country. As of now Panchayat Raj Act is in force through

104
out the country and accordingly Rules have been formulated by States including Kerala. The
Kerala Panchayath Raj (Registration of Private Hospitals and Private Paramedical
Institutions) Rules, 1997 insists on Registration of all Private Hospitals and Private
Paramedical Institutions. (Annexure I) This is a significant achievement of Kerala State in
devolution of power to Panchayats. The proposed legislation is retrograde in nature as it
deprives the existing power of local bodies and reverses the process of decentralization.
• Significantly it may be noted that the Report of the National Commission quoted above
which has recommended eight Institutional mechanisms for enforcement of regulations has
conspicuously remained silent on regulation of Clinical Establishments for obvious reasons.
The Hon. Ministers of Health and Finance were the Chairpersons of National Commission
on Macroeconomics and Health. The purpose of the current Bill beyond these
recommendations defies logic and reason.
• Adequate rules are already available on regulation of Clinical Establishments. Hence the
proposed Act will have no relevance. More over there will be lot of avoidable confusion and
overlapping of these rules will result in duplication and harassment. There are at least 40
Legislations regulating the clinical Establishments in our country particularly in Kerala State.
So it is evident that the Clinical establishments are being over regulated.
• Many States have already enacted Registration Acts for ciinical Establishments. e.g. The
Delhi Nursing Home Registration Act 1953, Tamil Nadu Private Clinical Establishment
Act, 1997 etc. The Government of Kerala has done considerable exercise in this regard. A
Committee headed by the Director of Medical Education had several sittings with all stake-
holders and has evolved a draft Bill of Kerala Private Healthcare Institutions Council, 2005.
An autonomous Council to register and regulate the Private Healthcare Institutions on the
lines of Medical Council is on the anvil.
• In a developing country like India with wide economic and healthcare disparities and social
diversities, what is needed is an Accreditation system and not standardization. Government
of India has already established a National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare
Providers (NABH). Motivating the Clinical Establishments for accreditation with NABH is
the need of the country so that, the Health Care of the population at large is not jeopardized
especially in the rural India. An accreditation system like NABH is more suitable for our
Country than enforcing a mandatory standardization through the proposed Clinical
Establishment Bill, 2007.
• It is not proper to consider the Registration and Regulation of Clinical Establishments under
a uniform Act through out the Country as infrastructural facilities of Healthcare varies from
State to State and region to region.
• Health is included in the concurrent list under seventh schedule, Article 246 of Constitution
of India.
According to Sarkaria Commission Report Clause 2.43.02, the enforcement of
Union Laws particularly those relating to the concurrent sphere, is secured through the
machinery of the States. Coordination of policy and action in all areas of concurrent or
overlapping jurisdiction through a process of mutual consultation and cooperation is, there
fore, a pre-requisite of smooth and harmonious working of the dual system. To secure
uniformity on the basic issues of national policy with respect to the subject of a proposed
legislation, consultation may be carried out with the State Governments individually and
collectively at the forum of the proposed Inter-Government Council. (para 2.14.01)
Clause 2.43.05—Ordinarily, the Union should occupy only that much field of a
Concurrent subject on which uniformity of policy and action is essential in the larger

105
interest of the nation, leaving the rest and details for State action within the broad frame-
work of the policy laid down in the Union Law. Further, whenever, the Union proposes to
undertake legislation with respect to a matter in the Concurrent list, there should be prior
consultation not only with the State Governments, individually, but also, collectively, with
the Inter-Governmental Council which as we have recommended, should be established
under Article 263. A resume of the views of the State Government and the comments of
the Inter-Governmental Council should accompany the Bill when it is introduced in
Parliament (para 2.23.05)
3.9.02— Federalism is more a functional arrangement for cooperative action, than a
static institutional concept. Article 258 provides a tool, by the liberal use of which,
cooperative federalism can be substantially realized in the working of the system. A more
extensive and generous use of this tool should be made, than has hither-to been done, for
progressive decentralization of powers to the Governments of the States and/or their
officers and authorities. (para 3.7.10)
In the Federal System of Administration, encroaching the powers of the State is
unconstitutional and hence objectionable.
• Designating Modern Medicine as Allopathy is derogatory and should not be used in any
official document of Government.
• Proposed National Council consisting of all systems of medicine is not a workable
proposition. Each Council for different systems of medicine is working as independent
statutory bodies by enactment of Parliament.
TRAV ANCORE-COCHIN MEDICAL COUNCILS
The views/suggestions of the council, furnished through their registrar, are summarized below:
Clause 2
Sub-clause (c)  of Clause 2 of the Bill defines clinical establishments. Hospitals maintained
under Medical College and Educational Institutions are to be exempted from the purview of the
definition since the quality and standards of such institutions are being prescribed by the Medical
Council of India. Further, the State of Kerala are having a unique public hospital system under the
direct control of the Government. As such all Government hospitals may be exempted from the
responsibility of being registered with an authority. Therefore, Sub-clause (c) of Clause 2 of the
Bill may be modified accordingly.
Clause 3
Regarding the constitution of the National Council, the State Medical Council suggests that
adequate representation should be given to members from Modern Medicine, since 90%  of the
healthcare in India are being dealt with by doctors under Modern Medicine.
Clause 5
National Council should be entrusted only with work relating to compilation, maintaining
and updating a National Register by collecting statistics from each State. Indian States have unique
features on public health. Therefore, a uniform standard prescribed by a National Council would
be improper.
Clause 8 to 13
The State Medical Council suggests that there should be a separate State Council for
registering clinical establishments within the respective State. In Kerala, only Modern Medicine

106
Hospitals comes under the purview of Director of Health Services. There are separate
establishments for Ayurveda and other Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathic Systems of
Medicine. It may not be proper to entrust the Director of Health Services to classify and register
the clinical establishments under Ayurveda and other systems of Indian Medicine and the
Homoeopathic System of Medicine. Therefore, a separate Council, consisting of competent persons
from all systems of Medicine, may be constituted at the State level and the powers to classify,
register and regulate clinical establishments in all systems of Medicine may be entrusted with the
State Council.
Clause 35
The State Council may be entrusted with the powers to collect fees and other charges from
clinical establishments.
Clause 38
The responsibility to maintain State Register may be entrusted with the State Council.
Chapter—VI
Necessary provision may be incorporated in the Bill to make it compulsory on the part of
every clinical establishment to furnish the educational qualifications and registration particulars of
all doctors working in the establishments to the State Medical Councils concerned.
The Schedule
The Kerala Ayurveda Health Centers (Issue of Licence and Control) Act, 2007 (Act No. 28
of 2007) may also be included in the Schedule.
KERALA STATE GOVERNMENT
DR. K. SHYLAJ A, ADHS (Plg),
i/c of Director of Health Services
• The State Government is actively involved in the process of enacting legislation for
regulation of private hospitals and clinics. Accordingly, several rounds of discussions have
been held with all stakeholders. The draft Bill is titled “The Kerala Private Health Care
Institutions Council Bill, 2006”.
• Regarding the Central Bill titled “The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation)
Bill, 2007), we submit that we decided to draft our own bill, health being a state subject
and also because situations in our State as for as health scenario is considered are
sufficiently different from rest of India. 60% of the Healthcare institutions in Kerala are
on private sector. There is no rural/urban difference in Kerala and high health spending in
Kerala due to high health seeking nature consequent to high literacy often push people to
indebtedness. There is no control over the rates charged by the private institutions for their
services where as there is standardization in rate and services in Government setup.
• Health infrastructure varies significantly from State to State and therefore a central
regulation may not necessarily take into account state specific issues.
• All institutions which are imparting Health services with OP or IP should be registered with
a council under government. However, diagnostics services including lab services, have to
be included, even if they are not associated with any health care delivery setup.

107
CHENNAI (TAMIL NADU)
The Committee interacted with the following entities at Chennai on the 12th January, 2008:—
HINDU MISSION HOSPITAL, Shri R. Matrubutham, Chief Administrator; Shri D. K.
Srinivasan, Hony. Secretary
PEOPLES AW ARENESS CENTRE
Shri V . Santhanam (Social Activist), President Madras Metropolitan Consumer Rights
Protection Centre, Chennai
Shri P. Umapathy, President
Shri M. Selvaraj, General Secretary
TAMIL NADU MEDICAL  PRACTITIONERS’ ASSOCIATION, Prof. C.M.K. Reddy,
President
THE VOLUNTARY HEALTH SERVICES (REGD.), Dr. S. Janaki, Medical Superintendent
Shri S. Martin, ADVOCATE AND SOCIAL ACTIVIST
ANDHRA MAHILA SABHA, Shrimati I. Lakshmi Murthy, Secretary
PUNJAB ASSOCIATION (Regd.), Dr . (Mrs.) Bela Suury Kumar
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, Dr . Capt. G. Raghavelu, Immediate Past State President
PRIV ATE HOSPITALS AND NURSING HOME BOARD, Dr. V .  Varadarajan, Founder
President
MADRAS SCAN SYSTEMS, Dr . B.I. Jaffery, Medical Director
Dr. D.R. SUBRAMANIAN, Director , Senthil School of Sonography
MEDISCAN, Dr. Indrani Suresh
APOLLO HOSPITALS, Dr. B.M. Nagraj, Medical Superintendent and Dr. Venkatasalam
HI TECH DIAGNOSTIC CENTRE, Dr. S.P. Ganesan
Dr. (Capt.) M. Kamatchi, EXPERT ADVISOR, TAMIL NADU HEALTH SYSTEMS
PROJECT, AND FORMERLY , DIRECTOR OF MEDICAL AND RURAL HEALTH
SERVICES, GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU.
ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICIANS OF INDIA, CHENNAI CHAPTER
Dr. E. Prabhu, Medical Director, Advanced Nuclear Medicine Research Institute.
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT  DOCTOR’S ASSOCIATION
Dr. V . Palani, President and State Head Qts. Secretary
MADRAS MEDICAL COLLEGE,
Dr A. Renuka, Director I/C and Professor, Institute of Biochemistry, Chennai.
MEDICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
Dr. K.S.G.A. Nasser, Principal, Tamil Nadu Government Dental College And
Hospital, Chennai

108
DR. N.S. KANNAN, JOINT DIRECTOR OF MEDICAL AND RURAL HEALTH SERVICES,
DINDIGUL, TAMIL NADU
DR. S. V ASANTHA, DIRECTOR OF MEDICAL AND RURAL HEALTH SERVICES (in-
charge) DEAN, KILPAUK MEDICAL COLLEGE HOSPITAL, CHENNAI
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE,
SHRI P.W.C DA VIDAR, IAS, SPECIAL  SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
HINDU MISSION HOSPITAL
SHRI R. MATRUBUTHAM, CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR,
SHRI D. K. SRINIVASAN, HONY. SECRETARY
Shri D.K. Srinivasan, Hony. Secretary  of the Hospital made the following submission:
• In Chapter I, under Heading National Council:—  There is no provision for
representation from private Medical Institutions/Professionals.
• In Chapter II, under Clause 12:— For hospital/Clinics existing at the time of registration,
relaxation needs to be given in respect of qualification and in favour of Professional
experience in the field. There are nurses/technicians/medical officers, who have had bedside
training and possessing skill and expertise, but may not possess the prescribed qualification.
• In Chapter III:— Registration should be “online”.
• In Chapter IV:—  Application for registration should be online.
• Under clause 21:— Notice regarding expiry of validity of recognition should be
communicated on line along with a hard copy to the Institution concerned.
• Under Clause 36, sub-clause 36(3) and Chapter VI, Clause 47(2):— Authority for
appeal should be specified.
PEOPLES AWARENESS CENTRE, CHENNAI
SHRI V. SANTHANAM (SOCIAL ACTIVIST), PRESIDENT
Shri Santhanam welcomed the Bill and offered the following views as a Social Activist:—
• Any Act/Regulation on Clinical Establishment should be such that it should not push the cost
of health care in the name of standardization.
• In Chennai Government General Hospital — “payment ward” has been started. Therefore,
standards are required to be set both for payment and non payment. It is confusing. It
should be explained in the Bill.
• In the National Council, each State should have representation.
• Provisional certificate validity period of 3 years is too long. It should be 1 year.
• Before provisional certificate, it is better to do enrolment.
• Too much regulation/restriction — will discourage Medical Practitioners from starting
Clinical establishment and deny the public access to health care.

109
• Penalty: Unregistered Clinical Establishment names should be published in the media along
with fine.
• Transparency: The Public should have access to patient’s records. There should be
transparency with regard to — Registration classification, renewal names of members of
National Council, State Council, should be notified in all establishment.
• Registrar: District Medical Officer alone should not be made as Registration Authority. It
should be panel of members or committee to issue registration certificate.
MADRAS METROPOLITAN CONSUMER RIGHTS PROTECTION CENTRE—CHENNAI
SHRI P. UMAPATHY , PRESIDENT
SHRI M. SELV ARAJ, GENERAL SECRETARY
Views furnished by the representatives of the above Centre are:—
Clause 2 (c) (i): This may give room for escaping from this Act for some willful escapers.
Therefore, substitute the words with beds suitably or replace it with the words with/without beds.
Clause 2 (c) (i) This may deprive the right of Armed force personnel and their families the benefit
of article 47 of the Constitution through this Act. Therefore, include the clinical establishments
owned controlled or managed by the Armed Forces.
Clauses 2 (c) (ii) (5): More than 75%  of the common consumer are depending on the single
doctor establishment and there are instance where the doctors in single doctor establishment are
not qualified doctors. More vigil is needed while registering the single doctor establishment even
for provisional registration.
Clause 3 (2): There is no nomination given to the VCO’s who can represent in a better manner
the problems of common consumer of our Nation. Kindly include one or two representatives of
VCOs in the National Council
Clause 5 (a) (b) (c): It seems that Standards and minimum standards and classification of
different categories of clinical establishments with regard to the local conditions need to be done
in the days to come. It may also consume more time. Kindly make use of the Standards Published
by Bureau of Indian Standards, the National Standards Body of our Nation, and save time in
giving permanent registration to clinical establishments. The BIS standards cover the codes, guides
and standards (physical, staff and equipment planning) quality management systems and operational
system for health care services and classification of various categories of hospitals.
Clause 17 and 23: According to this the clinical establishments can function without complying
with the prescribed minimum standards for a maximum period of three years. Here, the provisions
of mandate of Article 47 of the Constitution for improvement in public health are in question.
Therefore, validity of provisional registration should not be extended beyond 12 months time.
Clause 30 and 32: By virtue of their post District Health Officer/Chief Medical Officer have
administrative responsibilities in governing the respective State Government Clinical Establishment.
Please make suitable modifications so that responsibility of the DHO or the CMO as “authority”
under clause 2 (a) is discharged without prejudice.
Clause 37, 38, 39: The Registers may be maintained in any suitable format so that common
consumers, on registration number basis, view it on line.
Clause 51(1): This Act is going to commence immediately only in four States and Union
territories. The other is States have to adopt the Act by a resolution. So, to identify the difficulty

110
arising in giving effect to this Act may take time. Please do not fix any time-frame to pass order
by the Central Government to remove the difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act.
TAMIL NADU MEDICAL  PRACTITIONER’S ASSOCIATION
Prof. CMK Reddy, President
Stating that it was long overdue, the Association welcomed the formation of a regulatory
body and put forth the following suggestions for inclusion, which according to them will make it
more efficient and tamper-proof, ultimately fulfilling the aspirations of the law-makers and the
public:—
• Registering/Monitoring Committees (or Councils) at district levels must have adequate
representation from senior private practitioners and the IMA (TN) and one among them
should be the Chairman, while the Joint Director of Medical Services (JDMS) of the
District may be the Convener-Secretary, who is bound by the decisions of the District
Council.
• Acknowledging the shortage of qualified nursing and paramedical staff, due recognition may
be given to those who might be not qualified, but had put in more than 5-10 years of
experience of working in hospitals, so that all of them would not be thrown out of jobs
overnight. They may be given a separate status.
• A State level Appellate Council may be constituted, headed by a Retired High Court Judge
and the Director of Medical Services as the Convener, with adequate representation from
the senior private practitioners (of different specialities) and the IMA (TN). This council
may also review the rules and regulations and recommend any modifications required from
time to time, to the Government.
• Due representation to be given to the Private Hospitals and other clinical establishments in
the National Council, to be formed under the Act.
THE VOLUNTARY HEALTH SERVICES (REGD.)
Dr. S. Janaki, Medical Superintendent
Dr. Sarala Gopalan
Dr. S. Janaki, Medical Superintendent, of the VHS made the following recommendations in their
submission:—
• Chapter II
• Clause 3: The Council seems to be mainly consisting of Government officials which may
not be an ideal nodal agency. It should include representatives of professional bodies such
as IMA, surgeon’s Association, Association of Gynaecologist etc.
• Clause 5: The National Council may restrict its activities to registration and maintenance
of records.
• Chapter IV Clause 28: Need for periodical inspection is necessary without being
detrimental to the staff of the Institution. Charitable Institution affording free/subsidized
services to the poor may be exempted from periodical renewal.

111
Chapter V Clause 43: Penalty for minor deficiencies may not be made applicable to multispeciality
hospitals run by NGO/Private parties.
Chapter VI Clause 55: Laying of rules has to be done pragmatically. District level representation,
apart from Government officials should include, District Health Officer, Medical Officers from IMA
and Leading NGO’s. Realities of the situation and availability of qualified personnel to be taken into
consideration while framing rules for qualified staff.
SHRI S. MARTIN, ADVOCATE AND SOCIAL ACTIVIST
Welcoming the Bill in general, Shri Martin put forth the following views before the Committee in
his memorandum:
• Some of the States already have similar law on this topic and there is no mention about
the status of those State Laws.
• Clause 2 (c) (i) includes only those services ‘with beds’. It is not clear whether facilities
‘with beds’ alone will come under preview of the Act or otherwise. It would be good if
all medical services irrespective of whether ‘with beds’ or ‘without bed’ are included.
• Clause 2 (g): Instead of ‘recognized, system of medicine’ it may be mentioned as ‘any
system of medicine:
• Clause 2 (i): In some places, it is mentioned that the National Council will evolve
‘standards’ in some places it is mentioned that the Central Government may prescribe
standards. If the National council is given the sole power to evolve standards, it will be
effective.
• A time limit for the enforcement of the Act, for constitution of the National Council and
for evolving standards may be prescribed
• Clause 3 (2): Few more representatives like Secretary of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, representatives from Consumer groups and professionals of Public Health, Medical
Equipments and Pharmaceutical experts may be included in the National Council.
• Clause 3 (3) and (4):  There need not be a difference in term of office for nominated
members and elected members. Both can serve for 3 years.
• Clause 3 (6):  The National Council may be given full power to evolve by laws and
procedures and it need not be with the previous approval of the Central Government.
• Clause 7: It is mentioned that the National Council shall follow a consultative process...
in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. It is vague as to who will
prescribe.
• Clause 11:  The explanation says to “admit patients” it implies only clinical establishments
that admit patients will come under the preview of the Act. It can be ‘carrying on of
medical services’ in general
• Clause 13: There is  no complaint mechanism for complaint by consumers.
• Clause 20: A time limit may be prescribed to notify the changes.
• Clause 34: There need not be prior notice of inspection and this will defeat the very
purpose of inspection.

112
• Clause 44 and 45 :  There is an exclusion clause that if he proves that the contravention
was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent
contravention. Since it is the duty of the officer in charge to ensure that the Act is properly
implemented, this should not be there.
• Clause 46 : The recovery of the fine as arrears of land revenue is not at all implemented.
Hence forfeiture of assets and closure of the clinical establishment may be prescribed.
• Clause 52 : A time limit for framing the rules may be prescribed.
• A provision may be made for implementation of the waste disposal plan for every clinical
establishment under the Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules.
• Only fine is given as punishment. Since running an unregistered clinical establishments and
dealing with Human life amounts to criminal offence and  imprisonment can be awarded
ANDHRA MAHILA SABHA
SHRIMATI I. LAKSHMI MURTHY , SECRETARY
Commenting that even hotels require a licence to run, there are no rules to start or run a Hospital,
the representatives of Andhra Mahila Sabha welcomed and submitted the following views/
suggestions;
• Clause 3 :  The members of the Council should include representatives of IMA, V oluntary
Organisations.
• Clause 5 : The National Council may restrict its activities to registration, maintenance of
statistics and records. The setting of standards and the verification may be done by the
Quality Council of India, NABH, NABL or ISO which have already done a lot of work on
this. It is worth mentioning that CGHS has as its policy, to recognize Hospitals with NABH
or ISO accredition only. Therefore, registration may be given only if there is such valid
accreditation.
• Clause 28 : No registration can be permanent. It has to be periodically renewed subject
to the establishment continuing to be audited and inspected by the accrediting authority.
PUNJAB ASSOCIATION (Regd.)
Dr. (Mrs.) Bela Suury Kumar
The representatives of Punjab Association welcomed the intentions of the proposed Act and
stressed on the following to be taken care while finalizing the Bill:—
• It should protect the high Profile Medical Personnel from the misuse of the provisions of
the Act.
• Safety of Medical Personnel should be taken care of.
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION
Dr. Capt. G. Raghavelu. Immediate Past State President
Dr. Raghavelu placed the opinion of IMA, Tamil Nadu State Branch, as follows:
Page 3, CHAPTER I, PRELIMINARY 2 ( g): Amendment proposed – Delete Yoga and
Naturopathy as they do not have a council to recognize and  standardize them.

113
Page 3, CHAPTER II, THE NATIONAL COUNCIL 3 (2) (e) :  Amendment proposed— Ten
representatives to be elected by the Central Council of Indian Medical Association. Representation
should be on the strength of the organization. IMA membership is 1.75 lacs approximately.
Page 3, CHAPTER II, THE NATIONAL COUNCIL 3 (2) (i): Amendment proposed— One
representative from the line of paramedical system from each zone by rotation for a term only.
Page 3, CHAPTER II, THE NATIONAL COUNCIL 3 (2) (j): Amendment proposed—The Central
Government may nominate one representative of each system of medicine after due recognition till
no statutory regular authority has been set up; the representative will be elected by the respective
council immediately on setting up the regulation authority.
Page 4, CHAPTER II, THE NATIONAL COUNCIL 3 (6) : Amendment proposed—The National
Council may make bye laws ... ..(delete subject to the previous approval of the Central
Government).
Page 4, CHAPTER II, THE NA TIONAL COUNCIL  5 (a): Amendment proposed— Suggest the
standard for ensuring proper health care by the clinical establishment, the respective State council
may formulate the standards for that state keeping the objective of the standard of the National
Council
Page 4, CHAPTER II, THE NA TIONAL COUNCIL 5 (b):  Amendment proposed— Classify the
clinical establishment into different categories, however, the respective State council may classify
the establishment for the respective State keeping the objective of classification of National Council.
Page 5, CHAPTER II, THE NATIONAL COUNCIL 5 (c): Amendment proposed— Suggest the
minimum standards, but the State council may have the privilege to set a minimum standard for
respective state.
Page 6, CHAPTER III, REGISTRATION AND STANDARDS FOR CLINICAL
ESTABLISHMENTS 14 (4):  Amendment proposed— If any.......shall be made within two years
from the date of the notification of this Act in daily news paper after commencement of this Act.
Page 6, CHAPTER III, REGISTRATION AND STANDARDS FOR CLINICAL
ESTABLISHMENTS 20 :  Amendment proposed — Add : If there is no change of category of the
clinical establishment, the certificate of practical registration should be issued to the new owner
for the period of one year.
Page 10, CHAPTER VI, MISCELLANEOUS 51 (1) : Amendment proposed — Modify as :  If
any difficulty arise in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the Central Government may with
approval of National Council, by order published.........
Page 6, CHAPTER VI, MISCELLANEOUS 52 (1) : Amendment proposed — Modify as:  The
Central Government with approval of National Council, may be notification.
Page 12, CHAPTER VI, MISCELLANEOUS 56 (2) : Amendment proposed:— Modify as : The
Central Government may in consultation with National Council as and when  necessary, by
notification amend the schedule. However, these proposed amendment be discussed in State Council
and the suggested provision for amendment of the State Council should be considered by National
Council before finalizing the amendments.
GENERAL CONSIDERATION
• The State Body and District Body should have subcommittee and appellant committees that
can allow the Clinical Establishments applying or applied to express their grievances for
earlier/implementation or granting authorization.

114
• All the fines, imposed must be reduced so to be very practical and only to create
a sense of adhering to the rules and not with the intension of extracting money from the
clinical establishments:
• The minimum qualification must be a quallfied graduate registered in the respective State /
national council and should not include traditional or unqualified or experience based
practitioners.
• Registration Certificate should be valid for 5 years.
PRIV ATE HOSPITALS AND NURSING HOME BOARD,
DR. V. VARADARAJAN, FOUNDER PRESIDENT
According to the Board, though the Act is a welcome step as it will enable to have a list and
number of hospitals, bed strength, nature of diseases, treatment options available to all in digital
format for the District, State and the whole Country. It will help to identify, treat diseases and take
measures to control diseases.
• As this is a fresh Act, so a very cautious step is essential because there are varying types
of hospitals in terms of bed facility. The services offered vary from simple to specialized
treatments.
Every hospital, whether a small one in a village or a specialized one, is doing a life saving service
to the patient. Therefore, it is very difficult to put one common rule for all the hospitals. Each
hospital can only grow according to local need and support they cater to that locality and have
adapted to the local conditions. Each Hospital has to be judged individually. There is no single
hospital capable of satisfying all the needs of the patient.
• The aim of the rules, which are to be framed at a later stage, should be to support all
institutions rendering health care and allow them to grow by giving proper guidelines for
their services.
• CLAUSE 2
Please add column 5, instead of single doctor change as, “Institutions controlled managed
by any person, group of persons, firm or trust”.
• FEED BACK ESSENTIAL
We should know the local conditions in the hospitals demands and needs of the local public
as well as the necessity of the Government to support in certain areas. For example, Malaria
may be rampant in one place unless the authorities are aware of this, preventive measures
may be delayed. Or if there may be poor maternity care, there is necessity for the local
authorities to be aware of the deficiency and take remedial measures. This is possible only
when you get a feedback from the doctors of the hospitals of the area. The Government
should enlist the support of the Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes. A close coordination
is essential.
The doctors from the Nursing Homes of the area should be represented in the District,
State and the National level Advisory Committee, which may be required to be formed for
implementation of preventive steps in an epidemic out break, in the following manner:—
– for District Council one in every hundred Nursing Homes or part thereof,
– for State Council one in every thousand Nursing Homes or part thereof, and
– for National Council one in every three thousand Nursing Homes in the State.

115
Then only there will be a proper feedback, to the concerned Councils and the message of
the councils engaged in a health care will be properly communicated to the hospitals also
for compliance. They may be called Advisory Councils. They will serve in the same way
as Academic Councils and Board of Studies serve in the University. The rules framed as
well as suggestions for improvement can be periodically discussed with this Advisory
Council. As such  section 3 does not provide for any such close contact. It consists of
only official bodies. We require lot of people with field experience. The MCI Act and
State Medical Council provides for these representations in their Acts.
CLAUSES 40-44
The punishment is very huge and is not practicable. The provisions may be deleted allowing
the fine clause (for moderate amount) to be incorporated in the rules to be formed. It is
not necessary to put this in the Act as it may  be very difficult to change this in the future.
MADRAS SCAN SYSTEMS
DR. B. I. JAFFERY , MEDICAL DIRECTOR
• In their memorandum, welcoming the proposed legislation as a tool to maintain quality
services in the field of clinical medicine, they have sought for its implementation in a phased
manner so that it involves clinical establishments as also paramedical services and
pharmaceutical services.
• Along with penalties mentioned in the Bill for non-compliance, there should be a reward
for clinical establishments which are registered under the Bill, like concession in property
tax, rebates in other taxes and utility services.
• There should be strict control on pharmacies so that over the counter drug dispension are
strictly curtailed since this results in the severe misuse of drugs and anti-biotics without the
doctors examination and prescription, which will in turn improve the quality of medical
treatment given to patients.
• It would be preferred that the Government also imposes strict control on the use of media
as an advertisement tool by clinical establishments and hospitals to promote and market their
services as this increases unethical competition between Hospitals. Moreover, there should
be strict ban on all clinical establishments claiming medical specialties, especially with
unqualified doctors, who are promoting their services in media such as satellite TV
Channels.
Dr. D.R. SUBRAMANIAN
DIRECTOR, SENTHIL SCHOOL OF SONOGRAPHY
Dr. Subramanian while welcoming the contents of the Bill sought for strict implementation of
Clause 40 which provides for penalty for contravention of any provisions of the Act, so as to
eliminate unqualified persons from the medical field and to provide proper medical care to needy
people.
MEDISCAN
DR. INDRANI SURESH
Chapter I, Clause 2 (c) (ii)
The definition of the word “Clinical establishment” needs to be specified whether “outpatient”

116
clinics, scan  centres, radiology clinics are also included. The current definition as it stands appears
to pertain only to establishments where “in patient’ facilities are available. Absolute clarity in the
definition is important. The clause may read as “........investigations or other diagnostic or
investigative services with the aid of laboratory or other medical equipment are usually carried on
either as in patient or as an outpatient service, established and administered or maintained...etc.
It is also not clear whether the word “independent” refers to “outpatient”.
Chapter II
Clause 3(2)
With regard to the composition of the National Council, representatives from the National Societies
like IFUMB (Indian Federation of Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology), FOGSI, IRIA, and other
National societies may be included to ensure that the policies formulated by the National Council
will reach the concerned medical professionals through their respective societies. Each Society may
be asked to form a standards committee for establishing infrastructure and performance and the
National Council may review this for approval. It is very important for specialties and subspecialties
be included for better reach, monitoring and compliance. This may also help in resolving disputes/
differences between the authority and the individual doctor.
Clause 5(a) and ( c)
The meaning of the word “standards” should be clear. Standardization may refer to the process
of establishing the clinic, hospital, dispensary etc. with regard to the infrastructure and/or
standardization with respect to clinical performance. It is not clear whether it will look at “medical
waste disposal”.
It is suggested that the different National Medical Societies like FOGSI, IFUMB, IRIA, may be
asked to establish standards for clinical performance and they may be adopted by the National
Council. This will ensure that all members will follow these standards while delivering health care.
Ultimately, the patient will benefit only if the medical/paramedical professional does his job in a
consistent and standardized manner.
Chapter II, Clause 5(e):
The meaning of the word ‘statistics’ needs to be specified. It should be clear whether it means
the number of patients seen, number of scans done/number of x-rays taken, number of laboratory
tests done etc. or  does it mean the total number of establishments and their various categories?
Chapter IV :
Clauses 26 and 27: It is a dangerous provision putting the doctor in an extremely vulnerable
situation. Any member of the public at his whims and fancies may decide to raise an objection to
a clinic. These may be deleted.
Clause 34: It appears that a lot of power is assigned to a single “authority” to search and enter.
There should be a committee constituted by the State Government with the various stakeholders
in the respective district/city presided over by the designated “authority”. Every State Government
must constitute a State/District Committee with representatives from the medical profession, an
eminent social person, laboratory expert etc. This committee is to be presided over by the
“authority” mentioned in chapter I clause 2 (a).
Chapter V , Clause 40: Penalty—While the penalty clause is welcome, there should be a grievance
redressal mechanism for the owner of the establishment. What if the authority has failed to issue
the registration/renewal on time and inspection team reaches the establishment?

117
Chapter VI, Miscellaneous:
While the Government has taken care to protect itself from legal proceedings, there appears to be
no provision in the proposed Act for grievances redressal for the establishment owners. The
establishment owner should have the right of presenting his/her case to the State committee in
person and should have the right to appeal to the National Council in case of any disputes. A clause
for grievance redressal mechanism for the establishment owners should be there to protect their
rights.
APOLLO HOSPITALS
DR. B. M. S. NAGRAJ, MEDICAL SUPERINTENDENT,
DR. VENKATASALAM
They submitted the following points for kind consideration of the Committee:—
• The National Council should also have representation from eminent persons belonging to the
Private Hospitals/Nursing Homes across the Country.
• State and District Registering Authority should have similar representation from across the
State/District.
• The officer authorized to inspect the medical establishment for registration should be
qualified as per the standards set by the National Council for each recognized system of
medicine.
• The Appellate Committee at the State level for grievances should be headed by retired Judge
with the Director of Medical Services/Chief Medical Officer and two eminent people from
the recognized system of medicine being the members.
• The role of the already existing National Accreditation Boord for Hospitals (NABH) is not
clear.
HI TECH DIAGNOSTIC CENTRE
DR. S. P. GANESAN
Their general suggestions w.r.t. the Bill are:
• The Act is necessary, as it would help to have a complete Data base of the Clinical
Establishments in the country, and monitor the properly. Under no circumstances the Bill
should be dropped.
• It should include all disciplines of health care- Allopathy, Homoeopathy, Ayurveda, Siddha,
Unanai, other approved Indian systems of alternative Medicines, Physiotherapy Centres,
Cosmetology centres and any other establishments providing Medical treatment. Avoiding
registration claiming to be Wellness Centres, should not be permitted.
• It should cover all sizes of establishments — from the biggest corporate Hospitals to small
single man clinics in the rural area and also the Hospitals run by State and Central
Governments, and their Departments
• There should not be any exemptions even if they are registered with other Authorities or
societies. This should be an all inclusive Bill.
• There are no representatives from the private sector. Sufficient representation should be
given.

118
• The penalty amounts seem to be high, and they can be fixed according to the size and type
of the establishment, like the highest for a Big Hospital in a Metro and lower for a single
man Clinic in a rural area.
• Specific for Laboratories:
Some basic requirements must be insisted for being eligible for registration. Minimum
Space: For sample collection, first-aid room, Processing, Report preparation etc. 500 sq feet in
Tier III and IV towns, 700- 1500 sq. feet in tier II cities and above 1500 sq. feet in Metros.
Instruments: Semi Auto analyzer for Biochemistry, Cell Counter for Hematology, Microscopes,
Centrifuges etc.
Personnel: As per the guidelines issued by NABL (National Accreditation Board for Laboratories).
Quality control: The labs must have a good internal control programme. For external quality
control they should have an arrangement with AIIMS,  New Delhi, CMC Hospital Vellore, Quality
Council of India or other recognized organizations. In future, the Health Departments of the State
Government can make such programmes available.
Implementation: The Prof. of Pathology, Biochemistry, and Microbiology can be the implementing
authorities in districts, cities, where there is a medical College. In other places similar District
officials can be in charge of inspection and implementation.
DR. (CAPT) M. KAMATCHI, EXPERT ADVISOR,
TAMIL NADU HEALTH SYSTEMS PROJECT, and
FORMERLY, DIRECTOR OF MEDICAL AND RURAL HEALTH SERVICES,
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU.
Dr. Kamatchi submitted the following clause-wise suggestions:—
Clause 1: Preliminary — The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Bill, 2007 is a
long awaited necessity; hence it is a welcome step.
Clause 2: Definitions — Inclusion of Government Hospitals under this Act is also a welcome step
so that the Government Hospitals can also maintain standards.
It is not clear if the Clinic Establishments include the consulting rooms also where there are no
beds. It is suggested that they shall be included.
Clause 3: National Council — Establishment of National Council for registration is welcome. It is
suggested that the Registrar of Clinical Establishment of each State shall be a member of the
National Council so that he/she can participate in the deliberations of the National Council
effectively and can carryout any newer developments, if any, effectively in the State with a sense
of involvement and participation.
Clause 5: Functions of National Council — It is suggested that while determining standards for
clinical establishments, due consideration may be given for small Nursing Homes in rural areas.
Clause 25: Submission of evidence by the clinical establishment — The clause on submission of
evidence for the clinical establishment having complied with the prescribed minimum standards
does not mention how the evidence shall be submitted.
Clause 37: Register of clinical establishments — A register shall be published in the website also.

119
Clause 40-46:  Penal provision — Penal provisions for non registration etc., appears to be severe.
A distinction shall be made for registered medical practitioners contravening the provisions and an
unqualified person practicing medicine for imposition of penalty.
ASSOCIATION OF PHYSICIANS OF INDIA, CHENNAI CHAPTER
DR. E. Prabhu, Medical Director, Advanced Nuclear Medicine Research Institute.
Dr. Prabhu on behalf of the Association expressed happiness at the aims and objectives of this Bill.
The following suggestions w.r.t.. the Bill were put forth by them:
• Chapter 2, Clause 5(C) : develop minimum standards and their periodic review, Page
14, Statement of Objects and Reasons, Clause 1, ...excessive use of higher
technology...
Suggestion
The National Council may also formulate (like the Drug controller of India) the minimum required
standards for the various Medical Diagnostic and Therapeutic Equipments like the ultrasound, CT/
MRI equipments etc, and insist on their compliance with NEMA protocol, at the time of
introduction into country. Even the standards of the biochemical and immunological reagents should
be optimized in accordance with the category of the Clinical Establishment. The manufacturer
should clearly spell out the maintenance protocols and their guideline market value. The authorities
from the Bureau of Indian Standards can periodically verify the compliance of the manufacturer
and the vendor for use in the approved Clinical Establishments by the National Council.
Benefit —  The National Council will be able to give broad guidelines to the Directors of the
various approved Clinical Establishments and help them in planning their facilities. This will be of
much help to and optimize its utility in accordance with the local requirement and budget
constraints. In addition, the Clinical Establishments also become aware about their requirements that
are expected from the manufacturer/sellers.
• Chapter 3, Clause 12 – For registration and continuation..... as may be prescribed.
Suggestion — Formation of Hospital Regulatory Council Every Clinical Establishment within the
prescribed time after the receipt of Provisional registration shall constitute a committee of not less
than 5 members.
1. The Owner/Managing Director of the Clinical Establishment shall be the Chairperson/
convener. The other representatives can include.
2. Full time Medical Officer of the Clinical Establishment in the Rank of Medical Director
(Medical Personnel only),
3. Administrator/Financial Controller (full time employee of the hospital)
4. A Public person of good reputation, integrity and education to be nominated by the
governing body of the establishment from time to time.
5. Local Municipal Chairman/Corporation Councilor/Panchayat President/Village Administrative
Officer etc. as the case may be.
The Clinical Establishment to convene a meeting of the committee once in 4 months, with a prior
notice to all the members and review the utility and performance of the medical institution. It shall
formulate its bye laws and communicate its copy to the District/State/National Council. The
minutes of the meetings shall be carefully maintained. All the resolutions passed in that meeting
shall be reduced in writing and the extract of which shall be forwarded to the District Health

120
Officer or the Local Committee. This committee shall also examine the appropriateness of the
medical facility used for that individual locality which may vary in accordance with region, situation
and life style of the people.
Authorized representative of the banks/financial institutions who advance loans to that particular
institution may also be allowed to participate
Benefit —  This indirectly helps in the periodic monitoring of the functioning of the Registered
Clinical Establishments. In addition the doctor will get good rapport with the local population. The
above committee will help the inspecting officials as stated in Chapter 4. Clause (33). An
appropriately qualified expert shall be also included in the inspecting team. The public will also have
confidence in these hospitals as their representative is also directly involved. However, checks and
balances should be evolved so that the nominees of this committee should not misuse their office
and cause untoward expenditure to the Registered Clinical Establishment.
The District level/State level and the National level Committee can also formulate the appropriate
guidelines depending of the requirement of the local people, budget restrictions and use optimum
technology.
• Chapter 5, Clause 44 (1) – Where a person committing ..... and shall be liable to fine.
Background  —  Health care services is considered as a safe and profit making industry by the
various banks (Public and Private sectors – ‘Doctor plus’ loan for example), Non Banking Financial
Institutions and local money lenders. They take advantage of the ignorance of the Doctors on
financial issues and resort to intimidation, to ensure compliance with their terms and conditions.
Their lending/borrowing policies are not uniform, grossly unregulated and are not transparent.
Therefore the end users are subjected to financial trauma besides physical and mental stress which
subsequently percolates to the patients.
Suggestions —  The National Council shall evolve broad guidelines and emphasise uniform
standards to the various bankers and non banking financial institutions, besides formulating practical
lending/recovery policy to the Health care services. Softer and more practical approaches shall be
formulated towards the lean periods (like festivals), during which the priority of the people is not
to get admitted in hospitals, except in dire emergencies. This will prevent unnecessary harassment
of the patients.
• Chapter 2, Clause 3(2)(j) ... the Central Government may nominate ...set up
The Association of Physicians of India (API), is the largest professional body with about 50,000
physicians who are qualified M.D. and above as its life members.
The Chennai Chapter is the founder of this National body, which is professionally active and
comprises of experienced specialists and super specialists from almost all the fields of medical
specialities. As a social responsibility, we are unconditionally offering our services for the
betterment of our country. It will be of much help if one among the Central Government nominee
could be from us as this will help in rendering our knowledge and expertise directly, for the benefit
of our country.
TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT DOCTOR’S ASSOCIATION
DR. V . PALANI, PRESIDENT and STATE HEAD QTS. SECRETARY.
The submissions of the Association are summarized below:
Clause 3: There is lack of State Government Representation. It is suggested that the Director of
Medical Services be included as a local medical advisor apart from Registrar of Clinical
Establishment.

121
Clause 13:  Classification of Clinical Establishments as State, District and Taluk level. Further,
depending on bed strength, it should be sub-classified.
Clause 23: Time limit for provisional registration should be restricted upto one year. It should not
be renewed as Temporary beyond one year.
Clause 30: After commencement of the Act, period of registration should be six months.
Clause 32: Cancellation of registration – Temporary suspension may be imposed over the erring
clinics, and may be revoked after satisfying or rectifying the norms.
Clause 34: Power to enter – Surprise inspections may be done periodically without notice also so
that the real condition will be evident.
Clause 35: Finance and Accounts – V arious clinics may be categorized in four grades – ‘A’  Grade
for Corporate and multispeciality Hospitals with more than 100 beds; ‘8’ Grade for Speciality
Hospitals/Clinics having bed strength from 50 to 100; ‘C’  Grade for Hospitals/Nursing Homes/
Clinics having bed strength from 10 to 50; and ‘D’ Grade for Clinics/Hospitals having less than
10 beds.
Clause 41: Penalty for non-registration – Penalty for non-registration should vary according to the
category A, B, C, and D.
Clause 47: Legal Protection – Exemption of legal proceedings in relevant instances against Council
authorities does not seem to be appropriate.
General Remark:  Like Armed Forces Medical Institutions, Government Medical Institutions may
also be exempted from this Act in a better prospective.
DR. A. RENUKA, Director i/c and Professor,
Institute of Biochemistry, Madras Medical college, Chennai.
For Clinical laboratories carrying out pathological tests:
• Registration to be made mandatory for starting of a new clinical laboratory.
• Inspection of clinical laboratory prior to registration by qualified and competent lab
personnel to ensure availability of adequate resources in the form of space, equipment and
qualified personnel (both technical and supervisory).
• The proposed lab should submit to the registering authority a list of
• Tests that it proposes to carry out.
• List of equipments available.
• A list of technical staff (both technical and supervisory).
• List of personnel who are going to sign test reports.
• Qualifications of technical staff
Clinical Laboratories should compulsorily employ only qualified personnel.
• Technicians with a recognized 2 year DMLT course (or)
• CMLT 1 year course with minimum of 2 years experience (or)
• Up to 25% of technician need not have the above qualification but should have
passed +2 with a minimum experience of working in a medical college.

122
• Equipment
Following minimum equipment should be made available
• Semi automated analyzer – 1
• Colorimeter – 2
• Centrifugers – 1
• Micro pipettes – fixed and variable volume
• Light microscope – 1
• Hot air oven – 1
• Refrigerator – 1
• Physical balance – 1
• Authorized signatories
Minimum one of the following authorized signatory, whose qualifications are given, should
be present [part time/fulltime] to sign test reports:—
• M.D. in Biochemistry/Pathology/Microbiology.
• M.B.B.S., D.C.P.
• M.B.B.S.
• M.Sc., in Microbiology/Biochemistry.
• M.Sc. in Medical Laboratory Technology.
• Records and Registers
Minimum records to be maintained:
• Daily Results Register
• Internal Quality Control Register
• Sample collection register
• Participation in External Quality Assessment Scheme programmes
MEDICAL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
Dr. K. S. G . A. Nasser, Principal, Tamil Nadu Government Dental College and Hospital, Chennai
stated that the entire procedure of the introduction of this Clinical Establishment Registration and
Regulation Act is a good gesture which will eradicate the quacks. However, he made the following
submission before the Committee:
• Clause 26: If the objection are not present and it is given by unwanted person for the
owner, what is the remedy?
• Clause 41 (2): The present authority to establishment should be punished and not visiting
person.
• Clause 45 (1):  The Head of Department being the controlling authority only for the
administration of the Department can not be found guilty of the offence committed by his/
her subordinates and that there are sufficient Rules and Regulations of the State to proceed
against the erring officials.

123
• The Government Doctors should not be brought under the purview of this Act as they all
are the qualified Doctors. If this bill is introduced, there may be difficulty in treating the
serious cases in emergency circumstances.
Dr. N.S. Kannan,
Joint Director of Medical and Rural Health Services, Dindigul, Tamil Nadu.
Welcoming the Bill, Shri Kannan suggested following issues for better implementation of proposed
legislation:
Chapter II, Clause 3 (2) (j) :  The Provision regarding ‘The National Council Nomination of
eminent Representative of other systems of Medicine of which No statutory regulatory authority
has been set up’ may be temporarily kept in abeyance till such time, other system of medicine are
channelized by appropriate regulatory authority, to prevent unqualified persons being erroneously
licensed by this Act.
Chapter II, Clause 5 (c) : Periodical Review is appropriate in view of advancement in Medical
Science. But the periodicity should be specified e.g. once in two years and this review must be
made mandatory.
Chapter III, Clause 8 : As far as Tamil Nadu is Concerned Director of Medical and Rural Health
Services shall be notified as the State Registrar under Clinical Establishment Act and this power
should never be delegated to any other subordinate officer.
Chapter III, Clause 10 : Joint Director of Medical and Rural Health Services must be notified
as District Registering Authority because he is the Chief Medical Officer of the District in Tamil
Nadu.
Chapter IV , Clauses 15, 16, 17 :  The Provision of Provisional Certification within 10 days
without inspection or enquiry based only on application will pave path for quackery to get enlisted,
under the Banner of “Provisional Registration”, and enjoy for three years evading Permanent
Registration. These quacks may continue to take shelter under this Section with endless segments
of three years by shifting places or and changing their names. Hence “Temporary Registration”
should be removed.
Chapter IV, Clause 26 : This Section is unnecessary as it will stand in the way of fair Medicare
to poor people. Instead, the following Members/Representatives are included in the District
Registering Committee.
(1) Environment for Pollution Board
(2) Revenue – RDO
(3) Deputy Director of Health/Block Medical Officer
(4) Police – Deputy Superintendent of Police
(5) Drug Controller
(6) Microbiologist/Radiologist/Appropriate Specialist
(7) Bio-Medical Engineer
(8) Local Corporation/Municipality/Panchayat Body
(9) Consumer Forum

124
Chapter IV , Clause 36 :  Any Clinical Establishment aggrieved by any order of the District
Authority may appeal to State Registering Authority and any Clinical Establishment aggrieved by the
order of State Registrar may appeal to the National Council. The National Council’s decision should
be made final.
Chapter V :  Penalty: All the powers to impose penalties on erring clinical establishment including
cancellation of Registration and closure of the Establishment shall be vested with District
Registering Authority.
Civil and Criminal Proceedinqs (To be included fresh) – Whenever District Authority
refers the offence to Court of Law, ex.:— for Imprisonment, this offence must be made:
(1) Non Cognizable,
(2) Non Bailable, and
(3) Non compoundable as it is formulated for PCPNDT Act.
(i) DR. S. V ASANTHA,
DIRECTOR OF MEDICAL AND RURAL HEALTH SERVICES (i/c)
(ii) DEAN, KILPAUK MEDICAL COLLEGE HOSPITAL, CHENNAI
Following are the Clause-wise suggestions received from the Director, Medical and Rural Health
Services:—
Clause 3 : As no representation for the State of T amil Nadu has been given, a Medical advisor
nominated by Government of Tamil Nadu must be included.
Clause 5 : Categorization of clinics for fixing standard rates and tariffs.
Clause 8 : Registrar should be de-centralized. viz. State, District and Sub-District level.
Clause 24 : Permanent Registration – Every certificate of registration shall be valid for a period
of five years from the date of its issue. After expiry of five years the registration of clinical
establishments shall be renewed. Permanent registration could not be allowed because employees,
equipments, machineries and other infrastructure facilities may be changed during the period of
registration, that results in non-fulfilling the standards of National Council.
A list of all Councils including Medical Council, Nursing Council, Siddha Council, Homoeo Council,
Pharmacy Council, and Paramedical Council may be displayed on web. A hard and soft copy may
be made available to the authorities to verify the genuineness of the personnel to eradicate quackery.
Clause 30 : Period of Registration – Cut off date should be mentioned for applying for registration
after the commencement of Act rather than the period of one year to register them with the
Government.
Clause 30 and 31 : Certificate of Permanent registration – Validity of registration shall be for a
particular period say for 5 years or 6 years. Renewal may be granted after the expiry of
registration duly fulfilling the standard prescribed by the National Council.
Clause 32 :  Cancellation of registration – Temporary suspension may be included and awarded to
the erring clinics in the public interest and such suspension may be revoked at the authority level
after the receipt of satisfactory appeal from the clinics.
Clause 33 : Inspection of registered clinical establishment – Inspection of clinical establishments
may be done by the authorities at all reasonable time with or without notice. Authority may be
empowered to seize and seal the erring clinics as per IPC.

125
Clause 34 : Power to enter – Inspection of clinical establishments may be done by the authorities
at all reasonable time without notice also. If the notice served to the Clinical establishment running
without registration, the establishment may lock and simply escape from the inspection.
Clause 35 : Finance and accounts – Categorisation of clinics for Registration purpose.
May be categorized by the National Council at all India level say for A Grade – Multi speciality,
super speciality with fully equipped clinics/Hospital/Nursing Home. B Grade – Speciality hospital/
Clinic/Nursing Home. C Grade – Hospital/Nursing Home/Clinic. D Grade – Consulting clinics/
Referring unit. Standards for employees’ equipments and other infrastructure facilities may be
prescribed by the National Council in consultation with private and Government Association.
Categorisation of clinics for rates and tariffs charged by the clinics to the patients: A Grade, B
Grade, C Grade, and D Grade may be decided in consultation with the clinical establishments by
the State Government.
List of rates tariffs for various ailments and treatments may be displayed at the prominent place.
Clause 36 :  Appeal – Any person aggrieved by order of District Authority and State Authority may
appeal to State Authority and the State Government, respectively.
Clause 40  : Penalty – Penalty which is prescribed is very high and it should be minimized.
Penalty with court proceedings – When there is a complaint against clinical establishment; an
enquiry may be conducted by the authority consisting of Medical experts. Based on the enquiry
reports, penal action may be initiated as per IPC in the court of law including imprisonment
(quackery, medical negligence), if necessary. Further, based on the enquiry reports, compensation
may be awarded by the court of law.
Any person or clinics convicted for more than three times under this act, the name of clinics and
person may be debarred from the list concerned.
Clause 41 : Penalty for non-registration – Penalty for non-registration is also very high and should
be minimized.
Clause 42 :  Disobedience of order obstruction and refusal of information – Fine is very high and
it should also be minimized.
Clause 45 : Offences by Government Departments - Any officer in the Government Department,
who is responsible for the offence, may be liable to be proceeded against the punishment and the
HOD may be exempted from such punishment as the offence occurred without his knowledge or
notice.
P.W.C. DAVIDAR, IAS
SPECIAL SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
Shri Davidar expressed the following views before the Committee about the Bill:
• Under Clause 15, the provisional certificate may be made as the permanent certificate,
which is subject to cancellation if any of the information is found to be false. (this will
benefit all those who register in avoiding huge indirect cost in securing registration).
• A provision may be made for cancellation if any of the information is found to be false.
If cancelled, the Clinical establishment may apply afresh and such a Clinical establishment
should not be registered without an inspection and without verification by the inspection
authority.

126
• Registration at the initial stage and thereafter may be made compulsorily online. Net-based
registration may be made possible by the software application designed by the Ministry of
Health and Family welfare as and when all the information by a Clinical establishment is
entered, it may be registered and a registration certificate may be made available as a
printout. (This provision will ensure better compliance to the Act).
• Net-based registration will ensure that all the information is available in a digital format.
Also, there will be no necessity for fresh entry of voluminous date in the system as all the
data will be available online. Section 14 (2) will require amendment to provide for this.
• Clause 11 mentions “admit’ giving an impression that Clinical establishments will be
identified by admissions only ( i.e., inpatient facility only) although Clause 2 (c) provides a
more broad based definition, this may result in unnecessary litigation. The explanation given
may be expanded include “Services, facilities with/without beds requiring diagnosis etc. as
is found in Clause 2 (c)”.
• A specific provision should be added that anyone who is qualified/specialized in one system
of medicine should practise in the same system only ie. those registered in a particular
council should practise in that system only. Therefore, a homoeopathic doctor should not
practise allopathy and so on.
• A specific provision should be made to ensure that paramedics should not practise medicine
(nurses, lab technicians etc.)
HYDERABAD (ANDHRA PRADESH)
The Committee interacted with the following entities at Hyderabad on the 14th January, 2008:—
PHARMED, TRADE NEWS, SHRI V . BHA V A NARAYANA, EDITOR PUBLISHER
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, A.P. STATE
DR. E. RAVINDER REDDY , PRESIDENT
DR. B. MOHAN RAO, SECRETARY
DR. SREELA THA, VICE PRESIDENT
DR. DILIP BANUSHALI
DR. R. JAY ACHANDRA REDDY, PAST  NATIONAL PRESIDENT
BIOLOGICAL E. LIMITED, Dr. (Mrs.) RENUKA DATLA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
SHANTHA BIOTECHNICS LIMITED, SHRI V ARAPRASAD REDDY , MANAGING
DIRECTOR
MR. D. HANUMANTHA RAO, RETIRED DIRECTOR, DRUGS CONTROL
ADMINISTRATION
A.P. PRIVA TE HOSPITALS & NURSING HOMES ASSOCIATION (APNA)
DR. Y . RAVINDER RAO, PRESIDENT
DR. N.L.N. SHARMA, GENERAL SECRETARY
Dr. V ALLABHANENI RAMPRASAD,
CHAIRMAN, ANDHRA PRADESH MEDICAL COUNCIL, HYDERABAD
VIMTA LABS LIMITED,
Dr. S.P. V ASIREDDI, CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR

127
PHARMED, TRADE NEWS,
SHRI V. BHAV A NARAYANA, EDITOR PUBLISHER
Recommendations put forth by Shri Narayana w.r.t. the Bill are as follows:
• NATIONAL COUNCIL — Ensure participation of one member each from:
– Consumer education organizations
– Patient education organization
– All India Chemists and Druggists Organization (AIOCD)
• Finance and accounts — Ensure 25% of fee collected by State Governments to be passed
on to National council instead of mere 2% for effective functioning of National Council.
• Registration — Ensure all registrations of clinical establishments only if
(a) That all registrants will participate, promote National health programmes
(b) Participate in patient education programmes
(c) Use the benefits offered by information technology
(d) Shall follow all Acts in existence and to be promogulated including PNDT Act.
(e) Ensure all clinical establishments to follow the rates specified by Ministry for all
medical and surgical procedures
• Penalties —
The penalties for non-registration, non-compliance may be enhanced by 50%.
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, A.P. STATE
DR. E. RAVINDER REDDY, PRESIDENT
DR. B. MOHAN RAO, SECRETARY
DR. SREELATHA, VICE PRESIDENT
DR. DILIP BANUSHALI
DR. R. JAYACHANDRA REDDY, PAST NATIONAL PRESIDENT
The representatives of the IMA, A.P. State were in general against the proposed legislation to cover
the private clinical establishments. The reason cited by them was that this registration and
regulation of the establishments will not facilitate the improvement in public health. Further, it is
irrelevant to consider registration and regulation of establishments under one Act which are spread
all over the country and catering to the requirements of people of different States, districts, blocks
and variable social structure.
Stating their opinion that the individual clinics/dispensary without any bed should be outside the
purview of this Act, they proposed the following amendments in the Bill:
Chapter–l: Page–2
2 (c) – “Clinical establishment” means
(i) A hospital, maternity home, nursing home, dispensary and clinic (except the dispensary
and clinic owned and managed by a singe doctor)
2 (c) (ii) (5) – delete “a single doctor establishment”

128
Chapter–1:
2 (g) – “recognized system of medicine” means Allopathy, Ayurveda, Homoeopathy,
..................(delete Yoga and N aturopathy)
Chapter–II:
3(2)(e) —  Five to ten representatives to be elected by the Central Council of Indian Medical
Association should be included in the National Council instead of one Member as specified in the
Act. Representation should be on the strength of the organization.
3 (2) (i) —  One representative from the line of paramedical system from each zone by rotation
for a term only.
(i) The Central Government may nominate one representative of each system of medicine after due
recognition till no statutory regular authority has been set up; the representative will be elected by
the respective council immediately on setting up the regulatory authority.
3(6) — The National Council may make bye laws ...............(delete – subject to the previous
approval of the Central Government).
5(a) — National Council shall suggest the standard for ensuing proper health care by the clinical
establishment. The respective State council may formulate the standards for that State keeping the
objective of the standard of the National Council.
5(b) — classify the clinical establishment into different categories, however, the respective State
council may classify the establishment for the respective State keeping the objective of
classification of National Council.
5(c) — suggest the minimum standards, but the State council may have the privilege to set a
minimum standard for the respective State.
10 — Registering authority should include one member from Indian Medical Association along with
District Medical and Health Officer. This is already implemented by A.P. State Government. They
also included A.P. PRIV ATE HOSPITALS AND NURSING HOMES ASSOCIATION (APNA).
13 — last para —
Delete : Provided that in prescribing the standards for clinical establishment, the Central
Government shall have regard to the local conditions.
14(4) — If any .......... shall be made within two years from the date of the notification of this
Act in Newspaper after commencement of this Act.
20 — Add:
If there is no change of category of the clinical establishment the certificate of practical registration
should be issued to the new owner for the period of one year.
40 — Penalty for the first offence should be reduced to Rs. 25,000/-, Rs. 50,000/-for the second
offence and for the subsequent offence to Rs. 1,00,000/- because small establishments, mostly in
the rural areas and urban slums, can not afford to pay on par with bigger hospitals.
41, sub-clause 2
The Consultants must be made aware of this clause of the Act through the website which provides
for punishment with fine, which may  extend to Rs. 25,000/- for those who knowingly serve in
Clinical Establishments which are  not duly registered under this Act. The list of registered and
unregistered nursing homes should also be made available on net for the benefit of the consultants.

129
51 (1) — Read: If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the Central
Government may with approval of National Council by order published...........
52(1) — Read:  The Central Government may with approval of National Council, may by
notification make rules for carrying out all or any  of the provisions of this Act.
54(2) (w) Add:  The standards of clinical establishment in consultation with State council except
the clinic of individual doctor. Set the categories of clinical establishment except the clinic of one
individual doctor.
56 (2) Read: The Central Government may in consultation with National Council as and when
necessary, by notification amend the schedule. However, these proposed amendments be discussed
in State Council and the suggested provision for amendment of the State Council should be
considered by National Council before finalizing the amendments.
BIOLOGICAL E.  LIMITED
Dr. (Mrs.) RENUKA DATLA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Clause 2: Mobile Establishments are also to be considered.
Clause 22: There should be only granting of provisional registration that too for a period of one
year instead of three years and the provisional registration should not be renewed, otherwise, there
will be a tendency of establishment to continue to work or run on provisional certificate without
getting a permanent registration.
Clause 32 (3)
(i) There must be a State or Central Government approved body for arbitration in case of disputes
(with non-financial interest).
(ii) There must be some indication or provision for price/costing of life saving procedures and a
ceiling has to be put in the pricing. This will help in avoiding subsequent amendments in the Act
just like DPCO for Drug Act.
SHANTHA BIOTECHNICS LIMITED
SHRI V ARAPRASAD REDDY, MANAGING DIRECTOR
• Chapter III, Clause 11
Can a doctor continue to run an unregistered OPD provided he is not admitting patients or
does such an establishment also need to be registered.
• Chapter IV , Clause 20
Will it still be required to apply afresh for the registration in the event of just a local
relocation of the establishment, without a change in ownership, category or management?
MR. D. HANUMANTHA RAO, RETIRED DIRECTOR,
DRUGS CONTROL ADMINISTRATION
• A perusal of the provision of the proposed Bill revealed that clause 14(5) is contrary to
clause 56(1) in as much as the former clause contemplates for Registration inspite of being

130
registered under any other statute for the time being in force while the later clause exempts
for any registration in such circumstances.
• As per clause 56 (1) the Bill is not applicable to Andhra Pradesh as the Andhra Pradesh
Private Medical Care Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2002 is already in
force.
SHRI C. GOPALAKRISHNA MURTY,
DIRECTOR, DRUGS CONTROL ADMINISTRATION (RETIRED),
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH, HYDERABAD
Shri Murty welcomed the Bill.
A.P. PRIV ATE HOSPITALS AND NURSING HOMES ASSOCIATION (APNA)
DR. Y. RAVINDER RAO, PRESIDENT
DR. N.L.N. SHARMA, GENERAL SECRETARY
Clause 3, sub-clause 2 —  One elected representative from Private Hospitals and Nursing homes
association to be included in National Council, on lines of A.P. State Government, which included
in the A.P. Private Medical Care Establishment Act-2002.
Clause 10 —  Add one member from Indian Medical Association and one from Nursing Homes
Association. This has already been implemented by the A.P. State Government to make the
registering authority more effective and transparent.
Clauses 41, sub-clause 1 —  Fine for first offence should be Rs.25,000/-, Rs.50,000/- for second
offence and Rs. 1 Lac for subsequent offence. The reason being small nursing homes with 28 beds
or less mostly existing in rural areas and urban slums catering the needs of low socio-economic
groups with low cost health care, low establishment costs and with low investments can not afford
to pay on par with bigger hospitals.
Clauses 41, sub-clause 2 —  To make this provision more transparent, the consultants should be
made aware of this clause as well as the list of lawfully registered nursing homes and suspended
nursing home through website.
Clause 42, sub-clause 1 and 2 —  Penalty should vary with categorization of the hospitals/nursing
homes. Penalty of Rs. 5 lakhs will be detrimental to smaller setups. It will be difficult for medium
and bigger setups also. Hence the penalty amount may be reduced.
Clause 46 —  Before the district collector recovers the penalty under this clause, the nursing home
should be given a chance to represent the circumstances leading in not obliging to pay the penalty
in time.
• If possible by the necessary inclusion in the same Act or by a separate Act, a provision
for a single window system may be made, wherein all the taxes except income tax, are paid
under one roof at the time of registration of nursing home.
ANDHRA PRADESH MEDICAL COUNCIL, HYDERABAD
Dr. V ALLABHANENI RAMPRASAD, CHAIRMAN.
The representatives of APMC while highlighting that the proposed legislation will not be applicable
to the State of Andhra Pradesh as per Clause 56 (1), stated that there is no need for separate law
for enforcement in the State of Andhra Pradesh for registration of Clinical establishments.

131
They further stated that the primary objective of the legislation appears to be data collection.
Therefore, they suggested amendment in the provisions of Clause 14(5) of the proposed Bill as —
“If any Clinical establishment is already registered under any existing law of the State requiring
registration of such establishments, such establishment shall be deemed to have been done under
the provisions of proposed enactment and however, the data of such registration shall be made
available to the Central Council in digital format”.
VIMTA LAB LIMITED
Dr. S.P. V ASIREDDI, CHAIRMAN & MANAGING DIRECTOR
CHAPTER I, CLAUSE 2(C)
Clinical Establishment term should also be explicit in statements related to research and
development in addition to diagnosis, treatment or care for illness, injury, deformity, abnormality or
pregnancy in any recognized system of medicine established and administered or maintained by any
person or body of persons, whether incorporated or not; or
CHAPTER II, CLAUSE 3(2)
The National Council has no representation from:
• Contract Research Organizations who will test Drug Substance, Drug Product, Medical
Devices, Evaluate Diagnostic Kits and equipments.
• Manufacturers/Distributors of Drug Substance and Drug Product.
• Manufacturers/Distributors of Medical Devices.
• Manufacturers/Distributors of Diagnostic Kits and equipments.
• Consumer Forum who will be using above products and need to know what is inaccessible
to them and why?
• Insurance companies who will oversee rationality of expenses incurred and charged by
Health Providers.
• Necessity of exempting research and development expenses from overall taxes paid by
clinical establishments so as to encourage development of newer treatment methods thereby
having an efficient, accessible and, affordable health care delivery model.
Members from above will provide solutions to practical problems and distinguish between “needs”
and “Wants”.
CHAPTER III,  CLAUSE 11
Clinical Establishment term is restrictive to patients and does not cover “Health Study participants”,
and “Patients in remission state”. It should elaborate scope to cover them also as health of study
participants whether “healthy or patients in remission stage” is equally important.

STUDY NOTE
OF
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
ON ITS VISIT
TO
INDORE, AHMEDABAD, MUMBAI AND GOA
(12th to 19th FEBRUARY , 2008)
ON
THE CLINICAL ESTABLISHMENTS
(REGISTRATION AND REGULATION) BILL, 2007
133

INTRODUCTION
The Committee during its examination of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and
Regulation) Bill, 2007, had issued a Press Release on the 16th October, 2007 and in response
thereto, the Secretariat received a lot of memoranda from various individuals/associations on the
same. Many of these individuals/institutions/organizations expressed their willingness to appear
before the Committee in person to apprise the Committee about their views on the Bill. Accordingly,
the Committee decided and undertook a study visit to Indore, Ahmedabad, Mumbai and Goa 12th
to 19th February, 2008.
During its study visit, the Committee had interacted with the representatives of State
Governments, representatives of Private and Government Hospitals, Private Clinics, Diagnostic
Centres, Labs, experts and other stakeholders including NGOs on  the various provisions of the Bill.
The views and suggestions expressed by different stakeholders have been enumerated in the
succeeding pages.
135

136
INDORE
The Committee heard the views of the following Associations at Indore on the 13th
February, 2008:—
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (Indor e Branch) 2007-08
INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF PATHOLOGIST AND MICROBIOLOGIST, INDORE
INDIAN MEDICAL  ASSOCIATION (Indor e Branch) 2007-08
The representatives of the IMA, Indore Branch were of the view that the provisions of this
Act should not apply to the Madhya Pradesh State at present, as they already have an enactment
for the same, which is quite different from the proposed Bill. Still they submitted the following
points for consideration of the Committee:
• This Bill may promote “Inspector Raj” as the nodal officer will appoint inspectors to visit
the clinical establishments.
• Only MBBS doctors should be given authority for inspections.
• The proposed Act includes Government establishments. As CMHO-(Nodal Officer) is a
Government Officer and all Government Hospitals in the Distt. are under him, it is unlikely
that Government Hospitals will be penalized.
• A representative of IMA should be included in the District Level Local Committee, which
should be formed for the purpose of framing the rules and regulation of this Act.
• To raise the standard of medical services in the country, it is imperative that the so called
clinics of the quacks are closed permanently, the colleges running courses for the
unrecognized system of medicines are totally stopped and doctors are made to practice in
the system of medicine-pathy they have been trained to work.
• It is very difficult to get qualified staff for the clinics and investigation centers and to
inform every time if an employee is changed, more over it will not be practical. Therefore,
staff experience should be given due weightage.
• The registration certificate should clearly show in which system of medicine is the clinic/
hospital, being registered.
• It is suggested that pasting a photo of the person on the certificate will confirm that the
clinic is being run by him only.
• The Government should see that the Bill does not adversely affect the health care by
escalating the cost of treatment adding to the miseries of the poor.
• The Andhra Pradesh Ordinance for any act of violence on a doctor/hospital should be
implemented allover the country.
• The building requirements for the clinic, like presence of bathroom and other things should
be implemented for new establishment/clinic. The requirements in the Act. are the same
for village to Metro. cities. These should be categoried city wise.
• A general practitioner often dispenses also from his clinic, hence displaying a complete rate
list will not be possible. Further, in this Act it is not clear whether the clinics run at
residence would be registered separately or they will be exempted (as every doctor arranges
some facility for the emergency cases at residence).

137
• The Doctors are already registered with the Medical Council of India. So it is a futile
exercise to register again.
INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF PATHOLOGISTS AND MICROBIOLOGISTS, INDORE
• Blood Banks and sonography centres are registered separately. Will they come under one
registration?
• It always happens that private sector is discriminated from Government sector. Will the
standards be same for both? Is the Government ready to provide similar standards in
villages?
• There is no mention of curbing the unethical and malpractices going on in the country.
• Personnel problems need to be taken into consideration while setting the standards, for
example, non-availability of qualified trained technician and nurses.
• Pathology Association should have a representation in the composition of National Council
at all levels.
AHMEDABAD
The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the following Associations/State
Government at Ahmedabad on the 15th February, 2008:—
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (GUJARAT STA TE BRANCH)
GOVERNMENT OF GUJARAT
COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE, MANAGED BY ALL INDIA MOVEMENT
FOR SEV A. DIST. SABARKANTHA, GUJARAT
GUJARAT NURSING COUNCIL
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (GUJARAT STATE BRANCH)
Indian Medical Association, Gujarat State Branch observed that the registration and
regulation of the Clinical Establishments will not facilitate the improvement of public health as per
the mandate of Article 47 of the Constitution. It was further proposed that Government of India
may formulate standard of protocol for regulation of the clinical establishment but it can not be
uniform to all States/UTs and the States/UTs should formulate their own protocol considering the
health scenario of that State.
IMA, Gujarat was also of the view that the individual clinics/dispensaries without any bed
should be outside the purview of this Bill.
They suggested following proposed amendments in the draft Bill:—
CHAPTER-l, PAGE-2
• Clause 2 (c) “Clinical establishment means”
(i) A hospital maternity home, nursing home, dispensary and clinic (except the
dispensary and clinic owned and  managed by a single doctor)............................
Clause 2(c)(ii)(5) — delete “a single doctor establishment”

138
• Clause 2(g) — “recognized system of medicine” means Allopathy, Ayurveda,
Homeopathy......... (Delete Yoga and Naturopathy)
• Clause 3(2)(e) —  Five to ten representatives to be elected by the Central Council of Indian
Medical Association. Representation should be on the strength of the organization. IMA
membership is 1.75 lacs approximately.
• Clause 3(2)(i) — One representative from the line of paramedical system from each zone
by rotation for a term only.
• Clause 3(2)(j) — The Central Government may nominate one representative of each system
of medicine after due recognition till no statutory regulatory authority has been set up the
representative will be elected by the respective Council immediately on setting up the
regulatory authority.
• Clause 3(6) —  The National Council may make bye laws............ (delete subject to the
previous approval of the Central Government)
• Clause 5(a) —  Suggest the standard for ensuing proper health care by the clinical
establishment, the respective State council may formulate the standards for that State
keeping the objective of the standard of the National Council.
• Clause 5(b) —  Classify the clinical establishment into different categories, however the
respective state council may classify the establishment for the respective state keeping the
objective of classification of National Council.
• Clause 5(c) —  Suggest the minimum standards, but the State Council may have the
privilege to set a minimum standard for the respective State.
• Clause 13 : last para-
Delete: Provided that in prescribing the standards for clinical establishment, the Central
Government shall take the local conditions into consideration.
• Clause 14(4) —  If any............, shall be made within two years from the date of the
notification of this Act in daily newspaper after commencement of this Act.
• Clause 20 — add:
If there is no change of category of the clinical establishment, the certificates of practical
registration should be issued to the new owner for the period of one year.
• Clause 51(1) — Read:
If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may
with approval of National Council, by order published..
• Clause 52(1) — Read:
The Central Government may, with approval of National Council, by notification............
• Clause 54(2)(w) — Add:
The standards of Clinical Establishment in consultation with State Council except the clinic
of one individual doctor.
• Clause 56(2) — Read:
The Central Government may in consultation with National Council, as and when necessary,
by notification amend the schedule. However, these proposed amendments be discussed in
State Council and the suggested provision for amendment of the State Council should be
considered by National Council before finalizing the amendments.

139
GOVERNMENT OF GUJARAT
WELCOME FEATURES
• Long felt need
• Uniformity in standards
• Stronger enforcement
• Simple and accessible registration
• Regulation on broad based criteria minimum standards of facilities; personnel; maintenance
of records; classification of establishments and local conditions
• National Council balanced with State and district authorities
• Collection of cess for resource pool.
COVERAGE
• Geriatric homes and day care centres
• Dental clinics, fertility/ART clinics
• Counseling centres, dietician/nutritionist clinics
• Excluded outpatient facilities/day care centers, which comprise of 60-70% of private
healthcare thus a major spectrum of healthcare service providers’ land institutions are not
covered in the Bill.
Can we include them and have time bound programme for their registration?
REGISTRAION AND REGULATION
• Cumbersome process of laying down the standards
• Need for timelines
• Responsibility towards registration not regulation
• Need to evolve and result in good clinical practices and progressively better and better
healthcare for the Indian public
BASIC STRUCTURE OF STANDARDS COULD BE ADDED
• Human rights autonomy/informed consent/dignity/privacy/confidentiality and non-
discrimination equity.
• Good clinical care
• Good medical practices
• Work environment
• Probity and accountability
• Education, training, appraising and assessing
• Positive obligations of the State to the above — accountability, consistency, transparency
and accessibility.

140
PARTICIPATION IN THE NATIONAL HELATH PROGRAMMES AND PROGRAMMES BASED
ON STATE HEALTH PRIORITIES
• Every private healthcare establishment registered under this Act shall participate in  the
National Health Programmes, notify diseases as per Notifiable Disases Act/Epidemic Act and
perform statutory functions for prevention of communicable diseases.
• During outbreak of epidemics and disasters, all medical personnel shall work in partnership
with the Government machinery e.g., on detecting a case of Tuberculosis, information
regarding the same must be directed to Medical Officer in-charge of the local PHC/UHC
where the survey, education and treatment centre of the revised National Tuberculosis
Control Programme is situated.
OTHER ISSUES
• Free treatment for concessions obtained
• Improving service provision–Certification of need
• Regulating public private participation
PATIENTS AND PUBLIC NEGLECTED
• Predetermined and ascertainable level of healthcare and services, within its goal of
achieving the highest attainable standard of health for all.
• Persuaded to do the things right not encouraged to do things right. A combination of
punitive and compliance models to achieve the objectives.
PATIENT RIGHTS
• Emergency care
• Medico legal cases
• Abortion services
• Confidentiality
• Privacy and dignity
• Information on proposed treatment and right to participate in decision making
• V oluntary informed consent
• Right to a second opinion
• Participation in biomedical research – role of effective ethics committees.
ROLE OF PUBLIC IN REGULATION
• Provision for concrete involvement of consumer bodies, NGOs and through eminent
citizens who must be a part of the National Council and thereby of standard setting and
later on as part of the inquiry and decision making process as representatives of the public.
PROVISION FOR ACCREDITATION
• NABH could help the National Council in its objectives
• Quality services based on excellence, which goes beyond compliance with minimum general
standards.
• Improved environment of standards in the long run.

141
CONFLICT OF INTEREST (Clause 10  of Bill)
• The Bill designates District Health Officer and the Chief Medical Officer as the District
Registering Authority. Thus, regulator is also an administrator of Government facilities. This
could lead to conflict of interest.
NEED FOR REVALIDATION AND RENEWAL
• Annual appraisal on constantly evolving standards
• Clear responsibility for maintaining standards
• Procedures for identification and remedy of poor performance
• Arrangements for independent quality assurance
• Patients and public involvement
REDRESSAL MECHANISMS
• Ombudsman–Lokpal
• Internal redressal mechanisms
• External redressal mechanism
➢ District tribunal
➢ State level tribunal
PENALTY
• As per Clinical Establishment Bill, penalty for violation of Act is only financial whereas
Draft of Gujarat Public Health Bill has a penalty of imprisonment along with fine on second
or subsequent offence.
COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE, MANAGED BY ALL INDIA MOVEMENT FOR SEVA,
DISTT. SABARKANTHA, GUJARAT
➢ As per our Constitution, healthcare is primarily State Government prerogative. Having
registration of healthcare facilities at central level will be a duplicate effort and
unmanageable.
➢ Central Government should advise State Government with guidelines and Model law to base
formulating State Law.
➢ Giving provisional registration without inspecting the facility will lead to problem in quality
and giving permanent registration will lead to lot of fraud. What will prevent healthcare
facility to show good equipment in the beginning and then remove the same, like ghost
employees? It should be given for maximum 5 years.
➢ Registration should not include individual healthcare practitioner having their clinic.
➢ Physician gets degree from the university and then gets it registered by State medical
council. Why should they have to register at Central Government level? Professions are
supposed to be self regulated not by bureaucrats. If you mandate physicians to be registered
that will be a fertile ground for bribery and political influence peddling. Even in USA, State
did not require separate licensing of individual doctors except medical license to practice.

142
GUJARAT NURSING COUNCIL
➢ It appears that it is mainly focused on care and management of sick person. The preventive,
promotive and rehabilitative role of clinical establishment is not given enough clarity.
➢ Care related to normal pregnancy, delivery, post natal care, guidance and counseling centres
etc. should be exempted from definition of the clinical establishment.
➢ The Trained Nurse Association of India is the national level association of professional
nurses and midwives. Hence, it is appropriate to have representation for the same at
national, State and district level councils.
➢ The State and district level councils be constituted within Act with due representation from
nursing section.
➢ In line with national clinical establishment council, the State Government may appoint the
person as Secretary of the State Council and also at the District level.
MUMBAI
The Committee held discussions with the representatives of the following Associations and
Government of Maharashtra at Mumbai on the 17th February, 2008:—
GENERAL PRACTITIONERS ASSOCIATION
LAW FOCUS (ADVOCATES AND LEGAL CONSULTANTS)
DIRECTORATE OF HEALTH SERVICES, GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA
ASSOCIATION OF MEDICAL CONSULTANTS (MUMBAI)
SHRI ATUL M. NAIK
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, MAHARASHTRA STATE BRANCH
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, MUMBAI BRANCH
NATIONAL INTEGRATED MEDICAL  ASSOCIATION (Central Council)
ASSOCIATION OF THE HOSPITAL AND PRACTICING BIOCHEMISTS AND MEDICAL
TECHNOLOGISTS
GENERAL PRACTITIONERS ASSOCIATION
The representatives of the Association strongly objected to the Bill and placed their following views
before the Committee:
➢ Health is a State subject and therefore the Bill is against the spirit of federal structure of
the Country. It is unwarranted, undesirable and impracticable solution to the problem of
health of the Indian population.
➢ The Bill aims at curative aspects of the health problems and does not emphasize on any role
for the promotion of the public health. Thus, the aim of the Bill to provide good health for
all gets defeated by this attempt of the Government.
➢ The Bill will only double or triple the registration procedures and will add to the cost of
treatment to the common man and high penalty extending from fifty thousand to 5 lacs will
only further increase the cost of the health delivery system.

143
LAW FOCUS (ADVOCATES AND LEGAL CONSULTANTS)
Appreciating the contents and spirit of the proposed legislation, the representatives of the Law
Focus submitted the following points for consideration of the Committee:
➢ The definition of the clinical establishments as found in clause 2 (c)  appears to cover only
such establishments where services are provided with bed under (i) and (ii) a place
established as an independent entity or part of an establishment referred to in clause (i).
In this context it may be noted that a sizeable number of people especially in the rural areas
depend on clinics established by individual doctors/public health centres where there is no
facility of bed. The present definition is not sufficient to cover such establishments in
different systems of medicine. Therefore, it is humbly suggested that the scope of the
definition may be enlarged.
➢ The functions of the National Council as enumerated under clause 5 though comprehensive
shall be extended and enlarged to provide for transparency in treatment. For example, most
of the clinics do not part with the details of medicines and details of diagnoses
administered to the patients. This leads to prescription of unnecessary Medical tests and
administration of unauthorized and low quality medicines. The rules to be framed under the
new law shall take care of such things and it is prayed that sufficient enabling provisions
shall be made authorizing the Government concerned to frame rules for the purpose stated
above.
➢ The provision for appeal under clause 36(1) is limited to appeals by  persons aggrieved by
an order of the registering authority refusing to grant or renew a certificate of registration
or revoking a certificate of registration. It does not cover any other entity under the
proposed registration. The provisions from clause 40 to 46 deal with penalties and no  appeal
mechanism in respect of these penalties are provided. It is submitted that adequate
provisions should be made for appeal from penalties imposed under the new legislation.
➢ The Authority to adjudicate the offences under the Act and to impose punishments, is not
clear.
➢ It is also not clear as to who shall initiate prosecution under the proposed legislation. These
aspects may be cleared.
➢ The provisions under clauses 41, 42, 44, 45 and 46 are possible areas of disputes.
➢ The provisions related to penalty give rise to unguided discretion and therefore arbitrary.
➢ In most of the small clinics/dispensaries, the persons assisting the doctors are not properly
qualified to handle the medical jobs. Therefore, enabling provisions shall be made for fixing
up minimum qualification for the medical support staff.
DIRECTORATE OF HEALTH SERVICES, GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA
✓ The proposed legislation will apply to all clinical establishments under all recognized
systems of medicines viz. allopathic, Ayush etc.
It is felt that the proposed legislation should apply to all clinical establishments under all
recognized systems of medicine except single doctor establishments under each system,
which would be registered as separate categories. Establishments under each system would
be registered as separate categories. This would generate authentic data about all clinical
establishments in the country and facilitate holistic planning etc. A single doctor

144
establishment could be excluded for two reasons. Firstly, because the doctor is already
registered and licensed under the Indian Medical Council Act. Secondly, single doctor clinics
are not establishments. MOH&FW is, however, of the view that in order to have complete
and reliable data about clinical establishments in the country, even single doctor would also
be registered under the proposed legislation.
Only Nursing Homes and Maternity Homes are included under Bombay Nursing Homes
Registration (Amendment) Act, 2005.
✓ Registration to be compulsory under the proposed legislation even if the
establishment is registered under any other state law.
It is proposed to have compulsory registration under one central law to ensure creation of
a uniform data base about the number and type of clinical establishments in the country and
the type of services provided by them. The Government would however have the power
to notify different dates for making the Act applicable to different categories of clinical
establishments. This has been considered necessary to operationalise the process of
registration in a systematic manner so as to ensure that the sheer number of clinical
establishments does not overwhelm the law and the process of registration.
RECOMMENDATIONS
As far as Nursing Homes and Maternity Homes are concerned, they should be registered
under Bombay Nursing Homes Registration (Amendment) Act, 2005. Other establishments
should be registered under Clinical Establishments Act.
✓ The Registered Authority to be at district level.
It is proposed that the Registering Authority to register could be vested in the District Health
Officer or the Chief Medical Officer.
However, adequate capacity creation for handling the paper work etc. would have to be
supported through financial assistance from the Central Government.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Corporation level — Executive Health Officer
Municipal Level — Civil Surgeon
Gram Panchayat Level — District Health Officer
✓ Process of Registration
Most State laws for registration of clinical establishments could not be implemented because
the minimum standards that were a pre-condition for registration could not be notified.
(a) Provisional Registration
It is therefore being proposed that immediately after the commencement of the proposed
legislation, provisional registration would be available to each and every clinical
establishment on as is where is basis the clinical establishments would have to merely apply
for registration, their application being supported by prescribed documents. Immediately on
receipt of the application, the registering authority would give a provisional registration to
the applicant. This registration would be renewable on an annual basis, the procedure being
the same as for initial registration. Such a provisional registration would be given on
application. This would also facilitate creation of an authentic database of existing clinical
establishments in the country and also the infrastructure and facilities available with these
establishments.

145
(b) Standards for permanent registration
Once the Central Government prescribes standards, all clinical establishments would get
three year period to comply with the standards. In respect of those clinical establishments
for which standards have been notified, provisional registration shall not be allowed after
two years from the date of notification of such standards.
(c) Permanent registration
Clinical establishments that comply with notified standards would be provided with
permanent registration. Registration is to be given on the basis of documents certified by
professionals like chartered accounts, architects, certified evaluers ete. there are to be no
pre-registrations.
RECOMMENDATIONS
A certificate of registration issued under this shall, subject to provision of section 7, of
Bombay Nursing Home Registration (Amendment) Act, 2005 be in force and shall be valid
until the 31st day of March of the third year next following the date on which such
certificate is issued or renewed as the case may be.
✓ Different standards for different categories of clinical establishments.
The proposed legislation will apply to all clinical establishments under all recognized systems
of medicine. Obviously therefore, there would have to be different categories of clinical
establishments and different standards would need to be evolved. Accordingly, it is proposed
that the Central Government would have the power to classify clinical establishments into
different categories.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Categorization can be done on the basis of location i.e. urban/rural, bed strength, system
of medicine, services offered etc.
✓ National Council
Its composition and functions – As proposed
One representative from national level consumer groups may also be accommodated in the
National Council. The reason is that the National Council will be following a consultative
process while determining minimum standards.
✓ No provision for imprisonment for non-compliance:
No provision for imprisonment for non-compliance is proposed to be made. The registering
authority can however impose fines and if a clinical establishment fails to pay fine the same
would be recovered as an arrear of land revenue. All orders of the registering authority
would be appealable.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule shall, if no other
penalty is elsewhere provided in this Act or the rules for such contravention, on conviction,
be punished with fine, which may extend to five thousand rupees and in case of continuing
offence to a further fine of fifty rupees in respect of each day on which the offence
continues after such conviction. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall on
conviction, be punished with imprisonment, which may extend to six months or with fine,
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.

146
✓ Appellate Authority:
It is proposed to make provisions for appeals against the orders of the Registering Authority
to the same appellate authority to which appeals against the orders of the District Collector
under the State Land Revenue Acts normally lie.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Appellate Authority should be constituted at state level under chairmanship of Director of
Health Services, which should be a multi stakeholder body.
✓ Ombudsman
It is proposed that a clinical establishment that is aggrieved by non redressal of its
grievances by the appellate authority may make a representation for the redressal of its
grievances to an authority to be known as Ombudsman to be designated by the State
Government.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Appellate Authority should be constituted at state level under chairmanship of Director of
Health Services, which should be a multistakeholder body.
✓ Register of Clinical establishments:
As proposed.
✓ Transaction under the law to be transparent:
As proposed.
Most of the processes under the Bill are proposed to be done electronically using web based
technologies, it is expected that there would be complete transparency as all transaction
would be kept in the public domain.
✓ Public health institutions to be within the purview of the proposed law:
The fact that most similar State laws keep the Government clinical establishments out of
the requirements of registration and adherence to minimum norms is perhaps a factor
responsible for poor enforcement of these laws. Private sector players are quick to accuse
the Government of observing double standards in prescribing minimum standards for
private establishments and doing nothing to improve the pathetic conditions in public health
institutions. This issue would need to be addressed in the right spirit by the Government.
No exemptions have been provided for government institutions in laws framed for
management of biomedical waste, setting up of blood banks and prenatal diagnostics tests
etc. All these laws have had salutary impact on their specific areas. All the more reason that
government establishments should also be required to register and comply with prescribed
standards. As a matter of fact, MOH&FW has already started developing the Indian Public
Health Standards and compliance to these ought to be made mandatory especially when
funds are also being provided out of the National Rural Health Mission for up gradation of
Public Health Institutions.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Public Health Institutions should be within the purview of the proposed law.

147
ASSOCIATION OF MEDICAL CONSULTANTS (MUMBAI)
Following apprehensions were put forth by the Association:
• Most private clinical establishments in this country cater not only to the rich and elite of
the society but also the middle class and a large section of the lower class population of
the country. The purpose of the Act should essentially be to ensure adequate essential safety
mechanisms of a clinical establishment and to provide a mechanism to register such
establishments.
• Since this Act will also be applicable to self-owned clinical establishments wherein the
establishment owner in most cases a medical person, also functions as the chief clinical
service provider of the institution, the implementation of the Act should minimally disturb
his primary function i.e. patient care.
• The procedure for application, registration and inspection or ratification should be as simple
as possible to ensure compliance.
• The infrastructural limitations in the country need to be kept in mind and simultaneous
efforts made by the Government to improve the infrastructural inputs for health care
establishments e.g. increase nursing institutions, develop para-medical training centres etc.
• Attempts should be made to prevent injudicious closure of the existing medical
establishments for want of unreasonable and over-expectant measures within the Act or the
rules framed subsequently.
• The overall attempt should be to ensure safe health care to the society.
Some primary reservations on issues of the draft Bill are tabulated below in a chronological manner:
SECTION IN THE PROPOSED ACT
Clause 3(c) three representatives to be elected ......................... Indian Medicine Central Council
Act, 1970;
Comment/Query
Whereas there is only one representative from other councils why 3 for this council. It is
pertinent to note that most medical establishments are concerned with modern system of
medicine only.
Clause 3(e) one representative .............................. Indian Medical Council Act,  1956;
Comment/Query
Is the IMA covered by section 3 of the Act?
Clause 14 (5) If any clinical establishment.....................................referred to in sub-section (1).
Comment/Query
Will this not lead to duplication?
Clause 21. The authority ...................................................within the next forty-five days.
Comment/Query
Publicly publishing such information may give a wrong signal to society about the
establishment since the registration is anyway renewable.
Clause 22. Application for renewal................................................as may be prescribed.

148
Comment/Query
A clear procedure to be made for delayed application for renewal.
Clause 24. Application for permanent registration by a clinical establishment shall be made to
the authority in such form and be accompanied by such fees, as may be prescribed.
Comment/Query
The procedure for permanent registration needs to be better detailed and the temporary
registration to be valid till the permanent registration is not denied.
Clause 26. As soon as the clinical establishment submits...................................period of
thirty days before processing for grant of permanent registration.
Comment/Query
This is very prone to misuse by disgruntled sections of the society and also competing
peers. The process of licensing cannot be subject to public query and approval.
Clause 32. (1) If, at any time after any clinical establishment has been registered, the authority
is satisfied that,—
(a) the conditions of the registration are not being complied with; or
(b) the person entrusted ....................................... notice
Comment/Query
Only if the offence is significant.
Clause 36.(1) Any person, aggri eved by......................................appeal to the State Government:
Comment/Query
To whom in the State Government, within what time should the Government respond and
what happens to the establishment till the outcome of the appeal?
Clause 40. Whoever contravenes any provision.................................ftne which may extend to
five lakh rupees.
Comment/Query
Penalties are too high especially for small NHs. They should be a part of the registration
fees and these should be in accordance with the size and nature of the establishment.
Clause 41(2) Whoever knowingly serves in a clinical establishment.......................fine  which
may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.
Comment/Query
Practically not possible since the visiting doctors/staff often may be misled by the errant
establishment owner.
Clause 42(2) Whoever being required by or under this Act to supply....................fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
Comments/Query
This amount is too high. Often the information can be construed to be wrong and invite
unnecessary penalty.

149
Clause 54(2)(g)  the manner in which the authority shall publish the names of the clinical
establishments whose registration would be expiring under section 21;
Comments/Query
Needs to be scrapped for reasons cited above.
SHRI ATUL M. NAIK
One of the major issues, which is totally ignored by these establishments, is the electrical
safety of patients and medical staff. In modern health care delivery systems, equipment used is
very much dependent on secure supply of electricity. Such equipment requires extensive electrical
infrastructure. Any fault in the electrical system can mean sudden loss of electric supply to the
critical equipment. To give a few examples, sudden loss of supply during surgical operation or to
ICU, ICCU and such critical areas can be disastrous. Further, there is a hidden danger of electrical
leakages, which can maim and/or kill patient due to passing of such a leakage current through his
body. Generally, clinical establishments provide Diesel Generator Sets and UPS to provide adequate
supply during power outage. However, the time taken for the Generator to supply power is too
long and under certain electrical conditions, such as earth faults UPS and Generator will not
operate.
International practices have acknowledged these dangerous possibilities and the International
Electro Technical Commission has come out with a special Standard for the electrification of
clinical establishments (Standard IEC30364-7-710: 2002). India is a member of International Electro
Technical Commission and the said standard has been approved by all members of the Commission,
including India before it was published. In other countries, clinical establishments are not allowed
to function unless they adhere to that standard.
In India, we have National Electric Code 1985, which addresses the same issue in great
detail and is appreciated allover the World. Inexplicably, the preface to this Code states that it is
not mandatory. However, National Electricity Rules, 1956 clearly state under clause 29(2) that it
is mandatory. Unfortunately, various Central and State Authorities continue to ignore this important
aspect.
A summary entitled ‘Protective Measures in Hospital Electrical Distribution’ submitted by
Shri Naik is enclosed as Annexure.
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, MAHARASHTRA STATE BRANCH
The Indian Medical Association was of the opinion that this Bill is unwarranted, undesirable
and impracticable solution to the problem of health of the Indian population and against the spirit
of federal structure of the country where health is a State subject, as per the Constitution of India.
They stated that this whole process is duplication of the efforts and ways and means of registering
the medical establishments in different States. If, at all there is any necessity it is the mandatory
bodies like the Medical Council of India and the State Medical Councils which should be given
more powers and instructed to widen their horizons of working rather than trying to achieve
something which is already being organized in the country and the States. They accordingly
opposed this Bill and requested for its withdrawal.
They put forth the following points and reasons for not welcoming the Bill :—
➢ Health is a State Subject under the Constitution of India. The Central Government should
not interfere with this federal system. This federal system has stood the test of time and
does not need modification.

150
➢ The report of the National Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, Government of
India, August 2005, devolution of the authority to local bodies are the need of the hour and
the proposed legislation is retrograde in nature as it deprives the existing power of local
bodies and reverses the process of decentralization.
➢ The report of the National Commission recommending eight national mechanisms for
enforcement of regulations has been conspicuously abreast on the regulation of Clinical
Establishments for obvious reasons. Hence, this Bill defies the logic and reason.
➢ Adequate Rules and Regulations are available in different States to regulate the Clinical
Establishments and these rules in the Clinical Establishment Bill will only result in duplication
and harassment. There are already many legislations regulating the Clinical Establishments
in the country. No Central regulation is needed.
➢ Many States have the Registration Acts for Clinical Establishments e.g. The Delhi Nursing
Home Organization Act, 1953, Tamil Nadu Private Clinical Establishments Act, 1997 etc.
➢ An effective existing accreditation system through the National Accreditation Board for
Hospitals and Health Care Providers (NABH) is the need of hour and not standardization or
re-registration as described in the present Clinical Establishments Bill.
➢ Infrastructure for health facilities varies from State to State and region to region. Hence,
any Central Act as provided in the present Bill will be a futile exercise only.
➢ The Union Government should have consultation with the State Governments individually
and different N.G.Os. like IMA etc. involved in the health delivery system rather than
coming out with such a Bill.
➢ There are so many councils in the country regulating the health and medical education. The
proposed National Council consisting of all system of medicines is not a workable solution.
The existing councils like Medical Council of India, the State Medical Councils and other
agencies of the State Governments are sufficient to monitor the system.
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION, MUMBAI BRANCH
Echoing similar sentiments, as of the State IMA Branch, the Mumbai Branch also opposed
the Bill.
NATIONAL INTEGRATED MEDICAL  ASSOCIATION (Central Council)
Clause 2(g),  Definitions
‘Recognized System of Medicine’ should include ‘Integrated System of Medicine’ also.
Reason:  This system is practiced in our country for the last 100 years, by over lakhs of
practitioners.
Clause 3 (3)
The nominated members of the Central Council should hold office for at least three years.
Reason: One year is too short a period.
Clause 3(2)(j)
Other recognized systems of medicines should include integrated system of medicine.

151
Reason: Integrated system of medicine is existing in our country over 100 years successfully.
Hence, it should be included in recognized systems of medicines.
Clause 10
The District Health Officer or the Chief Medical Officer should have only supervisory or
recommendatory powers but not executive powers like imposing punishment, imposing fines
or cancellation of registration.
Clause 16 Entire clause needs rewriting.
The provisional registration should be given within stipulated time after making ad-hoc
inquiries by the concerned office. 16(2) hence should be deleted.
Clause 17 Should be rewritten.
‘Provisional registration need not be renewed. It should be replaced by permanent
registration only or otherwise with reasons thereto.
Clause 26 Entire Clause be rewritten.
As soon as the clinical establishment submits required evidence of the establishment,
having complied with the prescribed minimum standards, the authority shall grant permanent
registration.’
Reason: Display for the public at large will cause unnecessary harassment to the practitioner by
the notorious elements or persons with vested interest.
Clause 27 Should be deleted.
Clauses 40 to 44 are about penalties. Punishments suggested in the Clauses are exorbitant and
coercive and do not aim at the desire of the Government to raise standard of medical profession.
Punitive attitude of the Act seems to cause terror in  the minds of practitioners at the hands of
monopolized dictator bureaucrats. The punishment should be from warning, strict warning to
maximum of Ten Thousand in  Clause 43. It has been suggested, “fine of Rs. Ten Thousand for
minor deficiencies, not posing imminent danger to health and safety of the Patient.” This is too
much! A warning will suffice and meet the ends.
Clause 33(1) Please add “after due intimation to the clinic or establishment”.
Reason: This is necessary in view of on-spot replies or necessary papers being kept ready.
Clause 45
When the Bill suggests heavy penalties to the clinical establishments, which are at fault,
there is no provision against defaulting registering authorities.
Departmental actions or proceedings are not enough. For the defaulting Government
authorities or private clinical establishments standards of punishment should be the same.
The magnitude of the office should be measured and punished with the same yardstick for
both (defaulting Government authority or defaulting clinical establishment). Both should be
treated on par.
Clause 48
The proformas of returns should be easy. Usually Government proformas are very clumsy
or complicated. This is in particular very necessary for ‘single doctor establishment’ {refer
definitions 2(5)}. Representatives of medical organizations should be consulted before
preparing a proforma.

152
Clause 49
According to Ethics and Rules ‘Professional Secrecy’ is binding on the practitioners.
Authorities should not ask for personal details of the patients treated, nor make it binding.
Professional secrecy is a must for doctor-patient relationship.
Clause 52
Clause 52(2) (a) to (f)—representatives of clinical establishment should be consulted before
framing rules or standards.
ASSOCIATION OF THE HOSPITAL AND PRACTICING BIOCHEMISTS AND
MEDICAL TECHNOLOGISTS
• Clause 2(c)
(ii) a place established as an independent........................“where pathological,
bacteriological, genetic, chemical, biological investigations or other diagnostic or
investigation services”.............................
In the above clause, “biochemical, microbiological and clinical laboratory technological
investigation” services should also be included, as these are the most widely performed
services.
• Clause 3(2)
(2) The National Council shall consists of —
(i) “one representative from the line of paramedical system”.
Here please clarify what does it mean by “paramedical systems”
Does it mean–the systems of therapy (such as physiotherapy) or investigative services such
as medical laboratory technology, biochemistry, microbiology, radiology etc.?
If it means the latter then there is no proper representation from each of the faculties
whether, medical/clinical laboratory technology, or radiology etc. There should be
representatives from each of the various services.
• Page No. 14, under the heading “Statement of Objects and Reasons”
Under No.4 (i), it is provided that the National Council shall be consisting of representatives
from various councils as well as Indian Medical Association etc. but there is no
representation from paramedical, Medical Laboratory Technology, Bio-chemistry
Associations (such as the above “Association of Hospital and practicing Biochemists and
Medical Technologists”). Moreover, while preparing the “working group report” by the
Planning Commission there was no mention of any representative from the Association of
medical laboratory technology or biochemistry, as on the page 21 of the Report.
GOA
The Committee heard the representatives of the following Associations at Goa on the
18th February, 2008:—
ASSOCIATION OF PRIV ATE NURSING HOMES, GOA
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (GOA STATE BRANCH); and GOA
MEDICAL COUNCIL
VOLUNTARY HEALTH ASSOCIATION OF GOA
ASSOCIATION OF PRIV ATE NURSING HOMES, GOA

153
The following observations and suggestions were given by the Association’s representatives:
Chapter II,  Clause 3(2)
SUGGESTION
There should be representation of allopathic doctors associations in the council, like I.M.A;
Association of Obstetricians, Association of Surgeons, Association of Physicians etc. And
representation of medical fraternity from each state. State Council should be established on similar
lines as of the National Council.
REASON/JUSTIFICATION
Allopathic doctors represent majority of healthcare providers in the country and with about
80% of expenditure on the health services. Hence, it is logical that they have proportionate
representation on the National Council.
Chapter IV, Clause 16(2)
SUGGESTION
Provisional registration should automatically be granted for existing clinical establishments.
For new establishments the whole issue of provisional and permanent registration should be
disposed off within 6 months. The provisional registration should not be renewed beyond 3 years.
The provisional registration should be deemed to have been given, in case there is no response
from the concerned authorities in 6 months’ time.
REASONS
This is to prevent the clinical establishments from running only on provisional registrations
every year without going for permanent registration and also to prevent undue delay from the
authorities concerned to give the necessary permissions.
Chapter IV, Clause 29
SUGGESTION
The permanent registration should be renewable every 5 years.
REASON
This is to maintain the standards in all the clinical establishments up-to-date.
New Clause (Confidentiality Clause)
SUGGESTION
There should be confidentiality clause attached to any information collected by the
authorities in the process of implementation of the Bill.
REASON
This is in line with the existing laws related to confidential information.

154
INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION (GOA STATE BRANCH); and
GOA MEDICAL COUNCIL
Chapter II, Clause 3(2) — Composition of National Council.
80% of medicine practiced in our country is allopathic medicine. Therefore, more representation
is required from allopathic medical practitioners in the composition of National Council. These
representatives must be from each branch of allopathic medicine so that all doctors can be
regulated justly and fairly and thus ensure proper compliance of rules.
Chapter IV , Clause 16 (2) — Provisional Registration.
The time period of provisional registration may be decreased as one can expect early compliance
by sincere medical professionals who must not be unnecessarily inconvenienced.
• A State Council, on similar lines of National Council, should be constituted at State level
and the State Council should have representation from IMA, Medical Council.
VOLUNTARY HEALTH ASSOCIATION OF GOA
Chapter I, Clause 2(c) (5)
Definition, item 2, In place of ‘A Single doctor’ — ‘A  Single doctor or a partnership’
Chapter II, Clause 3(2) — Composition of National Council
Reputed NGO’s dedicated to Health Care should have representation on the Council
Chapter II, Clause 4(a) — Reasons for Disqualification
A person shall be temporarily disqualified if he is the subject of a criminal investigation or
investigation involving moral turpitude, insolvency, financial or other interest in the Council
Reason/Justification
Individuals on such councils are expected to be of the highest moral integrity.
Chapter III, Clause 11
‘carry on’ — The definition of this term should clearly state the admission of, or the
examination or treatment of a patient on an out patient basis.
Chapter IV, Clause 16(2) — Provisional Registration
The facility for Provisional Registration should be removed.
Chapter IV , Clause 29 — Permanent Registration
Renewal of Registration must be specified.
Chapter IV, Clause 32 — Cancellation of registration Clause
Add Clause 32 (1)
(c) — The registration has been obtained by fraud or misrepresentation;
(d) — The hospital, medical clinic, clinical laboratory or healthcare establishment in respect of
which the registration was issued, has ceased to operate.
(e) It is in the public interest to do so.

155
Clause 32(2)
Add “Reasonable opportunity” which shall be for a period of thirty days from the issuance of such
notice, within which period the appropriate authority in charge of the establishment shall appear in
person before the Council to state his case.
Clause 32(3) Notwithstanding any of the above, the authority may temporarily suspend
registration, pending investigation, if in the opinion of the council there has been a serious breach
of regulations, or of sufficient magnitude to be considered in public interest to do so.  In such an
event, the authority shall be obliged to complete its investigations within thirty days of suspension
of registration so that either the suspension is withdrawn or cancellation takes effect.
Reason/Justification
• The authority should have appropriate powers to act retrospectively, in the light of any
new information, which it may acquire.
• The establishment must be given due opportunity to defend itself.
• The option of temporary suspension must exist for application in grave situations.
Chapter IV, Clause 33
Add (3)
Directions as to apparatus, appliance, equipment, etc.
(1) Where, in the opinion of the Authority or an authorized officer, the use of any apparatus,
appliance, equipment or instrument or the carrying out of any practice or procedure in a hospital,
medical clinic, clinical laboratory or healthcare establishment —
(a) is dangerous or detrimental to any person therein; or
(b) is otherwise unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used or carried out, the
Authority or authorized officer may, by notice, direct the licensee or person having the
management or control of the hospital, medical clinic, clinical laboratory or healthcare
establishment to stop using such apparatus, appliance, equipment or instrument or to
stop carrying out such practice or procedure.
(2) The Authority or an authorized officer may, by notice, direct the licensee or person having the
management or control of a hospital, medical clinic, clinical laboratory or healthcare establishment
to install or replace such apparatus, appliance, equipment or instrument therein, as may be specified
in the notice.
(3) Any licensee or person who fails to comply with any direction given to him under subsection
(1) or (2) shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding
Rs...........or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to both and, in the case of
a continuing offence, to a further fine not exceeding Rs..........for every day or part thereof during
which the offence continues after conviction
Reason/Justification
The authority should give clear direction as well as opportunity to the establishment to
rectify shortcomings.
Chapter IV, Clause 34 — Power of entry
Provided no such person shall enter the clinical establishment without authorization from the
appropriate authority ( e.g. a magistrate). Prior notice may or may not be given.

156
(2) Powers of search, seizure, etc. The Authority or an authorized officer may, at the time of such
inspection —
(a) inspect any apparatus, appliance, equipment or instrument used or found in the
hospital, medical clinic, clinical laboratory or healthcare establishment;
(b) inspect, test, examine, take, remove and detain samples of blood, blood products,
human tissue or fluid or any product of the human body, dialysate, chemicals,
pharmaceuticals or any other substance which the Authority reasonably believes to be
any of the above mentioned items found in the hospital, medical clinic, clinical
laboratory or healthcare establishment;
(c) inspect any test or procedure performed or carried out at the hospital, medical clinic,
clinical laboratory or healthcare establishment in order to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this Act and any regulations made thereunder;
(d) inspect and make copies of and take extracts from, or require the licensee or person
having the management or control of the hospital, medical clinic, clinical laboratory or
healthcare establishment to provide copies of or extracts from, any book, document,
record or electronic material relating to the affairs of the hospital, medical clinic,
clinical laboratory, healthcare establishment or the facilities and services provided and
the practices or procedures being carried out thereat;
(e) inspect and make copies of and take extracts from, or require the licensee or person
having the management or control of the hospital, medical clinic, clinical laboratory or
healthcare establishment to provide copies of or extracts from, the medical record of
any person who has been or who is being treated or examined at the hospital, medical
clinic, clinical laboratory or healthcare establishment, notwithstanding that the prior
consent of such person has not been obtained.
(f) interview any person employed by the establishment in the course of any such enquiry,
with or without the permission of the management of the establishment.
(g) Seek any information it may consider necessary or relevant from any individual
employed by the establishment.
(3) Any licensee or person having the management or control of the hospital, medical clinic, clinical
laboratory or healthcare establishment who—
(a) refuses or fails, without reasonable excuse, to furnish any information to the Authority
in contravention of sub-section (2); or
(b) gives any false or misleading information, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be
liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding Rs. 500,00000 in the first instance.
Persistent refusal shall constitute grounds for withdrawal of license and further action
as the authority may see fit.
New clause
Confidentiality of information
Except in the case of a prosecution for an offence under this Act or any regulation made
thereunder, the Authority or an authorized officer shall not be compellable in any proceedings to
give evidence in respect of, or to produce any document containing, any information which has
been obtained from any hospital, medical clinic, clinical laboratory or healthcare establishment in
the course of carrying out any investigation or performing any duty or function under this Act.

157
(2) The Authority and an authorized officer shall not disclose any information which is contained
in the medical record, or which relates to the condition, treatment or diagnosis, of any person, as
may have come to his knowledge in the course of carrying out any investigation or performing any
duty or function under this Act unless the disclosure is made—
(a) Under or for the purpose of administering and enforcing—
(i) This Act;
(ii) The Infectious Diseases Act; or
(iii) The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act;
(b) For the purpose of any disciplinary proceedings under the Dentists Act, 1948
(Act... of...) or the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956; or Pharmacy Act, 1948; or
Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947; or Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 or
Homeopathy Central Council Act, 1973; or
(c) For any other purpose with the consent of the person to whom the information relates
or the representative of such person.
Chapter V , Clause 43 — Minor deficiencies
Define major and minor.

158
PROTECTIVE MEASURES IN HOSPITAL ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION
General
Hospital Electrical Distribution is a neglected subject in India. By and large the Hospital
Managements are unaware of the hazards posed by the “normal” electrical distribution used in
Indian Hospitals. National Electric Code (NEC): 1985 published by Bureau of Indian Standards does
address this essential and critical application. However, not considered being mandatory even
though specifically made so by clause 29(2) of Indian Electricity Rules 1956, it has been
completely ignored by the persons/organisations concerned in this field of activity. In 1987, Indian
Standard Spec. IS 3043 : 1987 covering earthing of electrical installations was published. This
Specification extensively covers protective measures for Medical Establishments. Regrettably,
neither the Consultants nor the Contractors have bothered to take cognizance of this Specification.
Indian Electricity Rules, 1956, Clause 29(2) also makes this document mandatory. Nowadays, with
the expected rise of “medical tourism” and consumer protection movement, with doctors and
hospitals, having been covered by the laws in this respect, it has become necessary to study this
aspect of hospital safety system.
Hazards
In a hospital, the foremost consideration is the wellbeing and safety of the patient. While great care
is taken to ensure that the patient under treatment does not develop medical complications, the
importance of hazard faced by him/her due to the electrical system is not quite realised. A patient
can be affected by failure of electrical system, during critical procedures or when he/she is on life
support system. There are two possibilities to be considered. First possibility is failure of electrical
system due to utility supply getting interrupted or the hospital electrical system failing due to
overloading. The second possibility is earth faults developing on the hospital electrical distribution
system and/or on the electrical equipment connected to it. This could, under worst conditions, lead
to electrocution of the patient. It is, therefore, necessary to have electrical distribution system with
proper safeguards built in to ensure security of supply and safety of patients, not to mention the
hospital staff.
Standards
Apart from the developed countries, a large number of developing countries such as Brazil, Chile,
Malaysia, Thailand etc. have adopted Standards in line with the International Standards in the field
of hospital electrification.
The well known Standards are listed herebelow.
(a) International Electrotechnical Commissions Standard —
IEC 60364-7-710,
(b) German Standard — DIN VDE 0107,
(c) UK Standards — HTM2007/2014, BS 7671,
(d) French Standard — NFC 15-211,
(e) USA Standard — NFP A99 (Latest Edition).
158

159
Classification of hazardous areas in Hospitals
All standards classify different areas of hospitals from the point of view of hazards faced by
patients in these areas. To illustrate this aspect, the classification as per IEC 60364-7-710 is given
below.
(a) Rooms in medical areas
These rooms are not used for medical treatment or examination, such as ward offices, wet
rooms, rest “rooms etc.
(b) Rooms used for medical purposes
These rooms are subdivided into three different categories.
(i) Group 0 : No application of medical electrical equipment.
(ii) Group 1 : No hazard through a device or power failure.
(iii) Group 2 : Hazard through power failure.
(c) Rooms for medical purposes outside hospitals
This category covers rooms for dental treatment, home dialysis etc. and denotes all rooms
for the examination and treatment of patients by general practitioners. In this area there is
no hazard through power failure.
Rooms used for medical purposes are the areas, which require specific attention. The classification
of these groups can be generally described as under.
Group 0 : This group covers consulting rooms, bandage rooms etc., where medical equipment is
not used and patients do not come in contact with medical electrical equipment and
earth. Medical equipment used in this area is supplied from power sources integrated
in the equipment. There is no hazard to the patients due to tripping of protective
devices, through electrical current or power failure. Areas such as lifts and common
passages are also included in this group.
Group 1 : This group covers general wards, labour wards and X-ray rooms. In this area, use of
medical electrical equipment on or in the body through natural or artificial orifices or
with minor surgical interventions is envisaged. There is no hazard to the patient
through tripping of protective devices or power failure.
Group 2 : This group covers operation theatres, recovery rooms, ICUs, ICCUs, endoscopy
rooms, cardiac catheter rooms, rooms for radiological diagnostics, dialysis rooms etc.
In these areas major surgeries of every type are carried out, critically ill patients are
kept on life support systems such as respirators with continuous monitoring of vital
functions etc. In these areas, patient’s life can be endangered due to tripping of
protective devices, power failure or passing of small fault currents through the body
of the patient. It is to be noted that leakage current as low as 10 micro-amperes can
upset functioning of heart.
While Group 0 and 1 areas can be supplied from the three phase, four wire, neutral grounded
supply (TN system), single phase, ungrounded supply (IT system) is normally recommended/used
for Group 2 areas. In such a supply system, the transformer neutral is not grounded. In this type
of distribution system, two major aspects are ensured. In case of an earth fault, tripping does not
take place leading to sudden loss of electric supply. With the help of Insulation Monitor, alarm is
given to indicate the existence of the fault, so that corrective action can be taken when the area

160
is not in use. With IT system, touch voltage are kept low to ensure personal safety of patients
and technicians/doctors.
Broad Outline of Electrical Distribution System for Hospitals
The Electrical Distribution will be based on redundancy principle. There should be two feeders, one
from the local utility and the other from the emergency source such as Diesel Generator Set, with
automatic starting facility. The switchover from the utility feeder to emergency feeder should take
place in the event of a voltage drop of more than 10%  over a period longer than 0.5 sec.
For Group 2 areas, the main feeder from the utility/emergency sources should also be provided
with a liberally rated UPS as redundancy feeder. When utility supply is tripped and the emergency
supply takes over there will be a period when there will not be any supply available for some
duration of time. During this period, UPS will feed essential equipment such as Operation Table
lights, respirator, life support monitoring system etc. The isolation transformer of the IT system
will be provided with load monitoring device. The health of the IT system will be monitored by
an Insulation Monitor.
The emergency power supply system consisting of auto starting Diesel Generator Set and UPS is
required to cater to the following acceptable time delay conditions.
(a) Time Delay of < 0.5 sec.
Application such as Operating Theatre lights, premature infant wards, ICUs and ICCUs.
(b) Time Delay of </= 15 secs.
Current consuming Medical equipment in Group 2 areas, medical gas supply, safety systems
such as alarm and warning systems, fire service lifts, electrical switchgear rooms and
escape routes.
(c) Time Delay of > 15 secs.
General services such as office areas, reception areas, heating, air-conditioning,
refrigeration plant, cooking facilities.
Maintenance of Equipment
Another critical area, generally neglected, is regular maintenance of equipment, such as X-ray
Equipment, heart-lung machines, dialysis equipment, MRl and catscan equipment, suction and other
pump operated devices, etc. General tendency is to wait for the equipment to fail and then call for
the manufacturer’s representative to repair the same. An earth fault developing in such a device can
trip the entire power system and cause havoc. A regular maintenance schedule with logged records
of critical electrical parameters should be maintained to monitor deterioration of these devices.
Conclusions
This article gives a broad outline of the electrical distribution system for hospitals, conforming to
International Standards. On the basis of these guidelines, individual distribution system is required
to be developed, with correct load evaluation of the existing devices and those planned to be
procured in the future. Some important aspects in designing such a distribution system are selection
of properly rated power supply devices such as transformers and UPS, selection of optimum
settings for protective devices, well planned alarm and warning system. It is also essential to have
well planned locations for alarm and warning displays in critical and common areas, switchgear and
related protection systems, transformers, power receptacles earthing systems, correct distribution
of loads, correct wiring of the distribution network with special attention to proper termination of
wires etc.

161
ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
NEW DELHI
(31st October, 2007)
Representatives of Department of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri Naresh Dayal, Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava Director-General, Health Services
3. Shri Vineet Chawdhry, Joint Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare
BANGALURU (KARNATAKA)
(8th January, 2008)
1. Dr. A. C. Sreeram, President, Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes Association, Bangalore
2. Dr. R. Balasubramaniam, President, Swami Vivekananda Youth Movement
3. Dr. Chikkananjappa, President, Karnataka Medical Council
4. Dr. C.N. Manjunath, Director, Sri Jayadeva Institute of Cardiology
5. Mr. Y V . Aswathanarayana, Consumer Care Society
6. Dr. R. Chandreashekhara; and
Dr. K. R. Kamath
7. Dr. G. K. Ramachandrappa;
Dr. V . C. Shunmuganandan; and Indian Medical Association, Karnataka S tate Branch
Dr. P. N. Govindarajulu
8. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, National Integrated Medical Association, Karnataka State Branch
9. Shri Y .G. Muralidharan, Consumer Rights Education and Awareness Trust (CREAT)
10. Dr L.H. Bidari, President; and Karnataka Private Medical Establishments
Dr. Srinath Mugali, Secretary Association (Regd.), Hubli
11. Director, Sanjay Gandhi Institute of Trauma and Orthopaedics
12. Ms. Usha Ganesh, Principal Secretary (H); and
Representatives of Dept. of Health and Family Welfare Government of Karnataka
161
Health Foundation

162
THlRUVANANTHAPURAM (KERALA)
(9th and l0th January, 2008)
1. Dr. K. C. Sunny, Prof. and Head of the Department;
Dr. Bismi Gopalakrishnan, Lecturer: and Department of Law University
Lifi Samuel, Research Scholar of Kerala
2. Shri S.S. Moorty, President; and
Shri John Stephen, Vydiar, Secretary
3. Dr. K. Mohandas, Director;
Dr. G . S. Bhubaneswar, Head, BMT Wing; and Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical
Mr. S. Balram, Scientist Sciences and Technology
4. Prof (Dr.) Ravi M. Nair, Former Advisor (Homoeopathy), Dept. of AYUSH, M/o H and FW,
G .O.I.
5. Dr. M. Balaraman Nair, Kerala
6. Shri Unnikrishnan Panicker, M. K., Senior Lecturer in Hospital and Clinical Pharmacy
7. Dr. S. Alex Franklin, President; and
Dr. R. Ramesh, Secretary Indian Medical Association, Kerala State Branch
8. Dr. K. Jayaram, Chelsa Clinic
9. Dr. A. Marthanda Pillai, Ananthapuri Hospital
10. Registrar, Travancore-Cochin Medical Councils
11. Dr. Dinesh Arora, State Mission Director, NRHM;
Dr. K. Shylaja, Director of Health Services; State Government Officials
Dr. Ramachandran, Director, Medical Education; and
Mr. M P. George, Drug Controller (i/c)
CHENNAI (TAMIL NADU)
(12th January, 2008)
1. Shri D. K. Srinivasan Hony. Secretary, Hindu Mission Hospital
2. Shri V . Santhanam, President, Peoples Awareness Centre, Chennai
3. Shri P. Umapathy, President, Madras: and Metropolitan Consumer Rights Protection
Shri M. Selvaraj, General Secretary Centre, Chennai
4. Prof. CMK Reddy, President, Tamil Nadu Medical Practitioners’ Association (Regd.)
5. Dr. S. Janaki; and
Dr. Sarala Gopalan The V oluntary Health Services (Regd.)
All India Siddha Vydia Federation

163
6. Shri S. Martin, Advocate and Social Activist
7. Shrimati I. Lakshmi Murthy, Secretary, Andhra Mahila Sabha
8. Dr. (Mrs.) Bela S. Kumar, Punjab Association (Regd.)
9. Dr. Capt. G . Raghavelu, Immediate Past State President, Indian Medical Association
10. Dr. V . Varadarajan, Founder President, Private Hospitals and Nursing Home Board
11. Dr. B. I. Jaffery, Medical Director, Madras Scan Systems
12. Dr. D.R Subramanian, Director, Senthil School of Sonography
13. Dr. Indrani Suresh, MediScan
14. Dr. B. M. S. Nagraj, Medical Superintendent; and
Dr. Venkatasalam
15. Dr. S. P. Ganesan., Hi Tech Diagnostic Centre
16. Dr. (Capt.) M. Kamatchi, Expert Advisor, Tamil Nadu Health Systems Project, and formerly,
Director of Medical and Rural Health Services, Government of Tamil Nadu
17. Dr. E. Prabhu, Medical Director, Advanced Nuclear Medicine Research Institute, Association
of Physicians of India, Chennai Chapter
18. Dr. V . Palani, President and State Head Qts., Secretary, Tamil Nadu Government Doctor’s
Association
19. Shri P.W.C. Davidar, Special Secretary to Government,
Department of Health and Family Welfare;
Dr. S. Vasantha, Director of Medical and Rural Health Services (i/c); and State
Dr. N.S.K. Kannan, Joint Director of Medical and Rural Health Services. Government official
20. Dr. A. Renuka, Director i/c and Professor, Institute of Biochemistry,
Madras Medical College
21. Dr. K. S. G . A. Nasser, Principal, Tamil Nadu Government Dental College and
Hospital, Chennai
22. Dean, Kilpauk Medical College Hospital, Chennai
HYDERABAD (ANDHRA PRADESH)
(14th January, 2008)
1. Shri V . Bhava Narayana, Editor Publisher, PharMed Trade News
2. Dr. E. Ravindra Reddy, President; and
Dr B. Mohan Rao, Secretary Indian Medical Association, A.P. State
3. Dr. (Mrs.) Renuka Datla, Executive Director, Biological E. Limited
4. Shri Varaprasad Reddy, Managing Director, Shantha Biotechnics Limited
Apollo Hospitals

164
5. Mr. D. Hanumantha Rao, Retired Director, Drugs Control Administration
6. Shri C. Gopalakrishna Murty, Director, Drugs Control Administration, Government of A.P. (Retd.)
7. Dr. Y . Ravinder Rao, President, and A.P. Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes
Dr. N.L.N. Sharma, General Secretary Association (APNA)
8. Dr. Vallabhaneni Ramprasad, Chairman, Andhra Pradesh Medical Council, Hyderabad
9. Dr. S.P. V asireddi, Chairman and Managing Director, Vimta Labs Limited
NEW DELHI
(25th January, 2008)
Representatives of Quality Council of India
1. Mr. Girdhar J. Gyani, Secretary-General
2. Dr. Y . P. Bhatia, Representative
Representatives of Indian Medical Association (Regd.)
1. Dr. M Abbas, National President
2. Dr. S.N. Misra, Hony. Secretary-General
INDORE (MADHYA PRADESH)
(13th February, 2008)
1. Dr. Dilip Kumar Acharya, President;
Dr. Sanjay Londhe, Hon. Secretary, and Indian Medical Association (Indore Branch)
Dr. D. R. Hariyani
2. Dr. Satish Joshi, President, Indian Associatron of Pathologist and Microbiologist
AHMEDABAD (GUJARAT)
(15th February, 2008)
1. Dr. Bipin M. Patel, Hon. Secretary, Indian Medical Association (Gujarat State Branch)
2. Dr. Amarjit Singh, Commissioner of Health, Medical Services, Medical Education and Research,
Government of Gujarat
3. Dr. Haren V . Joshi, Community Health Centre managed by All India Movement for Seva, Distt.
Sabarkantha, Gujarat
4. Registrar, Gujarat Nursing Council
MUMBAI (MAHARASHTRA)
(17th February, 2008)
1. Dr. Chandrakant S. Kambli, Hon. Secretary; and
Dr. Hozie Kapadia, President General Practitioners’ Association


165
2. Dr. Anil Gopal V ariath, Law Focus (Advocates and Legal Consultants)
3. Representatives of Directorate of Health Services, Government of Maharashtra
4. Dr. Umesh Oza, President;
Dr. Niranjan Agarwal Hon. Secretary; and Association of Medical Consultants (Mumbai)
Dr. Ketan Parikh, Past President
5. Shri Atul M. Naik
6. Dr. Vijay C. Panjabi, Imm. Past President; and Indian Medical Association, Maharashtra
Dr. Suhas Pingle, Hon. State Secretary State Branch
7. Dr. Anil Pachnekar, President;
Dr. Shivkumar Utture, Hon. Jt. Secretary;
Dr. Ramesh C. Shah, Hon. Secretary, and Indian Medical Association, Mumbai Branch
Dr. Vijay C. Panjabi, Past President
8. Dr. Vijay Thakurdesai, Secretary General, National Integrated Medical Association (Central
Council)
9. Dr. M. Z. Baig, Hon. Secretary, Association of the Hospital and Practicing Biochemists and
Medical Technologists
GOA
(18th February, 2008)
1. Dr. H. P. Pai, President, Association of Private Nursing Homes, Goa
2. Dr. J. V . Bhandare, President, and
Dr. S. S. Fonseca, Secretary
3. Dr. J. V . Bhandare, President, Goa Medical Council
4. Shri G. A. D’Costa, President, and V oluntary Health Association of Goa
Shri R.S. Vaidya, Secretary
NEW DELHI
(27th May, 2008)
Representatives of Medical Council of India (MCI)
1. Col. (Retd.) Dr. A.R.N. Setalvad, Secretary
2. Dr. V ed Prakash Mishra, Member, Executive Committee
NEW DELHI
(9th June, 2008)
Representatives of Bureau of Indian Standards
1. Shri Tilak Raj, Director (Legal)
Indian Medical Association (Goa State Branch)

166
2. Shri Rahul Kumar, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MHD)
3. Shri C.P. Puri, Scientist ‘E’ (MHD)
4. Shri Sanjay Arora, S.O. (Legal)
Representatives of Dental Council of India
1. Maj. Gen. (Retd.) Dr. P.N. Awasthi, Secretary
2. Prof Anmol Kalha, Head, PG studies IDST, Modi Nagar

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.